a brief description of the hand of Cyprus : by the which not only the venetian title why they have so long enjoy it , but also the turk , whereby now he claim it , may plain appear . 
 estgjlhe hand of Cyprus be environ with diverse sea : f°r westward it be wash with the sea call smhshi pamphilium : southward , with the sea TEgyptium : on the east part , with the sea Syrium : and northward , with the sea call Cilicium . the which hand in time pass have diverse name : call once Acamantis , as Sabellicus witness . Philonides make mention , that it be call sometime cerasis . Xenogoras write , that it be name Aspelia , Amathusa , and Macaria . there be in time past fifteen city or famous town in it , but now very few , among the which Famagusta be the chief and strong , situate by the sea side . there be also Nicosia , which be wont , by the traffic 124 
 of merchant , to be very wealthy : beside the city of Baffo , Arnica , Saline , Limisso , Melipotamo , and episcopia . Timosthenes affirm , that this hand be in compass 429 mile : and Arthemidorus write the length of the same to be 162 mile , measure of it from the east to the west , betwixt two promontory name Dinaretta and Acamanta . this hand be think to be very rich , abundant of wine , oil , grain , pitch , rozin , alum , salt , and of diverse precious stone , pleasant , profitable , and necessary for man use , and much frequent of merchant of Syria , unto the which it lie very near . it have be , as Pliny write , join sometime with Syria , as Sicilia have be also with Italy . it be a long time subject unto the roman , after to the persian , and to the sultan of . / Egypt . the selfsame hand be sometime also English , be conquer by king Richard the first , in his voyage to Jerusalem in the year of our lord 1192. who ( as Polydore write in his fourteenth book of our english history ) be prohibit by the cypriotte from arrival there , invade and conquer the same soon after by force : and have leave behind he sufficient garrison to keep the same , depart from thence to Ptolemayda : who afterward exchange the same with guy of Lusignan , that be the last christen king of Jerusalem , for the same kingdom . for the which cause the king of England be long time after call king of Jerusalem . and last of all , the venetian have enjoy it of late a long time , in this order follow . in the year of our lord 1470 , John king of the say hand , son to Janus of Lusignan , have by Helen his wife , which be of the imperial house of Paleologus , one daughter only call Charlotta , and a bastard call James : the which James be afterward consecrate bishop of Nicosia . This Charlotta be marry first to the king of Portugal , of who he have no issue , so that he be dead , lewes duke of Savoy ( to who she be the second time marry ) son to Lewes the second of that name ( unto 
 125 
 who the say hand by the right of this his wife Charlotta do appertain ) have the possession of the same . James the bastard assoon as his father be dead , of a bishop become a soldier , and with a army win the hand , make it his own by force . this duke of Savoy hear these news , with a number of well appoint soldier , arrive short after in Cyprus , and recover again the hand , compel the bastard to fly forthwith over to the sultan of / Egypt . who make himself his subject , in time so wrought and temper the matter , that the sultan in person at his request pass over into Cyprus , besiege duke Lewes in the castle of Nicosia , and at length compel he to depart , leave his kingdom . so that this bishop become again king of this hand : who short after cleave to the venetian have make a league of friendship with they , marry by their consent one Catherina the daughter of Marco Cornaro , which Catherine the senate of Venice adopt unto they soon after as their daughter . this bishop not long after sicken , and die , leave this his wife with child , who live not long after his father death . by the which mean the venetian make themselves the next heir to Catherina by the law of adoption , take unto they the possession of this kingdom , and have keep and enjoy the same almost this hundred year . now this great Turk call sultan Selim in the right of the sultan of / Egypt , who his grandfather ( call also sultan Selim ) conquer , pretend a right title unto it , and now , as you may understand by read of this short treatise , have by conquest obtain the same . who i pray the everliving God , if it be his holy will , short to root out from thence . 
 126 
 be not ignorant ( gentle reader ) how hard a matter it be for any one man to write that , which shall please and satisfy all person , we be common of so diverse opinion and contrary judgement : again Tully affirm it to be a very difficult thing , to find out any 
 matter which in his own kind may be in all respect perfect . wherefore i trust by your own judgement i ought of reason to be the soon pardon ( my translation be precise tie to my author mean ) if any thing herein beside be think to be want : i have learn by the way how cumbrous a thing it be to turn the selfsame matter out of the italian language into our country speech . but who so do what he possible can be bind to no more . and i now at the request of other ( who put i in mind , that i be not only bear unto my self ) have accomplish that in the end , which i promise and be require . with what pain and diligence , i refer i [ ii i . 121. ] to they which be skilful in the italian tongue , or may the better judge , if it please they to try the same , cast aside this exampier . i speak it not arrogant , i take God to witness : but man painful travel ought not light to be condemn : nor sure at any time be wont to be of the learned , or discreet . by who gentle acceptation if these my present do be now support , i will persuade my self that i have reap sufficient fruit of my travel . unto who with all my heart i wish prosperous success in all their affair . 
 Ann. Dom. 1572. W. m. 
 [ in turcha 
 127 
 um deus , succurre tuis , miseresce tuorum , et subeat gentis te nova cura tuus . 
 quem das tantorum finem , rex magne , laborum ? 
 in nos vibrabit tela quousque Satan ? 
 ant rhodum , mox ind^ Chium , nunc denique cyprum , turcharum cepit sanguinolenta manus . 
 Mustafa foedifragus part grassatur in omnes , et veneta cypriam strage cruentat humum . 
 nec finem imponit sceleri , molli tue furorem , nec nisi potato sanguine pastus abit . 
 qualis , quae nunquam nisi plena tum^nsque cruore sanguisuga obsessam mittit hirudo cutem . 
 torturam sequitur tortura , cruorque cruorem , et caedem admissam caedis alius amor . 
 saevit inop animi , nec vel se temperate ipse , vel manus indomitum nostra domare potest . 
 at tu , magne pater , tumidum disperde tyrannum , nec sine mactari semper ovile tuum . 
 Exulet hoc monstrum , ne sanguine terra redundet . 
 excutiantque novum Cypria regna jugum . » et quod Christicolae foedus pepigere Monarchae , id faustum nobis omnibus esse velis . 
 tu pugna illorum pugnas , and bella secunde . 
 captiv6sque tibi subde per arma Scythas . sic tua per totum fundetur gloria mundum , Unus sic christus fiet , and una fides . 
 gulielmus malim . 
 128 
 the true report of all the success of Famagusta , make by the earl Nestor Martiningo , unto the renown prince the duke of Venice . 
 he sixteenth day of February , * 1571 , the fleet which have bring the aid unto Famagusta , depart from thence , whereas be find in all the army , but four thousand footman , eight hundred of they choose soldier , and three thousand ( account the citizen and other of 
 the village ) the rest two hundred in number be 
 * in Italy and other place the date of the year of the lord be always change the first of January , or on new year day , and from that day reckon upon : although we he ere in England , especial the temporali lawyer for certain cause be not wont to alter the same unacustomated till the annunciation of our lady . 
 soldier of Albania . after the arrival of the which 
 succour , the fortification of the city go more diligent forward of all hand , than it do before , the whole garrison , the grecian citizen inhabit the town , the governor and captain not withdraw themselves from any kind of labour , for the better encouragement and good example of other , both night and day search the watch , to the intent with more careful heed take they may beware of their enemy , against who they make no sally out of the city to skirmish but very seidome , especial to understand when they may learn the intent of the enemy . while we make 
 this diligent provision within the city , the turk without make no less preparation of all thing necessary , fit to batter the fortress withal , as in bring out of Caramania and Syria with all speed by the sea , many woollpack , a great quantity of wood and timber , diverse piece of artillery , engine , and other thing expedient for their purpose . 
 at the begin of April Halli bassa land there 
 with fourscore galley or thereabouts in his company , who [ ii i . 122. ] bring thither that , which of our enemy be desire , who soon after depart from thence , and leave behind he thirty galley , which continual transport soldier , munition , fresh victual , and other necessary , 
 five 129 i 
 * carumusa-lini be vessel like unto the french ga-bard , sail daily upon the river of Bourdeaux , which sail w* a mizzen or triangle sail . 
 * Maone be vessel like unto you great hulk , which come hither from Denmark , some of the which carry 7 or 8 hundred ton a piece , flat and broad , which sail some of they with seven misens of piece . * palandrie be great flat vessel make like feriboat to transport horse . 
 Nicosia , otherwise call Nicosia . 
 signior braga-dino be proveditore , that be , governor , and signior baghone general of the christian army . 
 beside a great number of * caramusalin , or brigandine , great hulk call * Maones , and large broad vessel term of they * palandrie , which continual pass to and fro between Cyprus and Syria , and other place thereabouts , which they do with great speed , stand in fear of the christian army . and about the midst of the same month the Turk cause to be bring out of the city of Nicosia , which they have win a little before , fifteen piece of artillery , and raise their army from whence they be before , make ditch and trench necessary , encamp themselves in garden , and towards the west part of Famagusta near a place call Precipola . 
 the five and twenty day of the same month they raise up mount to plant their artillery upon , and cause trench to be make for harquebusier , one very nigh another , approach still very near the city , in such order , as be almost impossible to stay the same , forty thousand of their pioner continual labour there the most part of all the night . the intent of the enemy be then know , and in what part of the city he mind most to plant his battery , we take diligent heed on the other part , to repair and fortify all place necessary within . for the which cause we place a great watch in that way , which be cover with a counterscarp , and in the sally of their privy postern , for the defence of the say counterscarp , there be new flanker make , also traverse call butteriss make upon the cortaine , with one trench of Turves two foot high and broad , the which be make on that side of the wall of the city , which be already batter with the shot of the Turk , with certain loop hole for our harquebusier , by the which they defend the counterscarp . two noble personage Bragadino and Baglione personal take this charge on they , by the which mean the christian affair pass in very good order . all the bread for our soldier be make in one storehouse , of the which the noble gentleman Lorenzo 
 130 
 Tiepolo captain of * Baffo have charge , who refuse no pain , where he think his travel may prevail . in the castle be place that famous gentleman Andrea Bragadino , who with a diligent guard have charge on that part of the castle principal , next unto the sea side , trim and dig out new flanker for the better defence of the * arsenal . 
 a valiant knight name Foito be appoint master of the ordinance , who be slay within few day after in a skirmish , who garrison the noble Bragadino proveditore before name present deliver over to i . three other captain be appoint over the wildfire with twenty footman for every one of they , choose out of the army , to use and execute the same as occasion shall serve . the best piece of ordinance be bring forth unto that side of the town , where the battery be look for to be make : and they make privy fence to cover the better their cannon shoot withal . there be no want in the Christians to annoy their enemy in issue often out of every side against they , aswell to hinder their determination , as to hurt they otherwise at diverse time . they also render to we the like . for three hundred of the inhabitant of Famagusta one time issue out of the city , arm only with their sword and target , with so many italian harquebusier also in their company , receive great damage , because the trench of the enemy be make about so thick , although at the same present we compel they to fly , and slay also many of they : yet they increase to such number , that they kill present thirty , and hurt there threescore of our company . for the which cause order be take , that our man shall no more come forth of their hold , commit themselves to manifest peril to bid their enemy the base . 
 the Turk in process of time by little and little with their trench , come at length to the top of the counterscarp , and have furnish their fort the nineteenth day of May , begin their battery with ten fort , have 
 131 
 A.D. 
 1571. 
 * Baffo of the ancient writer name Paphos , in the which city there be a sumptuous church dedicate to Venus . 
 * arsenal in Constantinople and Venice be the place for munition and artillery to lie in . 
 threescore and fourteen piece of great artillery within their custody , among the which there be four basilisk ( for so they term they ) of a immeasurable greatness , and begin to batter from the gate Limisso unto the arsenal , and lay five battery against the town , the one against the great high turret of the arsenal , which be batter with five piece of ordinance mount upon that fort of the rock , the other against the cortaine it self of the arsenal , batter by one fort with eleven piece : another against the keep of Andruzzi with two commander , or cavalier , which be above with one fort of eleven other piece : another battery against the turret of saint Nappa , the which be batter with four basilisk . the gate of Limisso , which have one high commander or cavalier alone , and a Brey and cortaine without be batter by the fort with three and thirty piece of artillery , whereas Mustafa himself general of the Turk army take the charge in person . at the first they seem not to care much to spoil the wall , but shoot still into the city , [ ii i . 123. ] and against our ordinance , which great gall they . 
 whereupon they , who be within the city , aswell our soldier , as the grecian , assoon as the battery begin , withdraw themselves , come and dwell by the wall of the city , whereas they continue from that time to the end of the siege . the noble Bragadino lodge in the keep of Andruzzi , Baglioni in that ward of saint Nappa . the honourable Tiepolo in that which be call Campo Santo . wherefore they be present at all that be do , both encourage , and punish the soldier accord to their desert . the right worshipful Luigi Martiningo be appoint chief over the ordinance , who answer all man expectation of he , with great courage divide the charge thereof unto six other inferior captain , who take order and care for that company , and for the provision of thing necessary for the gunner : one company of the grecian be appoint to every gate of the city for to attend upon 132 
 the service of the artillery . the valiant captain Francisco Bagone ward at the keep , and at the great commander of the arsenal . captain Pietro Conte attend upon the cortaine , at the commander of the volti , and at the keep of Campo Santo . i for my part attend upon the commander of Campo Santo , and upon the commander of Andruzzi , and of the cortaine , unto the turret of Santa Nappa . the earl Hercole Martiningo attend upon the commander of Santa Nappa , and to the whole cortaine , unto the gate of Limisso . Horatio captain of Veletri attend upon the Brey and cortaine towards the bulwark . upon the high commander of Limisso , which be more trouble than all the rest , attend the captain Roberto Malvezzi . at the same time , when the battery begin ( by the commission of the honourable Bragadino ) victual be appoint , and give to all the soldier , aswell grecian , as italian , and gunner : namely wine , pottage , cheese , and bacon : all the which thing be bring to the wall as need do require in very good order , so that no soldier there spend any more in bread then two souse a day . they be pay at the end of every thirty day with the great travel of that right worshipful venetian gentleman m. Giovanni Antonio Querini , who beside this his ordinary charge be find present in all weighty and dangerous affair to the great encouragement of our soldier . and we make a counterbattery against our enemy for ten day space , with so great rage , that we choke and destroy fifteen of their best piece , also we kill and dispatch of they about thirty thousand at that season , so that they be disappoint at that time of their battery in that place , and be great dismay . but our foresee that we have no great store of powder leave , there be make a restraint , and such order take , that thirty piece shall not shoot off but thirty shot a piece every day , and that in the presence of the captain , who be still present , because the soldier and gunner shall not shoot off in vain . 
 133 
 two venetian souse or Soldi amount but to one penny English . 
 the nine and twenty day of may there come towards we from Candia a Fregat or pinnace , the which give we great hope and lightning of aid , increase marvellous every man courage . the turk with great travel and slaughter of both side , have win at the last the counterscarp from we , with great resistance and mortality on both part . whereupon they begin on the other side of the five battery to fill up the ditch , with the earth that they throw down , which be take near the wall of the counterscarp . but all that earth and fall down of the wall make by the shot of their artillery , be carry away of we within the city , all our company labour continual aswell by night as day , until our enemy have make certain loophole in the wall , through the which they flank and scour all the ditch with their harquebus , stop our former course of carry , or go that way any more , without certain and express danger . but m. Giovanni Marmori , a fortifier , have devise a certain kind of join board , the which be carry of the soldier , defend they from the shot of the harquebusier , so that some other quantity of earth , but no great store , be carry also away : in the which place this foresay fortifier be slay , who have do especial good service in all our necessary affair . and our enemy have cast so much earth into the ditch , as fill it up again , and make it a firm way to the wall of the counterscarp , and cast before they the earth by little and little , they make one traverse even unto the wall on two side in all their battery , the which they make thick and strong with woolpack , and other faggot , to assure themselves the better of our flanker . 
 when they have once possess the ditch , that they can not be hurt of we but by chance , they begin forthwith to cast and dig out undermine to undermine the Brey , the turret of Santa Nappa , the commander of Andruzzi , the keep of Campo Santo , the cortaine , and the turrion of the arsenal : so that be able not 
 134 
 long to serve our turn enjoy those few flanker , we throw down wildfire into our enemy camp , the which annoy they very sore , because it fire their woolpack , and also their faggot . and for the better encouragement of the soldier , the right honourable Bragadino give to every soldier one ducat , you which can gain or recover any of the former woolpacke , [ ii i . 124. ] make countermine in all place . to the which charge Maggio the fortifier knight be appoint , who in all our business serve with such diligence and courage , as he be able , or be requisite . but the countermine meet not , save those of the commander of S. Nappa , of Andruzzi , and that of Campo Santo , because they * ^Ibanois be open , and our man sally out often both by day soldier , soul-and night into the ditch to perceive better the way of dyer of the mine , and to fire the faggot and wool . nor we cease at any time through the unspeakable travel of cave the lord Baglione ( who have the oversight of all these who common matter ) to trouble our enemy intent , by all manner of serve the wit and policy , divide the company for the battery , return both join and plant in all place a garrison of the mdfiottvery * Albanois soldier , who aswell on foot as on horse - skilful y back , show always notable courage and manhood , painful . 
 the first assault . 
 the one and twenty day of June they put fire to the mine of the turret of the arsenal , whereas giambelat Bey take charge , who with great ruin rend in sunder a most great and thick wall , and so open the same , that he throw down more than half thereof , break also one part of the vaimure , make before to uphold the assault . and sudden a great number of the Turk skip upon the ruin thereof , display their ensign , even to the top of the same . captain Pietro Conte with his company be in that ward , the which be much shake and terrify by that sudden ruin . i with my company come first thither , so that they short take the repulse , and although they re - 
 135 
 of this noble fit painful venetian gentleman m. Gio. Antonio Querini ( who be afterward hew in sunder by the commandment of Mustafa ) i be entertain very courteous in my travel ! at Corcyra , now call Corfu , he be then there Mag. Castellano or Capitaine of one of the castle . 
 in extremity man have no regard to spare trifle . 
 fresh themselves with new supply five or six time , yet they fail of their purpose . there fight personal the lord Baglione : Bragadino and Querini be arm stand not far off to refresh and comfort our soldier , and the captain of the castle with the ordinance , that be plant upon the buttery destroy many of our enemy , when they give the assault , the which endure five hour together : so that of turk be slay very many , and of our side between they that be slay and hurt one hundred : most part of the which number be cast away by a mischance of our wildfire , the which be unadvised and negligent handle , burn up many of our own company . there die at that present the earl Gio. Francisco Goro , the captain Barnardino Agubio : and by the throw of stone Hercole Malatesta , captain Pietro Conte , with other captain and standerdbearer , be very sore hurt . 
 the night follow arrive in Cyprus a pinnace from Candia , which bring news of most certain aid , great increase both the mirth and courage of we all , so that we make soon after , with the help of the captain Marco Crivellatore , and Maggio the knight , certain retreat flank to all the place beat down , and whereas they suspect that the enemy have dig up any mine , with hogshead , chest , tike , and sack stuff full of moist earth ( the grecian with all speed have already bring almost all that which they have ) > because they have dispatch their Canveis about necessary use , they bring their hang , cortaine , carpet , even to their very sheet , to make and stuff up their foresay sack , a very good and ready way to make up again their vaimure , the which be throw down with the fury of the artillery , which never stint , so that we make up again still that in the night , the which be throw down and break in the day , sleep very seidome : all the soldier stand always upon the wall , visit continual of the 136 
 governor of the city , which sleep at no time , but in provident the extreme heat of the day , have no other time oarefull to take their rest , because the enemy be at hand , give we continual alarm , not suffer we long to seidome skepe breath . all the night 
 at any time , the second assault . muchiessein 
 - j . ... - dangerous 
 ' i ' he nine and twenty day of the same month season . 
 a they set the i make towards the Brey on fire , the which mine be dig in stone , which break and cleave all thing in piece , and cause great ruin , make a easy way for the enemy to assault we , who with a outrageous fury come to the top , whereas Mustafa their general be altogether present , which assault be receive , and stay at the begin of sma^ the earl Hercole Martiningo with his garrison , and at . the so be repulse by our company , who fight with - time g0 „ e out any advantage of covert , the vaimure be help much . throw down by the mine . there be slay of our company captain Meani the sergeant major of our army , captain Celio de Fuochi , captain Erasmo da Fermo : and captain Soldatello , Antonio d’Ascoli , captain Gio. d’Istria , standard bearer , with many other officer , be sore wound , there die also 30 other of our common soldier . at the arsenal they be beat back with great damage of our enemy , and small hurt to we . five only of our [ ii i . 125. ] part be slay there , whereas captain Giacomo de Fabriano also be kill , and i be wound in my left leg with a harquebus shoot . the which assault that certain continue six hour , the bishop of Limisso stand woman in-up there , encourage the soldier . where also th ” be find present stout woman , who come thither or man 0 with weapon , stone , and water , to help the soul - kind , i see diour . our enemy understand how great hin - sufficient trial derance they have receive at these two assault , change their mind , and begin again with great fury than ever they have before accustom to lay Saline . 
 137 
 it be account a good warlike shift , to leave that to our enemy with hindrance , which we can not any long keep , and use to our own commodity . 
 battery to all place , and into our retreat , so that they labour more speedy than ever they do , make seven other fort more , under the castle , and take away the artillery from they which be far off , plant of it somewhat near , to the number of fourscore , they batter the hold with so great rage , that on the eight day of July , with the same night also be number five thousand canon shoot , and after that sort they overthrow to the ground the vaimure , that scarce with great travel and pain we can repair they again , because our man that labour about they be continual slay by their ordinance , and by reason of the endless tempest of the shot of their harquebusier . and our man begin to decrease . for the Turk cause we to retire from our breye , by the violence of their artillery and mine , in such sort , that there be no more stand leave for our soldier , because we make our vaimure more thick , our stand begin to wax narrow , the which present we of necessity enlarge with board as a scaffold to the vaimure , whereby we may have more elbow room to fight . captain Maggio also make one mine under the say Brey , to the intent , that we be not able any long to keep it , the same may be leave to our enemy to their great hindrance . 
 the three assault . 
 to the say Brey the nine day of July they give the three assault , to the turrion of Santa Nappa , to that of Andruzzi , to the cortaine , to the keep of the arsenal : the which assault have continue more than six hour , they be beat back in four place , but we leave the Brey to their great loss , and we also : because we be assault , our company be not able to manage their pike in good order , by reason of the narrowness of the stand where they be , be willing to retire in that order , as the lord Baglione have prescribe unto they , and can not , 138 
 i57i-cast themselves at the last into a confuse order , and retire , they be mingle among the Turk : so that fire be give to our mine , the same ( with a terrible sight to behold ) slay present of our enemy more than one thousand , and above one hundred of we . there be slay Roberto Malvezzi , and captain Marchetto de Fermo be grievous wound . at the assault of the arsenal be slay captain David noce master of the camp , and i my self be hurt by the race of a cannon shot . this assault continue five hour , and the citizen of Famagusta show great courage in every place , with their woman also , and young stripling . the Brey be so deface by reason of this my set on fire , that no body any more attempt to recover the same : because there be no apt place remain to stay upon . the left flank only remain still , whereas another mine be make . the gate of Limisso be over against this foresay Brey , and somewhat low , which be always open , have make to the same a portali , with a Percollois annex to it , the which Percollois by the cut of a small cord , be a present defence to the gate , and our soldier give their attendance by that gate to bring in the batter earth , which fall in the ditch from the rampaire : and when they see that their enemy in four day come not thither , they begin to entrench above the Brey , and by the flanker above they suffer no ™ person to pass out of the gate , the which thing at bring great suspicion unto our enemy , because they dangerous be often time assail of our company . time not only 
 muck come - 
 the four assault . fort the 
 common soulwherefore they come the fourteen day of July dier , but also to assault the gate of Limisso , and lay their increase battery to all other place , they come and plant their ensign even before the gate , whereas the lord Baglione , endation^ ' and signior Luigi be in readiness , who have take upon all man . 
 139 
 they to defend that gate of the city . who assoon as they have encourage their soldier , sally swift forth , kill , and put to flight the great part of they , and at the last give fire to the mine of the flank slay four hundred Turk , and signior Baglione at the same time win a ensign of our enemy , wrest it violent out of one of the ensign bearer hand . the day follow they give fire to the mine of the cortaine , the which thing not [ ii i . 126. ] fall out great to their purpose , they follow not their prepare assault . wherefore they begin to fortify , and advance high their traverse in the ditch , for their better assurance against they shall give the assault : and they have empty and carry away all the earth near unto the counterscarf , where they lodge in their pavilion , so that we can not descry they . they shoot seven piece of artillery upon the wall of the counterscarp so covert , that they be not see : two from the Brey of the turrion of Santa Nappa , one from Andruzzi , and two other all along the battery of the cortaine . and they come with certain board cover with raw and green e hide , under which they bring their man to dig in the vaimure , we be nothing behind or forgetful to cast wildfire among they , and sometime to issue forth of our sally call postern , to offend their pioner , although to our great hindrance . and we still repair the vaimure by all mean possible , with buff skin , be moist and wet , throw in also earth , shread , and cotton with water , be well bind together with cord : all the woman of Famagusta gather themselves together into company in every street ( be guide of one of their monk call Caloiero ) resort daily to a certain place appoint , to labour , gather and provide for the soldier , stone and water , the which be keep for all assault in half butt to quench the fire , which the turk throw among they . 
 140 
 have have no great success in take of the gate , they find out a new way , never hear of before , in gather together a great quantity of certain wood call Teglia , which easy burn , and smell very evil , the which they throw before the former gate of the city , and faggot fasten to the same , with certain beam besmear with pitch , kindle sudden so great a fire , as be not possible for we to quench the same , although we throw upon it whole butt of water , which be throw down from a high commander , which butt present break in sunder . 
 this fire continue four day , wherefore we be enforce by reason of the extreme heat and stinch , to withdraw our self further inward , and they descend towards their low flanker , begin other mine , so that the gate be shut up , because it can be no long keep open , and sudden ( a thing marvellous to be speak ) the stand of the Brey be repair , and make up again , they plant one piece over against the gate , the which of we with stone , earth and other thing , be sudden bury up . by this time we be drive to a exigent , all our provision within the city stoop very low , save only hope , the noble courage of the governor and captain , and the stout readiness of the soldier : our wine , and flesh as well forsake . powder as unpowder be spend , nor there be any Saguntina cheese to be get , but upon a unreasonable price , our fame . company have eat up their horse , ass , and cat , for lack of other victualis : there be nothing leave to 
 teglia in latin call Teda be a certain wood which burn easy , and savour unpleasant , of the which there be great store in Sicilia . • sometime it be use for a torch . 
 no necessary thing to be do be leave unattempted on either part . 
 man courage oft abate , but hope seidome 
 be eat , but a small quantity of bread , and bean , and we drink water and vinegar together , whereof be not much leave . when that we perceive that our enemy have dig and cast up three mine in the commander of the gate , they labour in all place more diligent than ever they do before , bring into the ditch , over against the battery of the cortaine , a hill of earth , as high as the wall : and already they come to the wall above the counterscarp over against the turrion of the arsenal , 
 141 
 wont to travel , but by night only . a letter or supplication exhibit by 
 1571. 
 and have make one commander complete , fence with share , like unto plough share , in proportion and height correspondent to we . 
 within the city be remain but five hundred italian soldier , who be not hurt , yet very faint and weary by their long watch and pain , in fight in in July the those fervent and burn heat , which be in those heat be so ex - part - and the great and better part also of the ilandlhatthe grecian be by this time slay , whenas the chief of inhabitant those citizen remain do full resolve themselves ( than thereof be not which be about the twenty day of July ) to present a supplication in write to that noble gentleman Bragadino proveditore , desire and beseech he , that see their ci tie and fortress be thus batter and bring to extremity , without sufficient aid to defend the same , without substance or sustenance , have no hope of 
 the cypriot - succour , or any new supply , they have spend and con-^ragad^w it sum not only their good , but also their life for the ’ defence of they , and in testify of their dutiful service towards the noble and royal state of the signiory of Venice , that it may now please he , and the rest of the honourable governor , that be present , and put in trust , have a careful eye unto some honourable condition , to have now at the last a respect to the credit and honour of their long travel wife , and the safeguard of their poor child , which otherwise be short very like to be a prey to their bloudthirst and raven the answer enemy . to the which letter or supplication speedy of the firm answer be make by the forename honourable braga-e ere ' dino , comfort they , that they shall by no mean abate their courage , and that short he look for succour from the signiory , diminish as much as he may , the fear which they have conceive in their heart , dispatch and send away sudden from Cyprus into [ il i . 127. ] Candia , a pinnace to certify the duke and governor there , in what extremity they be . the Turk by this time have end their mine , and set they on fire , the 29. of July : in the which space our man , accord as they 142 
 be wont to do , renew and make up again the vaimure ruin before by the ordinance , and have no other stuff leave to advance they with , make sack of 
 it stand with reason , 
 kersie , unto the which the noble Tiepolo diligent look . the three mine of the commander do great damage to we , have throw down the great part of the earth , whereas the governor Randacchi be slay . ™ a " ingthe the mine of the arsenal overthrow all the rest of the great , to let 
 turrion , have garrison of our remain . 
 smolder and choke one whole the ss soldier , the two flanker only still 
 the five assault . 
 the enemy travel much to become master of those foresay flanker , and to sally forth by the other battery , and this assault last from three of the clock in the after noon until night , where , and at what time be slay very many of our enemy . in this assault signior Giacomo Strambali , among the rest , show much worthiness , as he have do before in other conflict . 
 the sixth and last assault . 
 the next morning follow , at the break of the day , they assail all place , the which assault continue more than six hour , with very little hurt on our side , because our enemy fight more cold then they be wont to do , annoy of we continual on the sea side with their galley , shoot in all their assault and battery continual cannon shoot in all part of the city , as near as they may . after our necessity oft have defend and repulse this assault , and perceive timetyess thing bring to a narrow strait than they be that , whick wont to be at , we have leave in all the whole city our will cm-but seven barrel of powder , the governor of the tinual city full determine to yield up themselves and the spurn city , with honourable condition . wherefore the first asamst " of August in the after noon , they take a truce , one 
 143 
 be come for that purpose from Mustafa the general , with who they conclude the next morning follow to give two hostage a piece , until such time as both army be agree . for our hostage ( by the appointment of the right honourable Bragadino ) be send forth the earl Hercole Martinengo , and signior Matteo Colsi a citizen of Famagusta , and from our enemy come into the city the lieutenant of Mustafa , giannezeribe and the aga of the giannizzer , the which be meet , e^tw-ke6 even unto e gate city , of signior Baglione 
 that ’ / Iga de two hundred harquebusier : we also be meet 
 giannizeri be in like manner with great pomp with horseman and the captain of harquebusier , with the son also of Mustafa in person , the Turk who make very much of they . 
 and be ’ the lord Baglione imparld with these hostage , 
 which be then come for that purpose of the article of peace , require by they of their general , their life , armour , and good , five . piece of ordinance , three of the best horse , and safe passage from thence unto Candia accompany with their galley , and last of all , that the grecian inhabit the island , may dwell there still quiet , and enjoy peaceable their own good and possession , live still Christians just turkish hereafter , as they have do before . all the which deal , to request and article be agree upon , grant , and speakeandnot subscribe unto by the hand of Mustafa . forthwith dainty to pro - be send galley , and other vessel into the haven , so mouse , and that our soldier immediate begin to embark them-neve to per - self , of the which the great part be already go firm the same . aboard , the nobility and our chief captain also be likewise very desirous to depart . 
 the 15. of August in the morning , the worthy Bragadino send i with a letter unto Mustafa , by the which he signify , that the same night he will come unto he to deliver up the key of the city , and that he will leave in the hold the honourable gentleman Tiepolo , pray he therefore , that while he shall have just cause thus to be abroad , that there may be 
 144 
 no harm do at home , and in the city . the Turk from our truce take until that time , practise with we all familiar , and without any suspicion of sinister or double deal , they have show we much courtesy both in word and deed . Mustafa himself by word of mouth present answer i to this letter , in this sort , that i shall return , and make relation to this noble man Bragadino , who have send i , that he shall come over to he at his own pleasure , for he be very desirous both to see and know he , for his great worthiness and prowess , that he have try to be in he , and in the other of his captain and soldier , of who manhood and courage he will honourable report , where soever he come , as occasion shall serve thereunto : and to conclude , that he shall nothing doubt of any thing : because in no manner of condition he will suffer any [ ii i . 128. ] violence to be do to those , which remain behind within the city . so i speedy return make true report of the same : and towards night about four of the clock , the right honourable Bragadino accompany with the lord Baglione , with signior Aluigi Martinengo , with the right worshipful signior Gio. Antonio Querini , with the right worshipful signior Andrea Bragadino , with the knight of haste , with the captain Carlo Ragonasco , with captain Francisco Straco , with captain Hector of Brescia , with captain Girolomo di sacile , and with other gentleman and fifty soldier , the governor and noble man with their sword , and the soldier with their harquebuss come forth of their hold , and go unto the pavilion of Mustafa , of who , all they at the beginning be courteous receive , and cause to sit down by he , he reason and discourse with they of diverse thing , a certain time , and draw they from one matter to another , at the last upon a sudden pick a quarrel unto they , especial burden that noble Bragadino with a untruth , lay to his charge y‘ he have cause certain of his slave in the time that the truce continue between they , to be put to death . the 
 five 14s king 
 the property of true fortitude be , not to be break with sudden terror . 
 Mustafa , cousin germane to you thief , which hang on the left side of our saviour at his passion . 
 which thing be most false . so that he be angry therewith , sudden step forth , and command they to be bind . thus they be unarm ( not suffer at that time to enter into his pavilion , with their former weapon ) and bind , be lead one by one into the market place , before his pavilion , be present cut and hew in sunder in his presence , and last of all from that worthy and noble Bragadino ( who be bind as the rest , and be command twice or thrice to stretch forth his neck , as though he shall have be behead , the which most bold he do without any spark of fear ) his ear be cut off , and cause he to be stretch out most vile upon the ground , Mustafa talk with he , and blaspheme the holy name of our saviour , demand he , where be now thy Christ , that he help thou not ? to all the which no answer at all be give of that honourable gendeman . the earl Hercole Martinengo , which be send for one of the hostage , who be also bind , be hide by one of Mustafas eunuch until such time as his fury be pass , afterward his life be grant he , he be make the eunuch slave . three grecian which be under his pavilion be leave untouched . all the soldier which be find in the camp , and all sort of Christians to the number of three hundred , be sudden slay , they nothing mistrust any such treason , or tyranny . the christian soldier which be embark a iide before , be link and fetter with iron chain , make slave , all thing be take from they , and strip into their shirt . 
 the second day after this murder be commit , which be the 17. of August , Mustafa enter the first time into the city , and cause the valiant and wise governor Tiepolo to be hang , who remain behind , wait the return of signior Bragadino . i be in the city at that present , when other of my countryman be thus miserable slay and make slave , hide my self in certain of the grecian house the space of five day , 146 
 and they not be able to keep i in covert any long for fear of the great penalty , which be proclaim against such transgressor and concealer , i ofired , and give my self slave to one sangiaccho deal by|our , promise he five hundred * zechin for my run - * t . echini , be some , with who i remain in the camp . the Friday follow ( be the Turk sabbath day ) this worthy coin in ve-and patient gentleman Bragadino be lead still in the nice , every one presence of that unfaithful tyrant Mustafa , to the of the which be battery make unto the ci tie , whereas he be compel to carry two basket of earth , the one upon his nce^tf^ur ? back , the other in his hand slavelike , to every sundry many , iasome-battrie , be enforce also to kiss the ground as oft as what better . • he pass by he , be afterward bring unto the sea side , where he be place in a chair to lean and stay upon , be winch up in that chair , and fasten unto byraltom . the maineyard of a galley , and hoist up with a crane , to show he to all the christian soldier and slave 
 ( which be in the haven already ship ) he be afterward let down , and bring to the market place , the torment take of his clothes from he , and tack he unto the pillory , whereas he be most cruel flay quick ; with so great constancy and faith on his part , that he never lose or abate any jot of his steadfast courage , be so far from any faint , that he at that present with most stout heart reproach they , and speak much shame of his most traitorous deal in break of his faithful promise . at the last without any kind of alteration of his constancy , he recommend his soul unto almighty God , give up the ghost . when he have thus end his life ( thank be to God ) his skin be take and fill with straw , be command forthwith to be hang upon the bowsprit of a * foist , and to be carry alongst the coast of Syria by the sea side , that all the port town may see , and understand who he be . 
 this be now so much as i be able to declare to your highness by that i see my self , and can remember 147 
 he death answerable to his former life . 
 * a foist be as it be a bri-gandine , be somewhat large than half a galley , much use of the turkish Cursaros , or as we call they pirate or rover . 
 ople : the which they call in the turkish language Stanboli . 
 ad . 
 i57i > 
 while that i be in the fortress : that also which by true relation of other i can understand , and see also my self in the camp , while i be slave , i will likewise brief utter unto you . the enemy army be in num - [ ii i . 129. ] ber two hundred thousand person of all sort and quality . of soldier which take pay there be 80. thousand , beside the which number , there be 14. thousand of giannizzer take out from all the hold of Syria , Caramania , Anatolia , and part of they also which * the gate of come from the * gate of the great Turk . the venture ^Isas th6 sword be 60. thousand in number . the much to say reason , why there be so many of this sort , be because as Constantin - Mustafa have disperse a rumour through the Turk dominion , that Famagusta be much more wealthy and rich , than the city of Nicosia be : so for that cause , and by the commodious and easy passage from Syria over into Cyprus , these venture be easy induce to come thither . in 75. day ( all the which time the battery 
 GliVenturieri still continue ) 140. thousand iron pellet be shoot of , number , and see . the chief personage which be in their army near unto Mustafa , be these follow : the bassa of Aleppo , the bassa of Anatolia , musafe bassa of Nicosia , the bassa of Caramania , the aga of the giannizzer , giambelat * bey , the sangiaccho of Tripoli , the * begliarbei of Greece , the bassa of Scivassi and of Marasco , Ferca Framburaro , the * sangiaccho of Antipo , Soliman Bey , three sangiaccho of Arabia , Mustafa Bey generail of the venturer , fergat governor of Malathia , the Framburaro of diverie , the sangiaccho of Arabia and other sangiaccho of lesser credit , with the number of fourscore thousand person beside , as by the muster make by his commission may well appear . 
 the Framburaro which be at Rhodes , be appoint and leave governor at Famagusta , and the report be that there shall be leave in all the island of Cyprus , twenty thousand person , with two thousand horse , many of the which i see , be very lean and evil appoint for 148 
 aa spada , be a kind of venture soldier , who common be wont to follow the army in hope of the spoil . 
 Aleppo , a famous city near unto Antiochia , otherwise call in greek , 17x16-iroxis , the city of the sun . 
 * bey in the turkish language , signify knight withus . 
 service . it seem also a thing not impertinent to the * begliarbei matter , to signify to you , how i , by the especial grace of dgftfiethlord God , be deliver out of their cruel hand , i have # g^'accho pay within two and forty day ( all the which time i be - u that^erson slave ) five hundred zechin for my ransom to he , w* the who prisoner i be , by the mean of the consul for Turk , that the french merchant , a ligier then at Tripoli , who he and vernetha little before come from Tripoli in Syria unto Cyprus , into ountrey^ the Turk camp . yet for all that i have pay this God suffer sum of money to he , he will not so set i at much to be liberty , but feed i up still with fair word , and pro - t0 his miss i that he will first bring i unto his servant^ government , which abut upon a piece of the famous them^ river of Euphrates , and afterward dismiss i . the necessity oft which malice and falsehood of his i perceive , deter - time sharp-mined with my self to give he the slip , and to fly ; so en^ ™ n i wait my time , and repair often to the city , at tk length meet with a small fisher boat , of the which a poor grecian be owner and master , with who in one night with two only oar and a small sail make of two shirt , i pass over from Cyprus unto Tripoli , be in very great danger of drown , whereas i remain in covert in the house of certain Christians , until the five and twenty of September , at what time i depart from thence in a little french ship call Santa vittor , which come into these part , and as we ride , we touch at a part of Cyprus westward , call Capo dell gat , where as i come on land , and talk with certain of the inhabitant of the village , who be then by chance a hawk , demand of they , how they be entreat of the Turk , and after what sort the island be till : to the which they answer , that they can not possible he nature be in worse pickle than they be at that present , not every commoenjoy that quiet which be their own , be make ditie be soon vifiaines and slave , and almost always carry away the understand by bastinado , so that now ( they say ) they know by trial too perfect the pleasant and peaceable government of enjoy of the christian , wish and pray God that they may the same . 
 149 
 * Candia , of the old writer call Creta in latin , YiKO . top.rrox.l's in Greek , because it have once a 100 city in it , now there remain but only 4. thus common name , Candia , la Cania , Retima , and Scythia . 
 [ il i . 130. ] 
 short return . And concern the tillage of the island they make answer moreover , that no part of it be plow or labour , save only that mountain which be towards the west , and that because they be little trouble with the cruelty of the Turk , but as for the plain and east part of the island , there be small seed sow therein , but become in a manner desert , there be leave but few inhabitant , and less store of cattle there . afterwards we depart from thence arrive in * Candia , i for my part be clothe in sackcloth , whereas soon after by the great courtesy of the right honourable signior Latino Orsino , i be new apparel accord , friendly welcome , and my necessity relieve . from whence i short after sail in a cypriotte ship ( thanks be to almighty God ) arrive in this city in health , and be safe come home now at the honourable foot of your highness . 
 the captain of the christian slay in Famagusta . 
 the lord Estor Baglione . 
 the lord Aluigi Martinengo . 
 the lord Federico Baglione . 
 the knight of asta vicegovernor . 
 the capitaine David Noce master of the camp . 
 the capitaine meani of Perugia sergeant major . 
 the earl Sigismond of Casoldo . 
 the earl Francisco of Lobi of Cremona . 
 the captain Francisco Troncavilla . 
 the captain Hannibal Adamo of Fermo . 
 the captain Scipio of the city of Castello . 
 the captain Charles Ragonasco of Cremona . 
 the captain Francisco Siraco . 
 the captain Roberto Malvezzo . 
 the captain Caesar of Adversa . 
 the captain Bernardin of Agubio . 
 the captain Francisco bugon of Verona . 
 the captain James of Fabiano . 
 150 
 the captain Sebastian deal sole of Florence . 
 the captain Hector of Brescia , the successor to the captain Caesar of Adversa . 
 the captain Flaminio of Florence , successor unto Sebastian deal sole . 
 the captain Erasmus of Fermo , successor to the captain of Cernole . 
 the captain Bartholomew of Cernole . 
 the captain John Battista of rivarole . 
 the captain John Francisco of Venice . 
 the name of Christians make slave . 
 the earl Herocles Martinengo , with Julius Caesar Ghelfo a soldier of Bressa . 
 the earl Nestor Martinengo , which flee . 
 the captain Marco crivellatore . 
 the lord Herocles Malatesta . 
 the captain Peter Conte of Montalberto . 
 the captain Horatio of Veletri . 
 the captain Aluigi Pezano . 
 the conte James of Corbara . 
 the captain John of Istria . 
 the captain Soldatelli of Agubio . 
 the captain John of Ascoli . 
 the captain Antony of the same town . 
 the captain Sebastian of the same town . 
 the captain Salgano of the city of Castello . 
 the captain marcheso of Fermo . 
 the captain John Antonio of Piacenza . 
 the captain carletto Naldo . 
 the captain Lorenzo Fornaretti . 
 the captain Barnardo of Brescia . 
 the captain Barnardino Coco . [ David noce . 
 the captain Simon Bagnese , successor to the captain 
 the captain Tiberio Ceruto , successor unto Conte Sigismond . 
 the captain Joseph of Lanciano , successor unto captain Francisco Troncavilla . 
 the captain Morgante , successor to captain Hannibal . 
 the lieutenant , successor unto the captain Scipio . 
 the standerdbearer , successor to captain Roberto . 
 the captain Ottavio of Rimini , successor to the captain Francisco Bugon . 
 the captain Mario de Fabiano , successor to captain Jacomo . 
 the captain Francisco of Venice , successor unto captain Antonio . 
 the captain Matteo of Capua . 
 the captain John Maria of Verona . 
 the captain Mancino . 
 the fortifier . 
 John marmori , slay . 
 the knight Maggio , slave . 
 turkish captain at Famagusta . 
 MUstafa general . 
 the bassa of Aleppo . 
 the bassa of Anatolia , slay . 
 musafe bassa of Nicosia . 
 the bassa of Caramania . 
 the aga of the giannizer . 
 giambelat bey . 
 the sangiaccho of Tripoli , slay . 
 the begliarbei of Greece . 
 [ ii i . 131. ] the bassa of Scivassi and Marasco . 
 Ferca Framburaro . 
 the sangiaccho of Antipo , slay . 
 Soliman bey , slay . 
 three sangiaccho of Arabia , slay . 
 Mustafa bey , general of the venturer , slay . 
 fergat , ruler of Malathia , slay . 
 the Framburaro of diverie , slay . 
 