[ ii i . 141. ] the charter of the privilege grant to the english , and the league of the great Turk with the queen majestic in respect of traffic , date in June 1580. 
 A.D. 
 i$8o . 
 180 
 181 
 A.D. 
 1580. 
 [ ii i . 142. ] 
 the interpretation of the letter , or privilege of [ ii i . 143. ] the most mighty and musumanlike emperor zuldan Murad can , grant at the request of Elizabeth by the grace of the most mighty God , and only creator of heaven and earth , of England , France and Ireland queen , confirm a peace and league betwixt both the say prince and their subject . 
 e most sacred musulmanlike emperor , by the infinite and exceed great power , by the everlasting and wonderful clemency , and by the unspeakable help of the most mighty and most holy God , creator of all thing , to be worship and fear with all pureness of mind , and rever 
 ence of speech , the prince of these present time , the only monarch of this age , able to give sceptre to 183 
 the potentate of the whole world , the shadow of the divine mercy and grace , the distributer of many kingdom , province , town and city , prince , and most sacred emperor of Mecca , that be to say , of God house , of Medina , of the most glorious and bless Jerusalem , of the most fertile Egypt , jeman and Jovan , Eden and Canaan , of Samos the peaceable , and of Hebe , of Jabza , and Pazra , of zeruzub and Halepia , of Caramaria and Diabekirvan , of Dulkadiria , of Babylon , and of all the three Arabia , of the Euzians and Georgians , of Cyprus the rich , and of the kingdom of Asia , of ozakior , of the tract of the white and black sea , of Grecia and Mesopotamia , of Africa and Goleta , of Alger , and of Tripoli in the west , of the most choice and principali Europe , of Buda and Temeswar , and of the kingdom beyond the Alps , and many other such like , most mighty Murad can , the son of the emperor Zelim can , which be the son of Zoleiman can , which be the son of Zelim can , which be the son of paiizid can , which be the son of meheme can , etc 
 we most mighty prince Murad can , in token of our Imperiali friendship , do signify and declare , that now of late Elizabeth queen of England , France and Ireland , the most honourable queen of Christendom ( to who merchant we wish happy success ) send her letter by her worthy servant William hareborne unto our stately and most magnificent porch replenish with justice , which be a refuge and sanctuary to all the prince of the world , by which letter her majesty signify , that whereas heretofore certain of her subject have repair 
 to our say stately porch , and have show their obedience to the same , and for that cause have desire 
 that leave and liberty may also be grant unto they , to come and go for traffic sake too and from our dominion , and that our imperial commandment may be give , that no man shall presume to hurt or hinder they , in any of their abode or passage by sea or land , and whereas she request that we will grant to all 
 184 
 her subject in general , this our favour , which before we have extend only to a few of her people : therefore as we have enter into amity , and most holy league with the most excellent king and prince our confederate , show their devotion , and obedience or service towards our stately porch ( as namely the french king , the venetian , the king of Polonia and other ) so also we have contract a inviolable amity , peace and league with the aforesaid queen . therefore we give licence to all her people , and merchant , peaceable and safe to come unto our Imperiali dominion , with all their merchandise and good without any impeachment , to exercise their traffic , to use their own custom , and to buy and sell accord to the fashion of their own country . 
 and further her majesty signify unto we , that certain of her people have heretofore be take prisoner , and be detain in captivity , and require that they may be set at liberty , and that as we have grant unto other prince our confederate , privilege , and Imperiali decree , concern our most inviolable league with they , so it will please our imperial majesty to grant and confirm the like privilege , and princely decree to the aforesaid queen . 
 wherefore accord to our humanity and gracious ingraft disposition , the request of her majesty be accept of we , and we have grant unto her majesty this privilege of we agreeable to reason and equity . and we straight command all our beglerbeg , and zanziacbeg our servant , and our Reyz , that be to say , our judge , and all our customer in all place , haven and passage , that as long as this league and amity with the condition , and article thereof , be keep and observe on the behalf of the aforesaid queen . 1 Oure Imperiali commandment and pleasure be , that the people and subject of the same queen , may safe and secure come to our princely dominion , with their good and merchandise , and lading , and other commodity by sea , in great and small vessel , and by land with their carriage 185 
 and cattle , and that no man shall hurt they , but they may buy and sell without any hindrance , and observe the custom and order of their own country . 
 [ ii i . 144. ] 2 item , if the aforesaid people and merchant shall 
 at any time in the course of their journey and deal by any mean take , they shall be deliver and enlarge , without any excuse or cavillation . 
 3 item , if their ship purpose to arrive in any of our port and haven , it shall|be lawful for they so to do in peace , and from thence again to depart , without any let or impediment . 
 4 item , if it shall happen that any of their ship in tempestuous weather shall be in danger of loss and perish , and thereupon shall stand in need of our help , we will , and command that our man and ship be ready to help and succour they . 
 5 item , if they shall|be willing to buy any victual for their money , no person shall withstand they , but they shall buy the same without any disturbance to the contrary . 
 6 item , if by any casualty their ship shall be drive on shore in peril of shipwreck , our beg and judge , and other our subject shall succour they , and such ware , and good of they as shall be recover from the loss , shall be restore to they , and no man shall wrong they . 
 7 item , if the people of the aforesaid queen , their interpreter and merchant , shall for traffic sake , either by land or sea repair to our dominion pay our lawful toll and custom , they shall have quiet passage , and none of our captain or governor of the sea , and ship , nor any kind of person , shall either in their body , or in their good and cattle , any way molest they . 
 8 item , if any Englishman shall grow in debt , and so owe money to any other man , and thereupon do absent himself that he can not be find , let no man be arrest or apprehend for any other man debt , except he be the surety . 
 186 
 9 item , if any Englishman shall make his will and testament , to who soever by the same he shall give his good , the party shall have they accord , and if he die intestate , he to who the consuli or governor of the society shall say the good of the dead be to be give , he shall have the same . 
 io item , if the Englishman or the merchant and interpreter of any place under the jurisdiction of England shall happen in the buy and sell of ware , by promise or otherwise to come in controversy , let they go to the judge , and cause the matter to be enter into a book , and if they will , let they also take letter of the judge testify the same , that man may see the book and letter , whatsoever thing shall happen , and that accord to the tenor thereof the matter in controversy and in doubt may be end : but if such thing be neither enter in book , nor yet the person have take letter of the judge , yet he shall admit no false witness , but shall execute the law accord to justice , and shall not suffer they to be abuse . 
 11 item , if any man shall say , that these be christian have speak any thing to the derogation of our holy faith and religion , and have slander the same , in this matter as in all other , let no false witness in any case be admit . 
 12 item , if any one of they shall commit any great crime , and fly thereupon can be find , let no man be arrest , or detain for another man fact , except he be his surety . 
 13 item , if any slave shall be find to be a Englishman , and their Consuli or governor shall sue for his liberty , let the same slave be diligent examine , and if he be find in deed to be English , let he be discharge and restore to the Englishman . 
 14 item , if any Englishman shall come hither either to dwell or traffic , whether he be marry or marry , he shall pay no poll or head money . 
 15 item , if either in Alexandria , Damascus , Samos , 187 
 A.D. 
 i58o . 
 Tunis , Tripoli in the west , the port town of . / Egypt , or in any other place , they purpose to choose to themselves consul or governor , let they do so , and if they will alter they at any time , and in the room of the former consul place other , let they do so also , and no man shall restrain they . 
 16 item , if their interpreter shall|be at any time absent , be occupy in other serious matter , let the thing then in question be stay and differ till his coming , and in the mean time no man shall trouble they . 
 17 item , if any variance or controversy shall arise among the Englishman , and thereupon they shall appeal to their consul or governor , let no man molest they , but let they free do so , that the controversy begin may be finish accord to their own custom . 
 18 item , if after the time and date of this privilege , any pirate or other free governor of ship trade the sea shall take any Englishman , and shall make sale of he , either beyond the sea , or on this side of the sea , the matter shall|be examine according to justice , and if the party shall|be find to be English , and shall receive the holy religion , then let he free be discharge , but if he will still remain a christian , let he then be restore [ ii i . 145. ] to the Englishman , and the buyer shall demand their money again of they who sell the man . 
 19 item , if the ship of war of our Imperiali highness shall at any time go forth to sea , and shall find any english ship lade with merchandise , no man shall hinder they , but rather shall use they friendly , and do they no wrong , even as we have give and grant article , and privilege to the french , venetian , and other king and prince our confederate , so also we have give the like to the english : and contrary to this our divine law and privilege , let no man presume to do any thing . 
 20 item , if either their great or small ship shall in the course of their voyage , or in any place to which 
 188 
 1581. come , be stay or arrest , let no man continue the same arrest , but rather help and assist they . 
 21 item , if any thief and robber shall by force take away any of their ship , and merchandise , let the same thief and robber be seek , and search for with all diligence , and let they be punish most severe . 
 22 last of all the beglerbeg , and zanziacbeg , our captain , our slave and servant of captain use the sea , and our judge , customer and governor of ship call reiz , and free reiz , all these , accord to the tenor of this privilege and article , shall|be bind to do accord : and , as long as the queen of England on her part shall due keep and observe this league and holy peace , express in this privilege , we also for our imperial part , do charge and command the same so long to be straight keep and observe . 
 give at Constantinople , in the 988. year of our most holy prophet , in the begin of the month of June , and in the year of Jesus 1580. 
 