the queen letter to the great Turk 1582. write in commendation of master hareborne , when he be send ambassador . 
 224 
 A.D. 
 1582. 
 the same in english . 
 ELizabeth by the grace of the most mighty God and only creator of heaven and earth , of England , France , and Ireland queen , the most invincible and most mighty defender of the christian faith against all kind of idolatry of all that live among the Christians and false profess the name of Christ , unto the most imperiali and most invincible prince , sultan Murad can , the most mighty ruler of the kingdom of turquoise , sole above all , and most sovereign monarch of the east empire , greeting . 
 whereas at our request your Imperiali majesty in the year of our saviour Jesus 1580. have enter into a league of peace with we , whereunto be unite a most large sc bountiful grant of certain privilege , by benefit whereof our subject may with all securi tie most safe and free travel ! by sea and land into all and singular part of your musulmanlike empire , and in the same exercise the trade of merchandise , may traffic , dwell , remain , depart from thence , and return thither at their pleasure , and in all place be maintain and defend from all damage of body and good , by such as be in authority under your imperiali majesty : we thankful and grateful receive the benefit of so great a privilege , as much as in we lie do approve and confirm the same , promise in the word of a prince , that we will keep the say league perfect and inviolable , and will cause our subject so to use the grant of the 226 
 privilege give unto they , as your Imperiali majesty shall never have occasion to repent you of your most princely liberality . and because the force of this grant , in the judgement of both our majesty , seem rather to consist in the use thereof , then in the word , we think good to send unto your imperiali majesty this our ambassador William hareborne , one of the esquire of m-our body , which both on our behalf shall yield thank Harebo ™ e unto your majesty , and also that we may use his good sa < qor t0 the endeavour for the establish of such order in our subject Turk . trade of merchandise , as well in your imperiali city of Constantinople , as in other place of your musulmanlike empire , as accord to the prescript of the privilege be grant by your princely majesty goodness , and shall be for they . benefit e of both our subject . for performance whereof , because he stand in need of your Imperiali majesty authority , we earnest beseech the same , that you will cause all those which bee in authority under your highness , by all their best mean to aid and assist this our ambassador in execute this your Imperiali majesty pleasure , for unto he we have commit this charge : wherein how honest he will discharge his credit towards both our majesty , i no whit stand in doubt : to who also our pleasure be , that all our subject shall be obedient , as far as the grant of your imperiali majesty do permit . Moreover , whereas request fir 
 that worthy personage Mustafa , your Imperiali majesty the prefer interpretor , have take speciali pain for the procure £ we of this league between we , we earnest beseech you that for our sake your imperiali majesty will vouchsafe to advance he unto the degree of the Mustafaraks or chief pensioner . if in these and in all other honest cause , our aforesaid agent and our subject shall find your Imperiali highness favour , a noble traffic will flourish between these nation , and we ( if by any way we may stand your state in stead ) will always most willing be ready to requite this your majesty favour and good will with all kind of good office . almighty 
 227 
 god the maker of the world preserve and keep your Imperiali majesty , etc 
 