a commandment to Patrasso in Morea . 
 when this commandment shall come unto you , know you , that the consuli of the english nation in our port of Patrasso , have give we to understand , that former we grant he a commandment that have pay once custom for the currant buy to lade in their ship , they shall not pay it again : accord to which they bring it to the port of Petrasso , inform thereof Mahomet the Nadir of Lepanto , he contrary to the tenor thereof and former order , do again take another custom of he , and require he to know why he so do contrary to our commandment , he answer we , he take it not for custom , but for a present . Moreover the say Consuli certify we how that the say Nadir contrary to ancient custom do not take for the king right as he ought current , but will have of the 285 
 poor man money at his pleasure , and therewith buy current at a very low price , which after he do forcible sell to we at a much high price , say it be remainder of the good of the king , and by this mean do hurt the poor man and do they wrong . wherefore i come - [ ii i . 182. ] man you by this my commandment , that you look to this matter between this Consuli , the Nadir , and this people , and do therein equal accord to right . and see that our commandment in this matter be observe in such sort , as they have once in the port pay full custom , do not pay it again , neither that this Nadir do take any more money of they by the way of present , for that therein it be most certain he do they injury contrary to the canon . and if with you shall be find to the value of one Asper take heretofore wrongful of they , see it present restore to they , without any default . and from henceforth see that he do neither he nor his people wrong , but that he deal with they in all thing accord to our canon , that the consuli and his hereafter have no occasion any more to complain here in our court , and that the Nadir proceed in gather corant of the people after the old order and not otherwise . This know you for certain , and give credit to this my commandment , which have read deliver again into the consul hand . from Constantinople the year of Mahomet 993. 
 