the commandment obtain of the grand signior by her majesty ambassador m. will . hareborne , for the quiet pass of her subject to and from his dominion , send in An. 1584. to the viceroy of Algiers , Tunis and Tripoli in Barbary . 
 to our Beglerbeg of Algiers . 
 e certify thou by this our commandment , that the right honourable will . hareborne ambassador to the queen majesty of England have signify unto we , that the ship of that country in their come and return to and from our empire , on the one part of the sea have the 
 Spaniard , florentine , sicilian and Malteses , on the other part our country commit to your charge : which abovesaid Christians will not quiet suffer their egress and regress , into , and out of our dominion , but do take and make the man captive , and forfeit the [ ii i . 178. ] ship and good , as the last year the Malteses do one , which they take at Gerbi , and to that end do continual lie in wait for they to their destruction , whereupon they be constrain to stand to their defence at any such time as they may meet with they . wherefore consider by this mean they must stand upon their guard , when they shall see any galley afar off , whereby if meeting with any of your galley and not know they , in their defence they do shoot at they , and yet after when they do certain know they , do not shoot any more , but 
 275 
 require to pass peaceable on their voyage , which you will deny , say , the peace be break because you have shoot at we , and so make prize of they contrary to our privilege , and against reason : for the prevent of which inconvenience the say ambassador have require this our commandment . we therefore command thou , that upon sight hereof thou do not permit any such matter in any sort whatsoever , but suffer the say Englishmen to pass in peace accord to the tenor of our commandment give , without any disturbance or let by any mean upon the way , although that meeting with thy galley , and not know they afar off , they take they for enemy shall shoot at they , yet shall you not suffer they to hurt they therefore , but quiet to pass . wherefore look thou that they may have right , accord to our privilege give they , and find any that absent himself , and will not obey this our commandment , present certify we to our porch , that we may give order for his punishment , and with reverence give faithful credit to this our commandment , which have read , thou shall again return it unto they that present it . from our palace in Constantinople , the 1. of June , 1584. 
 