to Assan Aga , eunuch and treasurer to Hassan bassa king of Alger , which Assan Aga be the son of Fran. Rowlie of Bristol merchant , take in the swallow . 
 receive your letter of will . Hamor gentleman my servant very thankful , aswell for the fervent faith that by his report i hear you have in our lord Jesus Christ , by who only merit and bloodshedding , you together with we and all other good Christians so true believe , 
 shall|be save , as also for your faithful obedience like a true subject to her majesty , natural love your country and countryman , declare in your favourable furtherance of the say Wil. Hamore , procure their redemption . of which your good and virtuous action , as i rejoice to understand , so will i impart the same to your singular commendation , both to our mistress her majesty , and her most honourable counseller the nobility of England , to who assure your self the report shall|be very welcome . and now this second time i be enforce by duty to God and her majesty , as also by the small regard your master have of the grand signor former commandment , to complain unto he , though not so vehement as i have occasion by his most unworthy answer . but i hope , and the rather by your mean , he will not contrary this second commandment , threaten he , not observe the same , loss of office and life . the due execution whereof by your virtuous and careful industry procure , will manifest to all the world , especial to her majesty , and 282 
 i her ambassador , your true christian mind and english heart , intentive bend to God honour , and the liberty of the poor man , for which i trust you be ordain another Joseph , to follow his example in true piety , in such sort that notwithstanding your body be subject to turkish thraldom , yet your virtuous mind free from those vice , next under God addict to you good service of your liege lady and sovereign prince , her most excellent majesty , will continual seek by all good mean to manifest you same in this and the like faithful service to your singular commendation , whereby both my self and other in that place have find you in all good office faithful affectionate , may in like case perform the like towards you , when and where you may have occasion to use i : which as i for my part do assure promise , and will no less faithful perform : so accord i expect herein , and hereafter the like of you , who most hearty salute i commend to the divine tuition and holy direction . from my house Rapamat , this 28. of June 1586. 
 your love and good friend her majesty ambassador with the grand signior , will . hareborne . 
 