a letter of the honourable m. Wil. hareborne her majesty ambass . with the grand signior to m. Tipton , appoint he consul of the english in Algiers , Tunis , and Tripoli of Barbary . 
 after Tipton , i have receive among other , you of the 10. of November 1584. by Soliman Sorda , certify the receipt of i of the 24. of June 1584. with the 3. commandment , which not ' be register , let it now be do . where you write the force of the privi - 
 lege to be break by our ship in shoot , and therefore be lawful take , you be deceive , for of those take 276 
 in they , have the grand signior now deliver we free , Wil. Moore , and Rob. Rawlings , and further promise the rest in like case , wheresoever they be , and that hereafter no violence shall|be show , consider we be merchant ship which go peaceable in their voyage , and be ignorant of the order of Algiers , neither know afar off , whether they be friend or the Christians galley in league against we , of who they most doubt , who not suffer our ship to come into these part , will make prize of the good and captive the man , so as they be not to let they come nigh they : and since we have not do contrary to the article of the same privilege , wherein be no order for Algiers prescribe we , as both by the originali now send we , and also by the copy now send you from London you may perceive , they accord to right be as abovesaid to be set free , and their good restore , which if it be not there accomplish as the grand signior have now command and most faithful promise , neither yet in case of their denial , those offender punish here , and our injury redress , we be to demand our congee , and command our merchant her majesty subject , to end their traffic here , which in our country commodity be prove and find by the grand signior to be so beneficial to his country as we be assure so well thereof , as also for the honour which his ancestor never have of friendship w‘ so mighty a prince as be her majesty , he will not but maintain you faith promise she , and the intercourse in due force . and where you say y‘ the grand signior his letter , in the behalf of the french , be no more accept there , then of a mean man , nor take no place , that be not material to we , our letter be after another sort much more effectual . for our case and they be find far different , in y‘ they be not only now out of favour with he , but also the commodity which they bring hither , as sugar , paper , bracelet , rope of baste almond , etc all which may be here well spare , and we contrary so well esteem , as he never deny we any thing since our 
 277 
 come demand , which neither their ambassador , nor the venetian can have here , and therefore we rest persuaded , know the wisdom of the Beglerbeg , who be advise by his friend from hence , of this our credit w‘ his master , he will so respect his commandment , as to accomplish you tenor thereof accord to our desire . and where you say y‘ the janizer rule all there , i know right well y* if thing be not do as the grand signior command , his lieutenant must answer it . and therefore i be full persuade if he do what he may they dare not resist he , for if they shall , those rebel shall not be unpunished of you grand signior . and though they speak their pleasure among themselves there , yet they be not so brutish , but they well consider that their master you grand signior may not be gainsay or mock of any . for upon his word depend the life or death even of the chief , as i have see since my come hither . So whatsoever these janissary say , they will be better advise in their deed then to withstand their viceroy , if he himself will use his lawful power , which if he do not , he can purge himself here of their evil proceed against the grand signior friend : for the foot may not rule the body , but contrariwise , the head , the foot , and all the rest of the member . and for that neither for fear , affection or otherwise you omit as a faithful true subject to her majesty to do your duty , i do by my warrant go herewith charge you , and in her majesty name , to the uttermost to use your good and faithful endeavour , as become a true subject , and in all thing that may concern her majesty good service , assist the Chaus with the rest of our messenger in counsel , travel , and what else shall be think requisite for your good discharge of your duty . and to you end you may bold proceed herein as also for the good opinion sir Edward Osborne and the company have of you , and i no less persuade of your wisdom , upright deal , and good experience in those part , do send you herewith the grand 278 
 signior and our patent for exercise the office of consul there , in Tripoli and Tunis : by virtue of which authority you may without fear proceed as the office do challenge in defence of our privilege , to redress all injury ofired our nation . which if you can get reform there of the beglerby upon your complaint , i thereof advertise , shall do it here , and to the uttermost maintain you in all rightful cause whatsoever , doubt you not . and hereafter accord to your advice , i will and do give our ship order not to fight with any galley of Alger , but to hoist out their skiff and go aboard to show they their safeconduct , and to present the captain with a garment , and you there in such like case be to take order that they do not forcible take any thing from they . Nothing doubt but the viceroy ( who friehdship in her majesty behalf i desire ) will not only perform the same your just request , and accord to right , restore to liberty our man since the privilege take , but also cause those y‘ take and sink our ship to answer the value , which i have set down true , and rather with the least in the inventory translate into 
 turkish , whereof the enclose be the copy in English , which i send to the end you may be the better inform of my demand by this our Chaus Mahomet , with who in all thing you be to confer of matter expedient , for the honour of her majesty country , and the commodity , and liberty of poor captive , which if the viceroy do well consider , accord to his wisdom , as the grand signior do thereof , he shall well perceive it not only a great honour to his master as aforesaid , to continue this amity with her majesty , but chief to the whole estate of his kingdom exceed profitable , which by this mean shall be abundant serve with the chief commodity they want , with many other thing of more importance to the grand signior his contentation , not herein to be mention . for i know the viceroy experience wisdom can well consider thereof , in such sort as he will not deny to accomplish his master commandment , and our earnest 279 
 the inventory of our ship and good sink and take by the galley of Alger . 
 request in so small a matter as this we require , whereof i expect no refusal ! : for thereby he shall increase his honour with the grand signior , be in credit with her majesty , be void of trouble which hereafter by future suit against he may happen , and his galley free of such doubtful issue as do chance , fight with our ship . which , as it be well know to all the world , have so great heart as never cowardly to yield to their enemy . and that therefore in that respect ( after the proverb , like esteem of their like ) they be the more of such a valiant prince as be their viceroy and his courageous soldier to be in all friendship cherish and better esteem . if the captain bassa have be return from Capha , i will in like manner have procure his letter , which for that he be not , i doubt nothing but that the grand signior will suffice . thus commend your self and these proceed to the almighty his merciful direction , i bid you most hearty well to fare . from my mansion Rapamat nigh Pera , this 30. of march 1585. 
 