the queen letter to the Turk 1584. for the restitution of the ship call the Jesus , and the english captive detain in Tripoli in Barbary , and for certain other prisoner in Argier . 
 the same in english . 
 Lizabeth , by the grace of the most high God , and only maker of heaven and earth , of England , France and Ireland queen , and of the christian 
 faith , against all the idolater and false professor of the name of Christ dwell among the christian , most invincible and puissant defender : to the most valiant and invincible prince , zultan Murad can , the most mighty ruler of the kingdom of Musulman , and of the east 
 312 
 empire the only and high monarch above all , health , and many happy and fortunate year , with great abundance of the best thing . 
 most noble and puissant'emperour , about two year now pass , we write unto your imperial ! majesty , that our well-beloved servant , William hareborne , a man of great reputation and honour , may be receive under your high authority , for our ambassador in Constantinople , and other place , under the obedience of your empire of Musulman : and also that the Englishman , be our subject , may exercise intercourse and merchandise in all those province , no less free than the french , polonians , venetian , germane , and other your confederate , which travel through diverse of the east part : endeavour that by mutual traffic , the east may be join and knit to the west . 
 which privilege , when as your most puissant majesty , by your letter and under your dispensation most liberal and favourable grant to our subject of England , we can not less doe , but in that respect give you as great thanks , as our heart can conceive , trust that it will come to pass , that this order of traffic , so well ordain , will bring with it self most great profit and commodity to both side , as well to the party subject to your empire , as to the province of our kingdom .. which thing that it may be do in plain and effectual manner , whereas some of our subject of late at Tripoli in Barbary , and at Argier , be by the inhabitant of those place ( be perhaps ignorant of your pleasure ) evil entreat and grievous vex , we do friendly and love desire your Imperiali majesty , that you will understand their cause by our ambassador , and afterward give commandment to the lieutenant and president of those province , that our people may henceforth free , without any violence , or injury , travel , and do their business in those place . 
 and we again with all endeavour , shall study to perform all those thing , which we shall in any wise 313 
 A.D. 
 1584. 
 understand to be acceptable to your imperiali majesty , which God , the only maker of the world , most best and most great , long keep in health , and flourish . give in our palace at London , the five day of the month of September , in the year of Jesus Christ our saviour , 1584. and of our reign , the 26. 
 