the time or seasonable wind call Monsons , wherein the ship depart from place to place in the east Indies . 
 ought , that the city of goa be the principali place of all the orientali India , and the winter there begin the 15 of may with very great rain , and so continue till the first of August , so that during that space , no ship can pass over the bar of goa , because through the continual shower of rain all the sand join together near unto a mountain call oghane , and all these sand be join together , run into the shoal of the bar and port of goa , and can have no other issue , but to remain in that port , and therefore it be shut up until the first of August , but at the 10 of August it open by reason of the rain which cease , and the sea do then scour the sand away again . the monson from goa to the northward , to say , for 
 Chaul , diu , Cambaia , Daman , basaim , and other place . 
 the ship depart betwixt the ten and 24 of August , for the northward place abovesaid , and to these place they may sail all time of the year , except in the winter , which begin and end at the time abovesaid . 
 the monson from the north part , for goa . 
 the ship depart from Chaul , diu , Cambaia , and other place northwards for goa , betwixt the 8 and 15 of Januarie , and come to goa about the end of February . the first monson from diu for the strait of Mecca . 
 the ship depart from diu about the 15 of Januarie , and return from the straight to diu in the month of August . 
 the second monson from diu for the strait of Mecca . 
 the ship depart betwixt the 2 5 and first of September , and return from the straight to diu , the first and 15 of May . 
 1584. the monson from secutra for ormus . 
 the ship depart about the ten of August for ormus : albeit secutra be a island and have but few ship , which depart as abovesaid . 
 the monson wherein the moor of the firm land come to goa . 
 about the fifteen of September the moor of the firm land begin to come to goa , and they come from all part , as well from balagvate , Bezenegar , as also from Sudalcan , and other place . 
 the monson wherein the moor of the firm land depart from goa . 
 they depart from goa betwixt the 10 and 15 day of November . note that by go for the north be mean the depart from goa , for Chaul , diu , Cambaia , Daman , basaim , ghassain , and other place unto Zindi : and by the south be understand , depart from goa , for Cochin , and all that coast unto cape Comori . 
 the first monson from goa for ormus . 
 the ship depart in the month of October from goa , for ormus , pass with easterly wind along the coast of Persia . 
 the second monson from goa to ormus . 
 the ship depart about the 20 of Januarie pass by the like navigation and wind as in the first monson , and this be call of the Portugal and Indians entre-monson . 
 the three monson from goa to ormus . 
 the ship depart betwixt the 25 of march , and 6 of April , have easterly wind , till they pass secutra , and then they find westerly wind , and therefore they set their course over for the coast of Arabia , till they come to cape Rasalgate and the strait of ormus , and this monson be most troublesome of all : for they make [ ii i . 279. ] two navigation in the heighth of Seylan , which be 6 degree and somewhat low . 
 the first monson from ormus for Chaul and goa . 
 the ship depart from ormus for Chaul , and goa in the month of September , with north and Northeast wind . 
 the second monson from ormus for Chaul and goa . 
 the second monson be betwixt the five and twenty and last of December , with like wind as the former monson . 
 the three monson from ormus for Chaul , and goa . 
 the three monson the ship depart from ormus , for Chaul and goa , betwixt the first and 15 of April , and they sail with southeast wind , east and Northeast wind , coast upon the Arabia side from cape mos-andon unto cape Rasalgate , and have lose the sight of cape Rasalgate , they have westerly wind , and so come for Chaul and goa , and if the say ship depart not before the 25 of April , they be not then to depart that monson , but to winter in ormus because of the winter . 
 the first monson from ormus for Zindi . 
 the ship depart for ormus betwixt the 15 and 20 of April . 
 the second monson from ormus for Zindi . 
 the ship depart betwixt the 10 and 20 of October for Zindi from ormus . 
 the monson from ormus for the red sea . 
 the ship depart from ormus betwixt the first and last of Januarie . 
 hitherto i have note the monson of the ship depart from goa to the northward : now follow the monson wherein the ship depart from goa to the southward . 
 the monson from goa for Calicut , Cochin , Seilan , and all that coast . 
 the ship depart from those place betwixt the 1 and 15 of August , and there they find it navigable all the year except in the winter , which continue as be aforesaid , from the 15 of may till the 10 of August . in like manner the ship come from these place for goa at every time in the year except in the winter , but of all other the best time be to come in November , December and January . 
 the first monson from goa , for Pegu. 
 the ship depart from goa , betwixt the 15 and 20 of April , and winter at saint Thomas , and after the 5 of August , they depart from saint Thomas for Pegu. 
 the second monson from goa for Pegu. 
 the ship depart from goa betwixt the 8 and 24 of August , go straight for Pegu , and if they pass the 24 of August , they can pass that monson , neither be there any more monson till April as be aforesaid . note that the chief trade be , to take money of saint Thomas rial , and patechoni , and to go to saint Thomas , and there to buy tellami , which be fine cloth of India , whereof there be great quantity make in Coromandel , and bring thither , and other merchandise be not good for that place except some dozen of very fair emerald orientali . for of gold , silver , and ruby , there be sufficient store in Pegu. 
 the monson from Pegu for the Indies . 
 the ship depart from Pegu betwixt the 15 and 2 5 of Januarie , and come to goa about the 25 of march , or in the begin of April . note , that if it pass the 10 of may before the say ship be arrive in goa , 
 note . 
 merchandise good for Pegu. 
 they can come thither that monson , and if they have not then fetch the coast of India , they shall with great peril fetch saint Thomas . 
 the first monson from goa for Malacca . 
 the ship depart betwixt the 15 and last of September , and arrive in Malacca about the end of October . 
 the second monson from goa to Malacca . 
 the ship depart about the 5 of may from goa , and arrive in Malacca about the 15 of June . 
 the first monson from Malacca to goa . 
 the ship depart about the 10 of September , and come to goa about the end of October . 
 the second monson from Malacca to goa . 
 the ship depart from Malacca about the 10 of February , and come to goa about the end of march . but if the say ship shall stay till the 10 of may , [ ii i . 280. ] they can enter into goa , and if at that time also they shall not be arrive at Cochin , they be force to return to Malacca , because the winter and contrary wind then come upon they . 
 the monson from goa for China . 
 the ship depart from goa in the month of April . 
 the monson from China for goa . 
 the ship depart to be the 10 of may in goa , and be not then arrive , they turn back to Cochin , and if they can fetch Cochin , they return to Malacca . 
 the monson from goa to the molucca . 
 the ship depart about the 10 or 15 of may , which time be pass , the ship can not pass over the bar of goa for the cause abovesaid . 
 the monson of the ship of the moluccaes arrival in goa . 
 the ship which come from the molucca arrive upon the bar of goa about the 15 of April . 
 