the ambassage which king John the second , king of Portugal , send to Edward the four king of England , which in part be to stay one John Tintam , and one William Fabian english man , from proceed in a voyage which they be prepare for Guinea , 1481 , take out of the book of the work of Gracias do resend , which intreat of the life and act of don John the second , king of Portugal . Chap. 33. 
 nd afterward the king send as ambassadors from the town of monte major to king Edward the four of England , Ruy de Sousa , a principali person , and a man of great wisdom and estimation , and in who the king repose great trust , with doctor John d’Elvas , and fer - 
 dinand de Pina , as secretary . and they make their voyage by sea very honourable , be very well accompany . Theise man be send on the behalf of their king , to confirm the ancient league with England , wherein it be condition that the new king of the one and of the other kingdom , shall be bind to send to confirm the old league . and likewise they have order to show and make he acquaint with the title which the king hold in the segneury of ginnee , to the intent that after the king of England have see the same , he shall give charge through all his kingdom , that no man shall arm or set forth ship to ginnee : and also to request he , that it will please he to give commandment to dissolve a certain fleet , which one John Tintam and one William Fabian , english man , be make , by commandment of the duke of Medina Sidonia , to go to the aforesaid part of ginnee . with 123 
 the first cause of this ambassage . 
 the second cause . 
 the three cause . 
 which ambassage the king of England seem to be very well please , and they be receive of he with very great honour , and he condescend unto all that the ambassador require of he , at who hand they receive authentical write of the diligence which they have perform , with publication thereof by the herald : and also proviso of those confirmation which be necessary . and have dispatch all thing well , and with the king good will , they return home into their country . 
 