the originali of the first voyage for traffic into the kingdom of Morocco in Barbary , begin in the year 1551. with a tall ship call the lion of London , whereof go as captain master Thomas Windam , as appear by this extract of a letter of James Aldaie , to the worshipful master Michael lock , which Aldaie profess himself to have be the first inventer of this trade . 
 late bene ac - 
 orshipful sir , have 
 quaint with your intent to prosecute the old intermit discovery for Catai , if therein with my knowledge , travel or industry i may do you service , i be ready to do it , and therein to adventure my life to the uttermost point . truth it be , that i have be by some man ( not my friend ) evil speak of at London , say that although i be a man of knowledge in the art of navigation and cosmography , and that i have be the inventer of some 
 voyage that be now grow to great effect ; yet say they malicious and without just cause , that i have not be willing at any season to proceed in those voyage that i have take in hand , take example especial of two voyage . the one be when i be master in the great bark Aucher for the Levant , in which voyage i go not , but the cause they do not know of my let from the same , nor of the other . but first the very 136 
 truth be , that i be from the same voyage let by the prince letter , which my master Sebastian Gabota have obtain for that purpose , to my great grief . and as touch the second voyage which i invent for the trade of Barbary , the live God know that i say most true , that when the great sweat be , ( whereon the chief of those with who i join in that voyage die , that be to say , sir John lutterell , John Fletcher , Henry ostrich and other ) ay my self be also take with the same sweat in London , and after it , whether with evil diet in keep , or how i know not , i be cast into such a extreme fever , as i be neither able to ride nor go : and the ship be at Portesmouth , Thomas Windam have she away from thence , before i be able to stand upon my leg , by who i lose at that instant fourscore pound . beside i be appoint by they that die ( if they have live ) to have have the whole government both of ship and good , because i be to they the sole inventer of that trade . 
 in the first voyage to Barbary there be two moor , be noble man , whereof one be of the king blood , convey by the say master Thomas Windham into their country out of England . 
 you humble at your commandment , James Alday . 
 