the first voyage make by master William towrson merchant of London , to the coast of Guinea , with two ship , in the year 1555. 
 Pon Monday the thirty day of Sep - September . tember we depart from the isle of wight , out of the haven of Neuport with two good ship , the one call the hart , the other the hind , both of London , and the master of they be John Ralph , and William carter , for 
 a voyage to be make unto the river de Sestos in Guinea , and to other haven thereabouts . 
 it fall out by the variety of wind , that it be the fourteen day of October before we can fetch October . Dartmouth : and be there arrive we continue in that ride six day , and the 20. of October our warp out of the haven , and set sail , direct our course towards the southwest , and the next morning we be run by estimation thirty league . 
 the first of November we find ourselves to be in November . 31. degree of latitude by the reckon of our master . 
 this day we run about 40. league also . 
 the second day we run 36. league . 
 the three day we have sight of Porto Santo , which be Porto Santo . a small island lie in the sea , about three league long , and a league and a half broad , and be possess by Portugal . it rise as we come from the northnorthwest like two small hill near together . the east end of the same island be a high land like a saddle with a valley , which make it to bear that form . 
 the west end of it be low with certain small round hillock . this island lie in thirty and three degree . 
 vi 177 m 
 the same day at n . of the clock we raise the isle Madera , of Madera , which lie 12. league from Porto Santo , towards the southwest : that island be a fair island and fruitful , and be inhabit by Portugal , it rise afar off like a great whole land and high . by three of the clock this day at after noon we be thwart of Porto Santo , and we set our course Southwest , to leave the isle of Madera to the eastward , as we do Porto Santo . Theise two island be the first land that we see since we leave the coast of England . about three of the clock after midnight we be thwart of Madera , within three league of the west end of it , and by mean of the high hill there , we be becalm : we suppose we run this day and night 30. league . 
 the four day we lay becalm under the isle of Madera , until one of the clock at afternoon , and then , the wind come into the east , we go our course , and run that day fifteen league . 
 the 5. day we run 15. league more . 
 the 6. day in the morning we raise the isle of tenerif . tenerif , otherwise call the pike , because it be a very high island , with a pike upon the top like a loaf of Palma , sugar . the same night we raise the isle of Palma , which be a high land also , and to the westward of the isle of tenerif . 
 Gomera . the 7. day we perceive the isle of Gomera , which be a island stand betwixt tenerif and Palma , about 12. league eastward from Palma , and 8. league westward from tenerif : and for fear of be becalm with the isle of tenerif , we leave both it , and Gomera to the eastward of we , and go betwixt Palma and Gomera . we run this day and night 30. league . 
 note that these island be 60. league from Madera , and that there be 3. Islands more to the westward of tenerif , name the grand Canaria , forteventura , and Lancerot , of which island we come not in sight : they be inhabit by Spaniards . 
 178 
 this day also we have sight of the isle of Ferro , Ferro . which be to the southward 13. league from the other island , and be possess by Spaniards . all this day and night by reason of the wind we can not double [ H. two . 24. ] the point or the isle of Ferro , except we will have go to the westward of it , which have be much out of our course : therefore we keep about , and run back five hour eastnortheast to the end we may double it upon the next board , the wind continue southeast , which have not be often see upon that coast by any traveller : for the wind continue there for the most part north-east , and east Northeast : so upon the other board by the next morning we be in a manner with the island , and have room enough to double the same . 
 the 8. day we keep our course as near the wind as we can , because that our due course to fetch the coast of Barbary be southeast and by east , but by the scant wind we can not go our due course , but go as near it as we can , and run this day and night 25. league . 
 the 9 day we run 30. league , the 10. 25. league , the 12. 24. 
 the 12. day we see a sail under our lee , which be as we think a fisherman , so that we go room to have speak with he , but within one hour there fall such a fog , that we can not see the ship nor one of we the other : we shoot off diverse piece to the hind , but she hear they not : at after noon she shoot off a piece which we hear , and make her answer with another : and within one half hour after the fog break up , and we be within 4. league of the shore upon the coast of Barbary , and we sound and have 14. fathom water . the bark also come room with we and there anchor by reason of the contrary wind . when we fall with the land , we can not judge just what part of the land it be , because the most part of that coast be low land , and no part to be judge of it 
 T79 
 but the forepart of the shore , which be white like chalk or sand , and very deep unto the hard shore : there immediate we begin to fish , and find great store of a kind of fish which the Portugal common fish for upon that coast , which they call pergoss , the Frenchman call they saders , and our man salt-water bream . before the clear up of the fog , the ship which we follow shape we such a course that we can see she no more , by reason of our shoot off to find the hind again . this part of the coast of Barbary , by our pilot reckon , be about 16. league to the eastwards of the river deal Oro. 
 the 13. day in the afternoon we spy a sail come towards we , which we judge to be the sail that we see the day before , and as soon as we spy he , we cause the hind to weigh her anchor and to go towards he , and man out our skiffe in like case to lay he aboard , or to discern what he be , and we our self within half a hour after weigh also : but after the sail have espy we , he keep about , and turn back again , and short after there fall such another fog , that we can not see he : which fog continue all that night , so that we be constrain to leave the chase . this afternoon the wind come about , and we go our course Southwest and by west , to go clear off the coast , we run that night sixteen league . 
 the fourteen day in the morning be very foggy : but about twelve a clock we espy a Carvell of 60. ton which be fish , and we send our skiff to he with five man , and all without any weapon save their oar . the Carvell for haste let slip her anchor , and set sail ; and they see that , fear that they shall not fetch she , will tarry for no weapon , and in the end overtake the Carvell , and make she to strike sail , and bring she away , although they have fourteen or fifteen man aboard , and every man his weapon , but they have not the heart to resist our man . 
 180 
 after they be come to we , they let fall their anchor , for we have cast anchor because the wind be not good : i cause then the skiff to come for i , and i go aboard of they to see that no harm shall be do to they , nor to take any thing but that which they may spare we for our money . so we take of they 3. tapnets of fig , two small pot of oil , two pipe of water , four hogshead of saltfish which they have take upon the coast , and certain fresh fish which they do not esteem , because there be such store upon that coast , that in a hour and sometime less , a man may take as much fish as will serve great store °f twenty man a day . for these thing , and for some wine which we drink aboard or they , and three or Barbary , four great can which they send aboard of our ship , i pay they twenty and seven pistolet , which be twice as much as they willing will have take : and so let they go to their anchor and cable which they have let slip , and get it again by our help . after this we set sail , but the wind cause we to anchor again about twelve league off the river del oro , as the Portugal tell we . there be five caravel more in this place , but when they see we , they make all away for fear of we . 
 the 15. day we rid still because of the wind . 
 the 16. day we set sail and run our course 40. league . this day , by the reckon of our pilot , we be right under the Tropike of Cancer . the 17. day TheTropike we run 2c . league within sight for the most part of °fGancerin the coast of Barbary . 
 the 18. day we run thirty league , and at twelve of the clock by the reckon of our pilot we be thwart of cape blank . cape blank . 
 the 22. day our pilot reckon we to be thwart [ H. two . 25. i cape Verde . cape er^ - 
 the 12. day of December we have sight of land of the coast of Guinea , which as soon as we see we hail into the land Northeast , and about 12. of the clock at night 
 181 
 we be near the shore within less than 2. league : and then we keep about and sound , and find 18. fathom water . afterwards we see a light towards the shore , which we think to have be a ship , and thereby judge it to be the river de Sestos , which light as soon as we espy , we come to a anchor and arm our top , and make all thing ready to fight , because we doubt that it may be some Portugal or french man : this night we remain at a anchor , but in the morning we see no man , only we espy 4. rock about 2. English mile from we , one great rock , and the 3. other small one , which when we see , we suppose that the light come from the shore , and so weigh and set sail east southeast along the shore , because the master do not well know the place , but think that we be not so far to the east as the river de Sestos . 
 this land all a long be a low land , and full of very high tree all along the shore , so that it be not possible to know the place that a man do fall withal , except it be by the latitude : in these 24. hour i think we run 16. league , for all the night we have a great gale as we be under sail , and have withal store of thunder and lightning . 
 the 13. day for the most part we run east southeast all along the shore , within two league always of the same , and find the land all as at the first , fill of wood and great rock hard aboard the shore , and the billow beat so sore , that the sea break upon the shore as white as snow , and the water mount so high that a man may easy discern it 4. league off , in such wise that no boat can land there . thus we run until 12. of the clock , and then they take the sun and after judge themselves to be 24. league past the river de Sestos to the eastwards , by reason whereof we hail into the shore within two english mile , and there anchor and find fifteen fathom water , and all off from the shore the sea so 182 
 » 555-smooth , that we may well have rid by a Hawser . all that afternoon we trim our boat and make she a sail , to the end that she may go along by the shore to seek some place to water in : for we can not go back again to the river de Sestos , because the wind blow always contrary , and the currant run - currant 
 n always to the eastwards , which be also against ast~ we . ’ 
 the 14. day we set sail St go back again along the coast , and send our boat hard aboard the shore to seek a water place , which they find about 12. of the clock , and we be far into the sea , meet with diverse boat of the country , small , long and narrow , and in every boat one man and no more : we give they bread which they do eat , and be very glad of it . about 4 of the clock our boat come to we with fresh water : and this night we anchor against a river . 
 the 15. day we weigh and set sail to go near the shore , and with our lead we sound all the way , and find sometime rock , and sometime fair ground , and at the shallow sound 7. fathom always at the least . so in fine we find 7. fathom and a half within a english mile of the shore , and there we anchor in a manner before the mouth of the river , and then we send our boat into the river for water , which go about a mile within the river , where they have very good water . river this river lie by estimation 8. league beyond the cent‘ river de Sestos , and be call in the card river S. Vincent , but it be so hard to find , that a boat be within half a mile of it shall not be able to discern that it be a river : by reason that direct before the mouth of it there lie a ledge of rock , which be much broad than the river , so that a boat must run in along the shore a good way betwixt the rock and the shore before it come to the mouth of the river , and be within it , it be a great river and diverse other river fall into it : the go into it be somewhat ill , because that at the enter the sea do 
 183 
 grain of Guinea . elephant tooth . 
 [ il two . 26. ] 
 go somewhat high , but be once within it , it be as calm as the Thames .. 
 there be near to the sea upon this river diverse inhabitant , which be mighty big man and go all naked except some thing before their privy part , which be like a clout about a quarter of a yard long make of the bark of tree , and yet it be like a cloth : for the bark be of that nature , that it will spin small after the manner of linen . some of they also wear the like upon their head be paint with diverse colour , but the most part of they go bare head , and their head be clip and shear of diverse sort , and the most part of they have their skin of their body raze with diverse work , in manner of a leather jerkin . the man and woman go so alike , that one can know a man from a woman but by their breast , which in the most part be very foul and long , hang down low like the udder of a goat . 
 the same morning we go into the river with our skiff , and carry certain bason , manel , etc and there we take that day one hogshead and 100 livre . weight of grain , and two elephant tooth at a reasonable good reckon . we sell they both bason , and manelios , and margarit , but they desire most to have bason : for the most part of our bason we have by estimation about 30. livre . for a piece , and for a elephant tooth of 30. livre . weight , we give they 6. 
 the 16. day in the morning we go into the river with our skiff , and take some of every sort of our merchandise with we , and show it to the negro , but they esteem it not , but make light of it , and also of the bason , manellio and margarit , which yesterday they do buy : howbeit for the bason they will have give we some grain , but to no purpose , so that this day we take not by estimation above one hundred pound weight of grain , by mean of their captain , who will suffer no man to sell any thing but through his hand , and at his price : he be so subtle , that for 184 
 a basin he will not give 15. pound weight of grain , and sometime will offer we small dishful , whereas before we have basket full , and when he see that we will not take they in contentment , the captain depart , and cause all the rest of the boat to depart , think belike that we will have follow they , and have give they their own asking . but after that we perceive their fetch , we weigh our Grapnel and go away , and then we go on land into a small town to see the fashion of the country , and there come a threescore of they about we , and at the first they be afraid of we , but in the end perceive that we do not hurt , they will come to we and take we by the hand and be familiar with we , and then we go into their town , the descrip-which be like to twenty small hovel , all cover over oftheir^ with great leaf and baggage , and all the side open , and a scaffold under the house about a yard high , where they work many pretty thing of the bark of tree , and there they lie also . in some of their house they work iron and make fair dart , and diverse other thing to work their boat , and other thing withal , and the woman work as well as the man . but when we be there diverse of the woman to show we pleasure dance and sing after their manner , full ill to our ear . 
 their song be thus : 
 sakere , sakere , ho , ho . sakere , sakere , ho , ho . 
 and with these word they leap and dance and clap their hand . beast we can see none that they have , but two goat , small dog , and small hen : other beast we see none . after that we have well mark all thing we depart and go aboard our ship : which thing the captain of the other town perceive , send two of his servant in a boat with a basket of grain , and make we sign that if when we have sleep we will come again into their river , we shall have store of grain , and so show we his grain and depart . 
 the 17. day in the morning because we think that the negro will have do something because the 
 captain send for we , i require the master to go on shore , and send the rest of our merchant with he , and tarry aboard my self by reason that the last day he esteem our thing so little : so when the master and the rest come into the river , the captain with diverse other come to they , and bring grain with they , and after that he see that i be not there , he make sign to know where i be , and they make sign to he again that i be in the ship : and then he make sign to know diago the who be captain by the name of Diago , for so they call name of a their captain , and they point to the master of the ship : 
 captain . begin to bis grain ) but he hold they 
 so unreasonable , that there be no profit to be make of they : which thing the master perceive , and see that they have no store of grain , come away , and take not above 50. pound weight of grain . than he go a shore to the little town where we be the day before , and one of they pluck a gourd , wherewith the negro be offend , and come many of they to our man with their dart and great target , and make sign to they to depart : which our man do , have but one bow and two or three sword , and go aboard the boat and come away from they : and assoon as they be come aboard our weigh and set sail , but the wind be off the sea , so that we can not get out clear of certain rock , and therefore we come to a anchor again . 
 the latitude this river be call river S. Vincent , stand in 4. of . Vincent degree anc [ a half , and it eb and flow there ' agree and a everX I2 - hour , but not much water when it eb half . the most : while we be there , it ebb one fathom and a half water . 
 this country as far as we can perceive be altogether woody , and all strange tree , whereof we know leaf of ex - none , and they be of many sort , with great leaf like ceed length , great dock , which bee high than any man be able to reach the top of they . 
 long pease there be certain peason by the sea side , which grow 
 stalk . upon great and very long stalk , one of the stalk i 186 
 1555-measured and find it 27. pace long , and they grow upon the sand like to tree , and that so near the sea , that sometime the sea flow into the wood as we may perceive by the water mark . the tree and all thing in this place grow continual green . diverse of the woman have such exceed long breast , that some long woman of they will lay the same upon the ground and lie down breast . by they , but all the woman have not such breast . 
 at this place all the day the wind blow off the [ ii two . 27. ] sea , and all the night off the land , but we find it to differ sometime , which our master marveil at . 
 this night at 9 of the clock the wind come up at the east , which ordinary about that time be wont to come out of the north northwest off the shore : yet we weigh and hail off south with that wind all night into the sea , but the next morning we hail in again to the land , and take in 6. ton of water for our ship , and i think the hind take in as much . 
 i can not perceive that here be any gold , or any other good thing : for the people be so wild and idle , that they give themselves to seek out nothing : if they will take pain they may gather great store of grain , but in this place i can not perceive two tun . 
 there be many fowl in the country , but the people will not take the pain to take they . 
 i observe some of their word of speech , which i 
 think good here to set down . 
 Bezow , bezow , ' Manegete afoye , Crocow afoye , zeramme afoye , beg sack , beg come , > - ‘ be their salutation . grain enough . hen enough . have you enough ? give i a knife . give i bread . 
 Borke , coutrecke , veede , brekeke , diago , 185 hold your peace . the lie . put forth , or empty . Rowe . their captain , and some 
 the language about the river of 8. Vincent . 
 call he Dabo . Theise and other word they speak very thick , and oftentimes recite one word three time together , and at the last time long than at the two first . 
 the 18. day towards night , as we be sail along the coast , we meet with certain boat in the sea , and the man show we that there be a river thwart of we , where there be grain to be sell , but we think it not good to tarry there , lest the other ship shall get before we . this river have lie before it three great rock , and 5. small rock , one great tree , and a little tree right by the river , which in height exceed all the rest : we hail this night along the coast 10. league . 
 the 19 day as we coast the shore , about twelve of the clock there come out to we 3. boat to tell we that they have grain , and bring some with they for a show , but we can not tarry there . we proceed along the coast , and anchor by the shore all the night , and run this day 10. league . 
 the 20. day the hind have anchor by we among rock , and foul ground , lose a small anchor . at noon , as we pass along the coast , there come forth a negro to we , make sign , that if we will go a shore , we shall have grain , and where we anchor at night , there come another to we , and bring grain , and show we they , and make sign that we shall tarry , and make a fire upon the land in the night , mean thereby to tell we where we shall land , and so they do in diverse other place upon the coast , where they see we to anchor . 
 the tide and in all the place where we have anchor , since we come shore rome our watr‘ns placei we have find the tide always ' running to the westwards , and all along the coast many rock hard aboard the shore , and many of they a league off the shore or more , we run this day 12. league . 
 the 21. day , although we run all day with a good gale of wind , yet the tide come so sore out of the coast , 188 
 that we be not able to run above six league : and this day there come some negro to we , as there have do other time . 
 the 22. we run all day and night to double a point , call Das palma , and run sixteen league . 
 the 23. day about 3. of the clock we be thwart of the point , and before we come to the westermost part of it , we see a great ledge of rock , which lie west from the cape about 3. league and a league or more from the land . Shortly after we have sight of the eastermost part of the cape , which lie 4. league from the westermost part , and upon the very corner thereof lie two green place , as it be close , and to the westwards of the cape the land part from the cape , as it be a bay , whereby it may well be know . four league more beyond that there lie a headland in the sea , and about two league beyond the headland there go in a great bay , as it be a river , before which place we anchor all that night , which we do , lest in the night we shall overrun a river , where the * last year they have all their elephant tooth . 
 this cape das palmas lie under four degree and a half , and betwixt the say cape , and the river de Sestos be the great store of grain to be have , and be past the say cape , there be no great store else where . 
 where we anchor this night , we find that the tide , which before run always to the westward , from this cape run all to the eastward : this day we run some 16. league . 
 the 24. day run our course , about eight of the clock there come forth to we certain boat , which bring with they small egg , which be soft without shell , and they make we sign , that there be within the land fresh water , and goat : and the master think that it be the river which we seek , cast anchor and send the boat on shore , with one that know the river , and come near the shore , he perceive that it be not the river , and so come back again , and go along the 189 
 A.D. 
 1555 - 
 the point oj Palmas , 
 * that be they ere 1554. 
 the tide run eastward . [ ii two . 28. ] 
 shore , with their oar and sail , and we weigh and run along the shore also : and be thirteen league beyond the cape , the master perceive a place which he judge to be the river , when we be in deed two mile shoot past it : yet the boat come from the shore , and they that be in she say , that there be no river : notwithstanding we come to a anchor , and the master and i take five man with we in the boat , and when he come near the shore , he perceive that it be the same river which he do seek : so we row in , and find the entrance very ill , by reason that the sea go so high : and be enter , diverse boat come to we , and show we that they have elephant tooth , and they bring we one of about eight pound , and a little one of a pound , which we buy : than they bring certain tooth to the river side , make sign , that if the next day we will come again , they will sell we they : so we give unto two captain , to either of they a manillio , and so we depart , and come aboard , and send out the other boat to another place , where certain boat that come into the sea , make we sign that there be fresh a town , water : and be come thither , they find a town , but no river , yet the people bring they fresh water , and show they a elephant tooth , make sign that the next day they will sei they tooth , and so they come aboard . 
 this river lie by the card thirteen league from the cape Das palma , and there lie to the westwards of the same a rock about a league in the sea , and the river it self have a point of land come out into the sea , whereupon grow five tree , which may well be discern two or three league off , come from the westward , but the river can be perceive until such time as a man be hard by it , and then a man may perceive a little town on each side the river , and to each town there belong a captain . the river be but small , but the water be good and fresh . 
 two mile beyond the river , where the other town be , 190 
 there lie another point into the sea , which be green like a close , and not above six tree upon it , which grow one of they from the other , whereby the coast may well be know : for along all the coast that we have hitherto sail by , i have not see so much bare land . 
 in this place , and three or four league to the westward of it , all along the shore , there grow many palm tree , whereof they make their wine de Palma . Theise tree may easy be know almost two league off , for they be very high and white body , and straight , and be big in the midst : they have no bough , but only a round bush in the top of they : and at the top of the same tree they boar a hole , and there they hang a bottle , and the juice of the tree run out of the say hole into the bottle , and that be their wine . 
 from the cape das Palmas , to the cape tres puntas , there be 100 league : and to the port where we purpose to make sale of our cloth beyond the cape Tres punta 40. league . 
 note , that betwixt the river de Sestos , and the cape Das palma , be the place where all the grain be gather . 
 the language of the people of this place , as far as i can perceive , differ not much from the language of those which dwell where we water before : but the people of this place be more gentle in nature than the other , and goodly man : their building and apparel be all one with the other . 
 their desire in this place be most of all to have manillio and margarite : as for the rest of our thing , they do little esteem they . 
 about nine of the clock there come boat to we forth , from both of the place aforesaid , and bring with they certain tooth , and after they have cause i to swear by the water of the sea that i will not hurt they , they come aboard our ship three or four of they , and we give they to eat of all such thing 191 
 many palm tree . 
 cape tres puntas . 
 their manner of swear by the water of the sea 
 as we have , and they do eat and drink of all thing , as well as we our self . afterwards we buy all their tooth , which be in number 14. and of those 14. there be 10. small : afterward they depart , make we sign that the next day we shall come to their town . 
 the 26. day because we will not trifle long at this place i require the master to go unto one of the town , and to take two of our merchant with he , and i my self go to the other , and take one with i , because these two town stand three mile asunder . to these place we carry somewhat of every kind of merchandise that we have : and he have at the one town , nine tooth , which be but small , and at the other town where i be , i have eleven , which be also not big , and we leave aboard with the master certain manillio , wherewith he buy 12. tooth aboard the ship , in our absence : and have buy these of they , we perceive that they have no more tooth : so in that place where i be one bring to i a small goat , which i buy , and to the master at the other place they bring five small hen , which he buy also , and after that we see there be nothing else to be have , we depart , and by one of the clock we meet aboard , and then weigh , and go east our course 18. league still within sight of land . 
 the 28. the wind vary , and we run into the sea , and the wind come again off the sea , we fall with the land again , and the first of the land which we raise show as a great red cliff round , but not very high , and to the eastward of that another small read cliff , and right above that into the land a round hummoke and green , which we take to be tree . we run in these 24. hour , not above four league . 
 the 29. day come near to the shore , we perceive the red . cliff aforesaid to have right upon the top of it a great heap of tree , and all to the westwards of it full of red cliff as far as we can see , and all 192 
 along the shore , as well upon the cliff , as otherwise , full of wood : within a mile of the say great cliff there be a river to the eastwards , and no cliff that we can see , except one small cliff , which be hard by it . we run this day and night 12. league . 
 the wind that we have in this place by the report of the people and of those that have be there , have not be usual , but in the night , at north off the land , and in the day south off the sea , and most common northwest , and Southwest . 
 the 31. day we go our course by the shore northwards : this land be all along a low shore , and full of wood , as all the coast be for the most part , and no rock . this morning come out many boat which go a fish , which bee great boat than those which we see before , so that in some of they there sate 5. man , but the fashion of the boat be all one . in the afternoon about three of the clock we have sight of a town by the sea side , which our pilot judge to be 25. league to the westwards of the cape tres puntas . 
 the three of January in the morning we fall with the cape tres puntas , and in the night pass , as our cape tres pilot say , by one of the Portugal castle , which be 8. league to the westwards of the cape : upon the first sight of the cape we discern it a very high land , and all grow over with tree , and come near to it , we perceive two head land , as it be two bay betwixt they , which open right to the westward , and the uttermost of they be the eastern cape , there we perceive the middle cape , and the eastermost cape : the middle cape stand not above a league from the west cape , although the card show they to be 3. league one from the other : and that middle cape have right before the point of it a small rock so near to it , that it can be discern from the cape , except a man be near to the shore , and upon the same cape stand a great heap of tree , and when a man be thwart 
 vi 193 n 
 the same cape to the eastward , there rise hard by it a round green hommoke , which come out of the main .. 
 the third cape be about a league beyond the middle cape , and be a high land like to the other cape , and betwixt the middle , and the third come out a little head or point of a land out of the main , and diverse rock hard aboard the shore . 
 before we come to the cape , be about 8. league off they , we have the land southeast , and by east , and be past the cape , the land run in again east Northeast . 
 about two league beyond the far cape there be a low glade about two mile long , and then the land rise high again , and diverse headland rise one beyond another , and diverse rock lie at the point of the first headland . the midst of these cape be the near to the southward , i mean , further into the sea then any of the other , so that be to the eastward of it , it may be discern far off , and be so to the eastward it rise with two small rock . 
 this day we anchor for fear of overshoot a town call S. Johns . we run this day not above 8. league . in the afternoon this day there come a boat of the country from the shore , with five man in she , and go along by we , as we think , to discern our flag , but they will not come near we , and when they have well look upon we , they depart . 
 the four day in the morning , sail by the coast , we espy a ledge of rock by the shore , and to the westwards of they two great green hill join together , so that between they it be hollow like a saddle : and within the say rock the master think the aforenamed town have stand , and therefore we man our boat , and take with we cloth , and other merchandise , and row ashore , but go along by the coast , we see that there be no town , therefore we go aboard again . 
 194 
 from these two hill aforesaid , about two league to the eastward , lie out into the sea almost two mile a ledge of rock , and beyond that a great bay , which run into the north northwestward , and the land in this place lie north Northeast along the shore : but the uttermost point of land in that place that we can see , lay Northeast , and by east from we . 
 after that we be with a small gale of wind run past that uttermost headland , we see a great red cliff , which the master again judge to be the town of saint Johns , and then we take our boat with merchandise , and go thither , and when we come thither , we perceive that there be a town upon the top of the hill , and so we go towards it , and when we be hard by it , the people of the town come together a great sort of they , and wave we to come in , with a piece of cloth , and so we go into a very fair bay , which lie to the eastward of the cliff , whereupon the town stand , and be within the cliff , we let fall our grapnell , and after that we have tarry there a good space , they send a boat aboard of we , to show we that they have gold , and they show we a piece about half a crown weight , and require to know our measure , and our weight , that they may show their captain thereof : and we give they a measure of two else , and a weight of two angel to show unto he , which they take , and go on shore , and show it unto their captain , and then they bring we a measure of two else , one quarter and a half , and one crusado-weight of gold , make we sign that so much they will give for the like measure , and less they will not have . after this , we tarry there about a hour , and when we see that they will do no otherwise , and withal understand , that all the best place be before we , we depart to our ship and weigh , and run along the shore , and go before with our boat , and have sail about a league , we come to a point where there lay forth a ledge of rock , like to the other before speak of , 195 
 [ ii two . 30. ] 
 and be pass that people , the master spy a place which he say plain be the town of don John : and the night be come upon we , so that we can not well discern it , but we anchor as near unto the place as we can . 
 the town of the five day in the morning we perceive it to be don John. same town jn deed , and we man our boat and go thither , and because that the last year the Portugal at that place take away a man from they , and after shot at they with great base , and do beat they from the place , we let fall our grapnel almost a base shot off the shore , and there we lie about two hour , and no boat come to we . then certain of our man with the hind boat go into the bay which lie to the eastward of the town , and within that bay they find a goodly fresh river , and afterward they come and wave to we also to come in , because they perceive the negro to come down to that place , which we do : and immediate the negro come to we , and make we sign that they have gold , but none of they will come aboard our boat , neither can we perceive any boat that they have to come withal , so that we judge that the Portugal have spoil their boat , because we see half of their town destroy . 
 we have stay there a good space , and see that they will not come to we , thrust our boat head a shore , be both well appoint , and then the captain of the town come down be a grave man : and he come with his dart in his hand , and six tall man after he , every one with his dart and his target , and their dart be all of iron , fair and sharp , and there come another after they which carry the captain stool : we salute he , and put off our cap , and bow our self , and he like one that think well of himself , do not move his cap , nor scant bow his body , and sit he down very solemn upon his stool : but all his man put off their cap to we , and bow down themselves . 
 196 
 he be clothe from the loin down with a cloth of that country make , wrap about he , and make fast about his loin with a girdle , and his cap of a certain cloth of the country also , and bear legged , and bear footed , and all bare above the loin , except his head . 
 he servant , some of they have cloth about their loin , and some nothing but a cloth betwixt their leg , and make fast before , and behind to their girdle , and cap of their own make , some like a basket , and some like a great wide purse of beast skin . 
 all their cloth , cord , girdle , fish line , and all such like thing which they have , they make of the bark of certain tree , and thereof they can work thing very pretty , and iron work they can make very fine , of all such thing as they do occupy , as dart , fishhook , their hook iron , iron head , and great dagger , some of weapons-them as long as a woodknife , which be on both side exceed sharp , and bend after the manner of turquoise blade , and the most part of they have hanging at their left side one of those great dagger . 
 their target be make of such pill as their cloth be make of , and very close wrought , and they be in form four square , and very great , and somewhat long than they be broad , so that kneel down , they make their target to cover their whole body . their bow be short , and of a pretty strength , as much as a man be able to draw with one of his finger , and the string be of the bark of a tree , make flat , and about a quarter of a inch broad : as for their arrow , i have not as yet see any of they , for they have wrap they up close , and because i be busy i can not stand about it , to have they open they . their gold also they work very well . 
 when the captain be set , i send he two else of [ ii two . 31. ] cloth , and two bason , and give they unto he , and he send again for a weight of the same measure , and i send he a weight of two angel , which he will not take , 
 197 
 neither will he suffer the town to buy any thing , but the bason of brass : so that we sell that day 74. bason unto the man of the town , for about half a angel weight , one with another , and nine white bason , which we sell for a quarter of a angel a piece , or thereabouts . 
 we show they all our other thing which we have , but they do not esteem they . 
 about two of the clock , the captain who do depart in the morning from we , come again , and bring with he to present i withal , a hen , and two great root , which i receive , and after make i sign that the country will come to his town that night , and bring great store of gold , which in deed about 4. of the clock they do : for there come about 100 man under 3. captain , well appoint with their dart and bow , and when they come to we , every man stick down his dart upon the shore , and the captain have stool bring they , and they sit down , and send a young man aboard of we , which bring a measure with he of a ell , and one four part , and one sixteenth part , and he will have that four time for a weight of one angel and twelve grain : i offer he two else , as i have do before for two angel weight , which he esteem nothing , but still stick at his four measure aforesaid : yet in the end , when it grow very late , and i make he sign that i will depart , he come to four else for the weight abovesaid , and otherwise he will not deal , and so we depart . this day we take for bason six ounce and a half and one eight part . 
 the sixth day in the morning we man our boat and the skiff well , for fear of the Portugal which the last year have take away a man from the other ship , and go on shore , and land , because they have no boat to come to we , and so the young man which be with we the night before be send aboard , who seem to have deal and bargain before with the Portugal for he can speak a little portuguise , and be perfect in 198 
 weight and measure : at his come he offer we , as he have do before , one angel , and twelve grain for four else , and more he will not give , and make sign , that if we will not take that , we shall depart , which we do : but before we do indeed depart , i offer he of some rot cloth three else for his weight of a angel and twelve grain , which he will not take , and then we depart make sign to he that we will go away , as indeed we will have do , rather than have give that measure , although the cloth be ill , see we be so near to the place , which we judge to be better for sale . than we go aboard our ship , which lie about a league off , and come back again to the shore for sand and balaste : and then the captain perceive that the boat have bring no merchandise but come only for water and sand , and see that we will depart , come unto they , make sign again to know whether we will not give the four eaves , and they make sign again , that we will give they but three , and when they see that the boat be ready to depart , they come unto they and give they the weight of our angel and twelve grain , which we require before and make sign , that if we will come again , they will take three else . so when the boat come aboard , we lay ware in they both , and for the speedy dispatch i and John Savill go in one boat , and the master John Makeworth , and Richard curligin , in the other , and go on shore , and that night i take for my part fifty and two ounce , and in the other boat they take eight ounce and a quarter , all by one weight and measure , and so be very late , we depart and go aboard , and take in all this day three pound . 
 the seven day we go a shore again , and that day i take in our boat three pound 19 ounce , so that we dispatch almost all the cloth that we carry with we before noon , and then many of the people be depart and those that remain have little gold , yet they make we sign to fetch they some latten bason , which 199 
 i will , not because i purpose not to trine out you time , but go thence with speed to don Johns town . but John Savill and John Makeworth be desirous to go again : and i , loath to hinder they of any . profit , consent , but go not my self : so they take eighteen ounce of gold and come away , see that the people at a certain cry make , be depart . 
 while they be at the shore , there come a young fellow which can speak a little portuguise , with three more with he , and to he i sell 39 hason and two small white saucer , for three ounce , etc which be the best reckon that we do make of any bason : and in the forenoon when i be at the shore , the master sell five bason unto the same fellow , for half a ounce of gold . 
 this fellow , as far as we can perceive , have be take into the castle by the Portugal , and be get away from they , for he tell we that the Portugal be [ ii two . 32. ] bad man , and that they make they slave if they can take they , and will put iron upon their leg , and beside he tell we , that as many Frenchman or Englishman , as they can take ( for he can name these two very well ) they will hang they : he tell we further , 60. Portugal that there be 60 man in the castle , and that every year ^htaCaStle there come thither two ship , one great , and one small ‘ carveil , and further , that don John have war with the Portugal , which give i the better courage to go to his town , which lie but four league from the castle , wherehence our man be beat the last year . 
 this fellow come aboard our ship without fear , and assoon as he come , he demand , why we have not the english bring again their man , which the last year we take * take ™ ™ away , and can tell we that there be five take away 
 negro ? hy Englishmen : we make he answer , that they be 
 in England well use , and be there keep till they can speak the language , and then they shall be bring again to be a help to Englishman in this country : and then he speak no more of that matter . 
 200 
 our boat be come aboard , we weigh and set sail and a title after spy a great fire upon the shore , and by the light of the fire we may discern a white thing , which they take to be the castle , and for fear of overshoot the town of don John we there anchor two league off the shore , for it be hard to fetch up a town here , if a ship overshoot it . this day we take seven pound , and five ounce of gold . 
 this town lie in a great bay , which be very deep . 
 the people in this place desire most to have bason and cloth . they will buy some of they also many trifle , as knife , horsetaile , home : and some of our 
 man go a shore , sell a cap , a dagger , a hat , etc 
 they show we a certain course cloth , which i think to be make in France , for it be course wool , and a 
 small thread , and as thick as worsted , and stripe with 
 stripe of green , white , yellow etc 
 diverse of the 
 people do wear about their neck great bead of it ’ " ' . here also i learn 
 glass of diverse colour . here also of their language , as follow : 
 some 
 Mattea , mattea , Dassee , dassee , sheke , cowrte , Cracca , Bassina , Foco , foco , Molta , 
 ' be their 
 salutation . 
 i thank you . 
 gold . 
 cut . 
 knife . 
 basin . 
 cloth . 
 much , or great store . 
 this language seem partly to be corrupt . 
 the eight day in the morning we have sight of the castle , but by reason of a mist that then fall we can not have the perfect sight of it , till we be almost at the town of don John , and then it clear 
 sight of the castleofMina . 
 up , and we see it and a white house , as it be a chapel , upon the hill about it : than we hail into the shore , within two english mile of don Johns town , and there anchor in seven fathom water . here , as in many other place before , we perceive that the currant go with the wind . 
 201 
 the land here be in some place low and in some high , and full of wood altogether . 
 do John yhe town of don John be but little , of about scribe twenty house , and the most part of the town be 
 ' wall in with a wall of a man height , make with reed or sedge , or some such thing . here we stay two or three hour after we have anchor , to see if any man will come unto we : and see that none do come , we man our boat and put in merchandise , and go and anchor with our boat near to the shore : than they send out a man to we who make we sign that that be the town of don John , and that he himself be in the country , and will be at home at the go down of the sun , and when he have do , he require a reward , as the most part of they will do which come first aboard , and i give he one ell of cloth and he depart , and that night we hear no more of he . 
 the nine day in the morning we go again with our boat to the shore , and there come forth a boat to we , who make sign that don John be not come home , but will be at home this day : and to that place also come another boat from the other town a mile from this , which be call don Devis , and bring with he gold to show we , make sign that we shall come thither . i then leave in this place John Savill , and John Makeworth , and take the hind , and go to the other town and there anchor , and take cloth and go to shore with the boat , and by and by the boat come to we and bring a measure of four yard long and a half , and show we a weight of a angel and twelve grain , which they will give for so much , and not otherwise : so i stay and make no bargain . and [ ii two . 33. ] all this day the bark lie at don Johns town , and do nothing , have answer that he be not come home . 
 the ten day we go again to the shore , and there come out a boat with good store of gold , and have drive the matter off a long time , and have 202 
 bring the measure to a nail less than three else , and their weight to a angel and twenty grain , and can not bring they to more , i do conclude with they and sell , and within one quarter of a hour i take one pound and a quarter of a ounce of gold : and then they make i sign to tarry , till they have part their cloth upon the shore as their manner be , and they will come again , and so they go away , and lay the cloth all abroad upon the sand piece by piece , and by and by one come run down from the town to they , and speak unto they , and forthwith every man make as much haste as he can away , and go into the wood to hide his gold and his cloth : we mistrust some knavery , and be wave by they to come a shore , yet we will not , but go aboard the hind , and perceive upon the hill 30 man which we judge to be Portugal : and they go up to the top of the hill and there muster and show themselves , have a flag with they . than i be desirous to know what the hart do , take the hind boat and go towards she , and when i come near to they they shoot off two piece of ordinance which i marveil at : i make as much haste as i can to she , and meet her boat and skiff come from the shore in all haste , and we meet aboard together . they show i that they have be a shore all that day , and have give to the two son of don John , to either of they three yard and a half of cloth , and three bason betwixt they , and have deliver he 3 yard of cloth more and the weight of a angel and 12 grain , and be on land do tarry for his answer , and in the mean time the Portugal come running from the hill upon they , whereof the negro a little before have give they warning , and bid they to go away but they per - invade our ceive it not . the son of don John conspire with man . 
 the Portugal against they , so that they be almost upon they , but yet they recover their boat and set off from the shore , and the Portugal shoot their 
 203 
 caliver at they , but hurt no man , and then the ship perceive it , shoot off the two piece aforesay among they . hereupon we lay base in both the boat , and in the skiff and man they well , and go a shore again , but because of the wind we can not land , but lie off in the sea about ten score and shot at they , but the hill succour they , and they from the rock and from the hill shoot at we with their half hake , and the negro more for fear then for love stand by they to help they , and when we see that the negro be in such subjection unto they that they dare not sell we any thing for fear of they we go aboard , and that night the wind keep at the east , so that we can not with our ship fetch the hind , but i take the boat in the night and go aboard the bark to see what be there to be do , and in the morning we perceive the town to be in like case lay with Portugal , so we weigh and go along the coast . this town of John de Viso stand upon a hill like the town of don John , but it have be burn , so that there be not pass six house in it : the most part of the gold that come thither come out of the country , and no doubt if the people dare for fear of the Portugal bring forth their gold , there will be have good store : but they dare not sell any thing , their subjection be so great to the Portugal . the 11 day run by the shore we have sight of a little town four league from the last town that we come from , and about half a league from that , of another town upon a hill , and half a league from that also of another great town upon the shore : whither we go to see what can there be do : if we can do nothing , than to return to the other town , because we think that the Portugal will leave the town upon our departure . along from the castle unto this place be very high hill which may be see above all other hill , but they be full of wood , and great red cliff by the sea side . 
 204 
 the boat of these place be somewhat large and big , for one of they will carry twelve man , but their form be alike with the former boat of the coast . there be about these town few river : their language differ not from the language use at don Johns town : but every one can speak three or four word of portuguise , which they use altogether to we . 
 we see this night about 5 of the clock 22 boat run along the shore to the westward , whereupon we suspect some knavery intend against we . the 12 day therefore we set sail and go further along the coast , and descry more town wherein be great house than in the other town , and the people come out of the town to look upon we , but we can see no boat . two mile beyond the eastermost town be black rock , which black rock continue to the uttermost cape of the land , which be about a league off , and then the land run in Eastnortheast , and a sandy shore again : upon these black rock come down certain negro , which wave we with a white flag , but we perceive the principali place to be near , will not stay , but bear still along the shore : and as soon as we have open the point of the land , we raise another headland about a league off the point , which have a rock lie off it into the sea , and that they think to be the [ ii two . 34. ] place which we seek . when we come thwart the place they know it , and we put ware into our boat , and the ship be within half a mile of the place anchor in five fathom water and fair ground . we go on shore with our boat , and anchor about ten of the clock in the forenoon : we see many boat lie upon the shore , and diverse come by we , but none of they will come near we , be as we judge afraid of we : because that four man be take perforce the last year from this four man place , so that no man come to we , whereupon we go aboard again , and think here to have make no sail : to nst ’ yet towards night a great sort come down to the water side , and wave we on shore with a white flag , and 
 205 
 the like they do in the country of Prete Janni . 
 afterward their captain come down and many man with he , and sit he down by the shore under a tree : which when i perceive , i take thing with i to give he : at last he send a boat to call to we , which will not come near we , but make we sign to come again the next day : but in fine , i get they to come aboard in offer they thing to give to their captain , which be two elles of cloth , one latten basin , one white basin , a bottle , a great piece of beef , and six biscuit cake , which they receive make we sign to come again the next day , say , that their captain be grand captain as appear by those that attend upon he with their dart and target , and other weapon . 
 this town be very great and stand upon a hill among tree , so that it can well be see except a man be near it : to the eastward of it upon the hill hard by the town stand 2. high tree , which be a good mark to know the town . and under the town lie another hill low than it , whereupon the sea beat : and that end next the sea be all great black rock , and beyond the town in a bay lie another small town . 
 the 13 day in the morning we take our boat and go to shore , and stay till ten a clock and no man come to we : we go about therefore to return aboard , and when the negro see that , they come run down with a flag to wave we again , so we anchor again , and then one show we that the captain will come down by and by : we see a sail in the mean time pass by we but it be small , and we regard it not . be on shore we make a tilt with our oar and sail , and then there come a boat to we with five man in she , who bring we again our bottle , and bring i a hen , make sign by the sun , that within two hour the merchant of the country will come down and buy all that we have : so i give they six manillio to carry to their captain , and they make sign to have a pledge of we , and they will leave we another man : and we willing to do so , put one of our man in their 206 
 boat , but they will not give we one of they , so we take our man again , and there tarry for the merchant : and short after one come down array like their captain with a great train after he , who salute we friendly , and one of the chief of they go and sit down under a tree , where the last year the captain be wont to sit : and at last we perceive a great many of they to stand at the end of a hollow way , and behind they the Portugal have plant a base , who sudden shoot at we but overshoot we , and yet we be in a manner hard by they , and they shoot at we again before we can ship our oar to get away but do no hurt . then the negro come to the rock hard by we , and discharge caliver at we , and again the Portugal shoot off their base twice more , and then our ship shoot at they , but the rock and hill defend they . 
 then we go aboard to go from this place , see master Robert the negro bend against we , because that the last year Gains^ * < 9-m . gainsh do take away the captain son and three other from this place with their gold , and all that they have about they : which be the cause that they become friend with the Portugal , who before they hate , as do appear the last year by the courteous entertainment which the Trinity have there , when the captain come the english aboard the ship , and bring they to his town , and offer they ground to build a castle in , and there c , ^wne they have good sale . 
 the 14 day we weigh and ply back again to seek the hind , which in the morning we meet , and so we turn both back to the eastwardes to see what we can do at that place where the Trinity do sell she eight frise the last year . the hind have take eighteen ounce and a half moor of gold of other negro , the day after that we leave they . this day about one of the clock we espy certain boat upon the sand and man by they and go to they with merchandize , and take three ounce of gold for 18 fuff of cloth , every fuffe three yard and a half after one angel and 12 
 207 
 grain the fuffe , and then they make i sign that the next day i shall have gold enough : so the master take the hind with John Savill and John Makeworth , and go to seek the place aforesaid , and i with Richard Pakeman remain in this place to see what we can do the next day : and when the negro perceive our ship to go away , they fear that the other will follow , and so send forth 2 boat to we with 4 man in they , require we to tarry and to give they one man for a pledge , and 2 of they shall tarry with we for he , so Edward m. morlei [ ii two . 35. ] servant see these man so earnest therein offer himself to be pledge , and we let he go for two of they , one whereof have his weight and scale , and a chain of gold about his neck , and another about his arm . they do eat of such thing as we have and be well content . in the night the negro keep a light upon the shore thwart of we , and about one of the clock we hear and see the light of a base which shoot off twice at the say light , and by and by discharge two caliver , a Portugal which in the end we perceive to be the Portugal brigantine . brigandine which follow we from place to place , to give warning to the people of the country , that they shall not deal with we . 
 the 15 day in the morning the captain come down with 100 man with he , and bring his wife , and many other bring their wife also , because their town be 8 mile up in the country , and they determine to lie by the sea side till they have buy what they will . when he be come he send our man aboard , and require to have two man pledge , and he himself will come aboard , and i send he two , of who he take but one , and so come aboard we , he and his wife with diverse of his friend , and bring i a goat and two great root , and i give he again a latten basin , a white basin , 6 manillio , and a bottle of malmesy , and to his wife a small casket . after this we begin to make our measure and weight : and he have a weight of his own which hold one angel and 14 grain , and require a measure of 4 208 
 elles and a half . in fine we conclude the 8 part for one angel and 20 grain , and before we have do , they take my own weight and measure . 
 the 16 day i take 8 livre . 1 ounce of gold : and since the departure of the hind i hear not of she , but when our pledge go into the country the first night , he say he see she cast anchor about five league from this place . the 17 day i sell about 17 piece of cloth , and take 4. livre . 4 ounce and a half of gold . the 18 day the captain desire to have some of our wine , and offer half a ducat of gold for a bottle : but i give it he free , and make he and his train drink beside . and this day also i take 5 livre . 5 ounce of gold . the 19 day we sell about 18 clothes , and take 4 livre . 4. ounce and one quarter of gold . 
 the 20 day we take 3 livre . six ounce and a quarter of gold . the 21 we take 8. livre . 7. ounce and a quarter . the 22. 3. livre . 8. ounce and a quarter . and this night about 4 of the clock the captain who have lie all this while upon the shore , go away with all the rest of the people with he . 
 the 23 day we be wave a shore by other negro , and sell they cloth , casket , knife , and a dozen of bell , and take 1. livre . 10. ounce of gold . the 24 likewise we sell bell , sheet , and thimble , and take two livre . one ounce and a quarter of gold . the 25 day we sell 7 dozen of small bell and other thing , and then perceive their gold to be do , we weigh and set sail and go to leeward to seek the hind , and about $ of the clock at night we have sight of she , and bear with she , and understand that she have make some sale . the 26 day we receive out of the hind 48 livre . 3 ounce and one eight part of gold , which they have take in the time that we be from they . and this day upon the request of a negro that come unto we from a captain , we go to shore with our merchandise , and take 7 livre . and one ounce of gold . at this place they require no gage of we , but at night they send a man aboard we , which lie vi 209 oh 
 [ ii two . 36. ] 
 with we all night , because we may know that they will also come to we the next day . the 27 day in both our ship we take 8. livre . one ounce , three quarter and half a quarter of gold . the 28 we make sale for the company , and take one pound and half a ounce of gold . the 29 day in the morning we hear two caliver shoot off upon the shore , which we judge to be either by the Portugal or by the negro of the Portugal : we man our boat and arm our self and go to shore , but can find nothing : for they be go . the 30 day we make more sale for the company and for the master . 
 the 31 we send our boat to shore to take in sand for ballast , and there our man meet the negro , with who they have make sale the day before a fish which do help they to fill sand , and have no gold , sell fish to our man for their handkerchief and nightker-chiefes . 
 the 1. day of February we weigh and go to another place , and take 1. livre . 9 ounce 3 quarter of gold . the 2 day we make more sale : but have view our victual , we determine to tarry no long time upon the coast , because the most part of our drink be spend , and that which remain grow sour . the 3 and 4 day we make some sale , though not great , and find the wind this 4. day to come off the shore , we set sail and run along the shore to the westwards : upon this coast we find by experience that ordinary about 2 of the clock in the night the wind come off the shore at Northnortheast , and so continue until eight of the clock in the morning : and all the rest of the day and night it come out of the southwest : and as for the tide or currant upon this shore , it go continual with the wind . the 5 day we continue sail and think to have meet with some english ship , but find none . 
 the sixth day we go our course Southwest to fetch under the line , and run by estimation 24 league . 
 the 13 day we think our self by our reckon 210 
 to be clear off the cape das Palmas , and run 12 league . 
 the 22 day we be thwart of the cape de monte , Cape de which be to the westward of the river de Sestos , about Monte . 30 league . 
 the first day of march in a ternado we lose the march . 
 hind , whereupon we set up a light and shoot off a piece but can not hear of she , so that than we strike our sail and tarry for she , and in the morning have sight of she again three league a stern off we . 
 upon the 22 day we find our self to be in the cape Verde height of cape Verde , which stand in 14. degree and m latitude r4 a half . in a 
 from this day till the 29 day we continue our course , ' and then we find our self to be in 22 degree . this day one of our man call William king , who have be long sick , die in his sleep , his apparel be distribute to those that lack it , and his money be keep for his friend to be deliver they at his come home . 
 the 30 day we find our self to be under the Tropike . 
 the 31 day we go our course , and make way 18 league . 
 from the first day of April to the 20 we go our April . course , and then find our self to be in the height of the asores . 
 the seven day of may we fall with the south part may . of Ireland , and go on shore with our boat have fresh drink , and two sheep of the country people , which be wild kern , and we give they gold for they , and buy further such other victual as we have need of , and thought will serve we till we arrive in England . 
 the 14 day with the afternoon tide we go into their arrival the port of Bristol call hungrode , and there anchor at bnst°u-in safety and give thanks to God for our safe arrival . 
 