the voyage of Thomas Stukley , wrongful call mark of Ireland , into Barbary 1578. write by Johannes Thomas Freigius in Historia de caede Sebastiani Regis Lusitaniae . 
 Enerant autem ad regem etiam sexcenti itali , quos papa subministrarat , comiti Irlandiae : qui cum vlissiponem tribus instructis navibus appulisset regi operam svam condixit , eumque in bellum sequi promisit . Cap. 7. 
 totum exercitum divisit in quatuor 
 acies quadratas : in dextro late primum agman erat velitum and militum Tingitanorum , eosque ducebat Alvarus Peresius de Tavara : sinistram aciem seu mediam tenebant Germani and itali , quibus imperabat Marchio Irlandiae , etc Cap. 11. 
 inter nobiles qui in hoc praelio ceciderunt , fuerunt , praeter regem Sebastianum , dux de Avero , Episcopi Conimbricensis and Portuensis , Commissarius generalis a papa missus Marchio Irlandiae , Christophorus de Tavora , and plures alii . Cap. 13. 
 293 
 A.D. 
 1578. 
 Thomas Stukley be wrongful endue with this title . 
 [ ii two . 68 ] 
 the same in english . 
 there come also to don Sebastian the king of Portugal 600. Italians , who the pope send under the conduct of the * Marques of Irland : who be arrive at Lisbon with three tall ship , proffer his service to the king , and promise to attend upon he in the war , etc 
 he divide the whole army into 4. squadron : upon the right wing stand the first squadron , consist of man light arm or skirmisher and of the soldier of Tangier , general of who be don Alvero Perez de Tavara : the left or middle squadron consist of germane and Italians , under the command of the mark of Irland , etc cap . 7. 
 of nobleman be slay in this battle ( beside don Sebastian the king ) the duke de Avero , the two bishop of Coimbra and of Porto , the mark of Irland send by the pope as his commissary generail , Christopher de Tavara , and many other , cap . 13. 
 it be further also to be remember , that diverse other 
 english gentleman be in this battle , whereof the most part be slay ; and among other m. Christopher Lyster be take captive , and be there long detain in miserable servitude . which gentleman although at length he happy escape the cruel hand of the moor ; yet return home into England , and for his manifold good part be in the year 1586. employ by the honourable the earl of Cumberland , in a voyage intend by the strait of Magellan for the south sea , as vice-admiral , ( wherein he show singular resolution and courage ) and appoint afterward in diverse place of speciali command and credit , be last of all miserable drown in a great and rich spanish prize upon the coast of Cornwall . 
 