the voyage of m. George Fenner to guinie , and the island of cape Verde , in the year of 1566. with three ship , to wit , the admiral call the castle of comfort , the may flower , and the George , and a pinnace also : 
 write by Walter wren . 
 he 10 day of December , in the year abovesaid , we depart from Plymouth , and the 12 day we be thwart of Ushant . 
 the 15 day in the morning be Sunday , we have sight of cape Finister , and the same night we lose the company 
 of our admiral , wherefore we sail along the coast of Portugal , hope that our admiral have be before we . the 18 day we meet with a french ship of who we make inquiry for our admiral , but he can not tell we news of he : so we follow our course to the hand of the canary . 
 the 25 day in the morning we fall with a small hand call porto Santo , and within 3 hour we have sight of another hand call Madera which be 6 league from Porto Santo . 
 the say 25 day be the day of the nativity , we hoist out our boat , and fetch master Edward Fenner captain of the may flower aboard we , be in the George , with the master who name be Robert cortise and other of the say ship , and feast they with such cheer as God have send we . 
 the 28 day we fall with a hand call tenerif , which be 27 league from the say hand , and on the east side thereof we come to a anchor in 40 fathom water , within a base shot of the shore , in a little bay wherein be 3 or 4 small house : which bay and house be distant from a little town call Santa Cruz , a league or thereabouts , and as we ride in the say bay , we may see 266 
 a hand call the grand canary which be 6 or 7 league from we . 
 the 29 day the may flower for that she can not fetch into you road where we be at a anchor , by reason the wind be off the shore , and because she bear more roomer from the land than we do , in the morning come bear in with the town of Santa Cruz , think to come to a anchor in the road against the town , and before she come within the reach of any of their ordinance , they shoot at her four piece which cause she to come room with we , and come at last to a anchor by we . and about one of the clock in the afternoon , the forename captain of the may flower write a letter a shore , direct it to the head officer of the town of Santa Cruz , to the intent to understand the pretense of the shoot off the say ordinance . 
 the letter be write , Robert courtise master of they may flower , and Walter wren be appoint to deliver the same a land at 3 or 4 house to be convey to the foresay town , and so go with six man in the boat , and row to the shore as near as they may , for set the boat on ground , for the sea go cruel at the shore . 
 the people stand in number 30 person with such armour as they have : the foresay wren call to they in spanish , declare to they that they have a letter which they will very glad have convey unto the town , show that they will traffic with they as merchant , desire their help for the conveyance of the same letter . with that one of the Spaniard will we to come on land , and we shall be welcome , but doubt the worst , the say Walter answer they that they will not come on land , until they have answer of their letter which they have bring . 
 whereupon one of the Spaniard unray himself , and leap into the water , and swim to the boat , who we receive . and he salute we , and demand what our request be : we make he answer , that by misfortune 267 
 we lose the company of our admiral , and be bind to this hand to traffic for wine and other thing necessary for we , do here mind to stay until he come . 
 concern our letter he make we answer , that he will with all diligence carry it , and deliver it accord to the direction , and so the say Walter knit the letter in a bladder , and deliver it unto he , and also give he four royal of spanish money for his pain : and promise that we shall have answer of it , he take his leave and swim again on shore , where the people stand ready to receive he . and after that they have talk with he , and understand our meaning , some of they throw up their hat , and the other put they off hold they in their hand , and make we very courteous sign , always desire that the boat will come a land , but we resalute they row back again aboard . 
 the 30 day the governor brother of Santa Cruz come aboard the may flower with six or seven Spaniard with he , who conclude with the captain that we may come a shore and traffic with they , but that day we do not , for we have no sufficient pledge of they for our assurance . our captain entertain they well , and at their departure give they four piece of ordinance for a farewell , and bestow upon they two cheese with other thing . 
 the say governor brother promise our captain that he shall have sufficient pledge the morrow follow , which be not do , whereupon we grow suspicious , and go not that day a shore . 
 the first day of January our captain send Nicholas day and John Sumpter a shore , who be very well entertain with as many of our company as go after they . 
 in the say hand be a marvelous high hill call the pike , which be a far off more like a cloud in the air , than any other thing : the hill be round and somewhat small at the top , it have not be know that ever any man can go up to the top thereof . and although 268 
 it stand in 28 degree which be as hot in January , as it be in England at midsummer , yet be the top of the say hill winter and summer seidome without snow . 
 in this island about two league from the say Santa Cruz be a city call Anagona . 
 the three day we depart about the western point of the island , about 12 or 14 league from Santa Cruz , into a bay which be right against the house of one Petro de souse , in which bay we come to a anchor the 5 day , where we hear that our admiral have be there at a anchor 7 day before we , and be go thence to a island call Gomera , whereupon we set sail present to seek he . 
 the 6 day we come to a anchor against the town of Gomera , where we find our admiral , which be very joyful of our come , and we also of his sight . 
 in the say road we find Edward cook in a tall ship , and a ship of the coppersmith of London , which the Portugal have treacherous surprise in the bay of Santa Cruz , upon the coast of Barbary , which ship we leave there all spoil . 
 our general and merchant buy in the say town for our provision , 14 butt of wine , which cost 15 ducat a but , which be offer we at Santa Cruz in tenerif for 8 , 9 , and 10 ducat . 
 the 9 day we depart from this road to another bay , about 3 league off , and there take in fresh water : and so the 10 day we set sail towards cape blank , which be on the coast of Guinea . 
 they meet their admiral again . 
 the 12 day we fall into a bay to the eastward of cape Pargos , which be 35 league from cape blank . but have no knowledge of that coast , we go with cape blank , and at the fall of the land we sound and have 16 fathom water two league from the shore . the land be very low and white sand . upon the fall of the a good caveat . say coast beware how you borrow in 12 or 10 fathom , for within 2 or 3 cast of the lead you may be on ground . 
 269 
 the foolish rashness of Wil. Bats persuade the company to land arm . 
 the 17 day we set sail from cape blank , direct our course south and by east , and south among , and so fall into a bay to the eastward of cape Verde , about 16 league , and about six league from the shore . the say land seem unto we as if it have be a great number of ship under sail , be in deed nothing else but the land which be frill of hammok , some high some low , with high tree on they . we bear with the say land till we be within 3 league of the shore , and then we sound , and find 28 fathom water , black oase . this day we see much fish in sundry skull swim with their nose with the brim of the water . 
 pass along this coast we may see two small round hill , seem to we about a league one from the other , which be the cape , and between they be great store of tree , and in all our day sail we see no land so high as the say two hill . 
 the 19 day we come to a anchor at the cape , in a road fast by the westermost side of two hill in 10 fathom of water where you may ride in five or six fathom , for the ground be fair , and always you shall have the wind off the shore . and as soon as we be all at a anchor , our general come aboard we , and with he the master of the admiral , who name be William Bats , and with they the captain of the vice-admiral , who name be master Edward Fenner , and Robert curtise the master , and dine aboard of we be in the George , wherein be captain John Heiwood , and John smith of Hampton master , and there we conclude to go aland , which be half a mile from we : and by the counsel of William bat both captain and merchant and diverse of the company go without armour : for he say , that although the people be black and naked , yet they be civil : so that he will needs give the venture without the consent of the rest to go without weapon . thus they row to shore , where , we be in the ship may see a great company of negro naked , walk to and fro by the sea side where the 
 270 
 land place be , wait for the come of our man , who come too soon , and land to their loss as it fall out afterward . 
 there go a shore the admiral skiff , and then may flower boat , and in they the number of 20 person or thereabouts , as m. George Fenner the general , his brother m. Edward Fenner , Thomas Valentine , John worm and Francis Leigh merchant , John Haward , William Bats , Nicholas day , John Tomson and other . 
 at their come to the shore there be 100 negro or upward , with their bow and arrow : our captain and merchant talk with they , and accord to the use of the country , the one demand pledge of the other , and they be content to deliver 3 of their negro for 5 of our man . Oure 5 man name be these , John Haward , Wil. Bats , Nich. day , Joh. Tomson , and John curtise : these be deliver they , and we receive 3 negro into our admiral skiff . 
 our man be a shore among the negro , begin to talk with they , declare what ware and merchandise we have , as woollen cloth , linen cloth , iron , cheese and other thing . the negro answer again , they have civet , musk , gold and grain , which please our captain and merchant very well . then the negro desire to have a sight of some of our ware , to the which our merchant be content , and forthwith send aboard one of the boat for part of their merchandise , and in the mean time while the boat go to the ship , our five man be walk on the shore with the negro , and our general and merchant stay in the other boat by the sea side , have the 3 negro with they . 
 our boat then come again and bring iron and other merchandise , with bread , wine , and cheese which they give unto they . than two of the negro ( which be the pledge ) make themselves sick , desire to go a shore , promise to send other two for they . 
 271 
 [ ii two . 59 ] 
 civet , musk , gold and grain , the commodity of case Verde . 
 captain haiward perceive that our man have let the negro come a shore , ask what they mean , and doubt the worst begin to draw towards the boat , and two or three of the negro follow he . and when he come to the boat they begin to stay he , and he make sign unto they that he will fetch they more drink and bread : notwithstanding , when he be enter into the boat , one of they catch he by the breech and will have stay he , but he spring from he and leap into the boat , and as soon as he be in , one of the negro a shore begin to blow a pipe , and present the other negro that be in our boat sit on the boat side , and master worm sword by he , sudden draw the sword out of the scabbard , and cast himself into the sea and swim a shore , and present the negro lay hand on our man that be on shore , and take three of they with great violence , and tear all their apparel from their back and leave they nothing to cover they , and many of they shoot so thick at our man in our boat , that they can scarce set hand to any oar to row from the shore , yet ( by the help of God ) they get from they with their boat , although many of they be hurt with their poison arrow : and the poison be uncurable , if the arrow enter within the skin and draw blood , and except the poison be present suck out , or the place where any man be hurt be forthwith cut away , he die within four day , and within three hour after they be hurt or prick , wheresoever it be , although but at the little toe , yet it strike up to the heart , and take away the stomach , and cause the party marvellous to vomit , be able to brook neither meat nor drink . 
 the Negros have use our man with such cruelty , who name be Nicholas Day , William Bats and John Tomson , lead they away to a town which be within a mile of the water side , or thereabouts . 
 the 20 day we send to land a boat or skiff wherein 
 272 
 be eight person , and one of they be the foresay John Tomson and our interpreter which be a Frenchman , ( for there be one of the negro which speak good french : ) and they carry with they two harquebuss , two target and a manteli . 
 the cause of send they be to learn what ransom they demand for bat and day who they detain . and when they come to the shore and tell the negro what they desire , they go and fetch they from among the tree , and bring they loose among forty or fifty of they . And be come within a stone cast of the sea side , William Bats break from they , and run as fast as he can into the sea towards the boat , and he be not so soon in the water but he fall down , either be out of breath or his foot fail he in the sand be soft : so that the negro come and fall on he and take he and hale he , that we think they have tear he in piece : for they tear again all the apparel from his back , so that some of they carry our man again to the town , and the rest shoot at we with their poison arrow , and hurt one of our man call androwe in the small of the leg , who be come aboard , ( for all that our surgeon can do ) we think he will have die . 
 our general ( notwithstanding all this villainy ) send again to they , and offer they any thing that they desire for the ransom of our man , but they will not deliver they : give we this answer : that there be in the foresay road , three week before we come , a english ship which have take three of their people , and until we do bring or send they again , we shall not have our man although we will give our three ship with their furniture . 
 the 2i day a french ship of the burden of 80 ton ( or thereabouts , ) come to the place where we be , be bind to traffic at the cape : we tell they of the detain of our two man by the negro : and see that these Frenchmen be very well welcome vi 273 sister 
 A.D. 
 1567. 
 a french interpreter far cape Verde . 
 the danger of poison arrow . 
 the answer of the negro . 
 [ ii two . 60. ] 
 to the negro , we wish they to see whether they can procure they again of the negro , and bring they along with they , and our general promise the Frenchman 100 livre . to obtain they . so we commit the matter to the Frenchman and depart . 
 of our man that be hurt by the negro arrow , four die , and one to save his life have his arm cut off . androwes that be last of all hurt , lay lame not able to help himself : only two recover of their hurt . so we place other man in the room of those that we lose , and set sail . 
 the 26 day between cape Verde and bona vista we see many fly fish of the bigness of herring , whereof two fly into our boat , which we tow at our stern . 
 the 28 day we fall with a hand call bona vista , which be from cape Verde 86 league . the northside of the say hand be full of white sandy hill and dale , and somewhat high land . 
 the say day we come to a anchor within the westermost point , about a league within the point , and find in our sound fair sand in ten fathom water , but you may go near till you be in five or six fathom , for the ground be fair . 
 as soon as we be at a anchor , our general send his pinnace a land , and find five or six small house , but the people be flee into the mountain : and the next day he send a shore again , and meet with two Portugal , who willing go aboard with his man , and at their come he welcome they , although they be but poor and simple , and give each of they a pair of shoe , and so set they a shore again . 
 the 30 day we weigh and sail into a bay within a small hand about a league from we , and take plenty of diverse sort of fish . the foresay hand lie in sixteen degree . and if you mean to anchor in the say bay , you may borrow in four or five fathom of the southermost point of the say hand , which you may see 274 
 ... I567 ' when you ride in the road . but beware of the middle of the bay , for there lie a ledge of rock , which at a admonttl , > n-lowe water break , yet there be three fathom water over they . 
 the last day of Januarie our general with certain of his man go a shore in the bay to the house , where he find 12 Portugal . in all the island there be not banish above 30 person , which be banish man for a time , portu&a^-some for more year , some for less , and among they there be one simple man which be their captain . 
 they live upon goat flesh , cock , hen , and fresh water : other victual they have none , save fish , which they esteem not , neither have they any boat to take they . 
 they report that this island be give by the king of Portugal to one of his gentleman , who have let it forth to rend for one hundred ducat a year , which rent be rear only in goat skin . for by their great steer of speech there have be send forth of the say island spates-into Portugal 40000 skin in one year . 
 we be to these man marvelous welcome , and to their power very well entertain , and they give we the flesh of as many hee-goate as we will have , and take much pain for we in take they , and bring they from the mountain upon their ass . 
 they have there great store of the oil of tortoise , which tortoise be a fish which swim in the sea , with a shell on his back as broad as a target . it rain not in this island but in three month of the year , from the midst of July to the midst of October , and it be here always very hot . kine have be bring hither , but by reason of the heat and drought they have die . 
 the 3 of February we depart from this island , and the same day fall with another island call the island of the lie of Maiyo , which be 14 league from the other island : there hoi in the midst of the way between these two hand a danger which be always to be see . 
 we anchor in the northwest side of the say he in a fair bay of eight fathom water and fair sand , but 
 275 
 here we stay not , but the four day weigh and sail to another hand call S. Jago , which lie off the say hand of Maiyo east and by south , and about five league one from the other . be come within the westermost point , we see a fair road , and a small town by the water side , and also a fort or platform by it : there we purpose to come to anchor , and our merchant to make some sale . but before we come within their shot , they let fly at we two piece , whereupon we go roomer and sail along the shore two or three league from the road , where we find a small bay and two or three small house , where we come to a anchor in 14 fathom fair ground . 
 within a hour after we have anchor we may see diverse horseman and footman on the land right against we ride and run to and fro . 
 the next day be the five of February , a great company of their horseman and footman appear on the shore side , unto who our general send to understand whether they will quiet traffic with they : and they send he word again , desire that they may speak with he , promise that if he come to traffic as a merchant he shall be welcome , and also that he shall have any thing that he or the merchant will with reason demand . 
 when this answer be bring unto our general he be very glad thereof and the whole company , and present ( with as much speed as he can ) he cause his boat to be make ready : but doubt the villainy of the Portugal , he arm his boat put a double base in the head of his pinnace , and two single base in the head of the skiff , and so send to the may-floure and the George , and will they in like sort to man their two boat . 
 these boat be thus man and well appoint , our general enter into his skiff , and with the rest row to the shore where be threescore horseman or more , and two hundred footman ready to receive they . our general marveil that they come in so great a 276 
 number and all arm , and therefore with a flag of truce send to they to know their pleasure : and they answer he with many fair promise and oath , that their pretence be all true , and that they mean like gentleman and merchant to traffic with he , declare also that their captain be come to speak with he , and therefore desire our general to come and speak with he himself . 
 with this answer the boat return , and then our general cause his pinnace to row to they , and as he come near the shore they come in a great company with much obeisance , open their hand and arm abroad , bow themselves with their bonnet off , with as much humble salutation outward as they may : earnest desire our general and merchant to come on land to they , whereunto he will not agree without sufficient gage of gentleman and merchant . at length they promise to send two gage to our general contentment , promise fresh water , victuali , money , or negro for ware , if it be such as they like : and therefore desire our general and merchant to send they a shore in write the quantity of their ware , and the name of they : all which our general depart to perform , look for their answer the morrow follow . And be go a little from the shore , he cause his base , currier , and harquebuss to be shoot off , and our ship in like case shoot off five or six piece of great ordinance , and so come aboard to prepare the note . the Portugal most of they depart , save those that be leave to watch and to receive the note , which about four or five a clock in the afternoon be send , and it be receive . but all the purpose of the Portugal be treason of villainous to betray we ( as shall appear hereafter ) although we mean in truth and honesty , friendly to our man 0 traffic with they . 
 there be to the westwards of we and about two league from we , a town behind a point fast by the sea side , where they have certain caravel , or ship and 277 
 also two brigandine , whereof they ( with all the speed that they may ) make ready four caravel , and both the brigandine which be like two galley , and furnish they both with man and ordinance as much as they can carry , and as soon as it be night , they come row and fall towards we : so that the land be high and weather somewhat cloudy or misty , and they come all the way close under the shore we can not see they till they be right against one of our ship call the may-floure . 
 by this time it be about one or two of the clock in the morning , and the may-floure ride near they than the other two by a base shot , so that they make a sure account either to have take she or burn she . in the mean time our man that have the watch ( little think of such villainous treachery after so many fair word ) be sing and play one with the other , and make such a noise , that ( be but a small gale of wind , and ride near the land ) they may hear we from the shore : so that we suppose that they make account that we have espy they , which indeed we have not , neither have any one piece of ordinance prime , or any other thing in a readiness . 
 they come so near we that they be within gunshot of we , and then one of our man chance to see a light , and then look out spy the 4 ship , and sudden cry out , galley , galley , at which cry we be all amaze , and forthwith they shoot at we all the great ordinance that they have , and their harquebuss , and currier , and so light certain tronke or piece of wild fire , and all of they with one voice ( as well they on the shore as they in the ship ) give a great shout , and so continue hallow with great noise , still approach near and near unto the may-floure . we ( with all the speed that we may ) make ready one piece of ordinance and shot at they , which cause they somewhat to stay , so they charge their ordinance and shot at we fresh again , and while they shoot this second time at we , we have 278 
 make ready three piece which we shoot at they , but they approach still so near , that at last we may have shoot a sheaf arrow to they . whereupon we have a gale of wind off the shore hoist our foresail , and cut our cable at the hawse , and go toward our admiral , and they continue follow and shoot at we , and sometime at our admiral , but our admiral shoot one such piece at they , that it make they to retire , and at length to warp away like traitorous villain , and although they thus sudden shoot all their shot at we , yet they hurt neither man nor boy of we , but what we do to they we know not . 
 but see the villainy of these man we think it best to stay there no long , but immediate set sail towards a hand call Fuego , 12 league from the say the isle of island of S. Jago . at which island of Fuego we come to a anchor the 11 day of this month , against a white chapel in the west end of the say island , within half a league of a little town , and within a league or thereabouts of the uttermost point of the say island . 
 in this island be a marvellous high hill which do burn continual , and the inhabitant report that about three year past the whole island be like to be burn with the abundance of fire that come out of it . 
 about a league from the say chapel to the westward be a goodly spring of fresh water , where we have as much as we will . wheat they have none grow here , but a certain seed that they call mill , and certain peason mill like guinie peason , which mill make good bread , but they have here good store of rother beast and goat . 
 their merchandise be cotton , which grow there . Cotton in the inhabitant be Portugal which have command - fuesp-ment from the king to traffic neither with Englishmen nor Frenchmen for victuali or any other thing , except they be force so to do . 
 there lie off this island another call ilha brava , the isle of which be not pass two league over , it have good store Brava - 
 279 
 Afrill . 
 wood . 
 may . 
 of goat and many tree , but there be not pass three or four person dwell in it . 
 the 25 day of February we depart towards the island of azore : and on the 23 day of march we have sight of one of they call Flores , and then we may see another island to the northward of it call Cuervo , lie two league or thereabouts off the other . 
 the 27 we come to a anchor in Cuervo over against a village of about twelve simple house ; but in the night by a gale of wind , which cause we to draw our anchor after we , we hoist sail and go to the aforesaid island of Flores , where we see strange stream of water run down from the high cliff by reason of the great abundance of rain that have sudden fall . 
 the 29 day we come again to Cuervo and cast anchor , but a storm arise and continue seven or eight hour together , so that we let slip a cable and anchor , and after the storm be allay we come again think to have recover the same , but the Portugal have either take it , or spoil it : the cable be new and never wet before , and both the cable and anchor be better worth than 40 livre . so that we account our self much behold to the honest Portugal . 
 the 18 day of April we take in water at the island of Flores , and have anchor , our cable be fret in sunder with a rock and so burst , where we lose that cable and anchor also , and so depart to our coast . 
 then we set sail to a island name faial , about the which lie three other island , the one call Pico , the other saint George , and the other Graciosa , which we have sight of on the eight and twenty day . 
 the 29 we come to a anchor in the southwest side of faial in a fair bay , and 22 fathom water against a little town where we have both fresh water and fresh victuali . in this island by the report of the inhabitant , there grow certain green woad , which by their speech be far better than the woad of saint Michael or of Tercera . 
 the 8 day of may we come to Tercera where we meet 
 280 
 with a Portugal ship , and be destitute of a cable and anchor , our general cause we to keep her company , to see if she can convenient spare we any . the next morning we may see bear with we a great ship and two caravel , which we judge to be of the king of Portugal armada , and so they be , whereupon we prepare our self for our defence . the say ship be Portugal one of the king Galliasses , about the burden of four ga^u if hundred ton , with about three hundred man in she , the +°° ume ' ship be well appoint with brass piece both great and small , and some of they so big that their shot be as great as a man head , the other two caravel be also very warlike and well appoint both with man and munition . 
 as soon as they be within shot of we , they wave we amain with their sword , we keep our course , the great ship shoot at we free and the caravel also , and 
 [ ii two . 63. ] 
 fight between one English ship 
 we prepare our self , and make all thing clear for our safeguard as near as we can . then the great ship shoot at we all her broad side , and her four great piece Portugal . 
 that lie in her stern , and therewith hurt some of our man , and we do the best we can with our shot to requite it . at last two other caravel come off the shore , and two other pinnace full of man , and deliver they aboard the great ship , and so go back again with two man in a piece of they . the ship and the caravel give we the first day three fight , and when the night be come they leave off shoot , yet notwithstanding keep hard by we all the night . in the mean time we have as much as we can do all the night to mend our rope , and to strengthen our bulwark , put our trust in God , and resolve our self rather to die in our defence then to be take by such wretch . 
 the next day be the 10 of may in the morning , there be come to aid the say Portugal four great armada or caravel more which make seven , of which 4 three of they be at the least 100 ton a piece , the other not so big , but all well appoint and full of man . 
 281 
 all these together come bear with we being in our admiral , and one of the great caravel come to lay we aboard ( as we judge ) for they have prepare their false netting , and all thing for that purpose , so that the gallia come up in our larboard side , and the caravel in our starboard side . 
 our captain and master perceive their pretence , cause our gunner to make all our ordinance ready with crossebarre , chaineshotte and hailshot : so the ship and caravel come up , and as soon as they be right in our side , they shoot at we as much ordinance as they can , think to have lay we present aboard : whereupon we give they such a heat with both our side , that they be both glad to fall astern of we , and so pause the space of two or three hour be a very small gale of wind . 
 then come up the other five and shoot all at we , and so fall all astern of we , and then go to counsel together . 
 then our small bark name the George come to we , and we confer together a great space . and as the Portugal ship and caravel be come to we again , our bark mind to fall astern of we and so to come up again , fall quick upon the lee , and by reason of the little wind , it be so long before she can fill her sail again , that both the ship and caravel be come up to we , and she fall in among they make reasonable shift with they , but they get a head of she , so that she can not fetch we : then 5 of the caravel follow she , but we see she defend her self against they all . 
 then come the great ship and the caravel to we , and fight with we all that day with their ordinance . 
 the may-floure our other consort be very good by the wind , take the benefit thereof and halde all that day close by the wind , but can not come near we . so when night again be come , they give over their fight and follow we all the night . 
 282 
 in these many fight it can not otherwise be but needs some of our man must be slay , ( as they be indeed ) and diverse hurt , and our tackle much spoil : yet for all this we do our best endeavour to repair all thing , and to stand to it to the death with our assure trust in the mercy and help of God . 
 this night the may-floure come up to we , and our captain tell they his harm and spoil , and wish they if they can spare half a dozen fresh man to hoist out their boat and send they to he , but they can not spare any , and so bear away again . which when our enemy see in the next morning that we be one from another , they come up to we again and give we a great fight with much hallow and hoop , make account either to board we or else to sink we : but although our company be but small , yet lest they shall see we any whit dismay , when they hallow we hallow also as fast as they , and wave to they to come and board we if they dare , but that they will not , see we still so courageous : and have give we that day four fight , at night they forsake we with shame , as they come to we at the first with pride . 
 they have make in our ship some leak with their shot which we again stop with all speed , and that be do , we take some rest after our long labour and trouble . 
 the next day in the morning the may-floure come to we , and bring we six man in her boat which do we much pleasure , and we send to they some of our hurt 
 the 7 Portugal : depart with shame from one english ship . 
 man . 
 then we direct our course for our own country , and by the second day of June we be near to our June . own coast and sound be thwart the lyzard . 
 the three day we have sight of a ship which be 
 a Portugal , who bear with we , and at his come to we [ 11. two . 64. ] ( the weather be calm ) our captain cause he to hoist forth his boat to come aboard to speak with he , and at their come our captain and merchant 
 283 
 demand of they what ware they have , and whither they be bind , and they make answer that their lade be sugar and cotton . than our captain and merchant show they five negro that we have , and ask they whether they will buy they , which they be very desirous to do , and agree to give for they 40 chest of sugar , which chest be small have not above 26 loaf in a piece : so they with their boat do fetch five of the chest and deliver they and go for more , and when they have lade their boat and be come again , we may see bear with we at Portugal a great ship and a small , which our captain suppose tandin^au ' to man war or rover , and then will they their mame ) Portugal to carry their sugar to their ship again , defend by purpose to make our self ready for our defence . our man from but the Portugal earnest entreat our captain not wer - so to forsake they , and promise he ( if he will safeguard they ) to give he above the bargain ten chest of sugar : whereupon our captain be content , and the Portugal not be good of sail , we spare our topsail for she : so at last the foresay ship bear with we , and ( see that we do not fear they ) give we over . and the next morning come two other bear with we , and see we not about to fly a jot from they forsake we also . 
 the 5 day of June we have sight of the start , and about noon we be thwart of the bay of lime , and so sound and have 35 fathom water . 
 the sixth day we come in at the needle and so come to a anchor under the isle of wight at a place call meadhole , and from thence sail to Southampton where we make a end of this voyage . 
 