the relation of one William Rutter to m. Anthony Hickman his master touch a voyage set out to Guinea in the year 1562 , by sir William Gerard , sir William Chester , m. Thomas lodge , the say Antony Hickman , and Edward Castelin : which voyage be also write in verse by Robert baker . 
 cape verde . 
 Rio de Sestos . 
 the minion . 
 orshipfull sir , my duty remember , this shall to declare unto you the discourse of this our voyage , since our departure out of England from Dartmouth ; at which time i give you to understand of our departure , which be the 25 of February 1562. then have a prosper 
 ous wind we depart from thence , and sail on our voyage until we arrive at Cavo verde the 20 of march , make no abode there , but sail along the coast to our first appoint port Rio de sestos , at which port we arrive the three of April in the morning , have the sight of a Frenchman , who assoon as he perceive we , set sail and make to the sea : in the mean time we come to a anchor in the road : and after that he have 
 espy our flag , perceive we to be Englishman , he bear with the shore , and hail our ship with his ordinance , at which time we the merchant of both the ship be in the river in traffic , and have understanding of the negro that he have be there three day before our come : so we conclude together , that if he send his pinnace to traffic , we will not suffer he , until we have take further order with their captain and merchant . in the afternoon the pinnace come into the river , who man we will to make no traffic until we have talk further with their captain , who we will that night to come aboard our admiral ; which be do . at which say time m. Burton and John Munt go aboard the minion where the Frenchman be , and there conclude that they 258 
 shall tarry by we eight day , and suffer we quiet to traffic , wherewith they be not well please . whereupon the next morning they depart from we , sail alongst the coast to the eastward towards Potis , which he do to hinder our traffic that way : wherefore the merchant of the minion and we conclude ( forasmuch as at that present we understand that there be no sail pass alongst ) that we shall go before , to the end we may not be hinder of our traffic by the Frenchman ; which thing we do : and at our come thither we find the Frenchman in traffic to the west of Potis , by who we pass , and arrive at Rio de potis the 12 of Rio de potis . April , where we remain in traffic until the 15 of the say month , and then depart from thence along the coast towards Sant Andre , where we appoint by agree - ri » de s. mean to tarry for the minion : and the 17 at night we ^ ” dre . come to the river of saint Andre ; in which very day the minion come unto we , tell we that they meet at cavo das das Palmas a great ship and a carveil of the king of Portugal palmas-bound to the Mina , who give chase unto they , and shoot free at they , and the minion in her defence return she the like : but God be praise the minion have no hurt for that time . in the end we conclude to hasten 
 towards cavo de tres puntas to have put they from the de tres castle , if by any mean we may ; and when we funtas-were come to the cape , we lay a hull one night and two day , and doubt they have be pass , the minion go near the shore , and send her merchant to a place call Anta , where beforetime we have traffic , and the - anta . next morning very early be the 21 of the say month , we again have sight of the ship and the caravel a good way to seaboard of we . than we present set sail , and bear with the foremost of they , hope to have get between the castle and they , but we come short of our purpose , which be no small grief unto we all ; and when they have get the castle to friend , they shoot at we free , and we at they , and the castle at we ; but we profit little . in the afternoon we set sail and come to the town 
 259 
 of don Juan call equi , where the 22 in the morning we go a shore to traffic , but the negro will not until they have news from don Luis , for at that time don Juan be dead , and the 23 come don Luis his son [ il two . 55. ] and Pacheco mind to traffic with we , at which say two galy . day come two galy row along the shore from the castle , mind to keep we from our traffic . the 24 we set sail and chase the galy to the castle again . the negro be glad of that require we to go to mow . mowre , which be some 3 league behind , and thither will they come for that they stand in fear of the Portugal , and there we remain for the merchant that come out of the country which be come with their gold , but Anthonio don Luis his son , and Pacheco be aboard the minion . and the 25 in the morning come the two galy from the castle again unto we , the weather be very calm , they shoot at we and hit we 3 time , and short after the wind come from the shore , at which instant we descry the ship , and the caravel come towards we , than we weigh and set sail , and bear as near unto they as we can : but it be night or ever we meet with they , and the night be very dark we lose they . the next day ply to the shore , Cormantin . at night we agree to go with Cormantin , but the next morning be the 28 we be but a little distant from the great ship and the 2 galy , have no wind at all , and the caravel hard aboard the shore . then be calm , come the 2 galy row to the stern of the minion , and fight with she the most part of the forenoon : and in the fight a mischance happen in the much hurt minion steward-room by mean of a barrel of powder do tn then take £re wherewith be hurt the master gunner , fire a barrel the steward , and most part of the gunner ; which then of gunpowder . galy perceive , begin to be more fierce upon they , and with one shot cut half her foremast in twain , that without present remedy she be not able to bear sail , and present upon this the great ship send her boat to the galy , who sudden depart from we . and after 
 260 
 their departure we go aboard the minion to counsel what be best to be do , at which time they be sore discomfit . whereupon we devise what be best to be do : and because we know that the negro neither will nor dare traffic so long as the galy be on the coast ; it be therefore agree that we shall prepare our self to depart to Rio de Sestos , and so we depart that day . the 14 of may in the morning we fall with the land , and when we come to it , we doubt what place it be , and send our boat on land to know the truth , and we find it to be Rio de barbos , which be to the eastward of sant Andre , and there remain in get of water until the 21 , where we lose the day before 5 of our man by mean of overthrow our black pin - 
 A.D. 
 1562. 
 they return . 
 rye de barb . 
 the black 
 nasse . the 22 we depart from thence to Rio de sesto , where we arrive the 2 of June , and the 4 we depart 
 from Rio de sesto , and arrive ( God be thank ) the 6 of August within sight of the start in the west part of England , our man be very sick and weak . we have not at this present above 20 sound man that be able to labour , and we have of our man 21 dead , and many more very sore hurt and sick . master Burton have be sick this 6 week , and at this present ( God strengthen he ) be so weak that i fear he will hardly escape . herein enclose your worship shall receive a brief of all the good sell by we , 8c also what commodity we have receive for the same . thus i leave to trouble your worship , reserve all thing else to our general meeting , and to the bringer hereof . from aboard the primerose the 6 of August 1563. 
 your obedient servant 
 William Rutter . 
 there be bring home this voyage An. 1563. elephant tooth 166. weigh 1758 pound . grain 22 butt full . 
 