the escape of the primrose a tall ship of London , from before the town of Bilbao in Biscay : which ship the corregidor of the same province , accompany with 97 Spaniards , offer violent to arrest , and be defeat of his purpose , and bring prisoner into England . 
 whereunto be add the king commission for a generail imbargment or arrest of all english , netherlandish , and Easterling ship , write in Barcelona the 19 of May 1585. 
 t be not unknown unto the world what danger our english ship have late escape , how sharp they have be entreat , and how hardly they have be assault : so that the valiancy of those that manage they be worthy remembrance . and therefore in respect 
 of the courageous attempt and valiant enterprise of the ship call the primrose of London , which have obtain renown , i have take in hand to publish the truth thereof , to the intent that it may be general know to the rest of the english ship , that by the good example of this the rest may in time of extremity adventure to do the like : to the honour of the realm , and the perpetuali remembrance of themselves : the manner whereof be as follow . 
 upon Wednesday be the six and twenty day of May 1585 , the ship call the primrose be of one hundred and fifty ton , lie without the bay of Bilbao , have be there two day , there come a spanish pinnace to they , wherein be the corregidor and six other with he : these come aboard the primrose , seem to be merchant of Biscay , or such like , bring cherry with they , and speak very friendly to the master of the ship , who name be foster , and 413 
 he in courteous wise bid they welcome , make they the best cheer that he can with beer , beef , and biscuit , wherewith that ship be well furnish : and while they be thus in banquet with the master , four of the seven depart in the say pinnace , and go back again to Bilbao : the other three stay , and be very pleasant for the time . but master foster misdoubt some danger secret give speech that he be doubtful of these man what their intent be ; nevertheless he say nothing , nor seem in any outward wise to mistrust they at all . forthwith there come a ship-boat wherein be seventie person be merchant and such like of Biscay : and beside this boat , there come also the pinnace which before have bring the other three , in which pinnace there come four and twenty , as the Spaniard themselves since confli . two . 113. ] fess . Theise make towards the primrose , and be come thither , there come aboard the corregidor with three or four of his man : but master foster see this great multitude desire that there may no more come aboard , but that the rest shall stay in their boat , which be grant : nevertheless they take small heed of these word ; for on a sudden they come forth of the boat , enter the ship , every Spaniarde take he to his rapier which they bring in the boat , with other weapon , and a drum wherewith to triumph over they . thus do the Spaniard enter the ship , plunge in fierce upon they , some plant themselves under the deck , some enter the Cabbens , and a multitude attend their prey . then the corregidor have a officer with he which bear a white wand in his hand , say to the master of the ship : yield your self , for you be the king prisoner : whereat the master say to his man , we be betray . than some of they set dagger to his breast , and seem in furious manner as though they will have slay he , mean nothing less than to do any such act , for all that they seek be to bring he and his man safe alive to shore . 
 whereat the master be amaze , and his man great discomfit to see themselves ready to be convey even to the slaughter : notwithstanding some of they respect the danger of the master , and see how with themselves there be no way but present death if they be once land among the Spaniard , they resolve themselves either to defend the master , and general to shun that danger , or else to die and be bury in the midst of the sea , rather than to suffer themselves to come into the tormentor hand : and therefore in very bold and manly sort some take they to their javelin , lance , boar-spear , and shoot , which they have set in readiness before , and have five caliver ready charge , which be all the small shot they have , those that be under the hatch or the grate do shoot up at the Spaniard that be over their head , which shoot so amaze the Spaniard on the sudden , as they can hardly tell which way to escape the danger , fear this their small shot to be of great number than it be : other in very manlike sort deal about among they , show themselves of that courage with boar-spear and lance , that they dismay at every stroke two or three Spaniard . than some of they desire the master to command his man to cease and hold their hand , but he answer that such be the courage of the english nation in defence of their own life , that they will slay they and he also : and therefore it lie not in he to do it . now do their blood run about the ship in great quantity , some of they be shoot in between the leg , the bullet issue forth at their breast , some cut in the head , some thrust into the body , and many of they very sore wound , so that they come not so fast in on the one side , but now they tumble as fast over board on both side with their weapon in their hand , some fall into the sea , and some get into their boat , make haste towards the city . and this be to be note , that although they come very thick thither , there return 
 415 
 A.D. 
 I585 - 
 but a small company of they , neither be it know as yet how many of they be slay or drown , only one english man be then slay , who name be John Tristan , and six other hurt . it be great pity to behold how the Spaniard lie swim in the sea , and be not able to save their life . four of they take hold of the ship be for pity sake take up again by master foster and his man , not know what they be : all the Spaniard bosom be stuff with paper , to defend they from the shot , and these four have some wound be dress by the surgeon of the ship . one of they be the corregidor himself , who be governor of a hundred town and city in Spain , his live by his office be better than six hundred pound yearly . this skirmish happen in the evening about six of the clock , after they have lade twenty tun of good and better out of the say ship : which good be deliver by two of the same ship , who name be John Burrell , and John brod-banke , who be on shore be apprehend and stay . 
 the cor - after this valiant enterprise of eight and twenty ri&dorofBtl - English man against 97 Spaniard , they see it be in bring to vain for they to stay and therefore set up sail , and by londm . God providence avoid all danger , bring home the rest of their good , and come thence with all expedition : and ( God be thank ) arrive safe in England near London on Wednesday be the 8 day of June , 1585. in which their return to England the Spaniard that they bring with they offer five hundred crown to be set on shore in any place : which , see the master will not do , they be content to be rule by he and his company , and crave mercy at their hand . and after master foster demand why they come in such sort to betray and destroy they , the corregidor answer , that it be not do only of themselves , but by the commandment of the king himself ; and call for his hose which be wet , do pluck forth the king 416 
 commission , by which he be authorize to do all that he do : the copy whereof follow , be translate out of spanish . 
 