certain remembrance of a intend voyage to Brasill , and the river of plate , by the Edward cotton , a ship of 260 ton of master Edward cotton of Southampton , which perish through extreme negligence near Rio grande in guinie , the 17 of July 1583. 
 article of covenant agree upon between Edward Cotton esquire , owner of the good ship call the Edward cotton of Southampton , and of all the merchandizes in she lade , of the one part , and William huddie gentleman , captain of the say ship , John Hooper his lieutenant , John foster master , huge smith pilot for the whole voyage , and William Cheesman merchant , on the other part . 
 i observe and keep the daily order 
 how °f common prayer aboard the ship , and the company to be call there-ols unto , at the least once in the day , to 
 □ bss osrk be pronounce open . 
 vyjer 2 item , that they be ready with the ■ ■ ■ first fair wind , to set sail and sail in the voyage , and not to put into any port or harbour , but be forcible constrain by weather , or other apparent and urgent cause . 
 3 item , that they take in , at or about the isle of cape Verde , to the quantity of 25 or 30 tun of salt , to be employ among other the owner merchandise , at Santos , and saint Vincent , to his only behoof , and the rest of the salt , so much as shall be need for victuali , and for save of the hide to be keep aboard , 8c the same salt to be provide either at the fishermen hand near the say isle for truck of commodity , or else to be take in at the aforesaid isle , at the discretion of the abovenamed . 
 4 item , upon the due performance of this voyage , the owner bind himself by this deed , to yield unto any 
 408 
 1583-such of the company , as shall refuse their share before they depart from the coast of England , 20 mark a single share , for the duty of the whole voyage , make not above 75. share single in the whole . 
 5 item , the company accord as they be appoint by the officer of the say ship above name , shall at all time be most ready to do their painful endeavour , not only aboard , but in all labour at the land , accord to the direction give by the above name officer , upon pain of forfeiture of their share and wage , the same to be divide among the company . 
 6 item , that the share be take at their return out of all the train oil , and hide of the seal , and of all other commodity get by their handy labour , and of the salt that shall be vend and other commodity , at , or near the coast of Brasill , to allow after 9 livre . the ton fraught , whereof one three to go to the company . 
 7 item , that if any man shall practise by any devise or devise whatsoever , to alter the voyage from the true purpose and intent of the owner , viz. to make their first port at Santos , and saint Vincent , and there to revictuall and traffic , and from thence to the river of plate to make their voyage by the train , and hide of the seal , [ ii two . 111. ] with such other commodity as be there to be have , accord as the owner , with diverse that have government in the say ship , be bind to her highness by their deed obligatory in great sum , that all such practiser , upon due proof make , shall loose their whole entertainment due by share or otherwise for this say voyage to be adjudge by the captain , his lieutenant , the master , pilot , and merchant , or three of they at the least , whereof the captain to be one . 
 8 item , that the pinnace be ready at all time to serve the merchant turn upon his demand , to take in ware and commodity , and to carry and recary to and from the shore , when , and as oft as need shall be , and to give due attendance at the merchant and merchant direction , during the whole voyage . 
 409 
 9 item , that no head or chief officer be set down for such a officer under the hand of the owner , at the go to sea of the say ship , shall or may be displace from his say place or office , without great cause , and his misdemeanour to be adjudge by the captain , and his lieutenant , the master , the pilot , and the merchant , or by the consent of three of they at the least . 
 10 item , that upon the return of the ship to the coast of England , the master and pilot put not into any port or harbour , to the westward of Southampton , but force by weather , or such like urgent cause . 
 William Huddie . John foster . 
 John Hooper . William Cheesman . 
 Hugh smith . 
 a direction as well for the captain , and other my friend of the ship , as especial for William Cheesman merchant , for the voyage to the river of plate . 
 [ * your come to the isle of saint Sebastian , upon the coast of Brasill , you shall according to your discretion , make sale of such commodity , as you may think will be thereabouts well vent , and likewise to buy commodity without make long stay there then your 
 victual be provide , but rather to bespeak commodity against your return from the river of plate , especial of amber , sugar , green ginger , cotton wool , and some quantity of the pepper of the country there . also for parats and monkey , and the beast call Serrabosa . also you shall barrel up of the beef call petune , two or three barrel , and to lose no good opportunity , to gather of the indian fig , and the grain of they to preserve dry , in such quantity as convenient may be do : and touch the make of the train , and preserve of the hide , i leave it whole to the order and the discretion of 
 410 
 the chief of the company . also that in any road where the ship shall ride upon the coast of America , trial be make with the drag , for the pearl oyster , and the same be take , to be open and search for pearl in the presence of the captain , his lieutenant , the master , the pilot , and merchant , or three of they , whereof the captain or his lieutenant to be one , and to remain in the custody of the captain and merchant , under two lock , either of they to have a key to his own lock , and that a true inventory be deliver also to the master and pilot of the say pearl or other jewel of price get in the say voyage , to the intent that no party be defraud of his due , and that no concealment be make of any such thing upon‘forfeiture , the party to lose his share and duty for the voyage that shall so conceal and not reveal it unto the officer above name . also to do your best endeavour to try for the best ore of gold , silver , or other rich metal whatsoever . forget not also to bring the kernel and seed of strange plant with you , the Palmito with his fruit enclose in he . serve God , keep good watch , and stand always upon your guard . 
 Edward Cotton . 
 these thing be thus order , and the ship of the burden of 260 ton , with 83 man of all sort furnish , and full appoint for the voyage , begin to set sail from Hurst castle upon Friday the 20 of may , anno 1583 , and the 17 day of July ensue fall with the coast of guinie , to take in fresh water , where , through mere dissolute negligence , she perish upon a sand , with the most part of the man in she , as appear by the confession of one that escape , the substance and tenor whereof be this . 
 [ the confession 411 
 [ ii two . 112. ] the confession of William bend master mate 
 in the Edward cotton , the 21 of October , Ann. 1584. 
 Rio grande . 
 one Coxe a old english man bury alive by the moor of Rio grande in Guinea . 
 he say , that the 17 day of July , anno 1583. have some lack of fresh water , they put room upon the coast of guinie , where they be set upon a sand about 8 league from the shore , and this examinate , with 29 more , get into the pinnace , who arrive in a island , be desolate of people , and five mile in compass , where they rest 18 day through force of weather , have nought to eat but grass . the rest of the company the ship be split in two , and in quarter , get they into one of they after quarter , and by the help of raft come also a shore into another island near to Rio grande , where they all die as he suppose . 
 the other 30 in the pinnace , at the end of 18 day , depart that island , and come to saint Domingo , where come on shore , they be take of the moor , and strip naked . and they bury one Coxe a old man alive , notwithstanding his pitiful lamentation and skriking : the rest have rice and water allow they , live there a certain time . this examinate be at last sell to a Portugal , with who he dwell the space of a quarter of a year , and in the end , a Portugal caravel come thither , his master jade the same with negro , and he obtain leave of his master to go in the same caravel , and by that mean arrive at Lisbon , and from thence come into England the 17 of October , 1584 , leave behind he of his company alive , Richard Hacker , John Baker , John Matthew , and a boy , with two other which be go beyond saint Domingo : all which , as he say , be so sick and disease , that he judge they to be long before this time dead . 
 