the queen majesty letter to the emperor of Morocco . 
 the queen letter to the emperor . 
 the same in english . 
 right high and mighty prince , have understand from our agent the great affection and good will which you bear we , and how great honour and favour you show he for our sake , to the end to give we more ample testimony of your friendship , we have receive very great 
 contentment and satisfaction , aswell of the one as of the other : and withal we can not omit to magnify you , accord to your desert . we have also receive your letter , and do not a little rejoice thereof , because they come from a prince unto who we be so much behold . our agent have write unto we concern certain thing which you desire to be send unto you from hence . and albeit we wish that we can particular satisfy you , as you desire , yet it be fall out , that the war , wherein at this present we be busy , will not suffer we full to do the same : nevertheless , we have command to satisfy you in part , and [ il two . 120. ] accord as the present necessity do permit we , as our agent will declare unto you more particular , hope you will receive it in good part , and accord to the good will wherewith we grant the same . and because it have be signify unto we that you have promise to proceed in justice against one John Herman John Herman our subject , which have grievous offend we , in such a ” be sort as we have send word unto you , we have give * order to our say agent to inform you more particular in that which we desire to be do in this business , pray you also to command the same to be 
 vi 433 2 e 
 the governor of . Michael take prisoner . 
 put in execution : and that it will please you always to favour our say agent and to hold he jn good credit , as you have do hitherto , not suffer your self to be change in your opinion , for all the false report which they may raise against he , nor to doubt that we will not accomplish at large all that he shall promise you on our behalf . our lord keep and preserve your right high and mighty person . write in our royal court at Greenwich the 20. of July 1587. a voyage to the azore with two pinnace , the one call the serpent , and the other the mary spark of Plymouth , both of they belong to sir Walter Ralegh , write by John Evesham gentleman , wherein be take the governor , of the isle of saint Michael , and Pedro Sarmiento governor of the strait of magalane , in the year 1586. 
 