the voyage of Richard Rainolds and Thomas Dassel to the river of Senega and Gambra adjoin upon Guinea , 1591 , with a discourse of the treason of certain of don Antonio his servant and follower . 
 the name of the chief place of traffic between Senega y Gambra . 
 [ ii two . 189. ] 
 y virtue of her majesty most gracious charter give in the year 1588 , and in the thirty year of her highness reign , certain english merchant be grant to trade , in and from the river of Senega to and in the river of Gambra , on the western coast of Africa . the 
 chief place of traffic on that coast between these river , be these : 
 1 Senega river : the commodity be hide , gum , elephant tooth , a few grain , ostrich feather , amber-griece , and some gold . 
 2 Beseguiache , a town by Capo Verde * league from Senega river : the commodity be small hide , and a few tooth . 
 3 Refisca Viejo , a town 4 league from Beseguiache : the commodity be small hide , and a few tooth now and then . 
 4 Palmerin , a town 2 league from Refisca : the commodity be small hide , and a few elephant tooth now and then . 
 5 porto d’ally , a town 5 league from Palmerin : the commodity be small hide , tooth , amber-griece , and a little gold : and many Portugal be there . 
 6 candimal , a town half a league from Porto d’ally : the commodity be small hide , and a few tooth now and then . 
 7 Palmerin , a town 3 league from candimal : the commodity be small hide , and a few tooth now and then . 
 8 Joala , a town 6 league from Palmerin : the 
 commodity be hide , wax , elephant tooth , rice , and some gold : and many Spaniards and Portugal be there . 
 9 Gambra river : the commodity be rice , wax , hide , elephant tooth , and gold . 
 the Frenchman of diepe and New-haven have trade trade thither above thirty year : and common with four or five ship a year , whereof two small bark go into the ' river of Senega . the other be wont ( until within these four year , that our ship come thither ) to ride with their ship in the road of Porto d’ally and so send their small shaloup of six or eight ton to some of these place on the sea coast before repeat . where in all place general they be well belove and as courteous entertain of the negro , as if they have be natural bear in the country . and very often the negro come into France and return again , which be a further increase of mutual love and amity . since our come to that coast the Frenchman ride with their ship at Refisca Viejo , and suffer we to anchor with our ship at Porto d’ally . the Frenchman never use to go into the river of Gambra : which be a river of secret Gambra d trade and riches conceal by the Portugal . for long since one Frenchman enter the river with a small bark conceay . which be betray , surprise , and take by two galley of the Portugal . 
 in our second voyage and second year there be by vile treacherous mean of the Portugal and the king v°3a&-of the negro consent in Porto d’ally and Joala about forty Englishman cruel slay and captive , and most forty English or all of their good confiscate : whereof there return mentramr-onely two , which be the merchant . and also by pro - and captive . curement of Pedro Gonsalves , one of don Antonio the king servant , Thomas Dassel and other have be betray , if it have not please almighty God to reveal the same , whereby it be prevent . 
 from the south side of Senega river on the sea coast unto about Palmerin be all one kingdom of Negros . 
 the king name be Melick Zamba , who dwell two day journey within the land from Refisca . 
 the 12 of November 1591 , i Richard Rainolds and Thomas Dassel factor in a ship call the nightingale of London of 125 ton , and a pinnace call the cape Verde . messenger of 40 ton arrive near unto Capo Verde at a little hand call the hand of liberty . at this hand we set up a small pinnace , with which we carry our merchandise on land when we traffic . and in the mean time Thomas Dassel go with the great pinnace to traffic with Spaniards or Portugal in Porto d’ally or Joala . over against the say island on the main besegueache . be a habitation of the negro call besegueache . the alcay or governor thereof with a great train come aboard in their canoas to receive the king duty for ankerage and permit the quiet set up of our pinnace : who like pass well that no Portugal come in the ship , say , we shall be better think of by the king and people , if we never do bring Portugal , but come of our self as the Frenchman ever do and do . and to purchase the more love , i Richard Rainolds give he and all his company courteous entertainment . also upon his entreaty , have sufficient pledge aboard , i and other go on land with he . at this instant there be great war between this alcay and another governor of the next province . nevertheless upon our arrival truce be take for a space ; and i with our company conduct among both enemy to the governor besegueache . house in besegueache , and be gentle and friendly feast after their manner , and with some present return safe aboard again . the next day the alcay come aboard again , to will i to send some iron and other commodity in the boat to traffic with the negro , and also request i that i will go to Refisca with the ship ; which i do . and one thing i note , that a number of Negros attend the alcaid land in warlike manner with bow and poison arrow , dart poison , and sword , ( because that the enemy by 92 
 1591. reason of the truce take be there also to view the ship ) who for the most part approach to he kneel down and kiss the back of his hand . 
 the 17 of November we weigh anchor ; and by reason no french ship be yet come , i go to the road of Refisca : where i send for the alcaids interpreter , who come thither aboard , and receive of i the king duty for to have free traffic with the negro , with who daily i exchange my iron and other ware for hide and some elephant tooth , find the people very friendly and tractable . and the next day after our arrival ! i go up into the land about three mile to the town of Refisca , where i be friendly use and well entertain Refisca . of the alcay , and especial of a young nobleman call Conde Amar pattay , who present i with a ox for my company , goat and some young kid , assure i that the king will be glad to hear of the arrival of a christian ship , who they call Blancos , that be , [ ii two . 190. ] white man : especial of a english ship . and so daily the young conde come with a small company of horseman to the sea side , feast i very kind and courteous . 
 and the five of December he with his train come aboard to see the ship ; which to they seem wonder , as people that seidome have see the like : who tell i that his messenger from the king be return ; and the king rejoice much to hear that english man be come with a ship to trade in his port ; and be the first Englishman that ever come with a ship , i be the better welcome ; promise that i or any Englishman hereafter shall be well entreat and find good deal at their hand . and further the conde on the king behalf and his own , earnest request , that before my departure off the coast i will return again to his road to confer with he for the better continuance and confirm of amity between they and Englishmen : which i agree unto . and so show he and his company the best friendship and courtesy i can , he go on shore , and shall have have the honour of our 93 
 ordinance but that he desire the contrary , be amaze at the sight of the ship and noise of the gun , which they do great admire . 
 the 13 of December at night we weigh anchor , and port » dally , arrive the 14 day at the road of Porto d’ally , which be another kingdom : the king thereof be call Amar Meleck , and son to Meleck Zamba the other king , and dwell a day journey and a half from Porto d’ally . when we have anchor , the king kinsman be governor , with all the officer of that town come aboard to receive all duty for the ship and licence to traffic due to the king ; who there general seem to be very glad that no Portugal be come in our ship out of England ; say it be the king pleasure we shall bring none hereafter ; for that the king do esteem they as people of no truth ; and complain of one Francisco de Costa servant to don Antonio , how he have often and the last year also abuse and delude their king Amar Meleck in promise to bring he certain thing out of England , which he never perform , and deem that to be the cause of his stay behind this voyage , and that neither Spaniard nor Portugal can abide we , but report very bad and give out hard speech tend to the defamation and great dishonour of England : and also affirm that at the arrival of a english ship call the Comanda the command , of Richard Kelley of Dartmouth , one ^rd^kd^ ' Pedro Gonsalves a Portugal that come in the say ship the monstrous fr°m don Antonio report unto they , that we be lie of a por - flee out of England and come away upon intent to rob tugall . and do great spoil upon this coast to the negro and Portugal , and that Thomas Dassel have murder Francisco de Acosta since our come from England , who be come to their king in our ship with great present from don Antonio , and desire that at our arrival stay may be make of our good and our self in secret manner ; which they deny , not give credit to his report , have be often abuse by such frivolous and slanderous speech by that nation ; tell i their 
 king be sorry for the former murder and captivity of our nation , and will never yield to the like , have the Portugal and Spaniard in generail hatred ever since , and conceive much better of our country , and we , than these our enemy report of . for which i yield they hearty thank , assure they they shall find great difference between the loyalty of the one and disloyalty of the other : and so pay their duty : and for that port dally the it be the chief place of trade , i show they how be resolve to go to their king with certain present ’ which we have bring out of England ; which we determine for the more honour and credit of our country , and augment of their better affection towards we . 
 all this while Thomas Dassel be with our great pinnace at the town of Joala , be in the kingdom of Joala . king Jocoel Lamiockeric , traffic with the Spaniard and Portugal there . and the forename Pedro Gonsalves , which come out of England , be there also with other english merchant about the business of Richard Kelley ; and as it shall seem , for that he can not obtain his mischievous pretend purpose against Thomas Dassel and other at the town of Porto d’ally , where i Richard Rainolds remain , he attempt with consent of other Portugal which be make privy to his intent to betray the say Thomas Dassel at this town , and have with bribe seduce the chief commander and negro to effect his wicked and most villainous practice : which as God will , be reveal to the say Thomas Dassel by Richard cape a Englishman and servant to the forename Richard Kelley ; to who this say Pedro Gonsalves have disclose his secret treachery , will he with all expedition to stand upon his guard . whereupon Thomas Dassel go aboard a small english bark call the cherubin the cherubin of lime , and there one John Payva a Portugal and at servant of don Antonio declare , that if he and one Garcia ' a Portugal of the say town will have consent with Pedro Gonsalves , the say Thomas Dassel have be betray long before . and upon this warning Thomas 
 Dassel the next day have get three Portugal aboard , advise for our better security to send two on land , and detain one with he call Villa nova , tell they that if the next day by eight of the clock , they will bring Pedro Gonsalves aboard to he , he will release the say villa nova , which they do not . and Thomas Dassel have intelligence that certain negro and Portugal be ride post overland to Porto d’aily with intent to have Richard Rainolds and his company stay on land , be doubtful what friendship soever the unconstant negro profess ( by reason they be often waver be overcome with drink wine ) how they will deal , to prevent the dangerous wile that may be effect in the road by Portugal , and for better strength , the 24 of December he come with his pinnace and Portugal to ride in the road of Porto d’ally , where our great ship the nightingale be : who be no soon arrive but he have news also from the shore from John Baily Anthony Dassels servant , who be there with our good detain by the Portugal mean , that above 20 Portugal and Spaniards be come from Joala by land , and Pedro Gonsalves in their company , to take order for the release of Villa nova . So have have conference two or three day with the commander , the negro , some Spaniard , and some Portugal , in the end by due examination of the matter the negro see how vile Pedro Gonsalves have deal , he be in their power , say he shall suffer death or be torture , for a example to other . but we in recompense of his cruelty pity he and show mercy , desire the negro to entreat he well though undeserving : and thereupon the commander bring he aboard the pinnace to Thomas Dassel to do with he what he will : where at his come from the shore , for lavish speech which he use of prince , he be well buffete by a Spaniard , and may have be slay , if for our sake he have not be rescue . 
 while i go on shore with Villa nova , the say Pedro Gonsalves confess unto Thomas Dassel that he do 96 
 inquire of some negro and Portugal if he may not stay he and his good in the land , and that he do nothing but by commission from his king by his letter which he receive from London in Dartmouth after we be depart from London , for that we presume to come to Guinea to traffic without a servant of his : and further , that he have power or procuration from Francisco de Costa the Portugal that stay behind in England to detain the good of Anthony Dassel in Guinea . 
 by consent of m. Francis Tucker , John browbeare , and the rest of the factor of Richard Kelley , with who this Pedro Gonsalves come , for avoid further mischief that may be practise , we agree that the say Pedro Gonsalves shall stay aboard our ship , and not go any more on land until they depart . So the nine of January he be deliver aboard to go for England in the same ship wherein he come : who be all the time of his abode in our ship both courteous and friendly use at my hand , much against the mariner will , who can not abide such a wicked creature and caitiff , that be nourish and relieve in our country , and yet by villainous mean seek the destruction of we all . 
 the Spaniard and Portugal though they be dissembler and not to be trust , when they perceive how king Amar melick negro befriend and favour we , and that it will be prejudicial ! to their trade for diverse respect , if we shall any way be injury , renounce the say practise , detest the author , and protest to defend we in such case with all faithfulness : desire we will , as the king of Negros have command we , never bring Portugal with we more : use this phrase in disdain of such as come out of England , let your Portugal be bar of iron : for in truth in regard of the rich trade maintain by Frenchmen and by we of late , they esteem more of one bar of iron then of twenty Portugal which we shall bring out of England : who at their come thither very subtle disadvantage we , and do great hurt to every party . 
 un 97 g 
 [ ii two . 192. ] San Domingo . Rio grande . note this trade . 
 at the begin of these broil the king Amar Melick have send his chief secretary and three horse for i Richard Rainolds : but i deny to go by reason of the hurley burley , though i may have have negro of account for pledge aboard : yet we send the present unto the king ; who so soon as he understand the cause why i come not to he , be sorry and offend thereat , command present by proclamation , that no injury shall be offer we in his dominion by his own people , or suffer to be do by Spaniards or Portugal . and if the negro join to his kingdom shall confederate with the Spaniard and Portugal to molest or trouble we ; that his subject the negro shall be ready to aid , succour and defend we . in which people appear more confident love and goodwill towards we , than ever we shall find either of Spaniards or Portugal , though we shall relieve they of the great misery that can be imagine . 
 in the river of Senega no Spaniard or Portugal use to trade : and only one Portugal call Ganigoga dwell far within the river , who be marry to a king daughter . 
 in the town of Porto d’ally and Joala , be town of chief trade , and in the town of canton and Cassan in the river of Gambra be many Spaniard and Portugal resident by permission of the negro ; who have rich trade there along the coast , especial to San Domingo and Rio grande , not far distant from Gambra river ; whither they transport the iron which they buy of Frenchmen and we , and exchange it for negro ; which be carry continual to the west Indies in such ship as come from Spain . also by the governor order and renter of castle de Mina and other place , where gold be , upon the coast of Guinea , they have a place limit how far they must go to trade within the river of Gambra ; and further they may not go upon pain of confiscation of their good , and loss of life : for that the renter themselves send at certain time their own 
 ■ 98 
 ' 594-bark within the river to such place , where as they have great store of gold . and in all these place hereabout , mb tr^e 
 where we use to trade , they have no fort , castle , or ™ place of strength , but only trade by the negro safe - ' 
 conduct and permission . and the most part of the Spaniard and Portugal that be resident in these place be banish man or fugitive , for commit most heinous crime and incestuous act , their life and conversation be agreeable ; and they be of the base behaviour that we have ever see of these nation in any other country . 
 