a report of master Robert Flicke direct to master Thomas Bromley , master Richard staper , and master Cordall concern the success of a part of the London supply send to my lord Thomas Howard to the isle of the azore , 1591. 
 orshipfull , my hearty commendation unto you premise : by my last of the twelve of August from this place i advertise you particular of the accident of our fleet until then . it remain now to relate our endeavour in accomplish the order receive for the join with my 
 lord Thomas Howard , together with the success we have have . our departure from hence be the seventeenth of August , the wind not serve before . the next day follow i cause a flag of counsel to be put forth , whereupon the captain and master of every ship 
 come aboard , and 1 acquaint they with my commission , firm by the right honourable the lord of her majesty counsel , and with all the advertisement of sir Edward Denny , of my lord determination to remain threescore league to the west of Fayal , spread north and south betwixt thirty seven and a half or thirty eight and a half degree . and not find he in this height to repair to the isle of Flores and Corvo , where a pinnace of purpose shall stay our come until the last of August , with intent after that day to repair to you coast of Spain , about the heighth of the rock , some twenty or thirty league off the shore . the which be advise consider off , have regard unto the shortness of time , by reason of our long abode in this place , and the uncertainty of the weather to favour we , it be general hold for the best and secure way to meet with my lord , to bear with the heighth of the rock , without make any stay upon the coast , and so 
 direct for the island which be accord full agree and perform . the 28 day we have sight of the burling , and the 29 be thwart of Peniche , the wind serve we , without any stay we direct our course west for the island . the 30 day we meet with captain Royden in the red-rose , sometime call the golden dragon , separate from my lord of Cumberland in a storm : who certify we of 50 sail of the spanish king armada to be go for the hand , but can not inform we any news of my lord Thomas Howard , otherwise then upon presumption to remain about the island , and so we continue our course the wind stand with we . 
 the 4 of September we recover Tercera , and range along all the island , both on the south and north side the space of four day : during which time it be not our hap to meet with any ship , whereby either to understand of my lord , or of the indian fleet : hereupon we direct our course to the west from Fayal , accord to the instruction of Sit* Edward Denny . the 11 day in the ply to the westwards we descry a sail out of our main top , and in the afternoon between two and three of the clock have raise her hull , the weather become calm , so that the ship can not fetch she . i send off " my skiff thorough man , furnish with shot and sword , the cherubin , and the Margaret and John do the like . upon this the sail stand off again , and the night approach , our boat lose she and so return . in this our pursuit after the sail the centurion be leave a stern , the next morning we miss she , and spend that day in ply up and down seek she . and for as much as every of the ship have receive order , that , if by extremity of weather or any other mischance they shall be sever from our fleet , they shall meet and join at Flores , we , accord to the instruction of sir Edward Denny , proceed to the find of my lord Thomas Howard , be in the heighth appoint and not able to hold the same by reason of 
 extreme tempest which force we to the isle of Flores and Corvo , which we make the 14 day in the morning , and there also join again with the centurion , who company before we have lose : who declare unto we that the 12 day , be the same day they lose we , they meet with five and forty sail of the indian fleet . the same night upon these news we come to a anchor between Flores and Corvo , and the morrow follow at the break of day , a flag of counsel be put out , the captain and master come aboard i : where , for the desire to understand some tiding of my lord , as also the supply of our want of water , it be think good to send our boat furnish on shore , under the conduct of captain Brothus , and then it be also order after our departure thence to range along the southside of the island to the end we may either understand of my lord , or else light on the indian fleet ; and in the miss of our purpose to direct our course for cape Sant Vincente . 
 the boat , accord to the foresay determination , be send on shore , it chance that the costly ride uttermost in the road , do weigh to bring her self more near among we for the succour of the boat send off , and in open the land discover two sail , which we in the road can not perceive : whereupon she give we a warn piece , which cause we to wave off our boat back , and before they can recover our ship , the descry ship appear unto we , towards the which we make with all haste , and in a very happy hour , as it please God . in that we have not so soon clear the land , and speak with one of they , which be a bark of Bristol , who have also seek my lord in the heigt appoint and can not find he , but a violent storm arise , in such manner , as if we have remain in the road , we have be in danger of perish : and the same extreme continue during the space of threescore hour . in which storm i be separate from our fleet , except the cherubin and the costly , which keep 58 
 company with i . and so sail among the hand , i view the road of Fayal , and find no reader there , go direct for the isle Tercera . 
 the nineteenth day in the morning come unto you same with intent to edge into the road , a tempest arise and scant the wind , that we can not seize it : from the which be drive we fall among certain of the indian fleet , which the say storm disperse , and put they from the road : whereupon my self with the other two ship in company give several ! chase , and thereby lose the company each of other . 
 in follow our chase above noon we make she to Portugal strike and yield , be a Portugal ! , lade with hide , prize take ' salsa-perilla and anile . at this very instant we espy another , and take our prize with we follow her , and somewhat before night obtain she , name the conception , Francisco Spinola be captain , which be ric^ westladen with hide , Cochonillio , and certain raw silk . InfM prize and for that the sea be so grow , as neither with ‘ boat nor ship they be to be board , we keep they till fit opportunity . the same night a little before day there happen another into our company , suppose we by our two prize to be of their fleet , which we until the morning dissemble . 
 the 20 day in the morning , the sail be shoot somewhat a head of we , have a speciali care for the safe keep of the two former , we purpose to cause our prize to put out more sail thereby to keep they near in give chase to the other : unto the which the master will not hearken nor be persuade , but that they will follow we : by the which his wilfulness by such time as we have cause the other to yield , and send man aboard , the conception , Francisco Spinola captain be bring a stern , and have get the wind of we , stand off with all her sail bear , so as we be force to make a new chase of she : and have not the wind enlarge upon we we have lose she . in the pursuit before we recover she and bring our self again in company of our 
 other prize , the whole day be spend , and by this mean we lose the opportunity of that day , the weather fit serve to board the Portugal prize , which be in great distress , and make request to take they be ready to sink , and , as we well perceive , they cease not to pump day and night : the which ship to all our judgement the same night perish in the sea . 
 the one and twenty day the conception , whereof Francisco Spinola be captain , be also in a leak , and the same still increase notwithstanding the continual pump , in such sort as not to be keep along above water , i take and discharge out of her two and forty chest of cochonillio and silk , and so leave she with 11 foot water in hold , and her furniture and 4700 hide , unto the sea . 
 the other prize which we have bring into the harbour be name nostra sennora de los remedios , whereof Francisco Alvares be captain , lade with 16 chest of Cochonillio , certain fardel of raw silk , and about 4000 hide . upon the discharge of the good your worship shall be particular advertise thereof . 
 in the board of the prize the disorder of the company be such , as that they let not present beside the rifle of the Spaniard to break open the chest and to purloin such money as be in they : notwithstanding that it be order at convenient leisure to have go aboard my self , and there in the presence of three or four witness to have take a just account thereof , and the same to have put in safe keep , accord to the effect of article receive in this behalf . 
 and whereas there be also certain sum of money [ ii two . 178. ] take from the company which they have thus purloin and embesele , and the same with some other parcel bring aboard my ship , amount unto 2129 pezoe and a half , the company as pillage due unto they demand to have the same share , which i refuse , and open at the main mast read the article firm by my lord treasurer and my lord admiral , whereby we 
 aught to be direct , and that it be not in i any way to dispose thereof until the same be final determine at home . hereupon they mutine and at last grow into such fury , as that they will have it or else break down the cabbine , which they be also ready to put in practice , whereby i be force to yield , lest the Spaniard which we have aboard be many perceive the same , may have have fit opportunity to rise against we , which , after their brawl be appease , they seek to have put in execution . 
 by the last advise from Castille the general of the king armada which be late come to sea have receive commandment to join his fleet with those of the Indies , and for to stay altogether at Tercera until the 15 of October : for that 6 patache with 7 or 8 million of the king treasure will come by that time , or else they stay their come from Havana until January next , or the king further pleasure therein to be know . Theise patache be say to be of 300 tun the piece , and to carry 30 piece of brass , and also of sail report to have the advantage of any ship . 
 there perish of the Indies fleet sink in the sea before their come to Flores 11 sail , whereof the general be one , and not one man save . and it be by the Spaniard themselves presuppose that the storm which we have at Flores and at Tercera have devour many more of they , whereof in part we be eye witness . and so what by the sea and our man of war i presume that of 75 sail that come from Havana , half of they will never arrive in Spain . 
 the 11 day of October at night we come to anchor in the sound of Plymouth , and the next morning with our prize come into Cattewater : for which God be thank : for that a vehement storm arise , and with such fury increase , as that the prize be force to cut over her main mast : otherwise with the violence of the storm , her ground tackle be bad , she have drive on shore : which be the most cause that move i to put in here ; 
 intend now here to discharge the good without further adventure , and have certify thus much unto my lord admiral , and therewith also desire to understand the direction of the lord of the counsel together with you , insomuch as my lord Thomas Howard be not return . how the rest of our consort which be separate from we by weather have speed , or what prize they have take , whereof there be much hope by reason of the scatter of the west indian fleet , as yet we be able to say nothing . and thus expect your answer , and for all other matter refer i unto the bearer captain Furtho , i end . Plymouth the 24 of October . 1591. 
 your worship love friend 
 Robert Flicke . 
 