the manner of the take of two spanish ship lade with quicksilver and the pope bull , bind for the west Indies , by m. Thomas white in the amity of London . 1592. 
 he 26 of July 1592 , in my return out of Barbary in the ship call the amity of London , be in the height of 36 degree or thereabouts , at four of the clock in the morning we have sight of two ship , be distant from we about three or four league : by 
 seven of the clock we fetch they up , and be within gunshot : who boldness , have the king of Spain arm display , do make we judge they rather ship of war , then lade with merchandise . and as it appear by their own speech , they make full account to have take we : it be a question among they , whether it be best to carry we to saint Lucar , or to Lisbon . we wave each other a main . they have place themselves in warlike order one a cable length before another , we begin the fight . in the which we continue , so fast as we be able to charge and discharge , the space of five hour , be never a cable length distant either of we from other . in which time we receive diverse shot both in the hull of our ship , mast , and sail , to the number of 32 great , beside 500 musket shoot and harquebuss a crock at the least , which we tell after the fight . and because we perceive they to be stout , we think good to board the Biscaine , which be on head the other : where lie aboard about a hour , and ply our ordinance and small shot ; in the end we stow all his man . now the other in the flyboat , think we have enter our man in their fellow , bare room with we , mean to have lay we aboard , and so to have entrap we betwixt they both : which we perceive , fit our ordinance 
 103 
 so for he , as we quit our self of he , and he board his fellow : by which mean they both fall from we . then present we keep our loose , hoist our topsail , and weather they , and come hard aboard the flyboat with our ordinance prepare , and give she our whole broad side , with the which we slay diverse of their man ; so as we may see the blood run out at the scupper hole . after that we cast about , and new charge all our ordinance , and come upon they again , will they to yield , or else we will sink they : whereupon the one will have yield , which be shoot between wind and water ; but the other call he traitor . unto who we make answer , that if he will not yield present also , we will sink he first . and thereupon he understanding our determination , present put out a white flag , and yield , and yet refuse to strike their own sail , for that they be swear never to strike to any Englishman . we then command their captain and master to come aboard we ; which they do . and after examination and stow they , we send certain of our own man aboard they , and strike their sail , and man their ship : find in they both 126 person live , and 8 dead , beside those which they themselves have cast overboard . so it please God to give we the victory be but 42 man and a boy , whereof 2 be kill and 3 wound : for the which good success we give God the only praise . Theise two rich prize lade with 1400 chest of quicksilver with the arm of Castille and Leon fasten upon they , and with a great quantity of bull or indulgence , and guild missal or service book , with a hundred ton of excellent wine , we bring short after into the river of Thames up to black-wall . 
 by the take of this quicksilver , about 1400 chest , the king of Spain lose for every quintali of the same a quintail of silver , that shall have be deliver he by the master of the mine there , which amount to 600000 pound . 
 104 
 the take of the ‘ Madre de Dios ’ a.d. 
 .... I592* 
 more by take of his bull , to wit , two million and 72 thousand for live and dead person for the province of Nova Hispania , lucatan , Guatimala , the Honduras , and the Phillipinas , tax at two real the piece . and more for eighteen thousand bull tax at four real , amount all to 107700 pound . summa totalis 707700 livre . 
 more there be take ten fardel of gild missal and breviaries send for the king account . 
 so the hindrance that the king receive by the loss of his bull and quicksilver amount as be abovesaid : beside the lack of his wine , about 100 ton , whereby his fleet be disappoint of a great part of their provision . 
 