the fire and sink of the stout and warlike carrack call Las cinque llaguas , or , the five wound , by three tall ship set forth at the charge of the right honourable the earl of Cumberland and his friend : write by the discreet and valiant captain m. Nicholas Downton . 
 beside these 3 ship there be a pinnace call the violet , or the why not i . . 
 n the latter end of the year i£93 - the right honourable earl of Cumberland , at his own charge and his friend , prepare 3 ship all at equal rate , and either of they have like quantity of victual , and like number of man , there be embark in all 3 ship 420 man 
 of all sort . the royal exchange go as admiral , wherein m. George cave be captain . the may-flower vice-admiral under the conduct of William Anthony : and the Samson , the charge whereof it please his honour to commit unto i Nicholas Dounton . our direction be send we to Plymouth , and we be to open they at sea . 
 the sixth of April 1594 we set sail in the sound of Plymouth , direct our course towards the coast of Spain . 
 the 24 of the say month at the admiral direction we divide our self east and west from each other , be then in the heighth of 43 degree , with commandment at night to come together again . 
 118 
 the fire of ‘ the five wound ’ a.d. 
 the 27 day in the morning we descry the Mayflower and the little pinnace with a prize that they have take , be of Viana in Portugal , and bind for Angola in Africa . this bark be of 28 ton , have some 17 person in the same . there be in her some 12 commodity butt of Galicia wine , whereof we take into every ship fi* fir Angola . a like part , with some Ruske in chest and barrel , with 5 butt of blue course cloth , and certain course linen-cloth for negro shirt , which good be divide among our fleet . 
 the 4 of may we have sight of our pinnace , and the admiral shallop which have take three Portugal caravel , whereof they have send two away and keep the three . 
 the second of June we have sight of saint Michael . the three day in the morning we send our small pinnace , which be of some 24 ton , with the small caravel which we have take at the burling to range the road of all the hand , to see if they can get any thing in the same : appoint they to meet usW . S.W . 12 league from faiall . their go from we be to no purpose . they miss come to we when we appoint , as also we miss they , when we have great cause to have use they . 
 the 13 of June we meet with a mighty carrack of the east Indies , call las cinque Llagas , or the five wound . the may-flower be in fight with she before night . i , in the Samson , fetch she up in the evening , and as i command to give she the broad side , as we term it , while i stand very heedful pry to discover her strength : and where i may give counsel to board she in the night when the admiral come up to we , and as i remember at the very first shot she discharge at we , i be shoot in a little above the belly , whereby i be make unserviceable for a good while after , without touch any other for that night . yet by mean of a honest true-hearted man which i have with i , one captain grant , nothing be neglect : until midnight when 
 119 
 the admiral come up , the may-flower , and the Samson never leave by turn to ply she with their great ordinance ; but then captai ne cave wish we to stay till morning , at what time each one of we shall give she three bout with our great ordinance , and so shall clap she a board : but indeed it be long linger in the morning until io of the clock before we attempt to board she . the admiral lay she a board in the mid ship : the may-flower come up in the quarter , as it shall seem , to lie at the stern of the admiral on the larboard side . the captain of the say may-flower be slay at the first come up : whereby the ship fall to [ ii two . 200. ] the stern of the out-licar of the carrack , which ( be a piece of timber ) so wound her foresail , that they say they can come no more to fight , i be sure they do not , but keep aloof from we . the Samson go aboard on the bow , but have not room enough , our quarter lie on the exchange bow , and our bow on the carrack bow . the exchange also at the first come have her captain m. cave shoot into both the leg , the one whereof he never recover , so he for that present be not able to do his office , and in his absence he have not any that will undertake to lead out his company to enter upon the enemy . my friend captain grant do lead my man on the carrack side , which be not manful back by the exchange man , his force be small , make the enemy bold than he will have be , whereby i have six man present slay and many more hurt , which make they that remain hurt to return aboard , and will never more give the assault . i say not but some of the exchange man do very well , and many more ( no doubt ) will have do the like , if there have be any principali man to have put they forward , and to have bring all the company to the fight , and not to have run into corner themselves . but 1 must needs say , that their ship be as well provide for defence , as any that i have see . and the Portugal peradventure encourage by our slack work , play 
 120 
 the man and have Barricados make , where they may stand without any danger of our shot . they ply we also very much with fire , so that most of our man be burn in some place or other : and while our man be put out of the fire , they will ever be ply they with small shot or dart . this unusual cast of fire do much dismay many of our man and make they draw back as they do . when we have not man to enter , we ply our great ordinance much at they as high up as they may be mount , for otherwise we do they little harm , and by shoot a piece out of our forecastle be close by she , we fire a mat on her beakhead , which moor and more kindle , and run from thence to the mat on the bowsprit , and from the mat up to the wood of the bowsprit , and thence to the topsail yard , which fire make the Portugal abaft in the ship to stagger , and to make show of parley . but they that have the charge before encourage they , make show , that it may easy be put out , and that it be nothing . whereupon again they stand stiff to their defence . Anone the fire grow so strong , that i see it beyond all help , although she have be already yield to we . than we desire to be off from she , but have little hope to obtain our desire ; nevertheless we ply water very much to keep our ship well . in deed i make little other reckon for the ship , my self , and diverse hurt man , than to have end there with the carrack , but most of our people may have save themselves in boat . and when my care be most , by god providence only , by the burn asunder of our spritsail-yard with rope and sail , and the rope about the spritsail-yard of the carrack , whereby we be fast entangle , we fall apart , with burn of some of our sail which we have then on board . the exchange also be far from the fire , afterward be more easy clear , and fall off from abaft . and as soon as God have put we out of danger , the fire get into the forecastle , where , i think , be store of Benjamin , and such other like combustible matter , for 
 121 
 it flame and run over all the carrack at a instant in a manner . the Portugal be leap overboard in great number . then send i captain grant with the boat , with leave to use his own discretion in save of they . so he bring i aboard two gentleman , the one an*old man call Nuno Velio Pereira , which ( as appear by the 4 chapter in the first book of the worthy history of Huighen de Linschoten ) be governor of Mozambique and Cefala , in the year 1582. and since that time have be likewise a governor in a place of importance in the east Indies . and the ship wherein he be come home be cast away a little to the east of the cape of Buona Speranza , and from thence he travel overland to Mozambique , and come as a passenger in this carrack . the other be call brass Carrero , and be captain of a carrack which be cast away near Mozambique , and come likewise in this ship for a passenger . also three man of the inferior sort we save in our boat , only these two we clothe and bring into England . the rest which be take up by the other ship boat , we set all on shore in the he of Flores , except some two or three negro , whereof one be bear in Mozambique , and another in the east Indies . this fight be open off the sound between faial and Pico 6 league to the southward . the people which we save tell we that the cause why they will not yield , be , because this carrack be for the king , and that she have all the good belong to the king in the country for that year in she , and that the captain of she be in favour with the king , and at his return into the Indies shall have be viceroy there . and withal this ship be nothing at all pester neither within board nor without , and be more like a ship of war then otherwise : moreover , she have the ordinance of a carrack that be cast away at Mozambique , and the company of she , together with the company of another carrack that be cast away a little to the eastwards of the cape of Buona Speranza . yet through sickness which they catch at Angola , where they water , they 
 122 
 the fire of ‘ the five wound ’ a.d. 
 1594-say , they have not now above 150 white man , but negro 
 a great many . they likewise affirm that they have [ ii two . 201. ] three nobleman and three lady in she , but we find they to differ in most of their talk . all this day and all the night she burn , but the next morning her powder which be low be 60 barrel blow she abroad , so that most of the ship do swim in part above the water . some of they say , that she be big than the Madre de Dios , and some , that she be less : but she be much undermast , and undersail , yet she go well for a ship that be so foul . the shot which we make at she in great ordinance before we lay she aboard may be at seven bout which we have , and six or 7 shot at a bout , one with another , some 49 shot : the time we lie aboard may be two hour . the shot which we discharge aboard the carrack may be some twenty sacar . and thus much may suffice concern our dangerous conflict with that unfortunate carrack . 
 the last of June after long traverse of the sea we have sight of another mighty carrack which diverse of our company at the first take to be the great saint Philip the admiral of Spain , but the next day be the first of July fetch she up we perceive she indeed to be a carrack , which after some few shot bestow upon she we summon to yield ; but they stand stout to their defence utter refuse the same . wherefore see no good can be do without board she i consult what course we shall take in the board . but by reason that we which be the chief captain be partly slay and partly wound in the former conflict , and because of the murmur of some disorder and cowardly companion , our valiant and resolute determination be cross : and to conclude a long discourse in few word , the carrack escape our hand . after this attend abput Corvo and Flores for some west indian purchase , and be disappoint of our expectation , and victual grow short , we return for England , where i arrive at Portesmouth the 28 of August . 
 