the three and last voyage unto Meta incognita , make by m. Martin Frobisher , in the year 1578. write by Thomas Ellis . 
 these be to let you know , that upon the 25. of may , the Thomas Allen be vice-admiral who captain be m. York , m. Gibbes master , Christopher hall pilot , accompany with the rear-admiral name the hopewel , who captain be m. Henry carewe , the 
 m. Andrew Dier , and certain other ship come to Gravesend , where we anchor and abide the come of certain of our fleet which be not yet come . 
 the 27. of the same month our fleet be now come together , and all thing press in a readiness , the wind favour , and tide serve , we be of sail in number eight , weigh anchor and hoist our sail towards Harwich to meet with our admiral , and the residue which then and there abide our arrival : where we safe arrive the 28. thereof , find there our admiral , who we with the discharge of certain piece salute , accord to order and duty , and be welcome with the like courtesy : which be finish we land : where our general continue muster his soldier and miner , and set thing in order appertain to the voyage until the last of the say month of May , which day we hoist our sail , and commit our self to the conduct of almighty God , we set forward towards the west country in such lucky wise and good success , that by the five of June we pass the dursy , be the utmost part of Ireland to the westward . 
 and here it be not much amiss nor far from our purpose , if i shall a little discourse and speak of our adventure and chance by the way , as our land at Plymouth , as also the meeting certain poor man , which be rob and spoil of all that they have by 
 231 
 master fork . Christopher hall . 
 the hopewel . captain Carew . 
 Andrew dier . 
 [ three . +o . i 
 Harwich . 
 dursy . 
 Ireland . 
 Plymouth . 
 pirate and rover : among who be a man of Briitote . Bristol , on who our general use his liberality , and send he away with letter into England . 
 but because such thing be impertinent to the matter , i will return ( without any more mention of the same ) to that from the which i have digress and swerve , i mean our ship now sail on the surge sea , sometime pass at pleasure with a wish eastern wind , sometime hinder of our course again by the western blast , until the 20. day of the foresay month of June , Frizeland . on which day in the morning we fall with Frizeland , which be a very hie and crag land and be almost clean cover with snow , so that we may see nought but craggy rock and the top of high and huge hill , sometime ( and for the most part ) all cover with foggy mist . there might we also perceive the great isle of ice lie on the sea , like mountain , some small , some big , of sundry kind of shape , and such a number of they , that we can not come near the shore for they . 
 thus sail alongst the coast , at the last we see a place somewhat void of ice , where our general ( accompany with certain other ) go a shore , where they see certain tent make of beast skin , and boat much the like unto they of Meta incognita . the tent be furnish with flesh , fish , skin , and other trifle : among the which be find a box of nail : whereby we do conjecture , that they have either artificer among they , or else a traffic with some other nation . the man run away , so that we can have no conference or communication with they . our general ( because he will have they no more to flee , but rather encourage the courtesy of to stay through his courteous deal ) give commaunde-our general . mean that his man shall take nothing away with they , save only a couple of white dog , for the which he leave pin , point , knife , and other trifle thing , and depart without take or hurt any thing , and so come aboard , and hoist sail , and pass forward . 
 232 
 but be scarce out of the sight thereof , there fall such a fog and hideous mist that we can not see one another : whereupon we strike our drum , and sound our trumpet , to the end we may keep together : and so continue all that day and night till the next day that the mist break up : so that we may easy perceive all the ship thus sail together all that day , until the next day , be the 22. of the same : on which day we see a infinite number of ice , from the which we cast about to shun the danger thereof . 
 but one of our small bark name the Michael , who master captain be master Kinderslie , the master Bartholomew bull , lose our company , insomuch that we can not ° mew ■ obtain the sight of her many day after , of who 1 mean to speak further anon when occasion shall be minister , and opportunity serve . thus we continue in our course until ! the second of July , on which day we fall with the queen foreland , where we see so much ice , that we think it unpossible to get into the strait : yet at the last we give the adventure and enter the ice . 
 be among it we see the Michael , of who i Michael . speak before , accompany with the Judith , who captain be Master Fenton , the master Charles Jackman , Charles bear into the foresay ice , far distant from we , who Jackman . in a storm that fall that present night , ( whereof i will at large God willing , discourse hereafter ) be sever from we , and be in , wander up and down the strait among the ice many day in great peril , till at the last , ( by the providence of God ) they come safe to harbour in their wish port. in the countess countess of Warwick sound , the 20. of July aforesaid , ten day before any of the other ship : who go on ' shore find where the people of the country have be , and have hide their provision in great heap of stone be both of flesh and fish , which they have kill ; 
 whereof we also find great store in other place after [ three . 41 . j our arrival . they find also diverse engine , as bow , 
 233 
 narrow shift fir safety . 
 sling , and dart . they find likewise certain piece of the pinnace which our general leave there the year before , which pinnace he have sink , mind to have it again the next year . 
 now see i have entreat so much of the Judith and the Michael : i will return to the rest of the other ship , and will speak a little of the storm which fall , with the mishap that we have , the night that we put into the ice : whereof i make mention before . 
 at the first enter into the ice in the mouth of the strait , our passage be very narrow , and difficult but be once get in , we have a fair open place without any ice for the most part , be a league in compass , the ice be round about we and enclose we , as it be , within the pale of a park . in which place , ( because it be almost night ) we mind to take in our sail , and lie a hull all that night . but the storm so increase , and the wave begin to mount aloft , which bring the ice so near we , and come on so fast upon we , that we be fain to bear in and out , where we may espy a open place . thus the ice come on we so fast , we be in great danger , look every hour for death . and thus pass we on in that great danger , see both our self and the rest of our ship so trouble and toss among the ice , that it will make the strong heart to relent . 
 at the last the bark Dionyse be but a weak ship , and bruise afore among the ice , be so leak that no long she can tarry above the water , sink without save any of the good which be within she : which sight so abash the whole fleet , that we think very we shall have taste of the same sauce . but nevertheless we see they in such danger , man our boat and save all the man in such wise , that not one perish : God be thank . 
 the storm still increase and the ice enclose we , so that we be fain to take down top and top mast : for the ice have so environ we , that we can see neither 234 
 i578-land nor sea , as far as we can ken : so that we be fain to cut our cable to hang over board for fender , somewhat to ease the ship side from the great and driry stroke of the ice : some with capstan bar , some fend off with oar , some with plank of two inche thick , which be break immediate with the force of the ice , some go out upon the ice to bear it off with their shoulder from the ship . but the rigorousness of the tempest be such , and the force of the ice so great , that not only they burst and spoil the foresay provision , but likewise so raze the side of the ship , that it be pitiful to behold , and cause the heart of many to faint . 
 thus we continue all that dismal and lamentable night plunge in this perplexity , look for instant death : but our god ( who never leave they destitute godsprwi-which faithful call upon he , although he often punish dence ' for amendment sake ) in the morning cause the wind to cease , and the fog which all that night lie on the face of the water to clear : so that we may perceive about a mile from we , a certain place clear from any ice , to the which with a easy breath of wind which our God send we , we bend our self . and furthermore , he provide better for we than we deserve or hope for : for when we be in the foresay clear place , he send we a fresh gale at west or at west Southwest , which set we clear without all the ice . and further he add more : for he send we so pleasant a day as the like we have not of a long time before , as after punishment consolation . 
 thus we joyful wight be at liberty , take in all our sail and lay a hull , praise God for our deliverance , and stay to gather together our fleet : which once be do , we see that none of they have any great hurt , neither any of they want , save only they of who i speak before and the ship which be lose , then at the last we hoist our sail , and lay bult off and on , till such time as it will please God to take away the ice that we may get into the strait . 
 235 
 1578. a mountain of ice appear in sundry figure . and as we thus lay off and on we come by a marvellous huge mountain of ice , which surpass all the rest that ever we see : for we judge it to be near fourscore fathom above water , and we think it to be a ground for any thing that we can perceive , be there nine score fathom deep , and of compass about half a mile . 
 a fog of long continuance . also the five of July there fall a hideous fog and mist , that continue till the nineteenth of the same : so that one ship can not see another . therefore we be fain to bear a small sail and to observe the time : 
 a current to the'northwest . but there run such a current of a tide , that it set we to the northwest of the queen foreland the backside of all the strait : where ( through the contagious fog have no sight either of sun or star ) we scarce know where we be . in this fog the ten of July we lose the company of the vice-admiral , the anne Francis , the buss of Bridgewater , and the Francis of Foy . the 16. day one of our small bark name the 
 the Gabriel . Gabriel be send by our general to bear in with the land to descry it , where be on land , they meet with 
 the people offer to traffic with we . the people of the country , which seem very humane and civil , and offer to traffic with our man , proffer they fowl and skin for knife , and other trifle : who courtesy cause we to think , that they have small conversation with other of the strait . than we bear back again to go with the queen foreland : and the eighteenth day we come by two island whereon we go on shore , and find where the people have be : but we see none of they . this day we be again in the ice , and like to be in as great peril as we be at the first . for through the darkness and obscurity of the foggy mist , we be almost run on rock and island before we see they : but God ( even miraculous ) provide for we , open the fog that we may see clear , both where and in what danger we present be , and also the way to escape : or else without fade we have ruinous run upon the rock . 236 
 when we know perfect our instant case , we cast about to get again on seaboard , which ( God be thank ) by night we obtain and praise God . the clear continue scarce a hour , but the fog fall again as thick as ever it be . 
 then the rearadmiral and the bear get themselves clear without danger of ice and rock , strike their sail and lay a hull , stay to have the rest of the fleet come forth : which as yet have not find the right way to clear themselves from the danger of rock and ice , until the next morning , at what time the rearadmiral discharge certain warning piece to give notice that she warn have escape , and that the rest ( by follow of she ) may set themselves free , which they do that day . charnd * 
 then have gather our self together we proceed on our purpose voyage , bear off , and keep our self distant from the coast till the 19 day of July : at which time the fog break up and disperse , so that we may plain and clear behold the pleasant air , which so long have be take from we , by the obscurity of the foggy mist : and after that time we be not much encumber therewith until we have leave the con 
 fine of the country . 
 then our espy a fair sound , suppose it to go a fair sound into the strait between the queen foreland and between the jackmans sound , which prove as we imagine . for our general send forth again the Gabriel to discover it , who jackmans pass through with much difficulty : for there run such sound . a extreme current of a tide , with such a horrible gulf , that with a fresh gale of wind they be scarce able to stem it : yet at the length with great travail they pass it , and come to the strait , where they meet with the Thomas Allen , the Thomas of Ipswich , and the buss of Bridgewater : who altogether adventure to bear into the ice again , to see if they can obtain their wish port. but they be so encumber that with much difficulty they be able to get out again , yet at the last they escape , the Thomas Allen , and the Gabriel 
 237 
 the time of our set forward , etc 
 bear in with the western shore , where they find harbour , and there moar their ship until the four of August , at which time they come to we in the countess of Warwick sound . the Thomas of Ipswich catch a great leak which cause she to cast again to Seabord and so be mend . 
 we sail along still by the coast until we come to the queen foreland , at the point whereof we meet with part of the gulf aforesaid , which place or gulf ( as some of our master do credible report ) do flow nine hour , and ebb but three . at that point we discover certain land southward , which neither time nor opportunity will serve to search . then be come to the mouth of the strait we meet with the anne Francis , who have lie bult up and down ever since her departure alone , never find any of her company . we meet then also the Francis of Foy , with who again we intend to venture and get in : but the ice be yet so thick , that we be compel again to retire and get we on seaboard . 
 there fall also the same day be the 26. of July , such a horrible snow , that it lie a foot thick upon the hatch which freeze as it fall . 
 we have also at other time diverse cruel storm both of snow and hail , which manifest declare the dis-temperature of the country : yet for all that we be so many time repulse and put back from our purpose , know that linger delay be not profitable for we , but hurtful to our voyage , we mutual consent to our valiant general once again , to give the onset . 
 the 28. day therefore of the same July we assay , and with little trouble ( God be praise ) we pass the danger by day light . then night fall on the face of the earth , we hull in the clear , till the cheerful light of the day have chase away the noisome darkness of the night : at which time we set forward towards our wish port : by the 30. day we obtain our expect desire , where we find the Judith , and the Michael : 
 238 
 which bring no small joy unto the general , and great consolation to the heavy heart of those weary wight . 
 the 30. day of July we bring our ship into the countess of Warwick sound , and moar they , namely these ship , the admiral , the rearadmiral , the Francis of Foy , the bear Armenel , the Salomon , and the buss of Bridgewater : which be do , our general commanded we all to come a shore upon the countess hand , where he set his miner to work upon the mine , give charge with expedition to dispatch with their lade . 
 our general himself , accompany with his gentleman , diverse time make road into sundry part of the country , as well to find new mine , as also to find out and see the people of the country . he find out one mine upon a island by bear sound , and name it the countess of Sussex island . one other be find in countess winter furnace , with diverse other , to which the ship °f^sjex be send sunder to be lade . in the same rodes winter he meet with diverse of the people of the country at furnace . sundry time , as once at a place call David sound : who David sound . shoot at our man , and very desperate give they the onset , be not above three or four in number , there be of our country man above a dozen : but see themselves not able to prevail , they take themselves to flight : who our man pursue , but be not use to such craggy cliff , they soon lose the sight of they , and so in vain return . 
 we also see of they at bear sound , both by sea the politic of and land in great company : but they will at all time the people fir keep the water between they and we . and if any of our ship chance to be in the sound ( as they come diverse time , because the harbour be not very good ) the ship jade , and depart again : then so long as any ship be in sight , the people will not be see . 
 but when as they perceive the ship to be go , they will not only show themselves stand upon high clifle , and call we to come over unto they : but also 
 239 
 will come in their boat very near to we , as it be to brag at we : whereof our general have advertisement , send for the captain and gentleman of the ship , to accompany and attend upon he , with the captain also of the anne Francis , who be but the night before come unto we . for they , and the Fleebote have lose we the 26. day in the great snow , put into a harbour in the queen foreland , where they find good oar , wherewith they jade themselves , and come to seek the general : so that now we have all our ship , save one bark , which be lose , and the Thomas of Ipswich , who ( compel by what fury i know not ) forsake our company , and return home without lade . 
 our general accompany with his gentleman , ( of who i speak ) come all together to the countess of Sussex island , near to bear sound : where he man out certain pinniss , and go over to the people : who perceive his arrival , flee away with all speed , and in haste leave certain dart and other engine behind they , which we find : but the people we can not find . 
 the next morning our general perceive certain of they in boat upon the sea , give chase to they in a pinnace under sail , with a fresh gale of wind , but can by no mean come near unto they : for the long he sail , the further off he be from they : which well show their cunning and activity . thus time wear away , and the day of our departure approach , our general command we to lade with all expedition , that we may be again on Seaboard with our ship : for while we be in the country , we be in continual danger of freeze in : for often snow and hail often fall , the water be so much freeze and congeal in the night , that in the morning we can scarce row our boat or pinnace , especial in dyer sound , which be a calm and still water : which cause our general to make the more haste , so that by the 30. day of August we be all lade , and make all thing ready to depart . 
 240 
 but before i proceed any further herein , to show what gentleman fortune befall at our departure , i will turn my pen a little to m. captain Fenton , and those gentleman which ' c^^gy* it shall have inhabit all the year in those country , who valiant mind be much to be commend : for doubtless they have do as they intend , if luck have not withstand their willingness . 
 for the bark dionise which be lose , have in her much of their house which be prepare and shall have be build for they , with many other implement . also the Thomas of Ipswich which have most of their provision in she , come not into the strait at all : neither do we see she since the day we be separate in the great snow , of which i speak before . for these cause , have not their house , nor yet provision , they be disappoint of their pretence to tarry , and therefore jade their ship , and so come away with we . 
 but before we take ship , we build a little house a house in the countess of Warwick island , and garnish it trick and with many kind of trifle , as pin , point , lace , iverstrin^s glass , kombe , babe on horseback and on foot , with innumerable other such fancy and toy : thereby to allure and entice the people to some familiarity against other year . 
 thus have finish all thing we depart the [ three . 44. i country , as i say before : but because the buss have not lade enough in she , she put into bear sound to take in a little moor . in the mean while the admiral , and the rest without at sea stay for she . 
 and that night fall such a outrageous tempest , beat a outragwus on our ship with such vehement rigor , that anchor and temfest-cable avail nought : for we be drive on rock and island of ice , insomuch that ( have not the great goodness of God be miraculous show to we ) we have be cast away every man . this danger be more doubtful and terrible , than any that precede or go before : for there be not any one ship ( i think ) that escape without damage . some lose anchor and 
 un 241 Q 
 our enter the coast dangerous . 
 also cable , some boat , some pinniss : some anchor , cable , boat and pinniss . 
 this boisterous storm so sever we from one another , that one ship know not what be become of another . the admiral know not where to find the vice-admiral or rearadmiral , or any other ship of our company . our general be on land in bear sound can not come to his ship , but be compel to go aboard the Gabriel where he continue all the way homeward : for the boisterous blast continue so extreme and so long a time , that they send we homeward ( which be God favour towards we ) will we , will we , in such haste , as not any one of we be able to keep in company with other , but be separate . and if by chance any one ship do overtake other , by swiftness of sail , or meet , as they often do : yet be the rigour of the wind so hideous , that they can not continue company together the space of one whole night . 
 thus our journey outward be not so pleasant , but our come thither , enter the coast and country , by narrow strait , perilous ice , and swift tide , our time of abode there in snow and storm , and our departure from thence the 31. of August with dangerous bluster wind and tempest , which that night arise , be as uncomfortable : separate we so as we sail , that not any of we meet together , until the 28. of September , which day we fall on the english coast , between Sylley and the land end , and pass the channel , until our arrival in the river of Thames . 
 242 
 the report of Thomas wiars passenger in the Emanuel , otherwise call the buss of Bridgewater , wherein James Leech be master , one of the ship in the last voyage of master Martin Frobisher 1578. concern the discovery of a great island in their way homeward the 12. of September . 
 he buss of Bridgewater be leave in bear sound at Meta incognita , the second day of September behind the fleet in some distress , through much wind , ride near the lee shore , and force there to ride it out upon the hazard of her cable and anchor , which 
 be all aground but two . the three of September be fair weather , and the wind north northwest she set sail , and depart thence , and fall with Frisland on the 8. day of September at six of the clock at night , and then they set off from the southwest point of Frisland , the wind be at east , and east southeast , but that night the wind vear southerly , and shift oftentimes that night : but on the ten day in the morning , the wind at west northwest fair weather , they steer southeast , and by south , and continue that course until the 12. day of September , when about 11. a clock before noon , they descry a land , which be from they about five league , and the southermost part of it be southeast by east from they , and the northermost next , north Northeast , or Northeast . the master account that the southeast point of Frisland be from he at that instant when he first descry this new island , northwest by north , 50. league . they account this island to be 25. league long , and the long way of it southeast , and northwest . the southern part of it be in the latitude of 57 degree and 1. second part , or there about . they continue in sight of it , from the 12. day at a 11. of the clock , till the 243 
 the island in length z 5. league . 
 this hand be in the latitude of^ . degree and 1 second pars . 
 13. day three of the clock in the after noon , when they leave it : and the last part they see of it , bear from they northwest by north . there appear two harborough upon that coast : the great of they seven league to the northward of the southermost point , the other but four league . there be very much ice near the same land , and also twenty or thirty league from it , for they be not clear of ice , till the 15. day of September after noon . they ply their voyage homeward , and fall with the west part of Ireland about Galway , and have first sight of it on the 25. day of September . 
 note frame by m. Richard Hakluyt of the middle temple esquire , give to certain gentleman that go with m. Frobisher in his northwest discovery , for their direction : and not unfit to be commit to print , consider the same may stir up consideration of these and of such other thing , not unmeet in such new voyage as may be attempt hereafter . 
 hat the first seat be choose on the seaside , so as ( if it may be ) you may have your own navy within bay , river or lake , within your seat safe from the enemy : and so as the enemy shall|be force to lie in open road abroad without , to be disperse with all wind and 
 tempest that shall arise . thus seat you shall be least subject to annoy of the enemy , so may you by your navy within pass out to all part of the world , and so may the ship of England have access to you to supply all want , so may your commodity be carry away also . this seat be to be choose in a temperate climate , in sweet air , where you may possess always sweet water , wood , seacole or turf , with 244 
 fish , flesh , grain , fruit , herb and root , or so many of those as may suffice very necessity for the life of such as shall plant there . and for the possess of mine of gold , of silver , copper , quicksilver , or of any such precious thing , the want of those needful thing may be supply from some other place by sea , etc 
 stone to make lime of , ' slate stone to tile withal , or such clay as make tile , stone to wall withal , if 
 Brycke may not be make , timber for building easy to * be convey to the place , reed to cover house or such like , if tile or slate be not . 
 be to be look for as thing without which no city may be make nor people in civil sort be keep together . 
 the people there to plant and to continue be either to live without traffic , or by traffic and by trade of merchandise . if they shall live without sea traffic , at the first they become naked by want of linen and woollen , and very miserable by infinite want that will otherwise ensue , and so will they be force of themselves to depart , or else easy they will be consume by the Spaniard , by the Frenchman , or by the natural inhabitant of the country , and so the enterprise become reproachful to our nation , and a let to many other good purpose that may be take in hand . 
 and by trade of merchandise they can not live , except the sea or the land there may yield commodity . and therefore you ought to have most speciali regard of that point , and so to plant , that the natural commodity of the place and seat may draw to you access of navigation for the same , or that by your own navigation you may carry the same out , and fetch home the supply of the want of the seat . 
 such navigation so to be employ shall , beside the supply of want , be able to encounter with foreign force . 
 245 
 and for that in the ample vent of such thing as be bring to you out of England by sea , stand a matter of great consequence , it behoove that all humanity and courtesy and much forbear of revenge to the inland people be use : so shall you have firm amity with your neighbour , so shall you have their inland commodity to maintain traffic , and so shall you wax rich and strong in force . diverse and several commodity of the inland be not in great plenty to be bring to your hand , without the aid of some portable or navigable river , or ample lake , and therefore to have the help of such a one be most requisite : and so be it of effect for the disperse of your own commodity in exchange into the inland . 
 nothing be more to be endeavour with the inland people than familiarity . for so may you best discover all the natural commodity of their country , and also all their want , all their strength , all their weakness , and with who they be in war , and with who confederate in peace and amity , etc which know you may work many great effect of great consequence . 
 and in your plant the consideration of the climate and of the soil be matter that be to be respect . for if it be so that you may let in the salt sea water , not mix with the fresh into flat , where the sun be of the heat that it be at rochel , in the bay of Portugal , or in Spain , then may you procure a man of skill , and so you have win one noble commodity for the fish , and for trade of merchandise by make 
 or if the soil and climate be such as may yield you the grape as good as that at Bordeaux , as that in Portugal , or as that about Sivil in Spain , or that in the island of the canary , then there rest but a workman to put in execution to make wine , and to dress resign of the sun and other , etc 
 or if you find a soil of the temperature of the south part of Spain or Barbary in the which you 246 
 find the olive tree to grow : than you may be assure of a noble merchandise for this realm , consider that our great trade of clothing do require oil , and weigh how dear of late it be become by the vent they have of that commodity in the west Indies , and if you find the wild olive there it may be graft . 
 or if you can find the berry of cochenile with which we colour stammelle , or any root , berry , fruit , wood or earth fit for die , you win a notable thing fit for our state of clothing . this cochenile be natural in the west Indies on that firm . 
 or if you have hide of beast fit for sole leather , etc it will be a merchandise right good , and the savage there yet can not tanne leather after our kind , yet excellent after their own manner . 
 or if the soil shall yield fig , almond , sugar cane , quince , orange , lemon , potato , etc there may arise some trade and traffic by fig , almond , sugar , Marmelade , sucket , etc 
 or if great wood be find , if they be of cypress , chest may be make , if they be of some kind of tree , pitch and tar may be make , if they be of some other , than they may yield rosin , turpentine , etc and all for trade and traffic , and cask for wine and oil may be make , likewise ship and house , etc 
 and because traffic be a thing so materiali , i wish that great observation be take what every soil yield natural , in what commodity soever , and what it may be make to yield by endeavour , and to send we notice home , that thereupon we may devise what mean may be think of to raise trade . 
 now admit that we may not be suffer by the savage to enjoy any whole country or any more than the scope of a city , yet if we may enjoy traffic , and be assure of the same , we may be much enrich , our navy may be increase , and a place of safety may there be find , if change of religion or civil 
 247 
 war shall happen in this realm , which be thing of great benefit . but if we may enjoy any large territory of apt soil , we may so use the matter , as we shall not depend upon Spain for oil , sack , resign , orange , lemond , spanish skin , etc nor upon France for woad , baysalt , and Gascoyne wine , nor on Eastland for flax , pitch , tar , mast , etc so we shall not so exhaust our treasure , and so exceed enrich our doubtful friend , as we do , but shall purchase the commodity that we want for half the treasure that now we do : and shall by our own industry and the benefit of the soil there cheap purchase oil , wine , salt , fruit , pitch , tar , flax , hemp , mast , board , fish , gold , silver , copper , tallow , hide and many commodity : beside if there be no flat to make salt on , if you have plenty of wood you may make it in sufficient quantity for common use at home there . 
 if you can keep a safe haven , although you have not the friendship of the near neighbour , yet you may have traffic by sea upon one shore or other , upon that firm in time to come , if not present . 
 if you find great plenty of timber on the shore side or upon any portable river , you be best to cut down of the same the first winter , to be season for ship , bark , boat and house ; 
 and if near such wood there be any river or brook upon the which a saw mill may be place , it will do great service , and therefore consideration will be have of such place . 
 and if such port and choose place of settle be in possession and after fortify by art , although by the land side our Englishman be keep in , and may not enjoy any traffic with the next neighbour , nor any victual : yet may they victuali themselves of fish to serve very necessity , and enter into amity with the enemy of their next neighbour , and so have vent of their merchandise of England and also have victual , or by mean hereupon to be use , to force the next neigh-248 
 hour to amity . And keep a navy at the settle place , they shall find out along the tract of the land to have traffic , and at diverse island also . and so this first seat may in time become a stapling place of the commodity of many country and territory , and in time this place may become of all the province round about the only governor . and if the place first choose shall not so well please our people , as some other moor late find out : there may be a easy remove , and that may be raze , or rather keep for other of our nation to avoid a ill neighbour . 
 if the soil adjoin to such convenient haven and settle place be find marshy and boggy , than man skilful in drain be to be carry thither . for art may work wonderful effect therein , and make the soil rich for many use . 
 to plant upon a island in the mouth of some notable river , or upon the point of the land enter into the river , if no such island be , be to great end . for if such river be navigable or portable far into the land , then will arise great hope of plant in fertile soil , and traffic on the one or on the other side of the river , or on both , or the link in amity with one or other petty king contend there for dominion . 
 such river find , both barge and boat may be make for the safe passage of such as shall pierce the same . these be to be cover with double of course linen artificial wrought , to defend the arrow or the dart of the savage from the rower . 
 since every soil of the world by art may be make to yield thing to feed and to clothe man , bring in your return a perfect note of the soil without and within , and we shall devise if need require to amend the same , and to draw it to more perfection . and if you find not fruit in your plant place to your like , we shall in five drifat furnish you with such kind of plant to be carry thither the winter after your plant , as shall the very next summer follow yield you some fruit , and 
 249 
 the year next follow , as much as shall suffice a town as big as Calais , and that short after shall be able to yield you great store of strong durable good sider to drink , and these tree shall be able to increase you within less than seven year as many tree present to bear , as may suffice the people of diverse parish , which at the first settle may stand you in great stead , if the soil have not the commodity of fruit of goodness already . and because you ought greedy to hunt after thing that yield present relief , without trouble of carriage thither , therefore i make mention of these thus special , to the end you may have it special in mind . 
 