a extract take out of the map of Sebastian Cabot , cut by clement Adam , concern his discovery of the west Indies , which be to be see in her majesty privy gallery at Westminster , and in many other ancient merchant house . 
 nno domini 1497 Joannes Cabotus Venetus , and Sebastianus illius filius eam terram fecerunt perviam , quam nullus prius adire ausus fuit , die 24 Junii , circiter horam quintam bene mane . hanc autem appellavit terram primum visam , credo quod ex mari in eam partem 
 primum oculos injecerat . nam quae ex adverso sita est insula , eam appellavit insulam divi Joannis , hac opinor ratione , qudd aperta fuit eo die qui est sacer divo Joanni Baptistae : huius incolae pelles animalium , exuviasque ferarum pro indumentis habent , easque tanti faciunt , vn 145 king 
 quanti nos vestes preciosissimas . cum bellum gerunt , utuntur arcu , sagittis , hasti , spiculis , clavis ligneis and fundis . Tellus sterilis est , neque ullos fructus aflert , ex quo fit , ut ursis albo colore , and cervis inusitatae apud nos magnitudinis referta sit : piscibus abundat , iisque sane magnis , quales sunt lupi marini , and quos salmon vulgus appellat ; soleae autem reperiuntur tam longae , ut ulnae mensuram excedant . imprimis autem magna est copia eorum piscium , quos vulgari sermon vocant bacallaos . gignuntur in ea insula accipitres ita nigri , ut corvorum similitudinem mirum in modum exprimant , perdices autem and aquilae sunt nigri coloris . 
 the same in english . 
 in the year of our lord 1497 John Cabot a venetian , and his son Sebastian ( with a english fleet set out from Bristol ) discover that land which no man before that time have attempt , on the 24 of June , about five of the clock early in the morning . this land he call prima vista , that be to say , first see , because as i suppose it be that part whereof they have the first sight from sea . that island which lie out before the land , he call the island of S. John upon this occasion , as i think , because it be discover upon the day of John the baptist . the inhabitant of this island use to wear beast skin , and have they in as great estimation as we have our fine garment . in their war they use bow , arrow , pike , dart , wooden club , and sling . the soil be barren in some place , and yield little fruit , but it be full of white bear ; and stag far great than we . it yield plenty of fish , and those very great , as seal , and those which common we call salmon : there be sole also above a yard in length : but especial there be great abundance of that kind of fish which the savage call baccalaos . in the same island also there breed hauk , but they be so black that they be very like to raven , as also their partridge , and eagle , which be in like sort black . 
 146 
 a discourse of Sebastian Cabot touch his discovery of part of the west India out of England in the time of king Henry the seven , use to Galeacius Butrigarius the pope legate in Spain , and report by the say legate in this sort . 
 ) e you not understand say he ( speak to certain gentleman of Venice ) how to pass to India towards the northwest , as do of late a citizen of Venice , so valiant a man , and so well practise in all thing pertain to navigation , and the science of cosmography , that at this present he 
 have not his like in Spain , insomuch that for his virtue he be prefer above all other pilot that sail to the west Indies , who may not pass thither without his licence , and be therefore call piloto mayor , that be , the grand pilot and when we say that we know he not , he proceed , say , that be certain year in the city of Sivil , and desirous to have some knowledge of the navigation of the Spaniard , it be tell he that there be in the city a valiant man , a venetian bear name Sebastian Cabot , who have the charge of those thing , be a expert man in that science , and one that can make card for the sea with his own hand , and that by this report , seek his acquaintance , he find he a very gentle person , who entertain he friendly , and show he many thing , and among other a large map of the world , with certain particular navigation , as well of the Portugal , as of the Spaniard , and that he speak further unto he to this effect . 
 this discourse be take out of the second volume of the voyage of Baptista Ramusius . 
 Sebastian Cabota Pilot mayor of Spain . 
 when my father depart from Venice many year since to dwell in England , to follow the trade of merchandises , he take i with he to the city of London , while i be very young , yet have nevertheless some knowledge of letter of humanity , and of the sphere . 
 147 
 the second voyage of Cabot to the land of Brasil , and Rio the plat a. 
 and when my father die in that time when news be bring that don Christopher Colonus Genuese have discover the coast of India , whereof be great talk in all the court of king Henry the 7. who then reign , insomuch that all man with great admiration affirm it to be a thing more divine then humane , to sail by the west into the east where spice grow , by a way that be never know before , by this fame and report there increase in my heart a great flame of desire to attempt some notable thing . And understand by reason of the sphere , that if i shall sail by way of they northwest , i shall by a short tract come into India , i thereupon cause the king to be advertise of my devise , who immediate command two caravel to be furnish with all thing appertain to the voyage , which be as far as 1 remember in the year 1496. in the begin of summer . i begin therefore to sail towards the northwest , not think to find any other land then that of Cathay , and from thence to turn towards India , but after certain day i find that the land run towards the north , which be to i a great displeasure . nevertheless , sail along by the coast to see if i can find any gulf that turn , i find the land still continent to the 56. degree under our pole . And see that there the coast turn towards the east , despair to find the passage , i turn back again , and sail down by the coast of that land towards the equinoctial ( ever with intent to find the say passage to India ) and come to that part of this firm land which be now call Florida , where my victual fail , i depart from thence and return into England , where i find great tumult among the people , and preparation for war in Scotland : by reason whereof there be no more consideration have to this voyage . 
 whereupon i go into Spain to the catholique king , and queen Elizabeth , which be advertise what i have do , entertain i , and at their charge furnish certain ship , wherewith they cause i to sail to dis-148 
 cover the coast of Brasile , where i find a exceed great and large river name at this present Rio de la plata , that be , the river of silver , into the which i sail and follow it into the firm land , more than six score league , find it every where very fair , and inhabit with infinite people , which with admiration come run daily to our ship . into this river run so many other river , that it be in manner incredible . 
 after this i make many other voyage , which i now pretermit , and wax old , i give my self to rest from such travel , because there be now many young and lusty pilot and mariner of good experience , by who for - office of wardnesse i do rejoice in the fruit of my labour , and ’ " ‘ mere with the charge of this office , as you see . 
 the foresay Baptista Ramusius in his preface to the third volume of the navigation , write thus of Sebastian Cabot . 
 n the latter part of this volume be put certain relation of John de Vararzana , florentine , and of a great captain a Frenchman , and the two voyage of Jaques Cartier a briton , who sail unto the land situate in 50. degree of latitude to the north , which be call new 
 France , which land hitherto be not thorough know , whether they do join with the firm land of Florida and Nova Hispania , or whether they be separate and divide all by the sea as hand : and whether that by that way one may go by sea unto the country of Cathaia . as many year past it be write unto i by Sebastian Cabota our country man a venetian , a man of great experience , and very rare in the art of navigation , and the knowledge of cosmography , who sail along and beyond this land of new France , at the charge of king Henry the seven king of England : and he advertise i , that have sail a long time west and by north , 
 the great fro-babilitleofthis northwest passage . 
 149 
 beyond those hand unto the latitude of 67. degree and a half , under the north pole , and at the n . day of June find still the open sea without any manner of impediment , he think very by that way to have pass on still the way to Cathaia , which be in the east , and will have do it , if the mutiny of the shipmaster and 
 mariner have not hinder he and make he to return homeward from that place . but it seem that God do yet still reserve this great enterprise for some great prince to discover this voyage of Cathaia by this way , which for the bring of the spicery from India into Europe , be the most easy and short of all other way hitherto find out . and sure this enterprise will be the most glorious , and of most importance of all other that can be imagine to make his name great , and fame immortali , to all age to come , far more than can be do by any of all these great trouble and war e among the miserable 
 christian people . 
 which daily be use in Europa 
 another testimony of the voyage of Sebastian Cabot to the west and northwest , take out of the sixth chapter of the three decade of Peter martyr of Angleria . 
 crutatus est oras glaciales Sebastianus quidam Cabotus genere Venetus , say a parentibus in . britanniam insulam tendentibus ( uti moris est venetorum , qui commercii causa terrarum omnium sunt hospite ) transportatus pene infans . duo be sibi navigia , propria pecunia in Brit - 
 annia ipsa instruxit , and prim tendens cum hominibus tercentum ad septentrionem donec etiam julio mense vastas repererit glaciales mole pelago natantes , and lucem fere perpetuam , tellure tamen libera , gelu liquefacto : quare coactus fuit , uti ait , vela vertere and occidentem sequi : tetenditque tantum ad meridiem littore seize in - 
 * 5° 
 curvante , ut herculei freti latitudinis fere gradus aequarit : ad occidentemque profectus tantum est ut cubam insulam a laeva , longitudine graduum pene parem , habuerit . be ea littora percurren , quae baccalaos appelavit , eosdem se reperisse aquarum , sed lenes delapsus ad occidentem ait , quos Castellani , meridionales suas regiones adnavigantes , inveniunt . ergo non modd verisimilius , sed necessario concludendum est , vastos inter utramque ignotam hactenus tellurem jacere hiatus , qui viam praebeant aquis ab orient cadentibus in occidentem . quas arbitror impulsu coelorum circulariter agi in gyrum circa terrae globum , non autem demogorgo anhelante vomi , absorberique ut nonnulli senserunt , quod influxu , and refluxu forsan assentire daretur . baccalaos , Cabotus ipse terras illa appellavit , eo quod in earum pelago tantam reperierit magnorum quorundam piscium , tynnos aemulantium , sic vocatorum ab indigenis , multitudinem , ut etiam illi interdum navigia detardarent . earum regionum homines pellibus tantum coopertos reperiebat , rationis haudquaquam expertes . Ursorum inesse regionibus copiam ingentem refert , qui and ipsi piscibus vescantur . inter densa namque piscium illorum agmina seize immergunt ursi , and singulos singuli complexos , unguibusque inter squamma immissis in terram raptant and comedunt . propterea minime noxios hominibus visos esse ait . Orichalcum in plerisque locis se vidisse apud incolas praedicat . Familiarem habeo domi cobotum ipsum , and contubernalem intejdum . Vocatus namque ex britannia a rege nostro catholico , post henrici majoris britanniae regis mortem , concurialis noster est , expectatque indies , ut navigia sibi parentur , quibus arcanum hoc naturae laten jam tandem detegatur . 
 the same in english . 
 these north sea have be search by one Sebastian Cabot , a venetian bear , who be yet but in manner a infant , his parent carry with they into England , have occasion to resort thither for trade of mar - 
 the people of island say the sea and ice set also west . 
 Jonas arngrimus . 
 chandise , as be the manner of the venetian to leave no part of the world unsearched to obtain riches . he therefore furnish two ship in England at his own charge , and first with 300 man direct his course so far towards the north pole , that even in the month of July he find monstrous heap of ice swim on the sea , and in manner continual day light , yet see he the land in that tract free from ice , which have be melt by the heat of the sun . thus see such heap of ice before he , he be enforce to turn his sail and follow the west , so coast still by the shore , that he be thereby bring so far into the south , by reason of the land bend so much southwards , that it be there almost equal in latitude , with the sea Fretum Herculeum , have the northpole elevate in manner in the same degree . he sail likewise in this tract so far towards the west , that he have the island of Cuba on his left hand , in manner in the same degree of longitude . as he travel by the coast of this great land , ( which he name baccalaos ) he say that he find the like course of the water towards the west , but the same to run more soft and gentle then the swift water which the Spaniard find in their navigation southward . wherefore it be not only more like to be true , but aught also of necessity to be conclude that between both the land hitherto unknown , there shall be certain great open place whereby the water shall thus continual pass from the east unto the west : which water i suppose to be drive about the globe of the earth by the un-cessant move and impulsion of the heaven , and not to be swallow up and cast up again by the breathe of Daemogorgon , as some have imagine , because they see the sea by increase and decrease to ebb and flow . Sebastian Cabot himself name those land baccalaos , because that in the sea thereabouts he find so great multitude of certain big fish much like unto Tunies , ( which the inhabitant call baccalaos ) that they sometime stay his ship . he find also the people of those 
 * 5* 
 region cover with beast skin , yet not without the use of reason . he also say there be great plenty of bear in those region which use to eat fish : for ing themselves into you water , where they perceive a multitude of these fish to lie , they fasten their claw in their scale , and so draw they to land and eat they , so ( as he say ) the bear be thus satisfy with fish , be not noisome to man . he declare further , that in many place of these region he see great plenty of copper among the inhabitant . Cabot be my very friend , who i use familiar , and delight to have he sometime keep i company in my own house . for be call out of England by the commandment of the catholique king of Castille , after the death of king Henry the seven of that name king of England , he be make one of our council and assistant , as touch the affair of the new Indies , look for ship daily to be furnish for he to discover this hide secret of nature . 
 the testimony of Francis Lopez de Gomara a Spaniard , in the four chapter of the second book of his general history of the west Indies concern the first discovery of a great part of the west Indies , to wit , from 58. to 38. degree of latitude , by Sebastian Cabota out of England . 
 e which bring most certain news of the country and people of baccalaos , say Gomara , be Sebastian cabote a venetian , which rig up two ship at the cost of king Henry the 7. of England , have great desire to traffic for the spice as the Portugal do . he carry 
 with he 300. man , and take the way towards island from beyond the cape of Labrador , until he find himself in 58. degree and better . he make relation 153 
 copper find in many place by cabote . 
 that in the month of July it be so cold , and the ice so great , that he dare not pass any further : that the day be very long , in a manner without any night , and for that short night that they have , it be very clear . Cabot feel the cold , turn towards the west , refresh himself at baccalaos : and afterward he sail along the coast unto 38. degree , and from thence he shape his course to return into England . 
 a note of Sebastian cabots first discovery of part of the Indies take out of the latter part of Robert fabian chronicle not hitherto print , which be in the custody of m. John stow a diligent preserver of antiquity . 
 cabot voyage from Bristol wherein he discover it newfound land , in the northern part of that land , and from thence as far almost as Florida . 
 n the 13. year of king Henry the 7. ( by mean of one John Cabot a venetian which make himself very expert and cunning in knowledge of the circuit of the world and hand of the same , as by a sea card and other demonstration reasonable he show ) the king cause 
 to man and victuali a ship at Bristol , to search for a island , which he say he know well be rich , and replenish with great commodity : which ship thus man and victual at the king cost , diverse merchant of London venture in her small stock , be in she as chief patron the say venetian . and in the company of the say ship , sail also out of Bristol three or four small ship fraught with sleight and gross merchandizes , as course cloth , cap , lace , point and other trifle . and so depart from Bristol in the begin of May , of who in this major time return no tiding . 
 154 
 of three savage which Cabot bring home and present unto the king in the fourteenth year of his reign , mention by the foresay Robert Fabian . 
 he year also be bring unto the king three man take in the newfound island that before i speak of , in William Purchas time be mayor : these be clothe in beast skin , and do eat raw flesh , and speak such speech that no man can understand they , and in their 
 demeanour like to bruit beast , who the king keep a time after . of the which upon two year after , i see two apparel after the manner of Englishman in Westminster palace , which that time i can not discern from Englishman , till i be learned what they be , but as for speech , i hear none of they utter one word . 
 