the relation of the course which the sunshine a bark of fifty ton , and the northstarre a small pinnace , be two vessel of the fleet of m. John Davis , hold after he have send they from he to discover the passage between Greenland and island , write by Henry Morgan servant to m. William Sanderson of London . 
 he seven day of May 1586. we depart out of Dartmouth haven four sail , to wit , the mermaid , the sunshine , the moonshine , and the northstarre . in the sunshine be sixteen man , who name be these : Richard pope master , mark carter master mate , Henry 
 Morgan Purser , George Draward , John Mandie , Hugh break , Philip Jane , Hugh Hempson , Richard Borden , 408 
 John philpe , Andrew Madock , William Wolcome , Robert wag carpenter , John bruskome , William Ashe , Simon Ellis . 
 our course be westnorthwest the seven and eight day : and the nine day in the morning we be on head of the tarrose of Silley . thus coast along the south part of Ireland the 11. day , we be on head of the dorse : and our course be southsouthwest until six of the clock the 12. day . the 13. day our course be northwest . we remain in the company of the mermaid and the moonshine until we come to the latitude of 60. degree : and there it seem best to our general m. Davis to divide his fleet , himself sail to ®avts ™ the northwest , and to direct the sunshine , wherein i be , e and the pinnace call the northstarre , to seek a divide his passage northward between Greenland and island to fleet into 2. the latitude of 80. degree , if land do not let we . so farts-the seven day of June we depart from they : and the-j . ofjsme . the nine of the same we come to a firm land of ice , which we coast along the nine , the ten , and the eleven day of June : and the eleven day at six of the clock at night we see land which be very high , which afterward we know to be island : and the twelve island day we harbour there , and find many people : the descr3e , in land lie east and by north in 66. degree . 66. degree . 
 their commodity be grefcne fish , and island ling , their commo-and stockfish , and a fish which be call scatefish : of all tity . which they have great store . they have also cow , sheep and horse , and hay for their cattle , and for their horse . 
 we see also their dog . their dwell house be their dwell-made on both side with stone , and wood lay across in& ' over they , which be cover over with turf of earth , and they be flat on the top , and many of these stand hard by the shore . their boat be make with wood their boat , and iron all along the keel like our english boat : and they have nail for to nail they withal , and fishhook and other thing for to catch fish as we have here in England . they have also brazen kettle , and girdle 
 409 
 and purse make of leather , and knoppe on they of copper , and hatchet , and other small tool as necessary as we have . they dry their fish in the sun , and when they be dry , they pack they up in the top of their house . if we will go thither to fish more than we do , we shall make it a very good voyage : for we get a hundred green fish in one morning . we find here two english man with a ship , which come out of England about Easter day of this present year 1586 , and one of they come aboard of we , and bring we two m. John roy - lamb . the english man name be m. John Roydon don of Ipswich . of IpSWich merchant : he be bind for London with 
 his ship . and this be the sum of that which i they depart observe in island . we depart from island the ^northwe^f sixteenth day of June in the morning , and our course ’ be northwest , and we see on the coast two small bark 
 go to a harbour : we go not to they , but see they a far off . thus we continue our course unto 
 the end of this month . 
 July . the three day of July we be in between two firm 
 land of ice , and pass in between they all that day until it be night : and then the master turn back again , and so away we go towards Greenland . and gronelanddl - the seven day of July we do see Greenland , and it be cover . high , and it look very blue : we can not come 
 to harbour into the land , because we be hinder by a firm land as it be of ice , which be along the shore side : but we be within three league of the land , coast the same diverse day together . the seventeenth day of July we see the place which our captain m. the land of John Davis the year before have name the land of desolation . desolation , where we can not go on shore for ice . 
 the eighteenth day we be likewise trouble with ice , and go in among it at three of the clock in the Greenland morning . after we have clear our self thereof , we range all along the coast of desolation until the end last of July °f the aforesaid month . 
 August . the three day of August we come in sight of gilbert 410 
 1586. sound in the latitude of 64. deg . 15. min. which be the place where we be appoint to meet our general and the rest of our fleet . here we come to a harbour at 6. of the clock at night . 
 the 4. day in the morning the master go on shore with 10. of his man , and they bring we four of the people row in their boat aboard of the ship . and in the afternoon i go on shore with 6. of our man , and there come to we seven of they when we be on land . we find on shore three dead people , and two of they have their staff lie by they , and their old skin wrap about they and the other have nothing lie by , wherefore we think it be a woman . we also see their house near the sea side , which be make with the house of piece of wood on both side , and cross over with pole gnnland-and then cover over with earth : we find fox run upon the hill : as for the place it be break land all the way that we go , and full of break island . 
 the 21. of August the master send the boat on shore for wood with six of his man , and there be one and thirty of the people of the country which go on shore to they , and they go about to kill they as we think , for they shoot their dart towards they , and we that be aboard the ship , do see they go on shore to our man : whereupon the master send the pinnace after they , and when they see the pinnace come towards they , they turn back , and the master of the pinnace do shoot off a caliver to they the same time , but hurt none of they , for his meaning be only to put they in fear . diverse time they do wave we on shore to play with they oh « r man play at the football , and some of our company go on shore to play with they , and our man do cast they down as gavage . soon as they do come to strike the ball . and thus much of that which we do see and do in that harbour where we arrive first . 
 the 23. day we depart from the merchant isle , where we have be first , and our course from thence 
 411 
 a skirmish between the savage and out-man . 
 be south and by west , and the wind be Northeast , and we run that day and night about 5. or 6. league , until we come to another harbour . 
 the 24. about eleven of the clock in the fbrenoone we enter into the aforesaid new harbour , and as we come in , we do see dog run upon the island . when we be come in , there come to we four of the people which be with we before in the other harbour , and where we ride , we have sandy ground . we see no wood grow , but find small piece of wood upon the island , and some small piece of sweet wood among the same . we find great heart home , but can see none of the stag where we go , but we find their footing . as for the bone which we receive of the savage i can tell of what beast they be . 
 the stone that we find in the country be black , and some white , as i think they be of no value , nevertheless i have bring example of they to you . 
 the 30. of August we depart from this harbour towards England , and the wind take we contrary , so that we be fain to go to another harbour the same day at 11. of the clock . and there come to we 39 of the people , and bring we 13. seal skin , and after we receive these skin of they , the master send the carpenter to change one of our boat which we have buy of they before , and they will have take the boat from he perforce , and when they see they can not take it from we , they shoot with their dart at we , and strike one of our man with one of their dart , and John filpe shoot one of they into the breast with a arrow . and they come to we again , and four of our man go into the shipboate , and they shoot with their dart at our man : but our man take one of their people in his boat into the shipboate , and he hurt one of they with his knife , but we kill three of they in their boat : two of they be hurt with arrow in the breast , 412 
 and he that be aboard our boat , be shoot in with a arrow , and hurt with a sword , and beat with staff , who our man cast overboard , but the people catch he and carry he on shore upon their boat , and the other two also , and so depart from we . and three of they go on shore hard by we , where they have their dog , and those three come away from their dog , and present one of their dog come swim towards we hear aboard the ship , whereupon our master cause the gunner to shoot off one of the great piece towards the people , and so the dog turn back to land and within a hour after there come of the people hard aboard the ship , but they will not come to we as they do come before . 
 the 31. of August we depart from gylberts sound for England , and when we come out of the harbour there come after we 17. of the people look which way we go . 
 the 2. of September we lose sight of the land at 12. of September . the clock at noon . 
 the three day at night we lose sight of the northstarre our pinnace in a very great storm , and lie a hull tarry for they the 4. day , but can hear no more of the pinnace they . thus we shape our course the 5. day south - n^^returnei southeast , and sail until the 27. of the say month , ’ we come in sight of cape clear in Ireland . 
 the 30. day we enter into our own channel . 
 the 2. of October we have sight of the isle of wight . 
 the 3. we coast all along the shore , and the 4. and 5. 
 the 6. of the say month of October we come into the river of Thames as high as Ratliffe in safety God be thank . 
 