article and order to be observe for the fleet , set down by captain Frobisher general , and deliver in write to every captain , as well for keep company , as for the course , the 31 of May . 
 1 tnprimis , to banish swear , dice , and card-playing , 1. and filthy conmunication , and to serve God twice a day , with the ordinary service usual in church of 
 322 
 England , and to clear the glass , accord to the old order of England . 
 2 the admiral shall carry the light , and after his light be once put out , no man to go a head of he , but every man to fit his sail to follow as near as they may , without endanger one another . 
 3 that no man shall by day or by night depart further from the admiral then the distance of one english mile , and as near as they may , without danger one of another . 
 4 if it chance to grow thick , and the wind contrary , either by day or by night , that the admiral be force to cast about , before her cast about she shall give warning , by shoot off a piece , and to her shall answer the vice-admiral and the rearadmiral each of they with a piece , if it be by night , or in a fog ; and that the vice-admiral shall answer first , and the rearadmiral last . 
 5 that no man in the fleet descry any sail or sail , give upon any occasion any chase before he have speak with the admiral . 
 6 that every evening all the fleet come up and speak with the admiral , at seven of the clock , or between that and eight , and if the weather will not serve they all to speak with the admiral , than some shall come to the vice-admiral , and receive the order of their course of master hall chief pilot of the fleet , as he shall direct they . 
 7 if to any man in the fleet there happen any mischance , they shall present shoot off two piece by day , and if it be by night , two piece , and show two light . 
 8 if any man in the fleet come up in the night , and hale his fellow know he not , he shall give he this watchword , before the world be God . the other shall answer he ( if he be one of our fleet ) after God come Christ his son . so that if any be find among we , not of our own company , he that first describe any such sail or sail , shall give warning to the 
 323 
 admiral by himself or any other that he can speak to , that sail better than he , be near unto he . 
 9 that every ship in the fleet in the time of fog , which continual happen with little wind , and most part calm , shall keep a reasonable noise with trumpet , drum , or otherwise , to keep themselves clear one of another . 
 io if it fall out so thick or misty that we lay it to hull , the admiral shall give warning with a piece , and put out three light one over another , to the end that every man may take in his sail , and at his set of sail again do the like , if it be not clear . 
 11 if any man discover land by night , that he give the like warning , that he do for mischance , two light , and two piece , if it be by day one piece , and put out his flag , and strike all his sail he have aboard . 
 12 if any ship shall happen to lose company by force of weather , than any such ship or ship shall get she into the latitude of , and so keep that latitude until they get Frisland . and after they be past the west part of Frisland , they shall get they into the latitude of , and , and not to the northward of ; and be once enter within the streite , all such ship shall every watch shoot off a good piece , and look out well for smoke and fire which those that get in first shall make every night , until all the fleet be come together . 
 13 that upon the sight of a ensign in the mast of the admiral ( a piece be shoot off ) the whole fleet shall repair e to the admiral , to understand such conference as the general be to have with they . 
 14 if we chance to meet with any enemy , that four ship shall attend upon the admiral , viz. the Francis of Foy , the moon , the bark Dennis , and the Gabriel : and four upon my lieutenant general in the Judith , viz. the hopewel , the armenal , the bear , and the Salomon : and the other four upon the vice-admiral , the 
 324 
 anne Francis , the Thomas of Ipswich , the Emmanuel , and the Michael . 
 15 if there happen any disorder person in the fleet , that he be take and keep in safe custody until he may convenient be bring aboard the admiral , and there to receive such punishment as he or their offence 
 shall deserve . 
 by i Martin Frobisher . 
 our departure from England . 
 have receive these article of direction we depart from Harwich the one and thirty of May . And sail along the south part of England westward , we at length come by the coast of Ireland at cape clear cape clear the six of June , and give chase there to a small bark which be suppose to be a pirate , or rover on the ’ sea , but it fall out indeed that they be poor man of Bristol , who have meet with such company of Frenchmen as have spoil and slay many of they , and leave the rest so sore wound that they be like to perish in the sea , have neither hand nor foot hole to help themselves with , nor victual to sustain their hungry body . our general , who well understand the office of a soldier and a Englishman , and know well what the necessity of the sea mean , pity much the misery charitable of the poor man , relieve they with surgery and salve to heal their hurt , and with meat and drink to comfort their pine heart ; some of they have neither eat nor drink more than olive and stink water in many day before , as they report . and after this good deed do , have a large wind , we keep our course upon our say voyage without stay for the take in of fresh water , or any other provision , whereof many of the fleet be not thorough furnish : and sail towards the northwest part from Ireland , we meet with a great current from out of the southwest , mark this which carry we ( by our reckon ) one point to the currentnortheastwards of our say course , which current seem 
 325 
 to we to continue it self towards Norway , and other the north-east part of the world , whereby we may be induce to believe , that this be the same which the Portugal meet at Capo de buona Speranza , where strike over from thence to the stfeite of Magellan , and find no passage there for the narrowness of the say streite , run along into the great bay of Mexico , where also have a let of land , it be force to strike back again towards the north-east , as we not only here , but in another place also , further to the northward , by good experience this year have find , as shall hereafter in his place more at large declare . 
 now have we sail about fourteen day , without sight of any land , or any other live thing , except certain fowl , as wilmot , nody , guile , etc which there seem only to live by sea . 
 the twenty of June , at two of the clock in the morning , the general descry land , and find it to be west Frisland , now name west England . here the general , and other gentleman go ashore , be the first know Christians that we have true notice of , that ever set foot upon that ground : and therefore the general take possession thereof to the use of our sovereign lady the queen majesty , and discover here a goodly harbour for the ship , where be also certain little boat of that country . And be there land , they espy certain tent and people of that country , which be ( as they judge ) in all sort , very like those of Meta incognita , as by their apparel , and other thing which we find in their tent , appear . 
 the savage and simple people so soon as they perceive our man come towards they ( suppose there have be no other world but they ) flee fearful away , as man much amaze at so strange a sight , and creature of humane shape , so far in apparel , complexion , and other thing different from themselves . they leave in their tent all their furniture for haste behind they , where among other thing be find a box of small 326 
 i578-naile , and certain e red herring , board of fir tree well cut , with diverse other thing artificial wrought : whereby it appear , that they have trade with some civil people , or else be indeed themselves artificiali workman . 
 our man bring away with they only two of their dog , leave in recompense belles , looking-glass , and diverse of our country toy behind they . 
 this country , no doubt , promise good hope of great commodity and riches , if it may be well discover . the description whereof you shall find more at large in the second voyage . 
 some be of opinion , that this west England be firm Frlsland supland with the north-east part of Meta incognita , or else with Greenland . and their reason be , because the people , Qroenian^ apparel , boat , and other thing be so like to they : and another reason be , the multitude of island of ice , which lie between it and Meta incognita , do argue , that on the north side there be a bay , which can be but by conjoin of the two land together . 
 and have a fair and large wind we depart from thence towards frobishers streite , the three and twenty 2 3 °f 
 of June . but first we give name to a high cliff in June ' West England , the last that be in our sight , and for a certain similitude we call it Charing cross . then Charing we bear southerly towards the sea , because to the cnue ' northwards of this coast we meet with much drive ice , which by reason of the thick mist and weather may have be some trouble unto we . 
 on Monday the last of June , we meet with many great whale , as they have be porpoise . 
 this same day the salamander be under both her whale corpse and bonnet , happen to strike a great whale with stn , > ke a shilling ! 1^-her full stem , with such a blow that the ship stand still , and stir neither forward nor backward . the whale thereat make a great and ugly noise , and cast up his body and tail , and so go under water , and within two day after , there be find a great whale dead 
 327 
 swim above water , which we suppose be that which the salamander strike . 
 the second day of July early in the morning we have sight of the queen foreland , and bear in with the land all the day , and pass through great quantity of ice , by night be enter somewhat within the streite , perceive no way to pass further in , the whole place be freeze over from the one side to the other , and as it frobisher be with many wall , mountain , and bulwark of ice , streite mud choke up the passage , and deny we entrance . and up w ice . joe j not nthat passage or sea hereabout be freeze over at any time of the year : albeit it seem so unto we by the abundance of ice gather together , which occupy the whole place . but i do rather suppose these ice to be breed in the hollow sound and freshet thereabouts : which by the heat of the summer sun , be loose , do empty themselves with the ebb into the sea , and so gather in great abundance there together . 
 and to speak somewhat here of the ancient opinion of the freeze sea in these part : i do think it to be rather a bare conjecture of man , then that ever any man have make experience of any such sea . and that which they speak of mare glacial , may be true think to be speak of these part : for this may well be call indeed the icy sea , but not the freeze sea , for no sea consist of salt water can be freeze , as i have more at large herein show my opinion in my second voyage , for saltwatercan - it seem impossible for any sea to be freeze , which not freeze . have his course of ebb and flow , especial in those 
 place where the tide do ebb and flow above ten fathom . and also all these aforesaid ice , which we sometime meet a hundred mile from land , be gather out of the salt sea , be in taste fresh , and be dissolve , become sweet and wholesome water . 
 and the cause why this year we have be more cumber with ice then at other time before , may be by reason of the easterly and southerly wind , which 328 
 bring we moor timely thither now then we look for . which blow from the sea direct upon the place of our streite , have keep in the ice , and not suffer they to be carry out by the ebb to the main sea , where they will in more short time have be dissolve . and all these fleet ice be not only so dangerous in that they wind and gather so near together , that a man may pass sometime ten or twelve mile as it be upon one firm island of ice : but also for that they open and shut together again in such sort with the tide and sea-gate , that while one ship follow the other with full sail , the ice which be open unto the foremost will join and close together before the latter can come to follow the first , whereby many time our ship be bring into great danger , as be not able so sudden to take in our sail , or stay the swift way of our ship . 
 we be force many time to stem and strike great rock of ice , and so as it be make way through mighty mountain . by which mean some of the fleet , where they find the ice to open , enter in , and pass so far within the danger thereof , with continual desire to recover their port , that it be the great wonder of the world that they ever escape safe , or be ever hear of again . for even at this present we miss two of the fleet , that be , the Judith , wherein be the lieutenant general captain Fenton ; and the Michael , who both we suppose have be utter lose , have not hear any tiding of they in more than 20 day before . 
 and one of our fleet name the bark Dennis , be b^ke Dennis of a hundred ton burden , seek way in among these ice , receive such a blow with a rock of ice that she sink down therewith in the sight of the whole fleet . 
 howbeit have signify her danger by shoot off a piece of great ordinance , new succour of other ship come so ready unto they , that the man be all save with boat . 
 329 
 A.D. 1578. part of the house lose . 
 within this ship that be drown there be parcel of our house which be to be erect for they that shall stay all the winter in Meta incognita . 
 this be a more fearful spectacle for the fleet to behold , for that the outrageous storm which present follow , threaten they the like fortune and danger . for the fleet be thus compass ( as aforesaid ) on every side with ice , have leave much behind they , through which they pass , and find more before they , through which it be not possible to pass , there arise a sudden terrible tempest at the southeast , which blow from the main sea , direct upon the place of the streite , bring together all the ice a seaboard of we upon our back , and thereby debar we of turn back to recover sea-room again : so that be thus compass with danger on every side , sundry man with sundry devise seek the best way to save themselves . some of the ship , where they can find a place more clear of ice , and get a little birth of sea room , do take in their sail , and there lay a drift . other some fasten and more anchor upon a great island of ice , and ride under the lee thereof , suppose to be better guard thereby from the outrageous wind , and the danger of the lesser fleet ice . and again some where so fast shut up , and compass in among a infinite number of great country and island of ice , that they be fain to submit themselves and their ship to the mercy of the unmerciful ice , and strengthen the side of their ship with juncke of cable , bed , mast , plank and such like , which be hang over board on the side of their ship , may the better defend they from the outrageous sway and stroke of the say ice . but as in great distress , man of best valour be best to be discern , so it be great worthy commendation and note with what invincible mind every captain encourage his company , and with what incredible labour the painful mariner and poor miner ( unacquainted with such extremity ) to the ever - 
 330 
 • .. I578 , last renown of our nation , do overcome the brunt of these so great and extreme danger : for some , even without board upon the ice , and some within board upon the side of their ship , have pole , pike , piece of timber , and Ores in their hand , stand almost day and night without any rest , bear off the force , and break the sway of the ice with such incredible pain and peril , that it be wonderful to behold , which otherwise no doubt have strike quite through and through the side of their ship , notwithstanding our former provision : for plank of timber of more than three inch thick , and other thing of great force and bigness , by the surge of the sea and billow , with the ice be shiver and cut in sunder , at the side of our ship , so that it will seem more than credible to be report of . and yet ( that which be more ) it be faithful and plain to , be prove , and that by many substantiali witness , that our ship , even those of great burden , with the meeting of contrary wave of the sea , be heave up between island of ice , a foot wellnear out of the sea above their watermark , have their knee and timber within board [ he . 79. i both bow and break therewith . 
 and amid these extreme , while some labour for defence of the ship , and seek to save their body , other some of more mild spirit seek to save the soul by devout prayer and meditation to the almighty , think indeed by no other mean possible then by a divine miracle to have their deliverance : so that there be none that be either idle , or not well occupy , and he that hold himself in best security have ( god know ) but only bare hope remain for his best safety . 
 thus all the gallant fleet and miserable man without hope of ever get forth again , distress with these extremity remain here all the whole night and part of the next day , except four ship , that be , the anne Francis , the moon , the Francis of Foy , and the Gabrieli , which be somewhat a seaboord of the fleet , and 
 331 
 be fist ship by a wind , have a moor scope of clear , try it out all the time of the storm under sail , be hardly able to bear a coast of each . 
 and albeit , by reason of the fleet ice , which be disperse here almost the whole sea over , they be bring many time to the extreme point of peril , mountain of ice ten thousand time escape they scarce one inch , which to have strike have be their present destruction , consider the swift course and way of the ship , and the unwieldiness of they to stay and turn as a man will wish : yet they esteem it their better safety , with such peril to seek sea-room , than without hope of ever get liberty to lie strive against the stream , and beat among the icy mountain , who hugeness and monstrous greatness be such , that no man will credit , but such as to their pain see and feel it . and these four ship by the next day at noon get out to sea , and be first clear of the ice , who now enjoy their own liberty , begin a new to sorrow and fear for their fellow safety . and devout kneel about their main mast , they give unto God humble thanks , not only for themselves , but beseech he likewise high for their friend deliverance . and even now white amid these extremity this gallant fleet and valiant man be altogether overlabour and forewatch , with the long and fearful continuance of the foresay danger , it please God with his eye of mercy to look down from heaven to send they help in good time , give they the next day a more favourable wind at the west northwest , which do not only disperse and drive forth the ice before they , but also give they liberty of more scope and sea-room , and they be by night of the same day follow perceive of the other four ship , where ( to their great comfort ) they enjoy again the fellowship one of another . some in mend the side of their ship , some in set up their top mast , and mend their sail and tackle ; again , 
 332 
 some complain of their false stem bear away , some in stop their leak , some in recount their danger past , spend no small time and labour . so that i dare well avouch , there be never man more dangerous distress , nor more merciful by God providence deliver . and hereof both the tear ship , and the forweary body of the man arrive do bear most evident mark and witness . and now the whole fleet ply off to seaward , resolve there to abide until the sun may consume , or the force of wind disperse these ice from the place of their passage : and be a good birth off the shore , they take in their sail , and lie adrift . 
 the seven of July as man nothing yet dismay , we another as-cast about towards the inward , and have sight of land , salt ' which rise in form like the Northerland of the straight , which some of the fleet , and those not the worst mariner , judge to be the north foreland : howbeit other sum be of contrary opinion . but the matter be not well to be discern by reason of the thick fog which a long time hang upon the coast , and the fog , snow , new fall snow which yearly alter the shape of the land , and take away oftentimes the mariner iners mark . mark . and by reason of the dark mist which continue by the space of twenty day together , this doubt grow the great and the long perilous . for whereas indeed we think our self to be upon the north-east side of frobishers straight , we be now carry to the south westwards of the queen foreland , and be deceive by a swift current come from the north-east , a swift eur-were bring to the southwestwards of our say course many mile more than we do think possible can come ’ to pass . the cause whereof we have since find , and it shall be at large hereafter declare . 
 here we make a point of land which some mistake for a place in the straight call mount Warwick : but how we shall be so far shoot up so sudden within the say straight the expert mariner begin to 
 333 
 James bear a good mariner . : 
 Christopher hall chief pilot . 
 marvel , think it a thing impossible that they can be so far overtake in their account , or that any current can deceive they here which they have not by former experience prove and find out . howbeit many confess that they find a swift course of flood then before time they have observe . and true it be wonderful to hear and see the rush and noise that the tide do make in this place with so violent a force that our ship lie a hull be turn sometime round about even in a moment after the manner of a whirlpool , and the noise of the stream no less to be hear afar off , than the waterfall of London bridge . 
 but while the fleet lie thus doubtful among great store of ice in a place they know not without sight of sun , whereby to take the height , and so to know the true elevation of the pole , and without any clear of light to make perfect the coast , the general with the captain and master of his ship , begin doubtful to question of the matter , and send his pinnace aboard to hear each man opinion , and special of James bear , master of the anne Francis , who be know to be a sufficient and skilful mariner , and have be there the year before , have well observe the place , and draw out card of the coast . but the rather this matter grow the more doubtful , for that Christopher hall chief pilot of the voyage , deliver a plain and public opinion in the hear of the whole fleet , that he have never see the foresay coast before , and that he can not make it for any place of frobishers streit , as some of the fleet suppose , and yet the land do lie and trend so like , that the best mariner therein may be deceive . 
 the ten of July , the weather still continue thick and dark , some of the ship in the fog lose sight of the admiral and the rest of the fleet , and wander to and fro , with doubtful opinion whether it be best to seek back again to seaward through great store of ice , or to follow on a doubtful course in a sea , bay , or streite they know not , or along a coast , whereof by reason of the 334 
 1578. dark mist they can not discern the danger , if by chance any rock or break ground shall lie of the place , as common in these part it do . 
 the vice-admiral captain York consider the foresaid opinion of the pilot hall , who be with he in the Thomas Allen , have lose sight of the fleet , turn back to sea again , have two other ship in company with he . 
 also the captain of the anne Francis have likewise lose company of the fleet , and be all alone , hold it for best to turn it out to sea again , until they may have clear weather to take the sun altitude , and with incredible pain and peril get out of the doubtful place , into the open sea again , be so narrow distress by the way , by mean of continual fog and ice , that they be many time ready to leap upon a hand of ice to avoid the present danger , and so hope to prolong life awhile mean rather to die a pine death . 
 some hope to save themselves on chest , and some hard shift to determine to tie the hatch of the ship together , and man to bind themselves with their furniture fast thereunto , wet ' and so to be tow with the ship-boat ashore , which otherwise can not receive half of the company , by which mean if happy they have arrive , they shall either have perish for lack of food to eat , or else shall themselves have be eat of those ravenous , bloody , and men-eating people . 
 the rest of the fleet follow the course of the the coast along general which lead they the way , pass up above sixty league within the say doubtful and suppose straight , ieagU ™ have always a fair continent upon their starreboorde side , and a continuance still of a open sea before they . 
 the general albeit with the first perchance he find mistake out the error , and that this be not the old straight , yet tf^ghttwhich he persuade the fleet always that they be in their n° 
 right course , and know straight . howbeit i suppose he rather dissemble his opinion therein then otherwise , 
 335 
 1578. mean by that policy ( be himself lead with a honourable desire of further discovery ) to induce the fleet to follow he , to see a further proof of that place . and as some of the company report , he have since confess that if it have not be for the charge and care he have of the fleet and fraught ship , he 
 Frobisher can have pass to Cataia . both will and can have go through to the south sea , call mar deal Sur , and dissolve the long doubt of the passage which we seek to find to the rich country of Cataya . 1 of which mistaken straight , consider the circumstance , we have great cause to confirm our opinion , to like and hope well of the passage in this place . for 
 fair open may . reason to prove a passage here . the foresay bay or sea , the further we sail therein , the wide we find it , with great likelihood of endless continuance . and where in other place we be much trouble with ice , as in the entrance of the same , so after we have sail fifty or sixty league therein we have no let of ice , or other thing at all , as in other place we find . 
 great indraft . 2 also this place seem to have a marvellous great indraft , and draw unto it most of the drift ice , and other thing which do fleet in the sea , either to the north or eastwards of the same , as by good experience we have find . 3 for here also we meet with board , lathe , and diverse other thing drive in the sea , which be of the wrack of the ship call the bark Dennis , which 
 a current to the west . perish among the ice as beforesaid , be lose at the first attempt of the entrance overthwart the queen foreland in the mouth of frobishers straight , which can by no mean have be so bring thither , neither by wind nor tide , be lose so many league off , if by force of the say current the same have not be violent bring . for if the same have be bring thither by tide of flood , look how far the say flood have carry it , the ebb will have recarry it as far back again , and by the wind it can not so come to 336 
 the material original position here be too large for reproduction in this reissue . a pdf can be download from the web address give on page iv of this book , by click on it resource available it . 
 .. 15781 pass , because it be then sometime calm , and most time contrary . 
 and some mariner do affirm that they have diligent observe , that there run in this place nine nine hour hour flood to three ebb , which may thus come to t0 pass by force of the say current : for whereas the sea in most place of the world , do moor or less ordinary ebb and flow once every twelve hour with six hour ebb , and six hour flood , so also will it do there , be it not for the violence of this hasten current , which force the flood to make appearance to begin before his ordinary time one hour and a half , and also to continue long than his natural course by a other hour and a half , until the force of the ebb be so great that it will no long be resist : accord to the say , naturam expellas furca licet , usque recurrit . although nature and natural course be force and resist never so much , yet at last they will have their own sway again . 
 moreover it be not possible that so great course of flood and current , so high swell tide with continuance of so deep water , can be digest here without unburden themselves into some open sea beyond this place , which argue the more likelihood of the passage to be hereabout . also we suppose these great indraft do grow and be make by the reverberation and reflection of that same current , which at our come by Ireland , meet and cross we , of which in the first part of this discourse i speak , which come from the bay of Mexico , pass by and wash the southwest part of Ireland , rebound over to the north-east part of the world , as Norway , island , etc where not find any passage to a open sea , but rather be there increase by a new access , and another current meet with it from the scythian sea , pass the bay of saint Nicholas westward , it do once again rebound back , by the coast of Greenland , and from thence upon frobishers straight be to the southwestwardes of the same . 
 seven 337 y 
 the sea move from east to west continual . 
 authority . 
 hard but yet possible turn back again . 
 tsaffique . 
 5 and if that principle of philosophy be true , that inferiora corpora reguntur a superioribus , that be , if inferior body be govern , rule , and carry after the manner and course of the superior , than the water be a inferior element , must needs be govern after the superior heaven , and so follow the course of primum mobile from east to west . 
 6 but every man that have write or consider any thing of this passage , have more doubt the return by the same way by reason of a great downfall of water , which they imagine to be thereabouts ( which we also by experience partly find ) than any mistrust they have of the same passage at all . for we find ( as it be ) a great downfall in this place , but yet not such but that we may return , although with much ado . for we be easily carry in one hour than we can get forth again in three . also by another experience at another time , we find this current to deceive we in this sort : that whereas we suppose it to be 15 league off , and lie a hull , we be bring within two league of the shore contrary to all expectation . 
 our man that sail further in the same mistake straight ( have the main land upon their starboard side ) affirm that they meet with the outlet or passage of water which come through frobishers straight , and follow as all one into this passage . 
 some of our company also affirm that they have sight of a continent upon their larboard-side be 60 league within the suppose straight : howbeit except certain hand in the entrance hereof we can make no part perfect thereof . all the foresay tract of land seem to be more fruitful and better store of grass , deer , wild foul , as partridge , lark , seamewe , gull , wilmot , falcon and tassel gen till , raven , bear , hare , fox , and other thing , than any other part we have yet discover , and be more populous . and here luke ward , a gentleman of the company , trade merchandise , and do exchange knife , bell , look glass , etc with 338 
 those country people , who bring he foul , fish , bear skin , and such like , as their country yield for the same . here also they see of those great boat of the country , with twenty person in a piece . 
 now after the general have bestow these many day here , not without many danger , he return back again . and by the way sail alongst this coast ( be the backside of the suppose continent of America ) and the queen foreland , he perceive a great sound to go through into frobishers straight . whereupon he send the Gabriel the one and twenty of July , to prove whether they may go through and meet again with he in the straight , which they do : and as we imagine before , so the queen foreland prove a hand , as i think most of these suppose continent will . and so he depart towards the straight , think it be high time now to recover his port , and to provide the fleet of their lade , whereof he be not a little careful , as shall by the process and his resolute attempt appear . and in his return with the rest of the fleet he be so entangle by reason of the dark fog among a number of hand and break ground that lie off this coast , that many of the ship come over the top of rock , which present after they may perceive to lie dry , have not half a foot water more than some of their ship do draw . and by reason they can not with a small gale of wind stem the force of the flood , whereby to go clear off the rock , they be fain to let a anchor fall with two bent of cable together , at a hundred and odd fathom depth , where otherwise they have be by the force of the tide carry upon the rock again , and perish : so that if God in these fortune ( as a merciful guide , beyond the expectation of man ) have not carry we through , we have sure perish amid these danger . for be many time drive hard aboard the shore without any sight of land , until we be ready to make shipwreck thereon , be force common with our boat to sound before our ship , lest we may light 
 return out of the mistake straight . 
 great danger . 
 339 
 anae Francis meet with some of the fleet . 
 thereon before we can discern the same ; it please God to give we a clear of sun and light for a short time to see and avoid thereby the danger , have be continual dark before , and present after . many time also by mean of fog and current be drive near upon the coast , God lend we even at the very pinch one prosperous breath of wind or other , whereby to double the land , and avoid the peril , and when that we be all without hope of help , every man recommend himself to death , and cry out , lord now help or never , now lord look down from heaven and save we sinner , or else our safety come too late : even than the mighty maker of heaven , and our merciful God do deliver we : so that they who have be partaker of these danger do even in their soul confess , that God even by miracle have seek to save they , who name be praise evermore . 
 long time now the anne Francis have lie beat off and on all alone before the queen foreland , not be able to recover their port for ice , albeit many time they dangerous attempt it , for yet the ice choke up the passage , and will not suffer they to enter . and have never see any of the fleet since twenty day past , when by reason of the thick mist they be sever in the mistake straight , they do now this present 23 of July overthwart a place in the straight call hatton Hedland , where they meet with seven ship of you fleet again , which good hap do not only rejoice they for themselves , in respect of the comfort which they receive by such good company , but especial that by this mean they be put out of doubt of their dear friend , who safety long time they do not a little suspect and fear . 
 at their meeting they hale the admiral after the manner of the sea , and with great joy welcome one another with a thunder volley of shot . and now every man declare at large the fortune and danger which they have pass . 
 34° 
 the four and twenty of July we meet with the Francis of Foy , who with much ado seek way back FrandsefF^ . again , through the ice from out of the mistake straight , where ( to their great peril ) they prove to recover their port. they bring the first news of the vice-admiral captain York , who many day with themselves , and the buss of Bridgewater be miss . Bridgwater they report that they leave the viceadmiral reasonable s^ ' clear of the ice , but the other ship they great fear , who they can not come to help , be themselves so hardly distress as never man more . also they tell we of the Gabriel , who have get thorough from the backside , and western point of the queen foreland , into frobishers straight , fall into their company about the cape of good hope . 
 and upon the seven and twenty of July , the ship of Bridgewater get out of the ice and meet with the fleet which lie off and on under hatton Hedland . they report of their marvellous accident and danger , declare their ship to be so leak that they must of necessity seek harbour , have their stem so beat within their hudding , that they have much ado to keep themselves above water . they have ( as they say ) five hundred stroke at the pump in less than half a watch , be scarce two hour ; their man be so overweary therewith , and with the former danger that they desire help of man from the other ship . Moreover they declare that there be nothing but ice and danger where they have be , and that the straight within be freeze up , and that it be the most impossible thing of the streit the world , to pass up unto the countess of Warwick over sound , which be the place of our port. 
 the report of these danger by these ship thus publish among the fleet , with the remembrance of the peril past , and those present before their face , bring no small fear and terror into the heart of many considerate man . so that some begin privy to murmur against the general for this wilful manner of 
 341 
 proceed . some desire to discover some harbour thereabouts to refresh themselves and reform their break vessel for a while , until the north and northwest wind may disperse the ice , and make the place more free to pass . other some forget themselves , speak more undutiful in this behalf , say : that they have as leave be hang when they come home , as without hope of safety to seek to pass , and so to perish among the ice . 
 the general not open his ear to the peevish passion of any private person , but chief respect the accomplishment of the cause he have undertake ( wherein the chief reputation and fame of a general and captain consist ) and call to his remembrance the short time he have in hand to provide so great number of ship their load , determine with this resolution to pass and recover his port , or else there to bury himself with his attempt . 
 notwithstanding somewhat to appease the feeble passion of the fearefull sort , and the better to entertain time for a season , while the ice may the better be dissolve , he hale on the fleet with belief that he will put they into harbour : thereupon while the ship lie off " and on under hatton Hedland , he seek to go in with his pinnace among the island there , as though he mean to search for harborowe , where indeed he mean nothing less , but rather seek if any ore may be find in that place , as by the sequel appear . 
 in the mean time while the fleet lie thus doubtful without any certain resolution what to do , be hard aboard the lee-shore , there arise a sudden and terrible tempest at the southsoutheast , whereby the ice begin marvellous to gather about we . 
 whereupon every man , as in such case of extremity he think best , seek the wise way for his own safety . the most part of the fleet which be further shoot up within the straight , and so far to the leeward , as that they can not double the land , follow the 342 
 course of the general , who lead they the way , take in their sail , and lay it a hull among the ice , and so pass over the storm , and have no extremity at all , but for a short time in the same place . 
 howbeit the other ship which ply out to seaward , have a extreme storm for a long season . and the nature of the place be such , that it be subject diverse to diverse wind , accord to the sundry situation of the great Alps and mountain there , every mountain cause a several blast , and pirrie , after the manner of a Levant . 
 in this storm be the six and twenty of July , there fall so much snow , with such bitter cold air , that we can not scarce see one another for the same , nor open our eye to handle our rope and sail , the snow snow in July . be above half a foot deep upon the hatch of our ship , which do so wet through our poor mariner clothes , that he that have five or six shift of apparel have scarce one dry thread to his back , which kind of wet and coldness , together with the overlabour of the poor man amid the ice , breed no small sickness among the fleet , which somewhat discourage some of the poor man , who have not experience of the like before , every man persuade himself that the winter there must needs be extreme , where they find extreme win-so unseasonable a summer . ter ' 
 and yet notwithstanding this cold air , the sun great heattn many time have a marvellous force of heat among m . etam 1 ™ % - , i , .... ° mta . 
 those mountain , insomuch that when there be no breath of wind to bring the cold air from the disperse ice upon we , we shall be weary of the bloom heat and then sudden with a perry of wind which inconstant come down from the hollowness of the hill , we weather-shall have such a breath of heat bring upon our face as though we be enter within some bathstove or hothouse , and when the first of the pirry and blast be past , we shall have the wind sudden a new blow cold again . 
 343 
 the general recavere th his port . 
 in this storm the anne Francis , the moon , and the Thomas of Ipswich , who find themselves able to hold it up with a sail , and can double about the cape of the queen foreland , ply out to the seaward , hold it for better policy and safety to seek sea room , than to hazard the continuance of the storm , the danger of the ice , and the leeshoare . 
 and be uncertain at this time of the general private determination , the weather be so dark that they can not discern one another , nor perceive which way he wrought , betake themselves to this course for best and safe . 
 the general , notwithstanding the great storm , follow his own former resolution , seek by all mean possible , by a short way to recover his port , and where he see the ice never so little open , he gate in at one gap and out at another , and so himself valiant lead the way through before to induce the fleet to follow after , and with incredible pain and peril at length get through the ice , and upon the one and thirty of July recover his long wish port after many attempt and sundry time be put back , and come to anchor in the countess of Warwick sound , in the entrance whereof , when he think all peril past , he encounter a great hand of ice which give the aid such a blow , have a little before weigh her anchor a cock bill , that it strike the anchor flouke through the ship bow under the water , which cause so great a leak , that with much ado they preserve the ship from sink . 
 at their arrival here they perceive two ship at anchor within the harbour , whereat they begin much to marvel and great to rejoice , for those they know to be the Michael , wherein be the lieutenant general captain Fenton , and the small bark call the Gabriel , who so long time be miss , and never hear of before , who every man make the last reckon , never to hear of again . 
 here every man great rejoice of their happy meet - 
 344 
 ing , and welcome one another after the sea manner with their great ordinance , and when each party have rip up their sundry fortune and peril past , they high praise God , and altogether upon their knee give he due , humble and hearty thanks , and master master wilf-wolfall a learned man , appoint by her majesty a^preachei-councell to be their minister and preacher make unto they a godly sermon , exhort they especial to be thankful to God for their strange and miraculous deliverance in those so dangerous place , and put they in mind of the uncertainty of man life , will they to make themselves always ready as resolute man to enjoy and accept thankful whatsoever adventure his divine providence shall appoint . this master Wolfall be well seat and settle at home in his own country , with a good and large live , have a good honest woman to wife and very towardly child , be of good reputation among the best , refuse not to take in hand this painful voyage , for the only care he have to save soul , and to reform those infidel if it be possible to Christianity : and also partly for the great desire he have that this notable voyage so well begin , may be bring to perfection : and therefore he be content to stay there the whole year if occasion have serve , be in every necessary action as forward as the resolute man of all . wherefore in this behalf he may right be call a true pastor and minister of God word , which for the profit of his flock spare not to venture his own life . 
 but to return again to captain fentons company , the adven-and to speak somewhat of their danger ( albeit they be more than by writing can be express ) they report cbm 0 that from the night of the first storm which be about panie . the first day of July until seven day before the general arrival , which be the six and twentieth of the same , they* never see any one day or hour , wherein they be not trouble with continual danger and fear of death , and be twenty day almost together fast 
 345 
 extremity cause man to devise nevi art and remedy . 
 hard shift . 
 strange wonder . 
 among the ice . they have their ship strike through and through on both side , their false stem bear quite away , and can go from their ship in some place upon the ice very many mile , and may easy have pass from one hand of ice to another even to the shore , and if God have not wonderful provide for they and their necessity , and time have not make they more cunning and wise to seek strange remedy for strange kind of danger , it have be impossible for they ever to have escape : for among other devise , wheresoever they find any hand of ice of great bigness than the rest ( as there be some of more than half a mile compass about , and almost forty fathom high ) they common covet to recover the same , and thereof to make a bulwark for their defence , whereon have more anchor , they ride under the lee thereof for a time , be thereby guard from the danger of the lesser drive ice . but when they must needs forgo this new find fort by mean of other ice , which at length will undermine and compass they round about , and when that by heave of the billow they be therewith like to be bruise in piece , they use to make fast the ship unto the most firm and broad piece of ice they can find , and bind her nose fast thereunto , will fill all their sail whereon the wind have great power , will force forward the ship , and so the ship bear before she the ice , and so one ice drive forward another , shall at length get scope and searoom e . and have by this mean at length put their enemy to flight , they occupy the clear place for a pretty season among sundry mountain and Alps of ice . one there be find by measure to be 65 fathom above water , which for a kind of similitude , be call Salomons porch . some think those hand eight time so much under water as they be above , because of their monstrous weight . but now i remember i see very strange wonder , man walk , run , leap and shoot upon the main sea 40. mile from any land , without 346 
 any ship or other vessel under they . also i see fresh river run amid the salt sea a hundred mile from land , which if any man will not believe , let he know that many of our company leap out of their ship upon island of ice , and run there up and down , do shoot at butt upon the ice , and with their caliver do kill great seal , which use to lie and sleep upon the ice , and this ice melt above at the top by reflection of the sun , come down in sundry stream , which unite together , make a pretty brook able to drive a mill 
 the say captain Fenton recover his port ten day before any man , and spend good time in search for i , and he find good store thereof . he also discover about ten mile up into the country , where he perceive neither town , village , nor likelihood of habitation , but it seem ( as he say ) barren , as the other part which as yet we have enter upon : but their victual and provision go so scant with they , that they have determine to return homeward within seven day after , if the fleet have not then arrive . 
 the general after his arrival in the countess sound , spend no time in vain , but immediate at his first land call the chief captain of his council together , and consult with they for the speedy execution of such thing as than they have in hand . as first , for search and find out good minerail for the miner to be occupy on . than to give good order to be observe of the whole company on shore . and last , to consider for the erect up of the fort and house for the use of they which be to abide there the whole year . for the better handle of these , and all other like important cause in this service , it be ordain from her majesty and the council , that the general shall call unto he certain of the chief captain and gentleman in council , to confer , consult and determine of all occurrent in this service , who name be as here they follow . 
 347 
 captain Fenton . 1 icaptaine Carew . 
 captain York . > < 
 captain best . i ^captaine Philpot. 
 and in sea cause to have as assistant , Christopher hall and Charles Jackman , be both very good pilot , and sufficient mariner , whereof the one be chief pilot of the voyage , and the other for the discovery . from the place of our habitation westward , master Selman be appoint notary , to register the whole manner of proceed in these affair , that true relation thereof may be make , if it please her majesty to require it . 
 the first of August every captain by order , from the general and his council , be command to bring ashore unto the countess hand all such gentleman , soldier , and miner , as be under their charge , with such provision as they have of victual , tent , and thing necessary for the speedy get together of i , and fraught for the ship . 
 the muster of the man be take , and the victual with all pth thing view and consider , every man be set to his charge , as his place and office require . the miner be appoint where to work , arid the mariner discharge their ship . 
 upon the second of August be publish and proclaim upon the countess of Warwick hand with sound of trumpet , certain order by the general and his council , appoint to be observe of the company during the time of their abide there . 
 in the mean time , while the mariner ply their work , the captain seek out new mine , the goldfiner make trial of the ore , the mariner discharge their ship , the gentleman for example sake labour hearty , and honest encourage the inferior sort to work . so that the small time of that little leisure that be leave to tarry , be spend in vain . 
 the second of August the Gabriel arrive , who come from the viceadmiral , and be distress sore with ice , put into harbour near unto mount Oxford . 
 348 
 and now be the whole fleet arrive safe at their port , except four , beside the ship that be lose : that be , the Thomas Allen , the anne Francis , the Thomas of Ipswich , and the moon , who absence be some let unto the work and other proceed , aswell for that these ship be furnish with the better sort of miner , as with other provision for the habitation . 
 the nine of August the general with the captain of his counsel assemble together , and begin to consider and take order for the erect up of the house or fort for they that be to inhabit there the whole year , and that present the mason and carpenter may go in hand therewith . First therefore they peruse Consulta tun the bill of lade , what every man receive into his ship , and find that there be arrive only the east - n‘t “ side , and the southside of the house , and yet not that perfect and entire : for many piece thereof be use for fender in many ship , and so break in piece while they be distress in the ice . also after due examination have , and true account take , there be find want of drink and fuel to serve one hundred man , which be a hundred the number appoint first to inhabit there , because their great store be in the ship which be not ' yet arrive . then captain Fenton see the scarcity of the necessary thing aforesaid , be content , and ofired himself to inhabit there with sixty man . where - habitatu » upon they cause the carpenter and mason to come ® , jun-before they , and demand in what time they will take upon they to erect up a less house for sixty man . they require eight or nine week , if there be timber sufficient , whereas now they have but six and twenty day in all to remain in that country . wherefore it be full agree upon , and resolve by the general and his counsel , that no habitation shall be there this year . and therefore they will master Selman the register to set down this decree with all their consent , for the better satisfy of her majesty , the lord of the counsel , and the adventurer . 
 349 
 the anne Francis , since she be part from the fleet , in the last storm before speak of , can never recover above five league within the strait , the wind be sometime contrary , and most time the ice compass they round about . and from that time , be about the seven and twenty of July , they can neither hear nor have sight of any of the fleet , until the 3. of August , when they descry a sail near unto mount Oxford , with who when they have speak , they can understand no news of any of the fleet at all . and this be the Thomas of Ipswich , who have lie beat off and on at sea with very foul weather , and contrary wind , ever since that foresay storm , without sight of any man . they keep company not long together , but be force to loose one another again , the moon be consort always with the anne Francis , and keep very good company ply up together into the strait , with great desire to recover their long wish port : and they attempt as often , and pass as far as possible the wind , weather , and ice give they leave , which common they find very contrary . for when the weather be clear and without fog , then common the wind be contrary . and when it be either easterly or southerly , which will serve their turn , then have they so great a fog and dark mist therewith , that either they can not discern way through the ice , or else the ice lie so thick together , that it be impossible for they to pass . and on the other side , when it be calm , the tide have force to bring the ice so sudden about they , that common then they be most therewith distress , have no wind to carry they from the danger thereof . 
 and by the sixth of August be with much ado get up as high as Leicester point , they have good hope to find the Souther shore clear , and so to pass up towards their port. but be there becalm and lie a hull open upon the great bay which come out of the mistake strait before speak of , they be 35° 
 so sudden compass with ice round about by mean of the swift tide which run in that place , that they be never afore so hardly beset as now . and in seek to avoid these danger in the dark weather , the anne Francis lose sight of the other two ship , who be likewise hardly distress , signify their danger , as they since report , by shoot off their ordinance , which the other can not hear , nor if they have hear , can have give they any remedy , be so busy occupy to wind themselves out of their own trouble . 
 the fleeboate call the moon , be here heave the moon . above the water with the force of the ice , and receive a great leak thereby . likewise the Thomas of Ipswich , and the anne Francis be sore bruise at that instant , have their false stem bear away , and their ship side strike quite through . 
 now consider the conti nuall danger and contrary , and the little leisure that they have leave to tarry in these part , beside that every night the rope of their ship be so freeze , that a man can not handle they without cut his hand , together with the great doubt they have of the fleet safety , think it a impossibility for they to pass unto their port , as well for that they see themselves , as for that they hear by the former report of the ship which have prove before , who affirm that the strait be all freeze over within : they think it now very high time to consider of their estate and safety that be yet leave together . and hereupon the captain and master of these ship , desire the captain of the anne Francis to enter into the anne consideration with they of these matter . wherefore captain Tanfield of the Thomas of Ipswich , with his pilot Richard Cox , and captain upcote of the moon , the moon c < m-with his master John Lakes come aboard the anne ™ lt . Francis the eight of August to consult of these cause . P11 , 87 - ] and be assemble together in the captain cabin , sundry doubt be there allege . for the fearefull sort of mariner be overtyre with the continual 
 351 
 labour of the former danger , covet to return homeward , say that they will not again tempt God so much , who have give they so many warning , and deliver they from so wonderful danger : that they rather desire to lose wage , fraught , and all , than to continue and follow such desperate fortune . again , their ship be so leak , and the man so weary , that to amend the one , and refresh the other , they must of necessity seek into harbour . 
 but on the other side it be argue again to the contrary , that to seek into harbour thereabouts , be but to subject themselves to double danger : if happy they escape the danger of rock in their enter , yet be in , they be nevertheless subject there to the danger of the ice , which with the swift tide and current be carry in and out in most harborough thereabouts , and may thereby gall their cable asunder , drive they upon the shore , and bring they to much trouble . also the coast be so much subject to break ground and rock , especial in the mouth and entrance of every harbour , that albeit the channel be sound over and over again , yet be you never the near to discern the danger . for the bottom of the sea hold like shape and form as the land , be full of hill , dale , and ragged rock , suffer you not by your sounding to know and keep a true guess of the depth . for you shall sound upon the side or hollowness of one hill or rock under water , and have a hundred , fifty , or fourty fathom depth : and before the next cast , year you shall be able to heave your lead again , you shall be upon the top thereof , and come aground to your utter confusion . 
 another reason against go to harbour be , that the cold air do threaten a sudden freeze up of the sound , see that every night there be new congeal ice , even of that water which remain within their ship . and therefore it shall seem to be more safe to lie off and on at sea , then for lack of wind to bring 352 
 they forth of harbour , to hazard by sudden frost to be shut up the whole year . 
 after many such danger and reason allege , and large debate of these cause on both side , the captain of the anne Francis deliver his opinion unto the company to this effect . First concern the question of return home , he think it so much dishonourable , as not to grow in any far question : and again to return home at length ( as at length they must needs ) and not to be able to bring a certain report of the fleet , whether they be live or lose , or whether any of they have recover their port or not , in the countess sound , ( as it be to be think the most part will if they be live ) he say that it will be so great a argument either of want of courage or discretion in they , as he resolve rather to fall into any danger , then so shameful to consent to return home , protest that it shall never be speak of he , that he will ever return without do he endeavour to find the fleet , and know the certainty of the general safety . he put his company in remembrance of a pinnisse of five ton burden , which he have within his ship , which be carry in piece , and unmake up for the use of those which shall inhabit there the whole year , the which , if they can find mean to join together , he offer himself to prove before therewith , whether it be possible for any boat to pass for ice , whereby the ship may be bring in after , and may also thereby give true notice , if any of the fleet be arrive at their port or not . 
 captain best resolution . 
 a pinnisse for the inhabiter . 
 but notwithstanding , for that he well perceive that the most part of his company be addict to put into harbour , he be will the rather for these cause somewhat to incline thereunto . at first , to search alongst the same coast , and the sound thereabouts , he think it to be to good purpose , for that it be likely to find some of the fleet there , which be leak , and sore bruise with the ice , be the rather think likely to be seven 353 z 
 put into a ill harbour , be distress with foul weather in the last storm , than to hazard their uncertain safety among the ice : for about this place they lose they , and leave the fleet then doubtful question of harbour . 
 it be likely , also , that they may find some fit harbour thereabouts , which may be behooveful for they against another time . it be not likewise impossible to find some ore or i thereabouts wherewithal ! to fraught their ship , which will be more commodious in this place , for the nearness to seaward , and for a better outlet , then far within the strait , be likely here always to load in a short time , howsoever the strait shall be pester with ice within , so that if it may come to pass that thereby they may either find the fleet , i , or convenient harbour , any of these three will serve their present turn , and give some hope and comfort unto their company , which now be altogether comfortless . but if that all fortune shall fall out so contrary , that they can neither recover their port , nor any of these aforesaid help , that yet they will not depart the coast , as long as it be possible for they to tarry there , but will lie off and on at sea athwart the place . therefore his final ! conclusion be set down thus , first , that the Thomas of Ipswich and the moon shall consort and keep company together careful with the anne Francis , as near as they can , and as true Englishman and faithful friend , shall supply one another want in all fortune and danger . in the morning follow , every ship to send off his boat with a sufficient pilot , to search out and sound the harborough for the safe bring in of their ship . And be arrive in harbour , where they may find convenient place for the purpose , they resolve forthwith to join and set together the pinnace , wherewithal ! the captain of the anne Francis might , accord to his former determination , discover up into the strait . 
 354 
 after these determination thus set down , the Thomas of Ipswich the night follow lose company of the other ship , and afterward shape a contrary course homeward , which fall out as it manifest appear , very much against their captain master tanfields mind , as by due examination before the lord of her majesty most honourable privy counsel it have since be prove , to the great discredit of the pilot Cox , who special persuade his company against the opinion of his say captain , to return home . 
 and as the captain of the anne Francis do witness , even at their conference together , captain Tanfield tell he , that he do not a little suspect the say pilot Cox , say that he have opinion in the man neither of honest duty , manhood , nor constancy . notwithstanding the say ship departure , the captain of the anne Francis be desirous to put in execution his former resolution , go with his ship boat ( be accompany also with the moon skiff ) to prove among the hand which lie under hatton Hedland , if any convenient harbour , or any knowledge of the fleet , or any good ore be there to be find . the ship lie off and on at sea the while under sail , search through many sound , they see they all full of many danger and break ground : yet one there be , which seem a indifferent place to harbour in , and which they do very diligent sound over , and search again . 
 here the say captain find a great black hand , whereunto he have good like , and certify the company thereof , they be somewhat comfort , and with the good hope of his word row cheerful unto the place : where when they arrive , they find such plenty of black ore of the same sort which be bring into England this last year , that if the goodness may answer the great plenty thereof , it be to be think that it may reasonable suffice all the gold-glutton of the world . this hand the captain for cause of his good 
 355 
 Bestes bless - hap , call after his own name , Bestes blessing , and with these good tiding return aboard his ship the nine of August about ten of the clock at night , he be joyful welcome of his company , who before be discomfort , and great expect some better fortune at his hand . 
 the next day be the ten of August , the weather reasonable fair , they put into the foresay harbour , have their boat for their better security sound before their ship . but for all the care and diligence that can be take in sound the channel Anne Francis over and over again , the anne Francis come aground in danger . upon a sink rock within the harbour , and lie thereon more than half dry until the next flood , when by god almighty providence , contrary almost to all expectation , they come afloat again , be force all that time to underset their ship with their main yard , which otherwise be likely to overset and put thereby in danger the whole company . they have above two thousand stroke together at the pump , before they can make their ship free of the water again , so sore the moon in she be bruise by lie upon the rock . the moon harbour . come safe , and ride at anchor by the anne Francis , who help in their necessity they can not well have miss . 
 now while the mariner be rummage their ship , and mend that which be amiss , the miner follow their labour for get together of sufficient quantity of ore , and the carpenter endeavour to do their best for the make up of the boat or pinnace : which to bring to pass , they want two speciali and most necessary thing , that be , certain principali timber that be call knee , which be the chief strength of any boat , and also nail , wherewithal ! to join the plank together . whereupon have by chance a smyth among they , ( and yet unfurnish of his necessary tool to work and make nail withal ) they be fain of a gun chamber to make a anvil to work upon , and to use a pickaxe 356 
 in stead of a sledge to beat withal , and also to occupy two small bellows in stead of one pair of great smith bellows . and for lack of small iron for the 
 easy make of the nail , they be force to break their tong , grydiron , and fireshovell in piece . 
 the eleven of August the captain of the anne Francis take the master of his ship with he , go up to the top of hatton Hedland , which be the high land of all the strait , to the end to descry the situation of the country underneath , and to take a true plot of the place , whereby also to see what store of ice be yet leave in the strait , as also to search what mineral matter or fruit that soil may yield : and the rather for the honour the say captain do owe to that honourable name which himself give thereunto the last year , in the high part of this Hedland he cause his company to make a column or cross of stone , in token of christian possession . in this place there be plenty of black ore , and diverse pretty stone . 
 the seventeenth of August the captain with their company chase and kill a great white bear , which adventure and give a fierce assault upon twenty man be weapon . and he serve they for good meat many day . 
 the eighteenth of August the pinnace with much ado be set together , the say captain best determine to depart up the strait , to prove and make trial , as before be pretend , some of his company great persuade he to the contrary , and special the carpenter that set the same together , who say that he will not adventure himself therein for five hundred 
 hatton Hedland . 
 pretty stone . a mighty white bear . 
 a pinnace there build . 
 pound , for that the boat hang together but only by the strength of the nail , and lack some of her principali knee and timber . 
 these word somewhat discourage some of the company which shall have go therein . whereupon the captain , as one not altogether addict to his own selfwill , but somewhat foresee how it may be 
 357 
 they adventure by the strait in a weak pinnace . 
 afterward speak , if contrary fortune shall happen he ( lo he have follow his own opinion and desperate resolution , and so thereafter it be befall he ) call the master and mariner of best judgement together , declare unto they how much the cause import he in his credit to seek out the general , as well to confer with he of some cause of weight , as otherwise to make due examination and trial of the goodness of the ore , whereof they have no assurance but by guess of the eye , and it be well like the other : which so to carry home , not know the goodness thereof , may be as much as if they shall bring so many stone . and therefore he desire they to deliver their plain and honest opinion , whether the pinnace be sufficient for he so to adventure in or no . it be answer , that by careful heed take thereunto among the ice , and the foul weather , the pinnace may suffice . and hereupon the master mate of the anne Francis call John grey , manful and honest offer himself unto his captain in this adventure and service , give cause to other of his mariner to follow the attempt . 
 and upon the nineteenth of August the say captain be accompany with captain upcote of the moon , and eighteen person in the small pinnace , have convenient portion of victual and thing necessary , depart upon the say pretend voyage , leave their ship at anchor in a good readiness for the take in of their fraught . and have little wind to sail withal , they ply alongst the Souther shore , and pass above 30. league , have the only help of man labour with oar , and so intend to keep that shore aboard until they be get up to the far and narrow of the strait , mind there to cross over , and to search likewise alongst the Northerland unto the countess sound , and from thence to pass all that coast along , whereby if any of the fleet have be distress by wreck of rock or ice , by that mean they may be perceive of they , and so they thereby to give they such 358 
 help and relief as they can . they do great fear , and ever suspect that some of the fleet be sure cast away , and drive to seek sour salad among the cold cliff . 
 and be shoot up about forty league within the +° - league strait , they put over towards the norther shore , which be not a little dangerous for their small boat . * ’ and by mean of a sudden flaw be dry when , and fain to seek harbour in the night among all the rock and break ground of gabriels hand , a place so name gabriel within the strait above the countess of Warwick add . sound : and by the way where they land , they do find certain great stone set up by the country people as it seem , for mark , where they also make many cross of stone , in token that Christians have be there . 
 the 22. of August they have sight of the countess sound , and make the place perfect from the top of a hill , and keep along the norther shore , perceive the smoke of a fire under a hill side : whereof they diverse deem . when they come near the place , they perceive people which waft unto they , as it seem , with a flag or ensign . and because the country people have use to do the like , when they perceive any of our boat to pass by , they suspect they to be the same . 
 and come somewhat near , they may perceive certain tent , and discern this ensign to be of mingle colour , black and white , after the english fashion . but because they can see no ship , nor likelihood of harbour within five or six league about , and know that none of our man be wont to frequent those part , they can not tell what to judge thereof , but imagine that some of the ship be carry so high with the storm and mist , have make shipwreck among the ice or the break island there , and be spoil by the country people , who may use the sundry colour flag for a policy , to bring they likewise within their danger . whereupon the say captain with his company , resolve to recover the same ensign , if it 
 359 
 be so , from those base people , or else to lose their life , and all together . in the end they discern they to be their countryman , and then they deem they to have lose their ship , and so to be gather together for their better strength . on the other side , the company ashore fear that the captain have lose his ship , come to seek forth the fleet for his relief in his poor pinnisse , so that their extremity cause each part to suspect the worst . 
 the captain now with his pinnisse be come near the shore , command his boat careful to be keep aflote , lest in their necessity they may win the same from he , and seek first to save themselves : for every 
 proximus sum man in that case be next himself . they hale one ogomet mihi . another accord to the manner of the sea , and de - 
 mand what cheer ? and either party answer the other , that all be well : whereupon there be a sudden and joyful outshoot , with great fling up of cap , and a brave voly of shot to welcome one another . and true it be a most strange case to see how joyful and glad every party be to see themselves meet in safety again , after so strange and incredible danger : 
 yet to be short , as their danger be great , so their 
 god be great . 
 and here the company be work upon new mine , 
 captainyorke which captain York be here arrive not long 
 before , have find out in this place , and it be name the countess of Sussex i . 
 after some conference with our friend here , the captain of the anne Francis depart towards the countess of Warwick sound , to speak with the general , and to have trial make of such mettle as he have bring thither , by the goldfiner . and so he determine to dispatch again towards his ship . and have speak with the general , he receive order for all cause , and direction as well for the bring up of his ship to the countess sound , as also to fraught his ship with the same oar which he himself have 
 360 
 find , which upon trial make , be suppose to be very good . 
 the 23. of August , the say captain meet together with the other captain ( commissioner in counsel with the general ) aboard the aid , where they consider and consult of sundry cause , which be particular register by the notary , be appoint where and how to be do against another year . 
 the 24. of August , the general with two pinniss and good number of man go to bear sound , command the say captain with his pinnace to attend the service , to see if he can encounter or apprehend any of the people : for sundry time they show themselves busy thereabouts , sometime with seven or eight boat in one company , as though they mind to encounter with our company which be work there at the mine , in no great number . but when they perceive any of our ship to ride in that road ( be belike more amaze at the countenance of a ship , and a more number of man ) they do never show themselves again there at all . wherefore our man seek with their pinniss to compass about the hand where they do use , suppose there sudden to intercept some of they . but before our man can come near , have belike some watch in the top of the mountain , they convey themselves privy away , and leave ( as it shall seem ) one of their great dart behind they for haste , which we find near to a place of their cave and house . therefore , though our general be very desirous to have take some of they to have bring into England , they be now grow more wary by their former loss , will not at any time come within our danger . about midnight of the same day , the captain of the anne Francis depart thence and set his course over the strait towards hatton Hedland , be about 15. league over , and return aboard his ship the 25. of August , to the great comfort of his company , who long expect his come , where he find his 361 
 none of the people will be take . 
 m. wolfall a godly preacher . 
 ship ready rig and load . wherefore he depart from thence again the next morning towards the countess sound , where he arrive the 28. of the same . by the way he set his miner ashore at bear sound , for the better dispatch and gather the ore together : for that some of the ship be behind hand with their fraught , the time of the year pass sudden away . 
 the thirtith of August the anne Francis be bring aground , and have 8. great leak mend which she have receive by mean of the rock and ice . this day the mason finish a house which captain Fenton cause to be make of lime and stone upon the countess of Warwick island , to the end we may prove against the next year , whither the snow can overwhelm it , the frost break it up , or the people dismember the same . and the better to allure those brutish and uncivil people to courtesy against other time of our come , we leave therein diverse of our country toy , as bell , and knife , wherein they special delight , one for the necessary use , and the other for the great pleasure thereof . also picture of man and woman in lead , man on horseback , look glass , whistle , and pipe . also in the house be make a oven , and bread leave bake therein for they to see and taste . 
 we bury the timber of our pretend fort . also here we sow pease , corn , and other grain , to prove the fruitfulness of the soil against the next year . 
 master wolfall on winter furnace preach a godly sermon , which be end , he celebrate also a communion upon the land , at the partake whereof be the captain of the anne Francis , and many other gentleman and soldier , mariner , and miner with he . the celebration of - the divine mystery be the first sign , seal , and confirmation of Christ name , death , and passion ever know in these quarter . the say m. Wolfall make sermon , and celebrate the communion at sundry other time , in several and sundry ship , because the whole company can never meet together at any one 362 
 place . the fleet now be in some good readiness for their lade , the general call together the gentleman and captain to consult , tell they that he be very desirous that some further discovery shall be attempt , and that he will not only by God help bring home his ship lade with ore , but also mean to bring some certificate of a further discovery of the country , which thing to bring to pass ( have sometime therein consult ) they find very hard , and almost invincible . 
 and consider that already they have spend sometime in consultation search out the trending and fashion of the mistake afurtly strait , therefore it can not be say , but that by this voyage they have notice of a further discovery , and that the hope of the passage thereby be much further and increase , as appear before in the discourse thereof . 
 yet notwithstanding if any mean may be further devise , the captain be content and willing , as the general shall appoint and command , to take any enterprise in hand . which after long debate be find a thing very impossible , and that rather consultation be to be have of return homeward , especial for these cause follow . First the dark foggy mist , the continual fall snow and stormy weather which they common be vex with , and now daily ever moor and more increase , have no small argument of the winter draw near . and also the frost every night be so hard congeal within the sound , that if by evil hap they shall be long keep in with contrary wind , it be great to be fear , that they shall be shut up there fast the whole year , which be utter unprovide , will be their utter destruction . again , drink be so scant throughout all the fleet by mean of the great leakage , that not only the provision which be lay in for the habitation be want and waste , but also each ship several provision spend and lose , which many of our company to their great grief find in their return since , for all the way homeward they drink nothing but water . and the great cause of this leakage 3^3 
 and waste be , for that the great timber and seacole , which lie so weighty upon the barrel , break , bruise , and rot the hoop insunder . yet notwithstanding these reason allege the general himself ( will the rest of the gentleman and captain every man to look to his several charge and lade , that against a day appoint , they shall be all in a readiness to set homeward ) go in a pinnace and discover further northward in the straight , and find that by bear sound and hall island , the land be not firm , as it be break Hands first suppose , but all break island in manner of a mma ” er°fan Archipelagus , and so with other secret intelligence to rc tpe agus . returnec [ to the fleet. where present 
 upon his arrival at the countess sound , he begin to take order for their return homeward , and first cause certain article to be proclaim , for the better keep of order and course in their return , which article be deliver to every captain . 
 the fleet return homeward . 
 have now receive article and direction for our return homeward , all other thing be in forwardness and in good order , the last day of August the whole fleet depart from the countess sound , except the Judith , and the anne Francis , who stay for the take in of fresh water , and come the next day and meet the fleet lie off and on , athwart bear sound , who stay for the general , which then be go return home - ashore to dispatch the two bark and the buss of ward - Bridgewater , for their load , whereby to get the company and other thing aboard . the captain of the anne Francis have most part of his company ashore , the first of September go also to bear sound in his pinnace to fetch his man aboard , but the wind grow so great immediate upon their land , that the ship at sea be in great danger , and some of they forcible put from their anchor , and great fear to be utter lose , as the Hopewell , wherein be captain Carew and 364 
 other , who can not tell on which side their danger be most : for have mighty rock threaten on the one side , and drive island of cut ice on the other side , they great fear to make shipwreck , the ice drive so near they that it touch their bolt-sprit . and by mean of the sea that be grow so high , they be not able to put to sea with their small pinnace to recover their ship . and again , the ship be not able to tarry or lie athwart for they , by mean of the outrageous wind and swell sea . the general will the captain of the anne Francis with his company , for that night to lodge aboard the buss of Bridgewater , and go himself with the rest of his man aboard the bark . but their number be so great , and the provision of the bark so scant , that they pester one another exceed . they have great hope that the next morning the weather will be fair , whereby they may recover their ship . but in the morning follow it be much worse , for the storm continue great , the sea be more swell , and the fleet go quite out of sight . so that now their doubt begin to grow great : for the ship of Bridgewater which be of great receit , and whereof they have best hope and make most account , ride so far to leeward of the harborowe mouth , that they be not able for the rock ( that lie between the wind and they ) to lead it out to sea with a sail . and the bark be already so pester with man , and so slender furnish with provision , that they have scarce meat for six day for such number . 
 the general in the morning depart to sea in the Gabriel to seek the fleet , leave the buss of Bridgewater , and the Michael behind in bear sound . the buss set sail , and think by turn in the narrow channel within the harbour to get to windward : but be put to leeward more , by that mean be fain to come to anchor for her better safety , among a number of rock , and there leave in great danger of ever get 365 
 forth again . the Michael set sail to follow the general , and can give the buss no relief , although they earnest desire the same . and the captain of the anne Francis be leave in hard election of two evil : either to abide his fortune with the buss of Bridgewater , which be doubtful of ever get forth , or else to be tow in his small pinnace at the stern of the Michael through the rage sea , for that the bark be not able to receive or relieve half his company , wherein his danger be not a little perilous . 
 so after he resolve to commit himself with all his company unto that fortune of God and sea , and be dangerous tow at the stern of the bark for many mile , until at length they espy the anne Francis under sail , hard under their lee , which be no small comfort unto they . for no doubt , both those and a great number more have perish for lack of victual , and convenient room in the bark without the help of the say Ship. but the honest care that the master of the anne Francis have of his captain , and the good regard of duty towards his general , suffer he not to depart , but honesdy abode to hazard a dangerous road all the night long , notwithstanding all the stormy weather , when all the fleet beside depart . and the pinnace come no soon aboard the ship , and the man enter , but she present shiver and fall in piece and sink at the ship stern , with all the poor man furniture : so weak be the boat with tow , and so forcible be the sea to bruise she in piece . but ( as God will ) the man be all save . 
 at this present in this storm many of the fleet be dangerous distress , and be sever almost all asunder . yet , thank be to God , all the fleet arrive safe in England about the first of October , some in one place and some in another . but among other , it be most marvelous how the buss of Bridgewater get away , who be leave behind the fleet in great danger of never get forth , be force to seek a way north-366 
 ward through a unknown channel full of rock , upon the back side of bear sound , and there by good hap find out a way into the north sea , a very dangerous attempt : save that necessity , which have no law , force they to try mastery . this aforesaid north sea be the same which lie upon the back side of frobishers strait , where first the general himself in his pinnace , 
 A.D. 
 1578. 
 a unknow channel into the north-east , discover by the buss of Bridgewater . 
 and after some other of our company have discover ( as they affirm ) a great foreland , where they will have also a great likelihood of the great passage towards the south sea , or mar deal Sur. 
 the buss of Bridgewater , as she come homeward , to a fruitful the southeastward of Friseland , discover a great island in the latitude of 57 degree and a half , which be ‘ never yet find before , and sail three day alongst the coast , the land seem to be fruitful , full of wood , and a champion country . 
 there die in the whole fleet in all this voyage not above forty person , which number be not great , consider how many ship be in the fleet , and how strange fortune we pass . 
 