a true discourse of the three voyage of discovery , for the find of a passage to Cathaya , by the northwest , under the conduct of Martin Frobisher general : before which , as a necessary preface be prefix a twofold e discourse , containing certain reason to prove all part of the world habitable . pen by master George best , a gentleman employ in the same voyage . 
 what commodity and instruction may be reap by diligent read this discourse . 
 i tturst , by example may be gather , how a dis-j ? coverer of new country be to proceed in his first attempt of any discovery . 
 2 item , how he shall be provide of ship , victual , munition , and choice of man . 
 3 how to proceed and deal with strange people , be they never so barbarous , cruel and fierce , either by lenity or otherwise . 
 4 how trade of merchandise may be make without money . 
 5 how a pilot may deal , bq environ with mountains of ice in the freeze sea 
 25° 
 6 how length of day , change of season , summer and winter do differ in ' sundry region . 
 7 how dangerous it be to attempt new discovery , either for the length of the voyage , or the ignorance of the language , the want of interpreter , new and unaccustomed element and air , strange and unsavoury meat , danger of thief and robber , fierceness of wild beast and fish , hugeness of wood , dangerousness of sea , dread of tempest , fear of hide rock , steepness of mountain , darkness of sudden fall fog , continual pain take without any rest , and infinite other . 
 8 how pleasant and profitable it be to attempt new discovery , either for the sundry sight and shape of strange beast and fish , the wonderful work of nature , the different manner and fashion of diverse nation , the sundry sort of government , the sight of strange tree , fruit , fowl , and beast , the infinite treasure of pearl , gold and silver , the news of new find land , the sundry position of the sphere , and many other . 
 9 how valiant captain use to deal upon extremity , and otherwise . 
 10 how trusty soldier dutiful use to serve . 
 11 also here may be see a good example to be observe of any private person , in take note , and make observation of all such thing as be requisite for a discoverer of new country . 
 12 last , the reader here may see a good pattern of [ in . 4.8 . i a well govern service , sundry instruction of matter of cosmography , Geographic , and navigation , as in read more at large may be see . 
 [ experience 
 251 
 experience and reason of the sphere , to prove all part of the world habitable , and thereby to confute the position of the five zone . 
 experience to prove thattor-rida zona be habitable . 
 irst , it may be gather by experience of our Englishman in anno 1553. for captain Windam make a voyage with merchandise to Guinea , and enter so far within the torrida zona , that he be within three or four degree of the equinoctial , and his company abide 
 there certain month , return , with gain . 
 also the Englishman make another voyage very prosperous and gainful , An. 1554. to the coast of Guinea , within 3. degree of the equinoctial . and yet it be report of a truth , that all the tract from cape de las Palmas trending by C. de tres puntas alongst by Benin , unto the he of saint Thomas ( which be perpendicular under the equinoctial ) all that whole bay be more subject to many bloom and smother heat , with infectious and contagious air , than any other place in all torrida zona : and the cause thereof be some accident in the land . for it be most certain , that mountain , sea , wood and lake etc may cause through their sundry kind of situation , sundry strange and extraordinary effect , which the reason of the climb otherwise will not give . i mention these voyage of our Englishman , not so much to prove that torrida zona may be , and be inhabit , as to show their readiness in attempt long and dangerous navigation . we also among we in England have black moor , . / ethiopian , out of all part of torrida zona , which after a small continuance , can well endure the cold of our country , and why shall not we as well abide the heat of their country ? but what shall i name any more experience , see that all the coast of Guinea and Benin be inhabit of Portugal , span - 
 252 
 yard , french , and some Englishman , who there have build castle and town . only this i will say to the merchant of London , that trade yearly to Marochus , it be very certain , that the great part of the burn zone be far more temperate and cool in June , than the country of Marochus , as shall appear by these reason and experience follow . for let we first consider the breadth and bigness of this burn zone ( which as every man know , be 47. degree ) each Tropic , which be the bounder thereof , be 23. degree and a half distant from the equinoctial . imagine again two other parallel , on each side the equinoctial one , either of they distant from the equinoctial about 20. degree , which parallel may be describe either of they twice a year by the sun , be in the first degree of gemini the 11. of may , and in Leo the 13. of July , have north latitude . and again , the sun be in the first degree of sagittarius , the 12. of November , and in Aquarius the 9 of January , have south latitude , i be to prove by experience and reason , that all that distance include between these two parallel last name ( contain 40. degree in latitude , go round about the earth , accord to longitude ) be not only habitable , but the same most fruitful and delectable , and that if any extremity of heat be , the same not to be within the space of twenty degree of the equinoctial on either side , but only under and about the two tropicke , and so proportional the near you do approach to either Tropic , the more you be subject to extremity of heat ( if any such be ) and so Marochus be situate but six or seven degree from the Tropic of Cancer , shall be more subject to heat , than any place under or near the equinoctial line . 
 and first by the experience of sundry man , yea thousand , traveller and merchant , to the east and west Indies in many place both direct under , and hard by the equinoctial , they with one consent affirm , that it abound in the midst of torrida zona with all 
 253 
 A.D. 
 1578. 
 Marochus more hot than about the equinoctial . 
 1578. manner of grain , herb , grass , fruit , wood and cattle , that we have here , and thousand other sort , far more wholesome , delectable and precious , than any we have in these northern climate , as very well shall appear to he that will read the history and navi - 
 marvellous fruitful soil under the equinoctial . gation of such as have travel Arabia , India intra and extra gangem , the island Moluccas , America , etc which all lie about the middle of the burn zone , where it be true report , that the great herb , as be radish , lettuce , colewort , borage , and such like , do wax ripe , great , more savoury and delectable in taste than we , within sixteen day after the seed be sow . wheat be sow the first of February , be 
 find ripe the first of May , and general , where it be less fruitful , the wheat will be ripe the four month after the seed be sow , and in some place will bring forth a ear as big as the wrist of a man’s arm contain 1000 grain ; bean , peace , etc be there ripe twice a year . also grass be cut down , will grow up in six day above one foot high . if our cattle be transport thither , within a small time their young one become of big stature , and more fat than 
 great tree . ever they will have be in these country . there be find in every wood in great number , such timber tree as twelve man hold hand together be not able to fathom . and to be short , all they that have be there with one consent affirm , that there be the goodly green meadow and plain , the fair mountain 
 commodity and pleasure under the equinoctial . cover with all sort of tree and fruit , the fair valley , the goodly pleasant fresh river , store with infinite kind of fish , the thick wood , green and bear fruit all the whole year , that be in all the world . and as for gold , silver , and all other kind of metal , all kind of spice and delectable fruit , both for delicacy and health , be there in such abundance , as hitherto they have be think to have be breed no where else but there . and in conclusion , it be now think that no where else but under the equinoctial , 254 
 or not far from thence , be the earthly paradise , and the only place of perfection in this world . and that these thing may seem the less strange , because it have be account of the old philosopher , that there can nothing prosper for the extreme heat of the sun continual go over their head in the zodiac , i think good here to allege such natural cause as to i seem very substantiali and sure reason . 
 first you be to understand that the sun do work his moor or less heat in these low part by two mean , the one be by the kind of angle that the sun beam do make with the earth , as in all torrida zona iter make perpendicular right angle in some place or other at noon , and towards the two pole very oblique and uneven angle . and the other mean be the long or short continuance of the sun above the horizon . so that wheresoever these two cause do most concur , there be most excess of heat : and when the one be want , the rigor of the heat be less . for though the sun beam do beat perpendicular upon any region subject unto it , if it have no continuance or abode above the horizon , to work his operation in , there can no hot effect proceed . for nothing can be do in a moment . and this second cause mora solis supra horizontem , the time of the sun abide above the horizon , the old philosopher never remember , but regard only the manner of Angles that the sun beam make with the horizon , which if they be equal and right , the heat be the great , as in torrida zona : if they be unequal and oblique , the heat be the less , as towards both pole , which reason be very good and substantiali : for the perpendicular beam reflect and reverberate in themselves , so that the heat be double , every beam strike twice , and by unite be multiply , and continue strong in form of a column . but in our latitude of 50. and 60. degree , the sun beam descend oblique and slant wise , and so strike but once and depart , and therefore our 
 255 
 heat be cause by two mean that be by his manner of angle and by his continuance . 
 note this reason . 
 heat be the less for any effect that the angle of the sun beam make . yet because we have a long continuance of the sun presence above our horizon than they have under the equinoctial ; by this continuance the heat be increase , for it shine to we 16. or 18. hour sometime , when it continue with they but twelve hour always . 
 and again , our night be very short wherein cold vapour use to abound , be but six or eight hour long , whereas they be always twelve hour long , by which two advantage of long day and short night , though we want the equality of angle , it come to-passe that in summer our heat here be as great as they be there , as have be prove by experience , and be nothing dissonant from good reason . therefore whosoever will right weigh the force of cold and heat in any region , must not only consider the angle that the sun beam make , but also the continuance of the same above the horizon . as first to they under the equinoctial the sun be twice a year at noon in their zenith perpendicular over their head , and therefore during the two hour of those two day the heat be very urgent , and so perhaps it will be in four or five day more an hour every day , until the sun in his proper motion have cross the equinoctial ; so that this extreme heat cause by the perpendicular angle of the sun beam , endure but two hour of two day in a year . but if any man say the sun may scalde a good while before and after it come to the meridian , so far forth as reason lead , i be content to allow it , and therefore i will measure and proportion the sun heat , by compare the Angles there , with the Angles make here in England , because this temperature be best know unto we . as for example , the two . day of march , when under the equinoctial it be half hour past eight of the clock in the morning , the sun will be in the east about 38. degree above the horizon , because there it rise always at six 256 
 of the clock , and move every hour 15. degree , and so high very near will it be with we at London the say eleven day of march at noon . and therefore look what force the sun have with we at noon , the eleven of march , the same force it seem to have under the equinoctial at half a hour past eight in the morning , or rather less force under the equinoctial . for with we the sun have be already six hour above the horizon , and so have purify and cleanse all the vapour , and thereby his force increase at noon ; but under the equinoctial , the sun have be up but two hour and a half , have sufficient to do , to purge and consume the cold and moist vapour of the long night past , and as yet have wrought no effect of heat . and therefore i may bold pronounce , that there be much less heat at half a hour past eight under the equinoctial , then be with we at noon : i fortiori . but in march we be not only content to have the sun shine , but we great desire the same . likewise the 11 of June , the sun in our meridian be 62 degree high at London : and under the equinoctial it be so high after 10 of the clock , and see then it be beneficial with we ; a fortiori it be beneficial to they after 10 of the clock . 
 and thus have we measure the force of the sun great heat , the hot day in the year , under the equinoctial , that be in march and September , from six till after ten of the clock in the morning , and from two until sun set . and this be conclude , by respect only the first . cause of heat , which be the consideration of the angle of the sun beam , by a certain similitude , that whereas the sun shine never above twelve hour , more than eight of they will be cool and pleasant even to we , much more to they that be acquaint always with such warm place . so there remain less than four hour of any excessive heat , and that only in the two summer day of the year , that be the eleven day of march , and the foure-vii 257 r 
 teenth of September : for under the equinoctial they have two summer , the one in march , and the other in September , which be our spring and autumn : and likewise two winter , in June and December , which be our summer and winter , as may well appear to he that have only taste the principle of the sphere . but if the sun be in either Tropic , or approach near thereunto , then may we more easy measure the force of his meridian altitude , that it strike upon the equinoctial . as for example , the twelve of June the sun will be in the first degree of Cancer . then look what force the heat of the sun have under the equinoctial , the same force and great it have in all that parallel , where the pole be elevate between fourty and seven , Paris in . and fourty and eight degree . and therefore Paris in France ss as prance the twelve day of June sustain more heat of the Equinoc - the sun , than saint Thomas hand lie near the tiall in June , same meridian do likewise at noon , or the hand 
 Taprobana , Moluccae , or the firm land of Peru in America , which all lie underneath the equinoctial . for upon the twelve day of June aforesaid , the sun beam at noon do make a isoscheles triangle , who vertex be the centre of the sun , the basis a line extend from saint Thomas hand under the equinoctial , unto Paris in France near the same meridian : therefore the two angle of the base must needs be equal per 5. primi , ergo the force of the heat equal , if there be no other cause then the reason of the angle , as the old philosopher have appoint . but in June be because at Paris the sun rise two hour before it m^then0* r^set^ to under the equinoctial , and set like-und the wise two hour after they , by mean of the obliquity equinoctial , of the horizon , in which time of the sun presence four hour in one place more than the other , it work some effect more in one place then in the other , and be of equal height at noon , it must then needs follow to be more hot in the parallel of Paris , than it be under the equinoctial . 
 258 
 also this be a other reason , that when the sun set to they under the equinoctial , it go very deep and low under their horizon , almost even to their antipode , whereby their twilight be very short , twilight and their night be make very extreme dark and long , a ’ sl®rter . ’ and so the moisture and coldness of the long night dark under wonderful increase , so that at length the sun the equinoc-rising can hardly in many hour consume and drive at away the cold humour and moist vapour of the night Paris ' past , which be clean contrary in the parallel of Paris : for the sun go under their horizon but very little , after a slope sort , whereby their night be not very dark , but lightsome , as look into the north in a clear night without cloud it do manifest appear , their twilight be long : for the parallel of Cancer cut not the horizon of Paris at right angle , but at angle very uneven , and unlike as it do the horizon of the equinoctial . also the summer day at Paris be sixteen hour long , and the night but eight : where contrariwise under the equinoctial the day be but twelve hour long , and so long be also the night , in whatsoever parallel the sun be : and therefore look what odds and difference of proportion there be between . the sun abode above the horizon in Paris , and the abode it have under the equinoctial , ( it be in cancer ) the same proportion will seem to be between the heat of the one place , and heat of the other : for other thing ( as the angle of the whole ark of the sun progress that day in both place ) be equal . 
 but under the equinoctial the presence and abode of the sun above the horizon be equal to his absence , and abide under the horizon , each be twelve hour . and at Paris the continuance and abode of the sun be above the horizon sixteen hour long , and but eight hour absence , which proportion be double , from which if the proportion of the equality be subtract to find the difference , there will remain still a double propor - 
 259 
 in what proportion the angle of the sun beante heat . 
 they use and have need of fire under the equinoctial . 
 cold intermingle with heat under the equinoctial . 
 cion , whereby it seem to follow , that in June the heat at Paris be double to the heat under the equinoctial . for ( as i have say ) the angle of the sun beam be in all point equal , and the cause of difference be , Mora solis supra horizontem , the stay of the sun in the one horizon more than in the other . therefore , whosoever can find out in what proportion the angle of the sun beam heat , and what increase the sun continuance do add thereunto , it may express be set down , what force of heat and cold be in all region . 
 thus you partly see by compare a climate to we well know , and familiar acquaint by like height of the sun in both place , that under the equinoctial in June be no excessive heat , but a temperate air rather tend to cold . for as they have there for the most part a continual moderate heat , so yet sometime they be a little pinch with cold , and use the benefit of fire as well as we , especial in the evening when they go to bed , for as they lie in hang bed tie fast in the upper part of the house , so will they have fire make on both side their bed , of which two fire , the one they devise superstitious to drive away spirit , and the other to keep away from they the coldness of the night . 
 also in many place of torrida zona , especial in the high land somewhat mountainous , the people a little shrink at the cold , and be often force to provide themselves clothing , so that the Spaniard have find in the west Indies many people clothe , especial in winter , whereby appear , that with their heat there be cold intermingle , else will they never provide this remedy of clothing , which to they be rather a grief and trouble then otherwise . for when they go to war , they will put off all their apparel , think it to be cumbersome , and will always go naked , that they thereby may be more nimble in their fight . 
 some there be that think the middle zone extreme hot , because the people of the country can , and doe 260 
 • .... IS78 ' live without clothe , wherein they childish be deceive : for our climb rather tend to extremity of cold , because we can live without clothe : for this our double line , fur , and wear so many clothes , be a remedy against extremity , and argue not the goodness of the habitation , but inconvenience and injury of cold : and that be rather the moderate , temperate , and delectable habitation , where none of these troublesome thing be require , but that we may live naked and bare , as nature bring we forth . 
 other again imagine the middle zone to be extreme hot , because the people of Africa , especial the ethiopian , be so coal black , and their hair like wool curl short , which blackness and curl hair they suppose to come only by the parch heat of the sun , which how it shall be possible i can see : for even under the equinoctial in America , and in the east Indies , and in the hand Moluccae the people be not black , but tauney and white , with long hair uncurl as we have , so that if the ethiopian blackness ethiopian come by the heat of the sun , why shall not those Americans and Indians also be as black as they , see ’ 
 the sun be equal distant from they both , they abide in one parallel : for the concave and convex superficies of the orb of the sun be concentrike , and equidistant to the earth ; except any man shall imagine somewhat of aux solis , and oppositum , which indifferent may be apply aswell to the one place as to the other . but the sun be think to give no otherwise heat , but by way of angle in reflection , and not by his nearness to the earth : for throughout all Africa , yea in the midst of the middle zone , and in all other place upon the top of mountain there lie con - ume tinuall snow , which be near to the orb of the sun , ^ateth not then the people be in the valley , by so much as the but oneiy height of these mountain amount unto , and yet the reflection . sun notwithstanding his nearness , can not melt the snow for want of convenient place of reflection . also 
 261 
 a black moor son bear in England . 
 the colour of the people in Meta incognita . the complexion of the people of Meta incognita . 
 the middle region of the air where all the hail , frost , and snow be engender , be near unto the sun then the earth be , and yet there continue perpetuali cold , because there be nothing that the sun beam may reflect against , whereby appear that the nearness of the body of the sun work nothing . 
 therefore to return again to the black moor . i my self have see a ethiopian as black as a coal bring into England , who take a fair english woman to wife , beget a son in all respect as black as the father be , although England be his native country , and a english woman his mother : whereby it seem this blackness proceed rather of some natural infection of that man , which be so strong , that neither the nature of the climb , neither the good complexion of the mother concur , can any thing alter , and therefore , we can impute it to the nature of the climb . and for a more fresh example , our people of Meta incognita ( of who and for who this discourse be take in hand ) that be bring this last year into England , be all general of the same colour that many nation be , lie in the midst of the middle zone . and this their colour be not only in the face which be subject to sun and air , but also in their body , which be still cover with garment as we be , yea the very suck child of twelve month age have his skin of the very same colour that most have under the equinoctial , which thing can proceed by reason of the climb , for that they be at least ten degree more towards the north than we in England be , no , the sun never come near their zenith by fourty degree : for in effect , they be within three or four degree of that which they call the freeze zone , and as i say , fourty degree from the burn zone , whereby it follow , that there be some other cause then the climate or the son perpendicular reflection , that shall cause the ethiopian great blackness . and the most probable cause to my judgement be , that this blackness proceed of some 262 
 natural infection of the first inhabitant of that country , and so all the whole progeny of they descend , be still pollute with the same blot of infection . therefore it shall not be far from our purpose , to examine the first originali of these black man , and how by a lineali descent they have hitherto continue thus black . 
 it manifest and plain appear by holy scripture , the cause of that after the generail inundation and overflow of EthwPians the earth , there remain no more man alive but no ‘ and his three son , Sem , cham , and Japhet , who only be leave to possess and inhabit the whole face of the earth : therefore all the sundry descent that until this present day have inhabit the whole earth , must needs come of the offspring either of Sem , cham , or Japhet , as the only son of Noe , who all three be white , and their wife also , by course of nature shall have beget and bring forth white child . but the envy of our great and continual enemy the wicked spirit be such , that as he can not suffer our old father Adam to live in the felicity and angellike state wherein he be first create , but tempt he , seek and procure his ruin and fall : so again , find at this flood none but a father and three son live , he so cause one of they to transgress and disobey his father commandment , that after he all his posterity shall be accurse . the fact of disobedience be this : when the ark of Noe at the commandment of God have make the ark and enter therein , and the floodgate of heaven be open , so that the whole face of the earth , every tree and mountain be cover with abundance of water , he straite command his son and their wife , that they shall with reverence and fear behold the justice and mighty power of God , and that during the time of the flood while they remain in the ark , they shall use continency , and abstain from carnail copulation with their wife : and many other precept he give unto they , and admonition touch the justice of God , in revenge sin , and his mercy in deliver they , 263 
 who nothing deserve it . which good instruction and exhortation notwithstanding his wicked son I|be disobey , and be persuade that the first child bear after the flood ( by right and law of nature ) shall inherit and possess all the dominion of the earth , he contrary to his father commandment while they be yet in the ark , use company with his wife , and crafty go about thereby to disinherit the offspring of his other two brethren : for the which wicked and detestable fact , as a example for contempt of almighty God , and disobedience of parent , God will a son shall be bear who name be Chus , who not only it self , but all his posterity after he shall be so black and loathsome , that it may remain a spectacle of disobedience to all the world . and of this black and curse Chus come all these black moor which be in Africa , for after the water be vanish from off - the face of the earth , and that the land be dry , Sem choose that part of the land to inhabit in , which now be call Asia , and Japhet have that which now be call Europa , wherein we dwell , and Africa remain for cham and his black son Chus , and be call Chamesis after the father name , be perhaps a curse , dry , sandy , and unfruitful ground , fit for such a generation to inhabit in . 
 thus you see , that the cause of the ethiopian blackness be the curse and natural infection of blood , and not the distemperature of the climate ; which also may be prove by this example , that these black man be find in all part of Africa , as well without the tropicke , as within , even unto Capo de buona Speranza southward , where , by reason of the sphere , shall be the same temperature that be in Sicilia , Morea and Candie , where all be of very good complexion . wherefore i conclude , that the blackness proceed not of the hotenesse of the climb , but as i say , of the infection of blood , and therefore this their argument gather of the african blackness be not able to destroy the temperature of the middle zone . we may therefore very well be ascertain , 264 
 that under the equinoctial be the most pleasant and delectable place of the world to dwell in ; where although the sun for two hour in a year be direct over their head , and therefore the heat at that time somewhat of force , yet because it come so seidome , and continue so small a time , when it come , it be not to be weigh , but rather the moderate heat of other great tem-time in all the year to be remember . and if the feature under heat at any time shall in the short day wax somewhat ^umoc~ urgent , the coldness of the long night there will easy refresh it , accord as Honterus say , speak of the temperature under the equinoctial . 
 qu6dque die solis violento incanduit aestu , Humida nox reficit , paribusque refrigerat horis . 
 if the heat of the sun in the day time do burn or parch any thing , the moisture of the night do cool and refresh the same again , the sun be as long absent in the night , as it be present in the day . 
 also our author of the sphere , Johannes de Sacro Bosco , in the chapter of the zodiac , derive the etymologic of Zodiacus , of the greek word so , which in latin signify vita , life ; for out of Aristotle he allege , that secundum accessum and recessum solis in Zodiaco , fiunt generationes and corruptione in rebus inferioribus : accord to the sun go to and fro in the zodiac , the inferior body take their cause of generation and corruption . than it follow , that where there be most go too and fro , there be most generation and corruption : which must needs be between the two tropicke ; for there the sun go too and from most , and no where else but there . therefore between they under the two tropike , that be , in the middle zone , be great Equinoctiallis increase , multiplication , generation , and corruption of thing , which also we find by experience ; for there be it summer twice in the year , and twice winter , so that they have two harvest in the year , and continual spring . see then the middle zone fall out so 
 265 
 great heat under the tropics . 
 temperate , it rest to dedare where the hot part of the world shall be , for we find some place more hot than other . 
 to answer this doubt , reason persuade , the ho test place in the world to be under and about the two tropicke ; for there more then in any other place do both the cause of heat concur , that be , the perpendicular fall of the sun beam , at right angle , and a great continuance of the sun above the horizon , the pole there be elevate three or four and twenty degree . and as before i conclude , that though the sun be perpendicular to they under the equinoctial , yet because the same continue but a small time , ( their day be short , and their night long ) and the speedy departure of the sun from their zenith , because of the sudden cross of the zodiac with the equinoctial , and that by such continual course and recourse of hot and cold , the temperature grow moderate , and very well able to be endure : so now to they under the two tropicke , the sun have once by his proper motion decline twenty degree from the equinoctial , begin to draw near their zenith , which may be ( as before ) about the eleven day of May , and then begin to send his beam almost at right angle , about which time the sun enter into the first degree of gemini , and with this almost right angle the sun beam will continue until it be past cancer , that be , the space of two month every day at noon , almost perpendicular over their head , be then the time of solstitium Aestivale : which so long continuance of the sun about their zenith may cause a extreme heat ( if any be in the world ) but of necessity far more heat than can be under the equinoctial , where the sun have not such long abode in the zenith , but pass away therehence very quick . also under the tropicke , the day be long by a hour and a half , than it be under the equinoctial ; wherefore the heat of the sun have a long time of operation , must needs be increase , 266 
 especial see the night wherein cold and moisture do abound under the tropicke , be less than it be under the equinoctial . therefore i gather , that under the tropicke be the hot place , not only of torrida zona , but of any other part of the world , especial because there both cause of heat do concur , that be , the perpendicular fall of the sun beam two month together , and the long abode of the sun presence above the Horison . and by this mean more at large be prove , that Marochus in summer be far more hot , then at any time under the equinoctial , because it be situate so near the Tropic of Cancer , and also for the length of their day . neither yet do i think , that the region situate under the Tropic be not habitable , for they be find to be very fruitful also ; although Marochus and some other part of Africa near the Tropike for the dryness of the native sandy soil , and some accident may seem to some to be intemperate for over much heat . for Ferdinandus Oviedus speak of Cuba and Hispaniola , hand of America , lie hard Cuba . under , or by the Tropike of Cancer , say , that these htspant°la-hands have as good pasture for cattle , as any other country in the world . 
 also , they have most wholesome and clear water , and temperate air , by reason whereof the herd of beast be much big , fat , and of better taste , than any in Spain , because of the rank pasture , who moisture be better digest in the herb or grass , by continual ! and temperate heat of the sun , whereby be make more fat and unctious , it be of better and more steadfast nourishment : for continual and temperate heat do not only draw much moisture out of the earth to the nourishment of such thing as grow , and be engender in that climb , but do also by moderation preserve the same from putrify , digest also , and condensate or thicken the say moist nourishment into a gum and ■ unctious substance , whereby appear also , that under moderat'tem the tropike be both wholesome , fruitful , and pleasant perature . 
 267 
 habitation , whereby last it follow , that all the middle zone , which until of late day have be count and call the burn , broil , and parch zone , be now find to be the most delicate , temperate , commodious , pleasant , and delectable part of the world , and especial under the equinoctial . 
 have now sufficient at large declare the temperature of the middle zone , it remain to speak somewhat also of the moderate and continual heat in cold region , as well in the night as in the day all the summer long , and also how these region be habitable to the inhabitant of the same , contrary to the opinion of the old writer . 
 of the temperature of cold region all the summer long , and also how in winter the same be habitable , especial to the inhabitant thereof . 
 he cold region of the world be those , which tend towards the pole arctike , and antarctike , be without the circuit or bound of the seven climate : which assertion agreeable to the opinion of the old writer , be find and set out in our author of the sphere , Johannes de 
 nine climate . 
 Sacrobosco , where he plain say , that without the seven climate , which be bound by a parallel pass at fifty degree in latitude , all the habitation beyond be discommodious and intolerable . but gemma Frisius a 
 late writer find England and Scotland to be without the compass of those climate , wherein he know to be very temperate and good habitation , add thereunto two other climate , the uttermost parallel whereof pass by 56. degree in latitude , and therein com-prehendeth over and above the first computation , England , Scotland , Denmark , Moscovia , etc which all be rich and mighty kingdom . 
 268 
 the old writer persuade by bare conjecture , go about to determine of those place , by compare they to their own complexion , because they feel they to be hardly tolerable to themselves , and so take thereby a argument of the whole habitable earth ; as if a man bear in Marochus , or some other part of Barbary , comparison shall at the latter end of summer upon the sudden , either naked , or with his thin vesture , be bring into England , he will judge this region present not to be habitable , because he be bring up in so warm a country , be not able here to live , for so sudden a alteration of the cold air : but if the same man have come at the begin of summer , and so afterward by little and little by certain degree , have feel and acquaint himself with the frost of autumn , it will have seem by degree to harden he , and so to make it far more tolerable , and by use after one year or two , the air will seem to he more temperate . it be count a great matter in the old time , that there be a brass pot break in sunder with freeze water in Pontus , which after be bring and show in Delphis , in token of a miraculous cold region and winter , and therefore consecrate to the temple of Apollo . 
 this effect be wrought in the parallel of fouretie three degree in latitude , it be present count a place very hardly and uneasy to be inhabit for the great cold . and how then can such man define upon other region very far without that parallel , whether they be inhabit or not , see that in so near a place they so gross mistake the matter , and other their follower be content with the invention of the old author , have persist willing in the same opinion , with more confidence than consideration of the cause : so light be that opinion receive , as touch the unhabitable climb near and under the pole . 
 therefore i be at this present to prove , that all the land lie between the last climate even unto the point ° ' direct under either pole , be or may be inhabit , habitable . 
 369 
 especial of such creature as be engender and breed therein . for indeed it be to be confess , that some particular live creature can live in every particular place or region , especial with the same joy and felici tie , as it do where it be first breed , for the certain agreement of nature that be between the place and the thing 
 elephant . breed in that place ; as appear by the elephant , which be translate and bring out of the second or three climate , though they may live , yet will they never engender or bring forth young . also we see the like in many kind orange tree , of plant and herb ; for example , the orange tree , although in Naples they bring forth fruit abundant , in room and Florence they will bear only fair green leaf , but not any fruit : and translate into England , they will hardly bear either flower , fruit , or leaf , but be the next winter pinch and wither with cold : yet it follow not for this , that England , Rome , and Florence shall not be habitable . 
 twa cause of ln the prove of these cold region habitable , i shall heat - very short , because the same reason serve for this purpose , which be allege before in the prove the middle zone to be temperate , especial see all heat and cold proceed from the sun , by the mean either of the angle which his beam do make with the horizon , or else by the long or short continuance of the sun presence above ground : so that if the sun beam do beat perpendicular at right angle , than there be one cause of heat , and if the sun do also long continue above the horizon , than the heat thereby be much increase by access of this other cause , and so grow to a kind of extremity . and these two cause , as i say before , do most concur under the two Tropic , and therefore there be the great heat of the world . and likewise , where both these cause be most absent , there be great want of heat , and increase of cold ( see that cold be nothing but the privation and absence of heat ) and if one cause be want , and the other present , the effect will grow indifferent . therefore this be to be 
 270 
 understand , that the near any region be to the equinoctial , the high the sun do rise over their head at noon , and so make either right or near right angle , but the sun tarry with they so much the short time , and cause short day , with long and cold night , to restore the damage of the day past , by reason of the moisture consume by vapour . but in such region , over the which the sun rise low ( as in region extend towards either pole ) it make there unequal angle , but the sun continue long , and make long day , and cause so much short and warm night , as retain warm vapour of the day past . for there be find by experience summer hight night night in Scotland and Gothland very hot , when under near t / ie the equinoctial they be find very cold . this benefit of the sun long continuance and increase of the day , do augment so much the more in cold region as they be near the pole , and cease not increase until it come direct under the point of the pole arcticke , where the sun continue above ground the space of .. six month or half a year together , and so the day ? ' 
 be half a year long , that be the time of the sun be in the north sign , from the first degree of Aries until the last of virgo , that be all the time from our io day 
 of march until the 14 of September . the sun their - °f fore during the time of these six month without any six monet , is-offence or hindrance of the night , give his influence upon those land with heat that never cease during that time , which make to the great increase of summer , by reason of the sun continuance . therefore it follow , that though the sun be not there very high over their head , to cause right angle beam , and to give great heat , yet the sun be there sometime almost 24 degree high do cast a convenient and mean heat , which there continue without hindrance of the night the space of six month ( as be before say ) during which 
 time there follow to be a convenient , moderate and moderate heat temperate heat : or else rather it be to be suspect then under you pole . 
 271 
 the sun never set in 182 day . 
 horizon and equinoctial all one under the pole . 
 heat there to be very great , both for continuance , and also , quia virtus unita crescit , the virtue and strength of heat unite in one increase . if then there be such a moderate heat under the pole , and the same to continue so long time ; what shall move the old writer to say there can be place for habitation . and that the certainty of this temperate heat under both the pole may more manifest appear , let we consider the position and quality of the sphere , the length of the day , and so gather the height of the sun at all time , and by consequent the quantity of his angle , and so last the strength of his heat . 
 those land and region lie under the pole , and have the pole for their zenith , must needs have the equinoctial circle for their horizon : therefore the sun enter into the north sign , and describe every 24 hour a parallel to the equinoctial by the diurnal motion of primum mobile , the same parallel must needs be whole above the horizon : and so look how many degree there be from the first of Aries to the last of virgo , so many whole revolution there be above their horizon that dwell under the pole , which amount to 182 , and so many of our day the sun continue with they . during which time they have there continual day and light , without any hindrance of moist night . yet it be to be note , that the sun be in the first degree of Aries , and last degree of virgo , make his revolution in the very horizon , so that in these 24 hour half the body of the sun be above the horizon , and the other half be under his only centre , describe both the horizon and the equinoctial circle . 
 and therefore see the great declination of the sun be almost 24 degree , it follow , his great height in those country to be almost 24 degree . and so high be the sun at noon to we in London about the 29 of October , be in the 15 degree of Scorpio , and likewise the 21 of January be in the 15 of Aquarius . therefore look what force the sun at noon have in 
 272 
 London the 29 of October , the same force of heat it London . have , to they that dwell under the pole , the space almost of two month , during the time of the summer solstitium , and that without intermingle of any cold night ; so that if the heat of the sun at noon can be well measure in London ( which be very hard to do , because of the long night which engender great moisture and cold ) then will manifest appear by express number the manner of the heat under the pole , which certain must needs be to the inhabitant very commodious and profitable , if it incline not to overmuch heat , and if moisture do not want . 
 for as in October in England we find temperate air , and have in our garden herb and flower notwithstanding our cold1 night , how much more shall they have the same good air , be continual without night . this heat of we continue but one hour , while the sun be in that meridian , but they continue a long time in one height . this our heat be weak , and by the coolness of the night vanish , that heat be strong , and by continual access be still increase and strengthen . and thus by a similitude of the equal height of the sun in both place appear they come - commodious modious and moderate heat of the region under the t^ngt " ider . ° the pole . 
 pole . 1 
 and sure i can think that the divine providence have make any thing uncommunicable , but to have give such order to all thing , that one way or other the same shall be employ , and that every thing and place shall be tolerable to the next : but especial all thing in this low world be give to man to have dominion and use thereof . therefore we need no long to doubt of the temperate and commodious habitation under the pole during the time of summer . 
 but all the controversy consist in the winter , for than the sun leave those region , and be no more see for the space of other six month , in the which time all the sun course be under their horizon for seven 273 sister 
 the space of half a year , and then those region ( say some ) must needs be deform with horrible darkness , and continual night , which may be the cause that beast can not seek their food , and that also the cold shall then be intolerable . by which double evil all live creature shall be constrain to die , and be not able to endure the extremity and injury of winter , and famine ensue thereof , but that all thing shall perish before the summer follow , when they shall bring forth their brood and young , and that for these cause the say climb about the pole shall be desolate and not habitable . to all which objection may be answer in this manner : first , that though the sun be absent from they those six month , yet it follow not that there shall be such extreme darkness ; for as the sun be depart under their horizon , so be it not far from they : and not so soon as the sun fall so sudden come the dark night ; but the evening do substitute and prolong the day a good while after by twilight . after which time the residue of the night receive light of the moon and star , until the break of the day , which give also a certain light before the sun rise ; so that by these mean the night be seidome dark ; which be verify in all part of the world , but least in the middle zone under the equinoctial , where the twilight be short , and the night dark than in any other place , because the sun go under their horizon so deep , even to their antipode . we see in England in the summer night , when the sun go not far under the horizon , , that by the light of the moon and star we may travel all night , and if occasion be , do some other labour also . and there be no man that doubt whither our cattle can see to feed in the night , see we be so well certify thereof by our experience : and by reason of the sphere our night shall be dark than any time under the pole . 
 the astronomer consent that the sun descend 274 
 from our upper hemisphere at the 18 parallel under the horizon make a end of twilight , so that at length the dark night ensue , and that afterward in the morning the sun approach again within as many parallel , do drive away the night by access of the twilight . again , by the position of the sphere under the pole , the horizon , and the equinoctial be all one . Theise revolution therefore that be parallel to the equinoctial be also parallel to the horizon , so that the sun descend under that horizon , and there describe certain parallel not far distant , do not bring dark night to those region until it come to the parallel distant 18 degree from the equinoctial , that be , about the 21 degree of Scorpio , which will be about the 4 day of our November , and after the winter solstitium , the sun return back again to the 9 degree of Aquarius , which will be about the 19 of January ; during which time only , that be , from the 4 day of November until the 19 day of January , which be about six week space , those region do want the commodity of twilight : therefore , during the time of these say six month of darkness under the pole , the night be destitute of the benefit of the sun and the say twilight only for the the region space of six week or thereabouts . and yet neither this under thepole time of six week be without remedy from heaven ; for the moon with her increase light have access at that time , and illuminate the month lack light every one of themselves several half the course of that month , by who benefit it come to pass that the night name extreme dark possess those region no long than one month , neither that continual , or all at one time , but this also divide into two sort of short night , of the which either of they endure for the space of 15 day , and be illuminate of the moon accord . 
 and this reason be gather out of the sphere , whereby we may testify that the summer be warm and fruitful , and the winter night under the pole be tolerable to live creature . and if it be so that the winter and 
 275 
 winter night time of darkness there be very cold , yet have not nature unfer^ leave they provide therefore : for there the beast be sng crea - cover with hair so much the thick inn how much the ture . vehemency of cold be great ; by reason whereof the best and rich fur be bring out of the cold region . also the fowl of these cold country have thick skin , thick feather , and more store of down then in other hot place . Oure english man that travel to saint Nicholas , and go a fish to Wardhouse , enter far within the circle arctike , and so be in the freeze zone , and yet there , aswell as in island and all along those northern sea , they find the great store of the great fish that be ; as whale , etc and also abundance of mean fish ; as herring , cod , haddock , bret , etc which argue that the sea as well as the land may be and be well frequent and inhabit in the cold country . 
 a objection but some perhaps will marvel there shall be such °f Meta incog - temperate place in the region about the pole , when at 
 ' under 62 degree in latitude our captain Frobisher and his company be trouble with so many and so great mountain of fleet ice , with so great storm of cold , with such continual snow on top of mountain , and with such barren soil , there be neither wood nor tree , but low shrub , and such like . to all which objection may be answer thus : first , those infinite island of ice be engender and congeal in time of winter , and now by the great heat of summer be thaw , and then by ebb , flood , wind , and current , be drive to and fro , and trouble the fleet ; so that this be a argument to prove the heat in summer there to be great , that be able to thaw so monstrous mountain of ice . as for continual snow on top of mountain , it be there not otherwise then be in the hot part of the middle zone , where also lie great snow all the summer long upon top of mountain , because there be not sufficient space for the sun reflection , whereby the snow shall be melt . touch the cold stormy 276 
 wind and the barrenness of the country , it be there as it be in Cornwall and Devonshire in England , which part though we know to be fruitful and fertile , yet on the north side thereof all alongst the coast within seven or eight mile off the sea there can neither hedge nor tree grow , although they be diligent by art husband and see unto : and the cause thereof be the northern drive wind , which come from the sea be so bitter and sharp that they kill all the young and tender plant , and suffer scarce any thing to grow ; and so be it in the island of Meta incognita , which be subject most to Meta incogeast and northeastern wind , which the last year choke habit . up the passage so with ice that the fleet can hardly recover their port . yet notwithstanding all the objection that may be , the country be habitable ; for there be man , woman , child , and sundry kind of beast in great plenty , as bear , dear , hare , fox and dog : all kind of fly fowl , as duck , seamewe , wilmot , partridge , lark , crow , hawk , and such like , as in the three book you shall understand more at large . than it appear that not only the middle zone but also the zone about the pole be habitable . 
 which thing be well consider , and familiar captain know to our general captain Frobisher , aswell for f^uhers that he be thorough furnish of the knowledge of the 5 sphere and all other skill appertain to the art of navigation , as also for the confirmation he have of the same by many year experience both by sea and land , and be persuade of a new and near passage to Cataya then by Capo de buona speranda , which the Portugal yearly use : he begin first with himself to devise , and then with his friend to confer , and lay a plain plat unto they that that voyage be not only possible by the northwest , but also he can prove easy to be perform . and further , he determine and resolve with himself to go make full proof thereof , and to accomplish or bring true certificate of the truth , or else never to return again , know this to be the only thing of 
 277 
 the world that be leave yet undo , whereby a notable mind may be make famous and fortunate . but although his will be great to perform this notable voyage , whereof he have conceive in his mind a great hope by sundry sure reason and secret intelligence , which here for sundry cause i leave untouched , yet he want altogether mean and ability to set forward , and perform the same . long time he confer with his private friend of these secret , and make also many offer for the perform of the same in effect unto sundry merchant of our country above 15 year before he attempt the same , as by good witness shall well appear ( albeit some evil willer which challenge to themselves the fruit of other man labour have great injure he in the report of the same , say that they have be the first author of that action , and that they have learn he the way , which themselves as yet have never go ) but perceive that hardly he be hearken unto of the merchant , which never regard virtue without sure , certain , and present gain , he repair to the court ( from whence , as from the fountain of our common wealth , all good cause have their chief increase and maintenance ) and there lay open to many great estate and learned man the plot and sum of his device . and among many honourable mind which favour his honest and commendable enterprise , he be special bind and behold to the right honourable Ambrose Dudley earl of Warwick , who favourable mind and good disposition have always be ready to countenance and advance all honest action with the author and executer of the same : and so by mean of my lord his honourable countenance he receive some comfort of his cause , and by little and little , with no small expense and pain bring his cause to some perfection , and have draw together so many adventurer and such sum of money as may well defray a reasonable charge to furnish himself to sea withal . 
 he prepare two small bark of twenty and five and 278 
 1578. twenty ton a piece , wherein he intend to accomplish his pretend voyage . wherefore , be furnish with the foresay two bark , and one small pinnace of ten tun burden , have therein victual and other necessary for twelve month provision , he depart upon the say voyage from black-wall the 15 or June anno domini 1576. 
 one of the bark wherein he go be name the Gabriel , and the other the Michael ; and sail northwest from England upon the 11 of July he have sight of a high and ragged land , which he judge to be Frisland ( whereof some author have make mention ) but dare not approach the same by reason of the great store of ice that lie alongst the coast , and the great mist that trouble they not a little . not far from thence he lose company of his small pinnace , which by mean of the great storm he suppose to be swallow up of the sea , wherein he lose only four man . 
 also the other bark name the Michael mistrust 7^ Michael the matter , convey themselves privy away from he , return and return home , with great report that he be cast me-away . 
 the worthy captain notwithstanding these discomfort , although his mast be spring , and his top mast blow overboard with extreme foul weather , continue his course towards the northwest , know that the sea at length must needs have a end , and that some land shall have a beginning that way ; and determine therefore at the least to bring true proof what land and sea the same may be so far to the northwestwards , beyond any man that have heretofore discover . and the twenty of July he have sight of a high land , which he call queen Elizabeth foreland , after her majesty name . And sail more northerly alongst that coast , he descry another foreland with a great gut , bay , or passage , divide as it be two main land or continent asunder . there he meet with store of exceed great ice all this coast along , and covet still to continue his 
 279 
 " frobishers first entrance within you strait . 
 frobishers straight . 
 course to the northward , be always by contrary wind detain overthwart these straight , and can not get beyond . within few day after he perceive the ice to be well consume and go , either there ingulf in by some swift current or indraft , carry more to the southward of the same straight , or else convey some other way : wherefore he determine to make proof of this place , to see how far that gut have continuance , and whether he may carry himself through the same into some open sea on the back side , whereof he conceive no small hope , and so enter the same the one and twenty of July , and pass above fifty league therein , as he report , have upon either hand a great main or continent . and that land upon his right hand as he sail westward he judge to be the continent of Asia , and there to be divide from the firm of America , which lie upon the left hand over against the same . 
 this place he name after his name , frobisher strait , like as Magellanus at the southwest end of the world , have discover the passage to the south sea ( where America be divide from the continent of that land , which lie under the south pole ) and call the same straight , magellane strait . 
 after he have pass 60 league into this foresay strait , he go ashore , and find sign where fire have be make . 
 dear . he see mighty dear that seem to be mankind , 
 which run at he , and hardly he escape with his life in a narrow way , where he be fain to use defence and policy to save his life . 
 in this place he see and perceive sundry token of the people resort thither . And be ashore upon the top of a hill , he perceive a number of small thing fleet in the sea afar off , which he suppose to be porpose or seal , or some kind of strange fish ; but come near , he discover they to be man in small the first sight boat make of leather . and before he can descend of you Savages . down from the hill , certain of those people have almost 280 
 cut off his boat from he , have steal secret behind the rock for that purpose , where he speedy haste to his boat , and bend himself to his halberd , and narrow escape the danger , and save his boat . afterwards he have sundry conference with they , and they come aboard his ship , and bring he salmon salmon . and raw flesh and fish , and greedy devour the same before our man face . and to show their agility , they try many mastery upon the rope of the ship after our mariner fashion , and appear to be very strong of their arm , and nimble of their body . they exchange coat of seal , and bear skin , and such like , with our man ; and receive bell , look glass , and other toy , in recompense thereof again . after great courtesy , and many meeting , our mariner , contrary to their captain direction , begin more easy to 
 trust they ; and five of our man go ashore be by five engrsh-them intercept with their boat , and be never since hear of to this day again : so that the captain be t^en destitute of boat , bark , and all company , have scarce sufficient number to conduct back his bark again . 
 he can now neither convey himself ashore to rescue his man ( if he have be able ) for want of a boat ; and again the subtle traitor be so wary , as they will after that never come within our man danger . the captain notwithstanding desirous to bring some token from thence of his be there , be great discontent that he have not before apprehend some of they : and therefore to deceive the deceiver he wrought a pretty policy ; for know well how they great delight in our toy , and special in bell , he ring a pretty lowbell , make sign that he will give he the same that will come and fetch it . and because they will not come within his danger for fear , he fling one bell unto they , which of purpose he throw short , that it may fall into the sea and be lose . and to make take of the they more greedy of the matter he ring a loud bell , firstsava&-so that in the end one of they come near the ship 
 281 
 the take possession of Meta incognita . 
 how the ore be find by chance . 
 side to receive the bel ; which when he think to take at the captain hand , he be thereby take himself : for the captain be ready provide let the bell fall , and catch the man fast , and pluck he with main force boat and all into his bark out of the sea . whereupon when he find himself in captivity , for very choler and disdain he bite his tongue in twain within his mouth : notwithstanding , he die not thereof , but live until he come in England , and then he die of cold which he have take at sea . 
 now with this new prey ( which be a sufficient witness of the captain far and tedious travel towards the unknown part of the world , as do well appear by this strange infideli , who like be never see , read , nor hear of before , and who language be neither know nor understand of any ) the say captain Frobisher return homeward , and arrive in England in Harwich the 2 of October follow , and thence come to London 1576 , where he be high commend of all man for his great and notable attempt , but special famous for the great hope he bring of the passage to Cataya . 
 and it be especial to be remember that at their first arrival in those part there lay so great store of ice all the coast along so thick together , that hardly his boat can pass unto the shore . at length , after diverse attempt he command his company , if by any possible mean they can get ashore , to bring he whatsoever thing they can first find , whether it be live or dead , stock or stone , in token of christian possession , which thereby he take in behalf of the queen most excellent majesty , think that thereby he may justify then have and enjoy of the same thing that grow in these unknown part . 
 some of his company bring flower , some green grass ; and one bring a piece of black stone much like to a sea coal in colour , which by the weight seem to be some kind of metal or minerali . this 282 
 be a thing of no account in the judgement of the captain at the first sight ; and yet for novelty it be keep in respect of the place from whence it come . 
 after his arrival in London , be demand of sundry his friend what thing he have bring they home out of that country , he have nothing leave to present they withal but a piece of this black stone . and it fortune a gentlewoman one of the adventurer wife to have a piece thereof , which by chance she throw and burn in the fire , so long , that at the length be take forth , and quench in a little vinegar , it glister with a bright marquesset of gold . whereupon the matter be call in some question , it be bring to certain goldfiner in London to make assay thereof , who give out that it hold gold , and that very rich for the quantity . afterwards , the same goldfiner pro - many adven-mised great matter thereof if there be any store to turers-be find , and offer themselves to adventure for the search of those part from whence the same be bring . some that have great hope of the matter seek secret to have a lease at her majesty hand of those place , whereby to enjoy the mass of so great a public profit unto their own private gain . 
 in conclusion , the hope of more of the same gold over to be find kindle a great opinion in the heart of many to advance the voyage again . whereupon preparation be make for a new voyage against the year follow , and the captain more special direct by commission for the search moor of this gold ore i » than for the search any further discovery of the v°ya& compassage . And be well accompany with diverse resolute and when me^ and forward gentleman , her majesty then lie at the fir the bring-right honourable the lord of Warwick house in Essex , mg of ore . he come to take his leave , and kiss her highness hand , with gracious countenance and comfortable word depart towards his charge . 
 [ a true 
 283 
 a true report of such thing as happen in the second voyage of captain Frobisher , pretend for the discovery of a new passage to Cataya , China and the east India , by the northwest . Ann. Dom. 1577. 
 eing furnish with one tall ship of her majesty , name the aid , of two hundred ton , and two other small bark , the one name the Gabriel , the other the Michael , about thirty tun a piece , be fit appoint with man , munition , victual , and all thing niece - 
 sary for the voyage , the say captain Frobisher , with the rest of his company come aboard his ship ride at Blackwall , intend ( with God help ) to take the first wind and tide serve he , the 25 day of May , in the year of our lord God 1577. 
 the name of such gentleman as attempt this discovery , and the number of soldier and mariner in each ship , as follow . 
 aboard the aid be admiral be the number of 100 man of all sort , whereof 30 or more be gentleman and soldier , the rest sufficient and tall sailor . 
 aboard the Gabriel be vice-admiral , be in all 18 person , whereof six be soldier , the rest mariner . 
 aboard the Michael be 16 person , whereof five be soldier , the rest mariner . 
 284 
 ' general of the | whole company for her majesty encage Martin Frobisher . 
 he lieutenant his ensign Corporali of the shot George Best . 1 Richard Philpot. Francis Forder . 
 aboard the aid be the rest of the gentleman ' Henry Carew . Edmund Stafford . John Lee. m. Harvie . Matthew Kinersley . Abraham Lins . Robert Kinersley . Francis Brakenbury . William Armshow . 
 aboard gabrieli aboard Michael than i be | the i be ] the master the mate the pilot - the master gunner ' captain | one gentleman the master 1 captain | one gentleman the master encage ' Christopher hall . Charles Jackman . Andrew Dier . Richard Cox. ' Edward Fenton . William Tamfield . William Smyth . " " Gilbert York . Thomas Chamberlaine . James bear . 
 on Whitsunday be the 26 of may , anno 1577 , early in the morning , we weigh anchor at Blackwall , and fall that tie down to Gravesend , where we remain until Monday at night .. 
 on Monday morning the 27 of may , aboard the aid the^mmun-we receive all the communion by the minister of ion 285 
 thefirst arrival after our departingfrom England . 
 a i of silver find in Orkney . 
 Gravesend , and prepare we as good Christians towards God , and resolute man for all fortune : and towards night we depart to Tilbery hope . 
 Tuesday the eight and twenty of may , about nine of the clock at night , we arrive at Harwitch in Essex and there stay for the take in of certain victual , until Friday be the thirty of May , during which time come letter from the lord of the council , straight command our general , not to exceed his compliment and number appoint he , which be , one hundred and twenty person : whereupon he discharge many proper man which with unwilling mind depart . 
 he also dismiss all his condemn man , which he think for some purpose very needful for the voyage , and towards night upon Friday the one and thirty of May we set sail , and put to the sea again . And sail northward alongst the east coast of England and Scotland , the seven day of June we arrive in saint magnus sound in Orkney hand , call in latin Orcades , and come to anchor on the south side of the bay , and this place be reckon from Blackwall where we set sail first league . 
 here our company go on land , the inhabitant of these island begin to flee as from the enemy , whereupon the lieutenant will every man to stay together , and go himself unto their house to declare what we be and the cause of our come thither , which be understand , after their poor manner they friendly entreat we , and bring we for our money such thing as they have . and here our goldfiner find a i of silver . 
 Orkney be the principali of the isle of the Orcades , and stand in the latitude of fifty nine degree and a half . the country be much subject to cold , answerable for such a climate , and yet yield some fruit , and sufficient maintenance for the people content so poor to live . 
 there be plenty enough of poultrey , store of egg , fish , and foul . 
 286 
 for their bread they have oaten cake , and their drink be ewe milk , and in some part ale . 
 their house be but poor without and sluttish enough within , and the people in nature thereunto agreeable . 
 for their fire they burn heath and turf , the country in most part be void of wood . 
 they have great want of leather , and desire our old shoe , apparel , and old rope ( before money ) for their victual , and yet be they not ignorant of the value of our coin . the chief town be call Kyrway . Kyrway the 
 in this island have be sometime a abbey or a cq , fa ™ ne < > f religious house call saint Magnus , be on the west s magnus side of the he , whereof this sound bear name , through find why so which we pass . their governor or chief lord be call . 
 call the lord Robert steward , who at our being there , as we understand , be in durance at Edinburgh , by the regent commandment of Scotland . 
 after we have provide we here of matter sufficient for our voyage the eight of June we set sail again , and pass through saint magnus sound have a merry wind by night , come clear and lose sight of all the land , and keep our course west northwest by the space of two day , the wind shift upon we so that we lay in traverse on the sea , with contrary wind , make good ( as near as we can ) our course to the westward , and sometime to the northward , as the wind shift . and hereabout we meet with 3 sail of english fisherman from Iseland , bind homeward , by who we write our letter 
 unto our friend in England . we traverse these sea by the space of 26 day without sight of any land , and meet with much drift wood , and whole body of tree . we see many monstrous fish and strange fowl , 
 great body of tree drive in the sea . 
 monstrous fish in strange foul live 
 which seem to live only by the sea , be there so far distant from any land . at length God favour we with more prosperous wind , and after we have sail four day with good wind in the poop , the four of July the Michael be foremost a head shoot off a piece sea 
 287 
 water be black and smooth signify land to be near . 
 hand ofyce . 
 we first sight of Frisland then . 4. of July . 
 Frisland describe . 
 a easy kind of fish . 
 of ordinance , and strike all her sail , suppose that they descry land which by reason of the thick mist they can not make perfect : howbeit , as well our account as also the great alteration of the water , which become more black and smooth , do plain declare we be not far off the coast . our general send his master aboard the Michael ( who have be with he the year before ) to bear in with the place to make proof thereof , who descry not the land perfect , but see sundry huge hand of ice , which we deem to be not pass twelve league from the shore , for about ten of the clock at night be the four of July , the weather be more clear , we make the land perfect and know it to be frislande . and the heighth be take here , we find our self to be in the latitude of 60 degree and a half , and be fall with the southermost part of this land . between Orkney and Frisland be reckon league . 
 this Frislande show a ragged and high lahde , have the mountain almost cover over with snow alongst the coast full of drift ice , and seem almost inaccessible , and be think to be a hand in bigness not inferior to England , and be call of some author , west Frislande , i think because it lie more west than any part of Europe . it extend in latitude to the northward very far as seem to we , and appear by a description set out by two brethren venetian , Nicholaus and Antonius Zeni , who be drive off from Ireland with a violent tempest make shipwreck here , and be the first know Christians that discover this land about two hundred year sithence , and they have in their sea-cardes set out every part thereof and describe the condition of the inhabitant , declare they to be as civil and religious people as we . and for so much of this land as we have sail alongst , compare their card with the coast , we find it very agreeable . this coast seem to have good fish , for we lie becalm let fall a hook without any bait and present 288 
 catch a great fish call a hollibut , who serve the whole company for a day meat , and be dangerous meat for surfeit . And sound about five league off from the shore , our lead bring up in the tallow a kind of coral almost white , and small stone as bright as crystal : and it be not to be doubt but that this land may be find very rich and beneficial if it be thorough discover , although we see no creature there but little bird . it be a marvellous thing to behold of what great bigness and depth some hand of ice be here , some seventie , some eighty fathom under water , beside that which be above , seem hand more than half a mile in circuit . all these ice be in taste fresh , and seem to be breed in the sound thereabouts , or in some land near the pole , and with the wind and tide be drive alongst the coast . we find none of these hand of ice salt in taste , whereby it appear that they be not congeal of the ocean sea water which be always salt , but of some stand or little move lake or great fresh water near the shore , cause either by melt snow from top of mountain , or by continual access of fresh river from the land , and intermingle with the sea water , bear yet the dominion ( by the force of extreme frost ) may cause some part of salt water to freeze so with it , and so seem a little brackish , but otherwise the main sea freeze not , and therefore there be no mare Glaciale or freeze sea , as the opinion hitherto have be . our general prove land here twice , but by the sudden fall of mist ( whereunto this coast be much subject ) he be like to loose sight of his ship , and be greedy endanger with the drive ice alongst the coast , be force aboard and fain to surcease his pretence till a better opportunity may serve : and have spend four day and night sail alongst this land , find the coast subject to such bitter cold and continual mist , he determine to spend no more time therein , but to bear out his course towards the straight call frobisher strait after the general name , who 
 seven 289 t 
 white coral get by sound . 
 monstrous isle of ice , in taste fresh , tohere-hence they be suppose to come . 
 the opinion of the freeze sea be destroy by experience . 
 be the first that ever pass beyond 58 degree to the northward , for any thing that have be yet know of certainty of new find land , otherwise call the continent or firm land land of America , discover the say straight this last year 1576. 
 between Frisland and the straight we have one great storm , wherein the Michael be somewhat in danger , the stirrage have her stirrage break , and her top mast blow °bnkenb^ae^ over board , and be not pass 50 league short of the tempest ? straight by our account , we strike sail and lay a hull , fear the continuance of the storm , the wind be at the north-east , and have lose company of the bark the first en - in that flaw of wind , we happy meet again the seven-tranceofthe teenth day of July , have the evening before see * s' diverse hand of fleet ice , which give a argument that we be not far from land . our general in the morning from the main top ( the weather be reasonfill . 63. ] able clear ) descry land , but to be better assure he send the two bark two contrary course , whereby they may descry either the south or north foreland , the aid lie off and on at sea , with a small sail by a hand of ice , which be the mark for we to meet together again . and about noon , the weather be more clear , we make the north foreland perfect , which hall Ilana otherwise be call Halles hand , and also the small hand bear the name of the say hall whence the ore be take up which be bring into England this last year 1576 then say hall be present at the find and take up thereof , who be then master in the gabrieli with captain Frobisher . at our arrival here all the sea about this coast be so cover over with huge quanti tie of great ice , that we think these place may only deserve the name of mare Glaciale , and be call the icy sea 
 the descrip - this north foreland be think to be divide from the trafhb continent of the Northerland , by a little sound call 
 ' hall sound , which make it a hand , and be think 
 little less than then he of wight , and be the first entrance 290 
 of the straight upon the norther side , and stand in the latitude of sixty two degree and fifty minute , and be reckon from Frisland league . God have bless we with so happy a landfall , we bear into the straight which run in next hand , and somewhat further up to the northward , and come as near the shore as we may for the ice , and upon the eighteenth day of July our general take the goldfiner with he , attempt to go on shore with a small row pinnace , upon the small island where the ore be take up , to prove whether there be any store thereof to be find , but he can not get in all that hand a piece so big as a walnut , where the first be find . but our man which seek the other hand thereabouts find they all to have good store of the ore , whereupon our general with these good tiding return aboard about ten of the clock at night , and be joyful welcome of the company with a volie of shot . he bring egg , fowl , and a young seal aboard , which the company have kill ashore , and have find upon those hand begin set to catch foul , and stick new cut , with other thing , he well perceive that not long before some of the country people have resort thither . 
 have therefore find those token of the people access in those part , and be in his first voyage well acquaint with their subtle and cruel disposition , he provide well for his better safety , and on Friday the ninteenth of July in the morning early , with his best company of gentleman and soldier , to the number of forty person , go on shore , aswell to discover the inland and habitation of the people , as also to find out some fit harborowe for our ship . And pass towards the shore with no small difficulty by reason of the abundance of ice which lie alongst the coast so thick together • that hardly any passage through they may be discover , we arrive at length upon the main of hall great hand , and find there also aswell as in the other small hand good store of the ore . and 
 no more gold over find in the first hand . 
 egg y fowl of Meta incognita . snare set to catch bird withal . 
 291 
 the build of a column , call mount Warwick . 
 the first sight of the country people , waft with a flag . 
 the meet apart of two Englishman , with two of that country . 
 the order oj there traffic 
 leave his boat here with sufficient guard we pass up into the country about two english mile , and recover the top of a high hill , on the top whereof our man make a column or cross of stone heap up of a good heighth together in good sort , and solemn sound a trumpet , and say certain prayer kneel about the ensign , and honour the place by the name of mount Warwick , in remembrance of the right honourable the lord Ambrose Dudley earl of Warwick , who noble mind and good countenance in this , as in all other good action , give great encouragement and good furtherance . this do , we retire our company not see any thing here worth further discovery , the country seem barren and full of ragged mountain and in most part cover with snow . 
 and thus march towards our boat , we espy certain of the country people on the top of mount Warwick with a flag waft we back again and make great noise , with cry like the mow of Buis seem great desirous of conference with we : whereupon the general be therewith better acquaint , answer they again with the like cry , whereat and with the noise of our trumpet they seem greedy to rejoice , skip , laugh and dance for joy . and hereupon we make sign unto they , hold up two finger , command two of our man to go apart from our company , whereby they may do the like . so that forthwith two of our man and two of they meet together a good space from company , neither party have their weapon about they . our man give they pin and point and such trifle as they have . and they likewise bestow on our man two bow case and such thing as they have . they earnest desire our man to go up into their country , and our man offer they like kindness aboard our ship , but neither part ( as it seem ) admit or trust the other courtesy . their manner of traffic be thus , they do use to lay down of their merchandise upon the ground , so much as they mean to part withal , and 
 292 
 so look that the other party with who they make trade shall do the like , they themselves do depart , and then if they do like of their mart they come again , and take in exchange the other merchandise , otherwise if they like not , they take their own and depart . the day be thus well near spend , in haste we retire our company into our boat again , mind forthwith to search alongst the coast for some harbour fit for our ship , for the present necessity thereof be much , consider that all this while they lie off and on between the two land , be continual subject aswell to great danger of fleet ice , which environ they , as to the sudden flaw which the coast seem much subject unto . but when the people perceive our departure , with great token of affection they earnest call we back again , follow we almost to our boat : whereupon our general take his master with he , who be best acquaint with their manner , go apart unto two of they , mean , if they can lay sure hold upon they , forcible to bring they aboard , with intent to bestow certain toy and apparel upon the one , and so to dismiss he with all argument of courtesy , and retain the other for a interpreter . the general and his master be meet with their two companion together , after they have exchange certain thing the one with the other , one of the savage for lack of better merchandise , cut off the tail of his coat ( which be a chief ornament among they ) and give it unto our general for a present . but he present upon a watchword give with his master sudden lay hold upon the two savage . but the ground underfoot be slippery with the snow on the side of the hill , their handfast fail and their prey escape run away and light recover their bow and arrow , which they have hide not far from they behind the rock . And be only two savage in sight , they so fierce , desperate , and with such fury assault and pursue our general and his master , be altogether unarm , and not mistrust their subtlety 
 293 
 another meet of two of our man with two of they . 
 the Englishman chase to their boat . 
 one of that countryman take . 
 that they chase they to their boat , and hurt the general in the buttock with a arrow , who the rather speedy flee back , because they suspect a great number behind the rock . our soldier ( which be command before to keep their boat ) perceive the danger , and hear our man call for shot come speedy to rescue , think there have be a great number . but when the savage hear the shot of one of our caliver ( and yet have first bestow their arrow ) they run away , our man speedy follow they . but a servant of my lord of Warwick , call Nicholas Conger a good footman , and uncumber with any furniture have only a dagger at his back overtook one of they , and be a Cornishman and a good wrestler , show his companion such a cornish trick , that he make his side ache against the ground for a month after . and so be stay , he be take alive and bring away , but the other escape . thus with their strange and new prey our man repair to their boat , and pass from the main to a small hand of a mile compass , where they resolve to tarry all night ; for even now a sudden storm be grow so great at sea , that by no mean they can recover their ship . and here every man refresh himself with a small portion of victual which be lay into the boat for their dinner , have neither eat nor drink all the day before . but because they know not how long the storm may last , nor how far off the ship may be put to sea , nor whither they shall ever recover they again or not , they make great spare of their victual , as it great behoove they : for they know full well that the best cheer the country can yield they , be rock and stone , a hard food to live withal , and the people more ready to eat they then to give they wherewithal ! to eat . and thus keep very good watch and ward , they lie there all night upon hard clifle of snow and ice both wet , cold , and comfortless . 
 these thing thus happen with the company on land , 294 
 the danger of the ship at sea be no less perilous . for within one hour after the general depart in the morning by negligence of the cook in overheating , and the workman in make the chimney , the aid be set on fire , and have be the confusion of the whole if by chance a boy espy it , it have not be speedy with great labour and god help well extinguish . 
 this day also be diverse storm and flaw , and by nine of the clock at night the storm be grow so great , and continue such until the morning , that it put our ship at sea in no small peril : for have mountain of fleet ice on every side , we go roomer for one , and loof for another , some scrape we , and some happy escape we , that the least of a m. be as dangerous to strike as any rock , and able to have split asunder the strong ship of the world . we have a scope of clear without ice , ( as God will ) wherein we turn , be otherwise compass on every side about : but so much be the wind and so little be our 
 sea room , that be able to bear only our forecourse we cast so oft about , that we make fourteen horde in eight ' glass running , be but four hour : but God be our best steresman , and by the industry of Charles Jackman and Andrew Dyer the master mate , both very expert mariner , and Richard Cox you master gunner , with other very careful sailor , then within board , and also by the help of the clear night which be without darkness , we do happy avoid those present danger , whereat since we have more marvel then in the present danger fear , for that every man within board , both better and worse have enough to do with his hand to hale rope , and with his eye to look out for danger . but the next morning be the 20 of July , as God will , the storm cease , and the general espy the ship with his new captive and whole company , come happy aboard , and report what have pass a shore , whereupon altogether upon our knee we give God humble and hearty thanks , for that it have please he , 
 the aid set on fire . 
 the great danger of those rock of ice . 
 night without darkness in that country . 
 295 
 from so speedy peril to send we such speedy deliverance , and so from this northern shore we strike over towards the Southerland . 
 the one and twenty of July , we discover a bay which run into the land , that seem a likely harbour gur first come - for our ship , wherefore our general row thither with his boat , to make proof thereof , and with his goldfiner fa , " » ™ to search for ore , have never assay any thing on the 
 straight . south shore as yet , and the first small hand which we 
 land upon . here all the sand and cliff do so glister and have so bright a marquesite , that it seem all to be gold , but upon trial make , it prove no better than a i of black-lead , and verify the proverb . all be not gold black lead . tjiat glister . 
 upon the two and twenty of July we bear into the say sound , and come to anchor a reasonable breadth off the shore , where think our self in good security , we be great endanger with a piece of drift ice , which the ebb bring forth of the sound and come thwart we ere we be aware . but the gentleman and soldier within board take great pain at this pinch at the Capstone , overcome the most danger thereof , and yet for all that may be do , it strike on our stern such a blow , that we fear lest it have strike away our rudder , and be force to cut our cable in the hawse , we be fain to set our fore sail to run further up within , and if our stirrage have not be strong than in the present time we fear , we have run the ship upon the rock , have a very narrow channel to turn in , but as God will , all come well to pass . and this jackmans be name jackmans sound , after the name of the 
 sound . master mate , who have first like unto the place . 
 smith hand . upon a small hand , within this sound call smith hand ( because he first set up his forge there ) be find a i of silver , but be not win out of the rock without great labour . here our goldfiner make say of such ore as they find upon the Northerland , and find four sort thereof to hold gold in good quantity . 
 296 
 i577-upon another small hand here be also find a great dead fish , which as it shall seem , have be embay with ice , and be in proportion round like to a porpose , be about twelve foot long , and in bigness answerable , have a horn of two yard long grow out of Thejmdingtf the snout or nostril . this horn be wreathe and an " ic°rnes strait , like in fashion to a taper make of wax , and ’ may true be think to be the sea unicorn . this horn be to be see and reserve as a jewel by the queen majesty commandment , in her wardrobe of robe . 
 Tuesday the three and twenty of July , our general with his best company of gentleman , soldier and sailor , to the number of seventie person in all , march with ensign displayde , upon the continent of the Southerland ( the suppose continent of America ) where , command a trumpet to sound a call for every man to repair to the ensign , he declare to the whole company how much the cause import for the service of her majesty , our country , our credit , and the safety of our own life , and therefore require every man to be conformable to order , and to be direct by those he shall assign . and he appoint for leader , captain Fenton , captain York , and his lieutenant George Beste : which do , we cast our self into a ring , and altogether upon our knee , give God humble thank for that it have please he of his great goodness to preserve we from such imminent danger , beseech likewise the assistance of his holy spirit , so to deliver we in safety into our country , whereby the light and truth of these secret be know , it may redound to the more honour of his holy name , and consequent to the advancement of our common wealth . and so , in as good sort as the place suffer , we march towards the top of the mountain , which be no less painful in climb then dangerous in descend , by reason of their steepness and ice . and have pass about five mile , by such unwieldy way , we return unto our ship with - 
 297 
 out sight of any people , or likelihood of habitation . here diverse of the gentleman desire our general to suffer they to the number of twenty or thirty person to march up thirty or forty league in the country , to the end they may discover the inland , and do some acceptable service for their country . but he not content with the matter he seek for , and well consider the short time he have in hand , and the greedy desire our country have to a present savour and return of gain , bend his whole endeavour only to find a i to fraught his ship , and to leave the rest ( by God help ) hereafter to be well accomplish . and therefore the twenty six of July he depart over to the Northland , with the two bark , leave the aid ride in jackmans sound , and mean ( after he have find convenient harbour , and fraught there for his ship ) to discover further for the passage . the bark come the same night to anchor in a sound upon the Northerland , where the tide do run so swift , and the place be so subject to indraft of ice , that by reason thereof they be great endanger , and have find a very rich i , as they suppose , and get almost twenty ton of ore together , upon the 28 of July the ice come drive into the sound where the bark ride , in such sort , that they be therewith great distress . and the Gabrieli ride astern the Michael , have her cable gall asunder in the hawse with a piece of drive ice , and lose another anchor , and have but one cable and anchor leave , for she have lose two before , and the ice still drive upon she , she be ( by God help ) well fence from the danger of the rest , by one great hand of ice , which come a ground hard a head of she , which if it have not so chance , i think sure she have be cast upon the rock with the ice . the Michael more anchor upon this great ice , and ride under the lee thereof : but about midnight , by the weight of it self , and the set of the tide , the ice break within half the bark length , and make 298 
 unto the company within board a sudden and fearful noise . the next flood towards the morning we weigh anchor , and go further up the straight , and leave our ore behind we which we have dig , for haste leave the place by the name of bear sound after the master name of the Michael , and name the hand lecester hand . in one of the small hand here we find a tomb , wherein the bone of a dead man lie together , and our savage captive be with we , and be demand by sign whether his countryman have not slay this man and eat his flesh so from the bone , he make sign to the contrary , and that he be slay with wolf and wild beast . here also be find hide under stone good store of fish , and sundry other thing of the inhabitant ; as sled , bridle , kettle of fish-skinne , knife of bone , and such other like . and our savage declare unto we the use of all those thing . And take in his hand one of those country bridle , he catch one of our dog and hamper he handsome therein , as we do our horse , and with a whip in his hand , he teach the dog to draw in a sled as we do horse in a coach , set himself thereupon like a guide : so that we may see they use dog for that purpose that we do our horse . and we find since by experience , that the lesser sort of dog they feed fat , and keep they as domestical cattle in their tent for their eat , and the great sort serve for the use of draw their sled . 
 the twenty nine of July , about five league from bear sound , we discover a bay which be fence on each side with small hand lie off the main , which break the force of the tide , and make the place free from any indraft of ice , do prove a very fit harbour for our ship , where we come to anchor under a small island , which now together with the sound be call by the name of that right honourable and virtuous lady , anne countess of Warwick . and this be the further place that this year we have enter up 
 299 
 bear sound . lecesters hand . 
 a tomb with a dead man bone in it . 
 bridle , knife , and other instrument find hide among the rock . 
 they use great dog to draw sleds , and title dog for their meat . 
 thirty league discover within the strait . 
 a good precedent of a good captain show by captain Frobisher . 
 within the streite , and be reckon from the cape of the queen foreland , which be the entrance of the streite not above 30 league . upon this hand be find good store of the ore , which in the wash hold gold to our think plain to be see : whereupon it be think best rather to load here , where there be store and indifferent good , than to seek further for better , and spend time with jeoperdie . and therefore our general set the miner to work , and show first a good precedent of a painful labourer and a good captain in himself , give good example for other to follow he : whereupon every man both better and worse , with their best endeavour willing lay to their help hand . and the next day , be the thirty of July , the Michael be send over to jackmans sound , for the ay de and the whole company to come thither . upon the main land over against the countess hand we discover and behold to our the manner of great marvel the poor cave and house of those their house in country people , which serve they ( as it shall seem ) t country . por tjjejr winfer dwelling , and be make two fathom under ground , in compass round , like to a oven , be join fast one by another , have hole like to a fox or Conny berry , to keep and come together . they undertrench these place with gutter so , that the water fall from the hill above they , may slide away without their annoyance : and be seat common in the foot of a hill , to shield they better from the cold wind , have their door and entrance whale bone ever open towards the south . from the ground up-timber^ ward they build with whale bone , for lack of m er ' timber , which bend one over another , be handsome compact in the top together , and be cover over with sealesskinne , which in stead of tile , fence they from the rain . in which house they have only one room , have the one half of the flower raise with broad stone a foot high than the other , whereon straw moss , they make their nest to sleep in . 
 300 
 they defile these den most filthy with their beastly feed , and dwell so long in a place ( as we think ) until their sluttishness loathe they , they be force to S‘ seek a sweet air , and a new seat , and be ( no doubt ) a disperse and wander nation , as the tar-tarians , and live in hold and troop , without any certain abode , as may appear by sundry circumstance of our experience . 
 here our captive be ashore with we , to declare set up the use of such thing as we see , stay himself alone behind the company , and do set up five small stick mean round in a circle one by another , with one small bone thereof . place just in the midst of all : which thing when one of our man perceive , he call we back to behold the matter , think that he have mean some charm or witchcraft therein . but the best conjecture we can make thereof be , that he will thereby his countryman shall understand , that for our five man which they betray the last year ( who he signify by the five stick ) he be take and keep prisoner , which he signify by the bone in the midst . for afterward the savage when we show he the picture of his countreman , which the last year be bring into England ( who countreiman counterfeit we have draw , with boat and other furni - picture . ture , both as he be in his own , and also in english apparel ) he be upon the sudden much amaze thereat , and behold advise the same with silence a good while , as though he will strain courtesy whether shall begin the speech ( for he think he no doubt a lively creature ) at length begin to question with he , as with his companion , and find he dumb and mute , seem to suspect he , as one disdeinfull , and will with a little help have grow into choler at the matter , until at last by feel and handle , he find he but a deceive picture . and then with great noise and cry , cease not wonder , think that we can make man live or die at our pleasure . 
 and thereupon call the matter to his remembrance , 
 301 
 another show of twenty person of that country in one boat . 
 he give we plain to understand by sign , that he have knowledge of the take of our five man the last year , and confess the manner of each thing , numbered the five man upon his five finger , and point unto a boat in our ship , which be like unto that wherein our man be betray : and when we make he sign , that they be slay and eat , he earnest deny , and make sign to the contrary . 
 the last of July the Michael return with the aid to we from the Southerland , and come to anchor by we in the countess of Warwick sound , and report that since we depart from jackmans sound there happen nothing among they there great worth the remembrance , until the thirty of July , when certain of our company be a shore upon a small island within the say jackmans sound , near the place where the aid ride , do espy a long boat with diverse of the country people therein , to the number of eighteen or twenty person , who so soon as our man perceive , they return speedy aboard , to give notice thereof unto our company . they may perceive these people climb up to the top of a hill , where with a flag , they waft unto our ship , and make great outcry and noise , like so many Buis . hereupon our man do present man forth a small skiff , have not above six or seven person therein , which row near the place where those people be , to prove if they can have any conference with they . but after this small boat be send a great , be well appoint for their rescue , if need require . 
 as soon as they espy our company come near they , they take their boat and haste away , either for fear , or else for policy , to draw our man from rescue further within their danger : wherefore our man construe that their come thither be but to seek advantage , follow speedy after they , but they row so swift away , that our man can come nothing near they . howbeit they fail not of their best endeavour in 
 302 
 row , and have chase they above two mile into the sea , return into their ship again . 
 the morning follow be the first of August , captain York with the Michael come into jackmans sound , and declare unto the company there , that the last night pass he come to anchor in a certain bay ( which since be name York sound ) about four league distant from jackmans sound , be put to leeward of that place for lack of wind , where he discover certain tent of the country people , where go with his company ashore , he enter into they , but find the people depart , as it shall seem , for fear of their come . but among sundry strange thing which in these tent they find , there be raw and new kill flesh of unknown sort , with dead carcase and bone 
 York sound . 
 the apparel 
 of dog , and i know not what . they also behold ( to their great marveile ) a doublet of canvas make after f0 ™ * 1 a^n^ . , the english fashion , a shirt , a girdle , three shoe for jman which the 
 contrary foot , and of unequal bigness , which they well year before conjecture to be the apparel of our five poor country - be take man , which be intercept the last year by these captwe-countrey people , about fifty league from this place , further within the strait . whereupon our man be 
 in good hope , that some of they may be here , and 
 yet live : the captain devise for the best leave his mind behind he in write , with pen , ink , and paper also , whereby our poor captive countryman , if it may come to their hand , may know their friend mind , and of their arrival , and likewise return their answer . and so without take any thing away in their tent , leave there also look glass , point , and other of our toy ( the better to allure they by such friendly mean ) depart aboard his bark , with intent to make haste to the aid , to give notice unto the company of all such thing as he have there discover : and so mean to return to these tent again , hope that he may by force or policy entrap or entice the people to some friendly conference . which thing when he have deliver 
 a good devise of captain York . 
 3°3 
 to the whole company there , they determine forthwith to go in hand with the matter . hereupon captain York with the master of the aid and his mate ( who the night before have be at the tent , and come over from the other side in the Michael with he ) be accompany with the gentleman and soldier to the number of thirty or forty person in two small row pinnace make towards the place , where the night before they discover the tent of those people , and set Charles Jackman , be the master mate , ashore with a convenient number , for that he can best guide they to the place , they march over land , mean to compass they on the one side , while the captain with his boat may entrap they on the other side . but land at last at the place where the night before they leave they , they find they with their tent remove . notwithstanding , our man which march up into the country , pass over two or three mountain , by chance espy certain tent in a valley underneath they near unto a creek by the sea side , which because it be not the place where the guide have be the night before , they judge they to be another company , and besetting the Savages they about , determine to take they if they can . but have boat of they have quick descry our company , launch one 3 ™ ’ great and another small boat , be about 16 or 18 person , and very narrow escape , put themselves to sea . the english whereupon our soldier discharge their caliver , and " those^people of f°^owed they , think the noise thereof be hear that country . to our boat at sea , our man there will make what speed they may to that place . and thereupon indeed our man which be in the boat ( cross upon ' they in the mouth of the sound whereby their passage be let from get sea room , wherein it have be impossible the swift for we to overtake they by row ) force they to put rowtngof those themselves ashore upon a point of land within the say * e < * e ' sound ( which upon the occasion of the slaughter there , the bloody be since name the bloody point ) whereunto our man 
 five ™ * ' so speedy follow , that they have little leisure leave they 
 304 
 to make any escape . but so soon as they land , each of they break his oar , think by that mean to prevent we , in carry away their boat for want of oar . and desperate return upon our man , resist they manful in their land , so long as their arrow and dart last , and after gather up those arrow which our man shoot at they , yea , and pluck our arrow out of their body encounter afresh again , and maintain their cause until both weapon and life fail they . and when they find they be mortal wound , be ignorant what mercy mean , with deadly fury they cast themselves headlong from off the rock into the sea , lest perhaps their enemy shall receive glory or prey of their dead carcaise , for they suppose we belike to be cannibal or eater of man flesh . in this conflict one of our man be dangerous hurt in the belly with one of their arrow , and of they be slay five or six , the rest by flight escape among the rock , save two woman , whereof the one be old and ugly , our man think she have be a devil or some witch , and therefore let she go : the other be young , and cumber with a suck child at her back , hide her self behind the rock , be espy by one of our man , who suppose she have be a man , shoot through the hair of her head , and pierce through the child arm , whereupon she cry out , and our surgeon mean to heal her child arm , apply salve thereunto . but she not acquaint with such kind of surgery , pluck those salve away , and by continual lick with her own tongue , not much unlike our dog , heal up the child arm . and because the day be wellnear spend our man make haste unto the rest of our company which on the other side of the water remain at the tent , where they find by the apparel , letter , and other english furniture , that they be the same company which captain York discover the night before , have remove themselves from the place where he leave they . 
 and now consider their sudden fly from our vn 305 u 
 York sound . 
 a hot skirmish between the english and they of that country . 
 the desperate nature of those people . 
 the take of the woman and her child . 
 a pretty kind of surgery which nature teach . 
 man , and their desperate manner of fight , we begin to suspect that we have hear the last news of our man which the last year be betray of these people . And consider also their ravenous and bloody disposition in eat any kind of raw flesh or carrion howsoever stink , it be to be think that they have slay and devour our man : for the doublet which be find in their tent have many hole therein be make with their arrow and dart . 
 but now the night be at hand , our man with their captive and such poor stufie as they find in their tent , return towards their ship , when be at sea , there arise a sudden flaw of wind , which be not a little dangerous for their small boat : but as God will they come all safe aboard . and with these good news they return ( as before mention ) into the countess of Warwick sound unto we . and between jackmans sound , from whence they come , and the countess of Warwick sound between land and land , be think the narrow the narrow place of the strait be judge nine raius^s league over at the least : and jackmans sound be league over . upon the Southerland , lie direct almost over against the countess sound , as be reckon scarce thirty league the queen within the strait from the queen cape , which be the entrance of the streit of the Southerland . this cape be name queen Elizabeth cape , stand in the latitude of 62 degree and a half to the northward of new find land , and upon the same continent , for any thing that be yet know to the contrary . 
 the manner of have now get a woman captive for the comfort the meeting of qf our manj we bring they both together , and every five , and their man with silence desire to behold the manner of their entertainment , meet and entertainment , the which be more worth the behold then can be well express by writing . at their first encounter they behold each the other very wistly a good space , without speech or word utter , with great change of colour and countenance , as though it seem the grief and disdeine of their captivity have 306 
 take away the use of their tongue and utterance : the woman at the first very sudden , as though she disdain or regard not the man , turn away , and begin to sing as though she mind another matter : but be again bring together , the man break up the silence first , and with stern and stay countenance , begin to tell a long solemn tale to the woman , whereunto she give good hear , and interrupt he nothing , till he have finish , and afterward , be grow into more familiar acquaintance by speech , they be turn together , so that ( i think ) the one will hardly have live without the comfort of the other . and for so 
 much as we can perceive , albeit they live continual together , yet they do never use as man and wife , though the woman spare not to do all necessary thing that appertain to a good housewife indifferent for they both , as in make clean their cabin , and every other thing that appertain to his ease : for when he be seasick , she will make he clean , she will kill 
 and flay the dog for their eat , and dress his meat . only i think it worth the note , the continency of they both : for the man will never shift himself , except he have first cause the woman to depart out of his cabin , and they both be most shamefast , lest any of their privy part shall be discover , either of themselves , or any other body . 
 on Monday the six of August , the lieutenant with all the soldier , for the better guard of the miner and the other thing a shore , pitch their tent in the countess island , and fortify the place for their better defence as well as they can , and be to the number of forty person , when be all at labour , they may perceive upon the top of a hill over against they a number of the country people waft with a flag , and make great outcry unto they , and be of the same company , which have encounter late our man upon the other shore , be come to complain their late loss , and to entreat ( as it seem ) for restitution of 
 the shamefastness and chastity of those savage captive . 
 another appearance of the country people . 
 307 
 these people know the use of writing . 
 a letter send unto the five english captive . 
 the woman and child , which our man in the late conflict have take and bring away ; whereupon the general take the savage captive with he , and set the woman where they may best perceive she in the high place of the island , go over to talk with they . this captive at his first encounter of his friend fall so out into tear that he can not speak a word in a great space , but after a while , overcome his kindness , he talk at full with his companion , and bestow friendly upon they such toy and trifle as we have give he , whereby we note , that they be very kind one to another , and greedy sorrowful for the loss of their friend . our general by sign require his five man which they take captive the last year , and promise they , not only to release those which he have take , but also to reward they with great gift and friendship . our savage make sign in answer from they that our man shall be deliver we , and be yet live , and make sign likewise unto we that we shall write our letter unto they , for they know very well the use we have of writing , and receive knowledge thereof , either of our poor captive countryman which they betray , or else by this our new captive who have see we daily write , and repeat again such word of his language as we desire to learn : but they for this night , because it be late , depart without any letter , although they call earnest in haste for the same . and the next morning early be the seven of August , they call again for the letter , which be deliver unto they , they speedy depart , make sign with three finger , and point to the sun , that they mean to return within 3 day , until which time we hear no more of they , and about the time appoint they return , in such sort as you shall afterward hear . 
 this night because the people be very near unto we , the lieutenant cause the trumpet to sound a call , and every man in the island repair to the ensign , he put they in mind of the place so far from their 308 
 country wherein they live , and the danger of a great multitude which they be subject unto , if good watch and ward be not keep , for at every low water the enemy may come almost dryfoot from the main unto we , wherefore he will every man to prepare he in good readiness upon all sudden occasion , and so give the watch their charge , the company depart to rest . 
 i think the captain letter well worth the remembering , not for the circumstance of curious endite , but for the substance and good meaning therein contain , and therefore have repeat here the same , as by himself it be hasty write . 
 