order agree upon by the captain and master to be observe by the fleet of sir Humphrey Gilbert . 
 irst the admiral to carry his flag by day , and his light by night . 
 2 item , if the admiral shall shorten his sail 
 by night , than to show two light until he be answer again by every ship show one light for a short time . 
 3 item , if the admiral after his shorten of sail , as aforesaid , shall make more sail again : than he to show three light one above another . 
 4 item , if the admiral shall happen to hull in the night , than to make a waver light over his other light , waver the light upon a pole . 
 5 item , if the fleet shall happen to be scatter weather , or other mishap , then so soon as one shall descry another , to hoist both top sail twice , if the weather will serve , and to strike they twice again ; but if the weather serve not , than to hoist the main top sail twice , and forthwith to strike it twice again . 
 6 item , if it shall happen a great fog to fall , then present every ship to bear up with the admiral , if there be wind : but if it be a calm , than every ship to hull , and so to lie at hull till it be clear . and if the fog do continue long , than the admiral to shoot off two piece every evening , and every ship to answer it with one shot : and every man bear to the ship , that be to leeward so near as he may . 
 7 item , every master to give charge unto the watch to look out well , for lay aboard one of another in the night , and in fog . 
 8 item , every evening every ship to hail the admiral , and so to fall astern he , sail through the ocean : and be on the coast , every ship to hail he both morning and evening . 
 9 item , if any ship be in danger any way , by leak or otherwise , than she to shoot off a piece , and present to hang out one light , whereupon every man to bear towards she , answer she with one light for a short time , and so to put it out again ; thereby to give knowledge that they have see her token . 
 10 item , whensoever the admiral shall hang out her ensign in the main shrowd , than every man to come aboard she , as a token of counsel . 
 11 item , if there happen any storm or contrary wind to the fleet after the discovery , whereby they be separate : 
 1583. than every ship to repair unto their last good port , there to meet again . 
 our course agree upon . 
 he course first to be take for the discovery be to bear direct to cape raze , the most southerly cape of newfound land ; and there to harbour 
 our self either in Rogneux or Fermous , be the first place appoint for our Rendez vous , and the next harbour unto the northward of cape raze : and therefore every ship separate from the fleet to repair to that place so fast as God shall permit , whether you shall fall to the southward or to the northward of it , and there to stay for the meeting of the whole fleet the space of ten day : and when you shall depart , to leave mark . 
 a direction of our course unto the newfound land . 
 begin our course from Silley , the near be by westsouthwest ( if the wind serve ) until such time as we have bring our self in the latitude of 43 or 44 degree , because the ocean be subject much to southerly wind in June and July . than to take traverse from 45 to 47 degree of latitude , if we be enforce by contrary wind : and not to go to the northward of the height of 47 degree of septentrionali latitude by no mean : if God shall not enforce the contrary ; but to do your endeavour to keep in the height of 46 degree , so near as you can possible , because cape raze lie about that height . 
 note . 
 if by contrary wind we be drive back upon the coast of England , than to repair unto Silley for a place of our assembly or meeting . 
 if we be drive back by contrary wind that we can 
 not pass the coast of Ireland , than the place of our assembly to be at bear haven or Baltimore haven . 
 if we shall not happen to meet at cape raze , than the place of Rendez vous to be at cape Briton , or the near harbour unto the westward of cape Briton . 
 if by mean of other ship we may not safe stay there , then to rest at the very next safe port to the westward ; every ship leave their mark behind they for the more certainty of the after comer to know where to find they . 
 the mark that every man ought to leave in such a case , be of the general private device write by himself , seal also in close wax , and deliver unto every ship one scroll , which be not to be open until occasion require , whereby every man be certify what to leave for instruction of after comer : that every of we come into any harbour or river may know who have be there , or whether any be still there up high into the river , or depart , and which way . 
 order thus determine , and promise mutual give to be observe , every man withdraw himself unto his charge , the anchor be already weigh , and our ship under sail , have a soft gale of wind , we begin our voyage upon Tuesday the eleven day of June , in the year of our lord 1583 , have in our fleet ( at our departure from causet bay ) these ship , who name and burden , with the name of the captain and master of they , i have also insert , as follow : 
 1 the delight ali&s the George , of burden 120 ton , be admiral : in which go the general , and William winter captain in she and part owner , and Richard clerk master . 
 2 the bark Raleigh set forth by m. Walter Raleigh , of the burden of 200 ton , be then viceadmiral : in which go m. butler captain , and Robert Davis , of Bristol master . 
 3 the golden hind , of burden 40 ton , be then rear-admiral : in which go Edward Hayes captain and owner , and William Cox of Limehouse master . 
 4 the swallow , of burden 40 ton : in she be captain Maurice Browne . 
 5 the squirrel , of burden 10 ton : in which go captain William Andrew , and one cade master . 
 we be in number in all about 260 man : among our fleet con-whom we have of every faculty good choice , as ship - tiste^offive wright , mason , carpenter , smith , and such like , " wonderful / Mlibout requisite to such a action : also Minerali man and 260 man . refiner . beside , for solace of our people , and allure - prevision fit mean of the savage , we be provide of music in fir su^ good variety : not omit the least toy , as morris covenes ' dancer , hobby horse , and maylike conceit to delight the savage people , who we intend to win by all fair mean possible . and to that end we be indifferent furnish of all petty haberdasherie ware to barter with those simple people . 
 in this manner we set forward , depart ( as have be June 11. say ) out of Causon bay the eleven day of June be Tuesday , the weather and wind fair and good all day , but a great storm of thunder and wind fall the same night . 
 Thursday follow , when we hail one another in June 13. the evening ( accord to the order before specify ) they signify unto we out of the vice-admiral , that both observe . the captain , and very many of the man be fall sick . and about midnight the viceadmiral forsake we , notwithstanding we have the wind east , fair and good . but it be after credible report , that they be infect with a contagious sickness , and arrive great distress at Plimmoth : the reason i can never understand . sure i be , no cost be spare by their owner master Raleigh in set they forth : therefore i leave it unto God . 
 by this time we be in 48 degree of latitude , not a little grieve with the loss of the most puissant ship in 
 July 20. Greatfogges upon the ocean sea northward . 
 July 27. 
 the bank in length unknown , stretchethfrom north into south , in breadth 10. league , in depth of water upon it 30. fathom . 
 our fleet : after who departure , the golden hind succeed in the place of vice-admiral , and remove her flag from the mizon unto the foretop . 
 from Saturday the 15 of June until the 28 , which be upon a Friday , we never have fair day without fog or rain , and wind bad , much to the west northwest , whereby we be drive southward unto 41 degree scarce . 
 about this time of the year the wind be common west towards the newfound land , keep ordinary within two point of west to the south or to the north , whereby the course thither fall out to be long and tedious after June , which in march , Apriell and may , have be perform out of England in 22 day and less . we have wind always so scant from west northwest , and from west southwest again , that our traverse be great , run south unto 41 degree almost , and afterward north into 51 degree . 
 also we be encumber with much fog and mist in manner palpable , in which we can not keep so well together , but be dissever , lose the company of the swallow and the squirrel upon the 20. day of July , who we meet again at several place upon the newfound land coast the three of August , as shall declare in place convenient . 
 Saturday the 27 of July , we may descry not far from we , as it be mountain of ice drive upon the sea , be then in 50 degree , which be carry southward to the weather of we : whereby may be conjecture that some current do set that way from the north . 
 before we come to newfound land about 50 league on this side , we pass the bank , which be high ground rise within the sea and under water , yet deep enough and without danger , be common not less than 25 and 30 fathom water upon they : the same ( as it be some vain of mountain within the sea ) do run along , and from the newfound land , begin northward about 52 or 53 degree of latitude , and do extend 48 
 into the south infinite . the breadth of this bank be somewhere more , and somewhere less : but we find the same about io league over , have sound both on this side thereof , and the other towards newfound land , but find no ground with almost 200 fathom of line , both before and after we have pass the bank . the Portugal , and French chief , have a notable trade of great fishfish upon this bank , where be sometime a hundred or more sail of ship : who common begin the ' fish in Apriell , and have end by July . that fish be large , always wet , have no land near to dry , and be call Corre fish . 
 during the time of fish , a man shall know without sound when he be upon the bank , by the incredible multitude of sea foul hover over the same , to pray abundance of upon the offalle and garbage of fish throw out by fisherman , and float upon the sea . 
 upon Tuesday the 11 of June , we forsake the coast of England . so again Tuesday the 30 of July ( seven i ay 30. week after ) we get sight of land , be immediate d^^ embay in the grand bay , or some other great bay : the ’ certainty whereof we can not judge , so great hase and fog do hang upon the coast , as neither we may 
 discern the land well , nor take the sun height . but by our best computation we be then in the 51 degree of latitude . 
 forsake this bay and uncomfortable coast ( nothing appear unto we but hideous rock and mountain , bare of tree , and void of any green herb ) we follow the coast to the south , with weather fair and clear . 
 we have sight of a hand name Penguin , of a foul hand and a there breed in abundance , almost incredible , which n ? m can fly , their wing not able to carry their body , be en^tn-very large ( not much less than a goose ) and exceed fat : which the french man use to take without difficulty upon that hand , and to barrel they up with salt . but for linger of time we have make we there the like provision . 
 viii 49 d 
 trending this coast , we come to the hand call baccalaos , be not pass two league from the main : to fafish th6 south thereof lie cape S. Francis , 5. league distant take there , from baccalaos , between which go in a great bay , by the vulgar sort call the bay of conception . here we meet with the swallow again , who we have lose in the fog , and all her man alter into other apparel : whereof it seem their store be so amend , that for joy and congratulation of our meeting , they spare not to cast up into the air and overboard , their cap and hat in good plenty . the captain albeit himself be very honest and religious , yet be he not appoint of man to his humour and desert : who for the most part be such as have be by we surprise upon the narrow sea of England , be pirate and have take at that instant certain Frenchman lade , one bark with wine , and another with salt . both which we rescue , and take the man of war with all her man , which be the same ship now call the swallow , follow still their kind so oft , as ( be separate from the general ) they find opportunity to rob and spoil . and because God justice do follow the same company , even to destruction , and to the overthrow also of the captain ( though not consent to their misdemeanour ) i will not conceal any thing that make to the manifestation and approbation of his judgement , for example of other , persuade that god more sharp take revenge upon they , and have tolerate long as great outrage in other : by how much these go under protection of his cause and religion , which be then pretend . 
 misdemeanour therefore upon further enquiry it be know , how of they in the this company meet with a bark return home after fallow . the Ashing with his fraught : and because the man in the swallow be very near scant of victuali , and chief of apparel , doubtful withal where or when to find and meet with their admiral , they beseech the captain they may go aboard this newlander , only to borrow what may be spare , the rather because the same 
 1583-was bind homeward . leave give , not without charge to deal favorable , they come aboard the fisherman , who they rifle of tackle , sail , cable , victual , and the man of their apparel : not spare by torture ( wind cord about their head ) to draw out else what they think good . this do with expedition ( like man skilful in such mischief ) as they take their cock boat to go aboard their own ship , it be overwhelm in the sea , and certain of these man there drown : the rest be preserve even by those silly soul who they have before spoil , who save and deliver they aboard the swallow . what become afterward of the poor newlander , perhaps destitute of sail and furniture sufficient to carry they home ( whither they have not less to run then 700 league ) god alone know , who take vengeance not long after of the rest that escape at this instant : to reveal the fact , and justify to the world God judgement inflict upon they , as shall declare in place convenient . 
 thus after we have meet with the swallow , we hold on our course southward , until we come against the harbour call S. John , about 5 league from the former cape of S. Francis : where before the entrance into the harbour , english ship we find also the frigate or squirrel lie at anchor , who the english merchant ( that be and always be mirais admiral by turn interchangeable over the fleet of fieete , fish fisherman within the same harbour ) will not permit to upon the south enter into the harbour . glad of so happy meeting both purtsofuew-of the swallow and frigate in one day ( be Saturday °un a ' the 3. of August ) we make ready our fight , and prepare to enter the harbour , any resistance to the contrary notwithstanding , there be within of all nation , to the number of 36 sail . but first the general dispatch a boat to give they knowledge of his come for no ill intent , have commission from her majesty for his voyage he have in hand . and immediate we follow with a slack gale , and in the very entrance ( which be but narrow , not above 2 butt length ) the admiral fall upon 
 good order take by english merchant for our supply in newfound land . 
 a rock on the larboard side by great oversight , in that the weather be fair , the rock much above water fast by the shore , where neither go any sea gate . but we find such readiness in the english merchant to help we in that danger , that without delay there be bring a number of boat , which tow off the ship , and clear she of danger . 
 have take place convenient in the road , we let fall anchor , the captain and master repair aboard our admiral : whither also come immediate the master and owner of the fish fleet of Englishman , to understand the general intent and cause of our arrival there . they be all satisfy when the general have show his commission , and purpose to take possession of those land to the behalf of the crown of England , and the advancement of christian religion in those paganish region , require but their lawful aid for repair of his fleet , and supply of some necessary , so far as convenient may be afford he , both out of that and other habor adjoin . in lieu whereof , he make offer to gratify they , with any favour and privilege , which upon their better advice they shall demand , the like be not to be obtain hereafter for great price . So crave expedition of his demand , mind to proceed further south without long detention in those part , he dismiss they , after promise give of their best endeavour to satisfy speedy his so reasonable request . the merchant with their master depart , they cause forthwith to be discharge all the great ordinance of their fleet in token of our welcome . 
 it be further determine that every ship of our fleet shall deliver unto the merchant and master of that harbour a note of all their want : which do , the ship aswell English as stranger , be tax at a easy rate to make supply . and beside , commissioner be appoint , part of our own company and part of they , to go into other harbour adjoin ( for our english merchant command all there ) to leavy our provision : 
 whereunto the Portugal ( above other nation ) do most willing and liberal contribute . insomuch as we be present ( above our allowance ) with wine , marmalad , most fine rusk or biscuit , sweet oil and sundry delicacy . also we want not of fresh salmon , trout , lobster and other fresh fish bring daily unto we . Moreover as the manner be in their fish , every week to choose their admiral a new , or rather they succeed in orderly course , and have weekly their admiral feast solemnize : even so the general , captain and master of our fleet be continual invite and feast . to grow short , in our abundance at home , the entertainment goadenter-had be delightful , but after our want and tedious passage through the ocean , it seem more acceptable ianJt and of great contentation , by how much the same be Savages in the unexpected in that desolate corner of the world : where at south part of other time of the year , wild beast and bird have only the fruition of all those country , which now seem a ’ place very populous and much frequent . 
 the next morning be Sunday and the 4 of August , August 4. the general and his company be bring on land by english merchant , who show unto we their accustom walk unto a place they call the garden . but nothing appear more than nature it self without art : who confuse have bring forth rose abundant , wild , but odoriferous , and to sense very comfortable . also the like plenty of raspis berry , which do grow in every place . 
 Monday follow , the general have his tent set up , August 5. who be accompany with his own follower , summoned the merchant and master , both english and stranger to be present at his take possession of those possession country . before who open be read and interpret taken‘ unto the stranger his commission : by virtue whereof he take possession in the same harbour of saint John , and 200 league every way , invest the queen majesty with the title and dignity thereof , have deliver unto he ( after the custom of England ) a rod and a turfle of 
 actuallposses-sion maintain in Newfoundland . 
 the same soil , enter possession also for he , his heir and assign for ever : and signify unto all man , that from that time forward , they shall take the same land as a territory appertain to the queen of England , and himself authorise under her majesty to possess and enjoy it . and to ordain law for the government thereof , agreeable ( so near as convenient may be ) unto the law of England : under which all people come thither hereafter , either to inhabit , or by way of traffic , shall be subject and govern . and especial at the same time for a beginning , he propose and deliver three law to be in force immediate . that be to say : the first for religion , which in public exercise shall be accord to the church of England . the 2. for maintenance of her majesty right and possession of those territory , against which if any thing be attempt prejudicial ! , the party or party offend shall be adjudge and execute as in case of high treason , accord to the law of England . the 3. if any person shall utter word sound to the dishonour of her majesty , he shall loose his ear , and have his ship and good confiscate . 
 these content publish , obedience be promise by generail voice and consent of the multitude aswell of Englishman as stranger , pray for continuance of this possession and government begin . after this , the assembly be dismiss . and afterward be erect not far from that place the arm of England engrave in lead , and infix upon a pillar of wood . yet further and actual to establish this possession take in the right of her majesty , and to the behoof of sir Humphrey Gilbert knight , his heir and assign for ever : the general grant in fee farm diverse parcel of land lie by the water side , both in this harbour of saint John , and elsewhere , which be to the owner a great commodity , be thereby assure ( by their proper inheritance ) of ground convenient to dress and to dry their fish , whereof many time before they do fade , be prevent 54 
 sir Humphrey Gilbert by they that come first into the harbour . for which ground they do covenant to pay a certain rent and service unto sir Humphrey Gilbert , his heir or assign for ever , and yearly to maintain possession of the same , by themselves or their assign . 
 now remain only to take in provision grant , accord as every ship be tax , which do fish upon the coast adjoin . in the mean while , the general appoint man unto their charge : some to repair and trim the ship , other to attend in gather together our supply and provision : other to search the commodity and singularity of the country , to be find by sea or land , and to make relation unto the general what either themselves can know by their own travail and experience , or by good intelligence of english man or stranger , who have long frequent they same coast . also some observe the elevation of the pole , and draw plait of the country exact grade . and by that i can gather by each man several relation , i have draw a brief description of the newfound land , with the commodity by sea or land already make , and such also as be in possibility and great likelihood to be make : nevertheless the card and plait that be draw , with the due gradation of the harbour , bay , and cape , do perish with the admiral : wherefore in the description follow , i must omit the particular of such thing . 
 