article set down by the committee appoint in the behalf of the company of Moscovian merchant , to confer with m. Carlile , upon his intend discovery and attempt into the hithermost part of America . 
 the name of the committee . 
 master Aiderman hart 
 master Aiderman Spencer . 
 master Hoddesden . 
 master William Burrough . 
 master slany . 
 ' master towerson . master staper . 
 < master John Castelin . master Leake . 
 irst the committee be well persuade , that the country whereunto this action be intend , be very fruitful , inhabit with savage people of a mild and tractable disposition . and that of all other place which be unfrequented at this day , it be the only most fit and 
 most commodious for we to intermeddle withal . 
 the convenient manner of attempt this enterprise be think to be thus : that there shall be one hundred man convey thither to remain there one whole year : who with friendly intreaty of the people , 147 
 may enter into better knowledge of the particular estate of the country , and thereby gather what commodity may be hereafter , or present look for . 
 the famish - the charge to transport these hundred man , to victuali they , and to furnish they of munition and other neede-one year will thing , will not be less than four thousand pound : cost 4000 U. whereof have be very ready offer by the city of Bristol one thousand pound , the residue be three thousand pound , remain to be furnish by this city of London , or any other who will adventure their money in this first preparation . 
 the committee think it convenient that a privilege shall be procure by master Carlile from her majesty , by virtue whereof these condition and article follow may be effectual provide for . 
 first , that they who shall disburse their money for the first preparation , shall be name adventurer , and shall have the one half of all such land , territory , town , mine of gold and silver , and other metal whatsoever , as shall be find , get , obtain , as conquer by this discovery : yield to her majesty the five part of all such gold and silver , as shall happen to be have out of any mine that so shall be find . 
 that those party which do employ themselves personal in the present discovery , shall be name enterpriser , and shall have the other half of all the land , territory , town , mine of gold and silver , and other metal , yield to her majesty the five part of the gold and silver , as the adventurer do : the same to be distribute by the general , with the consent of the great part of twelve discreet person to be choose out of the whole number of the enterpriser . 
 also , that all trade of merchandise which shall be use to and from those part , which by this discovery shall be find out , shall appertain only to the adventurer which first shall disburse their money for this discovery , with prohibition to all other her majesty subject , and other merchant to deal in the say part , 148 
 without the consent of the first adventurer , upon loss of ship and good , and punishment of their person , that so shall adventure in trade of merchandise : or otherwise by imprisonment at the company pleasure . 
 that no person shall hereafter adventure in this discovery as adventurer for the profit mention in the first article , but such only as do disburse their money in this first preparation : and they shall not adventure hereafter any great sum , then ratable accord to their proportion of this their first adventure . 
 also , the profit which by this discovery shall be attain unto , either by land which may be conquer , or otherwise get : as also such profit which by this discovery shall be obtain by mine , or otherwise get , that each one shall have his part rate and rate like , accord to the proportion of their first adventure , and not otherwise . 
 the adventurer in this first preparation shall , at their own free will and liberty , choose whether they will supply hereafter any further charge or not : if there do fall out any such occasion to require the same . and yet withal shall for ever hold to they the freedom of the trade which shall grow in any of these part : notwithstanding their say refusal to bear any further charge . 
 that in the patent which be to be obtain , be grant , that all her majesty subject may transport themselves thither that shall be content to go . and that the Patentee or his assign may ship thither from time to time , so many and such person , man , woman , and child , as they shall think meet . and the same person to inhabit or remain there at their pleasure , any law to the contrary notwithstanding , with express prohibition , as be mention in the three article , against all other , which shall go thither without the licence of the patentee or his assign first obtain . 
 that it shall not be lawful for any of her majesty subject , or any other to inhabit or traffic within 149 
 A.D. 
 1583. 
 [ three . 189. i 
 one hundred league any way of the place , where the general shall have settle his chief being or residence . 
 ij9i . 
 the fieete of Canada . 
 cape raze . 
 the isle of S. Peter . 
 cape de Rey. 
 the isle of aponas . 
 