the manner of the savage . 
 to dedare unto you the state of the savage , they be people of a goodly stature , and well make , they be very white , but they be all naked : and if they be apparel as the french be , they will be as white and as fair : but they paint themselves for fear of heat and sun burn . 
 in stead of apparel , they wear skin upon they like mantle ; and they have a small pair of breech , wherewith they cover their privity , as well man as woman . they have hose and shoe of leather excellent make . and they have no shirt : neither cover they their head , but their hair be truss up above the crown of their head , and plait or braid . touch their victual , they eat good meat , but all unsalted , but they dry it , and afterward they broil it , as well fish as flesh . they have no certain dwell place , and they go from place to place , as they think they may best find food , as alose in one place , and other fish , salmon , sturgeon , mullet , surmullet , Barz , carp , eel , Pinperneaux , and other fresh water fish , and store of porpoise . they feed also of stag , wild boar , bugle , porkespynes , and store of other wild beast . and there be as great store of foul as they can desire . 
 touch their bread , they make very good : and it be of great mill : and they live very well ; for they take care for nothing else . 
 they drink seal oil , but this be at their great feast . 
 they have a king in every country , and be wonderful obedient unto he : and they do he honour accord unto their manner and fashion . and when they travail from place to place , they carry all their good with they in their boat . 
 their apparel . 
 so have they of Ceula , and Quivira , and Meta incognita . 
 their victual . 
 they remove from place to place . 
 fish . 
 beast . 
 foul . 
 their bread of great mill or Maiz. 
 drink of seal oy le at their great feast . their government . 
 the woman nurse their child with the breast , and they sit continual , and be wrap about the belly with skin of fur . 
 