How after the departure of the two ship which be send back into Britain , and that the fort be begin to be build , the captain prepare two boat to go up the great river to discover the passage of the three fault or fall of the river . 
 the say captain have dispatch two ship to return to carry news , accord as he have in charge from the king , and that the fort be begin to be build , for preservation of their victual and other thing , determine with the viscount of Beaupre , and other gentleman , master , and pilot choose for counsel , to make a voyage with two boat furnish with man and victual to go as far as Hochelaga , of purpose to view and understand the fashion of the fault of water , which be to be pass to go to Saguenay , that he may be the ready in the spring to pass far , and in the winter time to make all thing needful in a readiness for their business . the foresay boat be make ready , the captain and Martine de Painpont , with other gentleman and the remnant of the mariner depart from the say place of Charlesburg royal the seven day of September in the year aforesaid 1540 and the viscount of Beaupre stay behind for the guard and government of all thing in the fort and as they go up the river , the captain go to see the lord of hochelay , which dwell between Canada and Hochelaga : which in the former voyage have give unto the say captain a little girl , and have oftentimes inform he of the treason which Taignoagny and Domagaya ( who the captain in his former voyage have carry into France ) will have wrought against he . in regard of which his courtesy the say captain will not pass by without visit of he , and to let he understand that the captain think himself behold unto he , he give unto he two young boy , 269 
 the viscount of Beaupre and the rest of their council . 
 the rich country of Saguenay situate beyond the fault which be in 44. deg . they depart from Charlesburg royal the 7. of Septem . 
 the town oftutonaguy . 
 bid ground and a great current . 
 a town of friendly people . 
 another village of good people which dwell over against the second salt . 
 and leave they with he to learn their language , and bestow upon he a cloak of Paris read , which cloak be set with yellow and white button of tin , and small bell . and withal he give he two basin of Laton , and certain hachet and knife : whereat the say lord seem high to rejoice , and thank the captain . this do , the captain and his company depart from that place : and we sail with so prosperous a wind , that we arrive the eleven day of the month at the first salt of water , which be two league distant from the town of tutonaguy . and after we be arrive there , we determine to go and pass as far up as it be possible with one of the boat , and that the other shall stay there till it return : and we double man she to row up against the course or stream of the say salt . and after we have pass some part of the way from our other boat , we find bid ground and great rock , and so great a current , that we can not possible pass any further with our boat . and the captain resolve to go by land to see the nature and fashion of the salt . and after that we be come on shore , we find hard by the water side a way and beat path go towards the say fault , by which we take our way . and on the say way , and soon after we find a habitation of people which make we great cheer , and entertain we very friendly . and after that he have signify unto they , that we be go towards the fault , and that we desire to go to Saguenay , four young man go along with we to show we the way , and they bring we so far that we come to another village or habitation of good people , which dwell over against the second salt , which come and bring we of their victual , as pottage and fish , and offer we of the same . after that the captain have inquire of they as well by sign as word , how many more fault we have to pass to go to Saguenay , and what distance and way it be thither , this people show we and give we to understand , that we be at the 
 270 
 1540 second salt , and that there be but one more to pass , they be at that the river be not navigable to go to Saguenay , and that the say salt be but a three part far than ' r-wgr vtz have travail , show we then same with certain little navigable to stick , which they lay upon the ground in a certain pass to sague-distance , and afterward lay other small branch be - na9 ' between both , represent the fault . and by the say mark , if their saying be true , it can be but six league by land to pass the say fault . 
 here after follow the figure of the three fault . 
 after that we have be advertise by the say people , of the thing abovemention , both because the day be far spend , and we have neither drink nor eat the same day , we conclude to return unto our boat , and we come thither , where we find great store of people to the number of 400. person or thereabouts , which 400 person seem to give we very good entertainment and to rejoice of our come : and therefore our captain give ‘ each of they certain small trifle , as comb , brooch of tin and copper , and other small toy , and unto the chief man every one his little hatchet and hook , tike °f whereat they make certain cry and ceremony of joy . new ^ibim . but a man must not trust they for all their fair ceremony and sign of joy , for if they have think they have be too strong for we , then will they have do their best to have kill we , as we understand afterward . the savage this be do , we return with our boat , and pass by the dwell of the lord of hochelay , with who the ’ captain have leave the two youth as he come up the river , think to have find he : but he can find no body save one of his son , who tell the captain that he be go to Maisouna , as our boy also tell we , say , that it be two day since he depart . but the §avages in truth he be go to Canada to conclude with Agona , conspire towhat they shall do against we . and when we be gether against arrive at our fort , we understand by our people , that the trench . 
 271 
 a very great number of savage assemble together . 
 the fault be in 44. deg . a penny easy to pass . 
 but 5. league journey to pass the 3 fault . 
 the savage of the country come not any more about our fort as they be accustom , to bring we fish , and that they be in a wonderful doubt and fear of we . wherefore our captain , have be advertise by some of our man which have be at Stadacona to visit they , that there be a wonderful number of the country people assemble together , cause all thing in our fortress to be set in good order : etc 
 the rest be want . 
 