a brief and true report of the new find land of Virginia : of the commodity there find , and to be raise , aswell merchantable as other : Written by Thomas Heriot , servant to sir Walter Ralegh , a member of the colony , and there employ in discover a full twelvemonth . 
 Ralph lane one of her majesty esquire , and governor of the colony in Virginia , above mention , for the time there resident , to the gentle reader wish all happiness in the lord . 
 lbeit ( gentle reader ) the credit of report in this treatise contain 
 the 
 can 
 little be further by the testimony of one as my self , through affection judge partiali , though without desert : nevertheless , forsomuch as i have be request by some my particular friend , who 
 conceive more right of i , to deliver free my knowledge of the same , not only for the satisfy of they , but also for the true information of any other whosoever , that come not with a prejudicate mind to the read thereof : thus much upon my credit i be to affirm , that thing universal be so true set down 348 
 in this treatise by the author thereof , a actor in the colony , and a man no less for his honesty then learn commendable , as that i dare bold avouch , it may very well pass with the credit of truth even among the most true relation of this age . which as for my own part i be ready any way with my word to acknowledge , so also ( of the certainty thereof assure by my own experience ) with this my public assertion i do affirm the same . farewell in the lord . 
 to the adventurer , favourer , and well-willer of the enterprise for the inhabit and plant in Virginia . 
 ince the first undertake by sir Walter Ralegh to deal in the action of discover of that country which be now call and know by the name of Virginia , many voyage have be thither make at sundry time to his great charge ; as first in the year 1584 , and 
 afterward in the year 1585 , 1586 , and now of late this last year 1587 : there have be diverse and variable report , with some slanderous and shameful speech bruit abroad by many that return from thence : especial of that discovery which be make by the colony transport by sir Richard Grinvile in the year 1585 , be of all other the most principali , and as yet of most effect , the time of their abode in the country be a whole year , when as in the other voyage before they stay but six week , and the other after be only for supply and transportation , nothing more be discover then have be before . which report have not do a little wrong to many that otherwise will have also favour and adventure in the action , to the honour and benefit of our nation , beside the particular profit and credit which will redound to themselves the dealer therein , as i hope by the sequel of 349 
 event , to the shame of those that have avouch the contrary , shall be manifest , if you the adventurer , favourer and well-willer do but either increase in number , or in opinion continue , or have be doubtful , renew your good like and furtherance to deal therein accord to the worthiness thereof already find , and as you shall understand hereafter to be requisite . touch which worthiness through cause of the diversity of relation and report , many of your opinion can not be firm , nor the mind of some that be well dispose be settle in any certainty . 
 i have therefore think it good , be one that have be in the discovery , and in deal with the natural inhabitant special employ : and have therefore see and know more than the ordinary , to impart so much unto you of the fruit of our labour , as that you may know how injurious the enterprise be slander , and that in public manner at this present , chief for two respect . 
 first , that some of you which be yet ignorant or doubtful of the state thereof , may see that there be sufficient cause why the chief enterpriser with the favour of her majesty , notwithstanding such report , have not only since continue the action by send into the country again , and replant this last year a new colony , but be also ready , accord as the time and mean will affbord , to follow and prosecute the same . 
 second , that you see and know the continuance of the action , by the view hereof you may general know and learn what the country be , and thereupon consider how your deal therein , if it proceed , may return you profit and gain , be it either by inhabit and plant , or otherwise in further thereof . 
 and least that the substance of my relation shall be doubtful unto you , as of other by reason of their diversity , i will first open the cause in a few word , wherefore they be so different , refer my self to 35° 
 your favourable construction , and to be adjudge of , as by good consideration you shall find cause . 
 of our company that return , some for their misdemeanour and ill deal in the country have be there worthy punish , who by reason of their bad nature , have malicious not only speak ill of their governor , but for their sake slander the country it self . the like also have those do which be of their consort . 
 some be ignorant of the state thereof , notwithstanding since their return among their friend and acquaintance , and also other , especial if they be in company where they may not be gainsay , will seem to know so much as no man more , and make no man so great traveller as themselves . they stand so much , as it may seem , upon their credit and reputation , that have be a twelvemonth in the country , it will have be a great disgrace unto they , as they think , if they can not have say much , whether it be true or false . of which some have speak of more than ever they see , or otherwise know to be there . other sum have not be ashamed to make absolute denial of that , which although not by they , yet by other be most certain and there plentiful know , and other some make difficulty of those thing they have no skill of . 
 the cause of their ignorance be , in that they be of that many that be never out of the island where we be seat , or not far , or at the least wise in few place else , during the time of our abode in the country : or of that many , that after gold and silver be not so soon find , as it be by they look for , have little or no care of any other thing but to pamper their belly : or of that many which have little understanding , less discretion , and more tongue then be needful or requisite . 
 some also be off a nice bring up , only in city or town , or such as never ( as i may say ) have see 351 
 A.D. 
 I587 - 
 the world before . because there be not to be find any english city , nor such fair house , nor at their own wish any of their old accustom dainty food , nor any soft bed of down or feather , the country be to they miserable , and their report thereof accord . 
 because my purpose be but in brief to open the cause of the variety of such speech , the particularity of they , and of many envious , malicious , and slanderous report and device else , by our own countryman beside , as trifle that be not worthy of wise man to be think upon , i mean not to trouble you withal , but will pass to the commodity , the substance of that which i have to make relation of unto you . 
 the treatise whereof , for your more ready view and easy understanding , i will divide into three speciali part . in the first i will make declaration of such commodity there already find or to be raise , which will not only serve the ordinary turn of you which be and shall be the planter and inhabitant , but such a overplus sufficient to be yield , or by man of skill to be provide , as by way of traffic and exchange with our own nation of England , will enrich your self the provider : those that shall deal with you , the enterpriser in general , and great profit our own countryman , to supply they with most thing which heretofore they have be fain to provide either of stranger or of our enemy , which commodity , for distinction sake , i call merchantable . 
 in the second i will set down all the commodity which we know the country by our experience do yield of it self for victuali and sustenance of man life , such as be usual feed upon by the inhabitant of the country , as also by we during the time we be there . 
 in the last part i will make mention general of such other commodity beside , as i be able to remember , and as i shall think behooveful for those that shall 
 352 
 1586. inhabit , and plant there , to know of , which special concern building , as also some other necessary use : with a brief description of the nature and manner of the people of the country . 
 the first part of merchantable commodity . 
 like of grass , or grass silk . there be a kind of grass in the country , upon the blade whereof there grow very good silk in form of a thin glitter skin to be strip off . it grow two foot and a half high or better : the blade be about two foot in length , and 
 half a inch broad . the like grow in Persia , which be in the self same climate as Virginia , of which very many of the silk work that come from thence into Europe be make . hereof if it be plant and order as in Persia , it can in reason be otherwise , but that there will rise in short time great profit to the dealer therein , see there be so great use and vent thereof aswell in our country as elsewhere . and by the mean of sow and plant it in good ground , it will be far great , better , and more plentiful than it be . although notwithstanding there be great store thereof in many place of the country grow natural and wild , which also by proof here in England , in make a piece of silk grogran , we find to be excellent good . 
 worm silk . in many of our journey we find silkworm fair and great , as big as our ordinary walnut . although it have not be our hap to have find such plenty , as elsewhere to be in the country we have hear of , yet see that the country do natural breed and nourish they , there be no doubt but if art be add in plant of mulberry tree , and other , fit . for they in commodious place , for their feed and nourish , and some of they careful gather and husband in that sort , as by man of skill they 353 z 
 be know to be necessary : there will rise as great profit in time to the Virginians , as thereof do now to the persian , Turks , Italians and Spaniard . 
 flax and hemp . the truth be , that of hemp and flax there be no great store in any one place together , by reason it be not plant but as the soil do yield of it self : and howsoever the leaf and stem or stalk do differ from we , the stuff by judgement of man of skill be altogether as good as we : and if not , as further proof shall find otherwise , we have that experience of the soil , as that there can be show any reason to the contrary , but that it will grow there excellent well , and by plant will be yield plentiful , see there be so much ground whereof some may well be apply to such purpose . what benefit hereof may grow in cordage and linen who can easy understand ? 
 alum . there be a vein of earth along the sea coast for the space of forty or fifty mile , whereof by the judgement of some that have make trial here in England , be make good alum , of that kind which be call Roch alum . the richness of such a commodity be so well know , that i need not to say any thing thereof . the same earth do also yield white coprasse , nitrum , and Alumen plumeum , but nothing so plentiful as the common alum , which be also of price , and profitable . 
 wapeih . a kind of earth so call by the natural inhabitant , very like to terra sigillata , and have be refine , it have be find by some of our physician and Chyrurgians , to be of the same kind of virtue , and more effectual . the inhabitant use it very much for the cure of sore and wound : there be in diverse place great plentv . and in some place of a blue sort . 
 pitch , tar , resin and turpentine . there be those kind of tree which yield they abundant and great store . in the very same island where we be seat , be fifteen mile of length , and five or six 35+ 
 mile in breadth , there be few tree else but of the same kind , the whole island be full . 
 sassafras , call by the inhabitant winauk , a kind of wood of most pleasant and sweet smell , and of most rare virtue in physic for the cure of many disease . it be find by experience to be far better and of more use than the wood which be call Guaiacum , or lignum vitas . for the description , the manner of use , and the manifold virtue thereof , i refer you to the book of monardes , translate and entitle in english , the joy full news from the west Indies . 
 cedar . a very sweet wood , and fine timber , whereof if nest of chest be there make , or timber thereof fit for sweet and fine bedsted , table , desk , lute , virginal , and many thing else , ( of which there have be proof make already ) to make up fraught with other principali commodity , will yield profit . 
 wine . there be two kind of grape that the soil do yield natural , the one be small and sour , of the ordinary bigness as we in England , the other far great and of himself luscious sweet . when they be plant and husband as they ought , a principali commodity of wine by they may be raise . 
 oil . there be two sort of walnut , both hold oil ; but the one far more plentiful than the other . when there be mill and other device for the purpose , a commodity of they may be raise , because there be infinite store . there be also three several kind of berry in the form of oke-akorne , which also by the experience and use of the inhabitant , we find to yield very good and sweet oil . Furthermore , the bear of the country be common very fat , and in some place there be many . their fatness , because it be so liquid , may well be term oil , and have many speciali use . 
 fur . all along the sea coast there be great store of otter , which be take by wear and other engine make for the purpose , will yield good profit . we hope 
 355 
 A.D. 
 1586. 
 also of marten fur , and make no doubt by the relation of the people , but that in some place of the country there be store , although there be but two skin that come to our hand . Luzernes also we have understanding of , although for the time we see none . 
 deer skin dress after the manner of chamoes , or undress , be to be have of the natural inhabitant thousand yearly by way of traffic for trifle , and no more waste or spoil of deer then be and have be ordinary in time before . 
 civet-cat . in our travel there be find one to have be kill by a savage or inhabitant , and in another place the smell where one or more have late be before , whereby we gather , beside then by the relation of the people , that there be some in the country : good profit will rise by they . 
 iron . in two place of the country special , one about fourscore , and the other six score mile from the fort or place where we dwell , we find near the water side the ground to be rocky , which by the trial of a minerali man be find to hold iron rich . it be find in many place of the country else : i know nothing to the contrary , but that it may be allow for a good merchantable commodity , consider there the small charge for the labour and feed of man , the infinite store of wood , the want of wood and deerenesse thereof in England , and the necessity of ballast of ship . 
 copper . a hundred and fifty mile into the main in two town we find with the inhabitant diverse small plate of copper , that have be make as we understand by the inhabitant that dwell further into the country , where as they say be mountain and river that yield also white grain of mettle , which be to be deem silver . for confirmation whereof , at the time of our first arrival in the country , i see , with some other with i , two small piece of silver gross beat , about the weight of a testron , hang in the ear of a 356 
 wiroan or chief lord that dwell about fourscore mile from we : of who through inquiry , by the number of day and the way , i learn that it have come to his hand from the same place or near , where i after understand the copper be make , and the white grain of metal find . the aforesaid copper we also find by trial to hold silver . 
 pearl . sometime in feed on muscle we find some pearl : but it be our hap to meet with rag , or of a pied colour : not have yet discover those place where we hear of better and more plenty . one of our company , a man of skill in such matter , have gather together from among the savage people about five thousand : of which number he choose so many as . thousand make a fair chain , which for their likeness and fea^s uniformity in roundness , orientness , and pidenesse of * ‘ 
 many excellent colour , with equality in greatness , be very fair and rare : and have therefore be present to her majesty , have we not by casualty , and through extremity of a storm lose they , with many thing else in come away from the country . 
 sweet gum of diverse kind , and many other apothecary drug , of which we will make speciali mention , when we shall receive it from such man of skill in that kind , that in take reasonable pain shall discover they more particular than we have do , and then now i can make relation of , for want of the example i have provide and gather , and be now lose , with other thing by casualty before mention . 
 die of diverse kind : there be Shoemake well know , and use in England for black : the seed of a herb call Wasebur , little small root call chap-pacor , and the bark of the tree call by the inhabitant tangomockonomindge : which die be for diverse sort of red : their goodness for our english clothes remain yet to be prove . the inhabitant use they only for the die of hair , and colour of their face , and mantle make of dear skin : and also for the die 
 357 
 of rush to make artificiali work withal in their mat and basket : have no other thing beside that they account of , apt to use they for . if they will not prove merchantable , there be no doubt but the planter there shall find apt use for they , as also for other colour which we know to be there . 
 woad : a thing of so great vent and use among English dyer , which can not be yield sufficient in our own country for spare of ground , may be plant in Virginia , there be grind enough . the growth thereof need not to be doubt , when as in the island of the azore it grow plentiful , which be in the same climate . so likewise of mad . 
 we carry thither sugar-cane to plant , which be not so well preserve as be requisite , and beside the time of the year be pass for their set when we arrive , we can not make that proof of they as we desire . notwithstanding , see that they grow in the same climate , in the south part of Spain , and in Barbary , our hope in reason may yet continue . so likewise for orange and Limmons . there may be plant also Quinses . whereby may grow in reasonable time , if the action be diligent prosecute , no small commodity in sugar , sucket , and Marmelades . 
 many other commodity by plant may there also be raise , which i leave to your discreet and gentle consideration : and many also may be there , which yet we have not discover . two more commodity of great value , one of certainty , and the other in hope , not to be plant , but there to be raise and in short time to be provide , and prepare , i may have specify . so likewise of those commodity already set down i may have say more : as of the particular place where they be find , and best to be plant and prepare : by what mean , and in what reasonable space of time they may be raise to profit , and in what proportion : but because other than well-willer may be there withal acquaint , not to the good of the action , i have witting omit 358 
 they : know that to those that be well dispose , i have utter , accord to my promise and purpose , for this part sufficient . 
 the second part of such commodity as Virginia be know to yield for victuali and sustenance of man life , usual feed upon by the natural inhabitant ; as also by we , during the time of our abode : and first of such as be sow and husband . 
 agatowr , a kind of grain so call by the inhabitant : the same in the west Indies be call Mayz : English man call it guiny-wheat or turkey-wheat , accord to the name of the country from whence the like have be bring . the grain be about the bigness of our 
 ordinary english pease , and not much different in form and shape : but of diverse colour : some white , some red , some yellow , and some blue . all of they yield a very white and sweet flower : be use accord to his kind , it make a very good bread . we make of the same in the country some malt , whereof be brew as good ale as be to be desire . so likewise by the help of hop , thereof may be make as good beer . it be a grain of marvellous great increase : of a thousand , fifteen hundred , and some two thousand fold . there be three sort , of which two be ripe in eleven and twelve week at the most , sometime in ten , after the time they be set , and be then of height in stalk about six or seven foot . the other sort be ripe in fourteen , and be about ten foot high , of the stalk some bear four head , some three , some one , and some two : every head contain five , six , or seven hundred grain , within a few more or less . of these grain , beside bread , the inhabitant make victuali , either by parch they , or seethe they whole until they 359 
 be break : or boil the flower with water into a 
 pap - .... 
 Okindgier , call by we bean , because in greatness and partly in shape they be like to the bean in England , save that they be flatter , of more diverse colour , and some pied . the leaf also of the stem be much different . in taste they be altogether as good as our english pease . 
 wickonzowr , call by we pease , in respect of the bean , for distinction sake , because they be much less , although in form they little differ : but in goodness of taste much like , and be far better than our english pease . both the bean and pease be ripe in ten week after they be set . they make they victuali either by boil they all to piece into a broth , or boil they whole until they be soft , and begin to break , as be use in England , either by themselves , or mixed together : sometime they mingle of the wheat with they : sometime also , be whole sodden , they bruise or pun they in a mortar , and thereof make loaf or lump of doughish bread , which they use to eat for variety . 
 macocquer , accord to their several form , call by we pompion , melon , and gourd , because they be of the like form as those kind in England . in Virginia such of several form be of one taste , and very good , and do also spring from one seed . there be of two sort : one be ripe in the space of a month , and the other in two month . 
 there be a herb which in dutch be call Melden . some of those that i describe it unto take it to be a kind of orage : it grow about four or five foot high : of the seed thereof they make a thick broth , and pottage of a very good taste : of the stalk by burn into ash they make a kind of salt earth , wherewithal ! many use sometime to season their broth : other salt they know not . we our self use the leaf also for potherb . 
 360 
 there be also another great herb , in form of a marigold , about six foot in height , the head with the flower be a span in breadth . some take it to be Planta solis : of the seed hereof they make both a kind of bread and broth . 
 all the aforesaid commodity for victuali be set or sow , sometime in ground apart and several by themselves , but for the most part together in one ground mixed : the manner thereof , with the dress and prepare of the ground , because i will note unto you the fertility of the soil , i think good brief to describe . 
 the ground they never fatten with muck , dung , or any other thing , neither plow nor dig it as we in England , but only prepare it in sort as follow . a few day before they sow or set , the man with wooden instrument make almost in form of mattock or hoe with long handle : the woman with short pecker or parer , because they use they sit , of a foot long , and about five inch in breadth , do only break the upper part of the ground to raise up the weed , grass , and old stub of corn stalk with their root . the which after a day or two day dry in the sun , be scrap up into many small heap , to save they labour for carry they away , they burn into ash . and whereas some may think that they use the ash for to better the ground , i say that then they will either disperse the ash abroad , which we observe they do not , except the heap be too great , or else will take speciali care to set their corn where the ash lie , which also we find they be careless of . and this be all the husband of their ground that they use . 
 then their set or sow be after this manner . first for their corn , begin in one corner of the plot , with a pecker they make a hole , wherein they put four grain , with care that they touch not one another ( about a inch asunder ) and cover they with the mould 361 
 again : and so throughout the whole plot make such hole , and use they after such manner , but with this regard , that they be make in rank , every rank differ from other half a fathom or a yard , and the hole also in every rank as much . by this mean there be a yard spare ground between every hole : where accord to discretion here and there , they set as many bean and Peaze ; in diverse place also among the seed of macocquer , Melden , and Planta solis . 
 the ground be thus set accord to the rate by we experiment , a english acre contain forty perch in length , and four in breadth , do there yield in crop or ofcome of corn , bean and Peaze , at the least two hundred London bushel , beside the macocquer , Melden , and Planta solis ; when as in England forty bushel of our wheat yield out of such a acre be think to be much . 
 i think also good to note this unto you , that you which shall inhabit , and plant there , may know how special that country corn be there to be prefer before we : beside , the manifold way in apply it to victual , the increase be so much , that small labour and pain be needful in respect of that which must be use for we . for this i can assure you that accord to the rate we have make proof of , one man may prepare and husband so much ground ( have once bear corn before ) with less than four and twenty hour labour , as shall yield he victual in a large proportion for a twelvemonth , if he have nothing else but that which the same ground will yield , and of that kind only which i have before speak of : the say ground be also but of five and twenty yard square . and if need require , but that there be ground enough , there may be raise out of one and the selfsame ground two harvest or ofcome : for they sow or set , and may at any time when they think good , from the midst of march until the end of June : so that they also set when they have eat of their first crop . in some 362 
 1586. place of the country notwithstanding they have two harvest , as we have hear , out of one and the same ground . 
 for english corn nevertheless , whether to use or not to use it , you that inhabit may do as you shall have further cause to think best . of the growth you need not to doubt : for barley , oat , and pease , we have see proof of , not be purposely sow , but fall casual in the worst sort of ground , and yet to be as fair as any we have ever see here in England . but of wheat , because it be musty , and have take salt water , we can make no trial : and of rye we have none . thus much have i digress , and i hope not unnecessary : now will i return again to my course , and entreat of that which yet remain , appertain to this chapter . 
 there be a herb which be sow apart by it self , and be call by the inhabitant Uppowoc : in the west Indies it have diverse name , accord to the several place and country where it grow and be use : the Spaniard general call it tobacco . the leaf thereof tobacco . be dry and bring into powder , they use to take the fume or smoke thereof , by suck it through pipe make of clay , into their stomach and head ; from whence it purge superfluous flame and other gross humour , and open all the pore and passage of the body : by which mean the use thereof not only preserve the body from obstruction , but also ( if any be , so that they have not be of too long continuance ) in short time break they : whereby their body be notable preserve in health , and know not many grievous disease , wherewithal ! we in England be often time afflict . 
 this Uppowoc be of so precious estimation among they , that they think their god be marvellous delight therewith : whereupon sometime they make hallow fire , and cast some of the powder therein for a sacrifice : be in a storm upon the water , to pacific their god , they cast some up into the air and into the 363 
 water : so a wear for fish be new set up , they cast some therein and into the air : also after a escape of danger , they cast some into the air likewise : but all do with strange gesture , stamp , sometime dance , clap of hand , hold up of hand , and stare up into the heaven , utter therewithal ! , and chatter strange word and noise . 
 we our self , during the time we be there , use to suck it after their manner , as also since our return , and have find many rare and wonder experiment of the virtue thereof : of which the relation will require a volume by it self : the use of it by so many of late man and woman of great call , as else , and some learned physician also , be sufficient witness . 
 and these be all the commodity for sustenance of life , that i know and can remember , they use to husband : all else that follow , be find grow natural or wild . 
 of root . 
 OPenauk be a kind of root of round form , some of the bigness of walnut , some far great , which be find in moist and marish ground grow many together one by another in rope , as though they be fasten with a string . be boil or sodden , mmardes they be very good meat . monardes call these root , part z . lib . 1. gea ( js or pater nostri of Santa Helena . 
 cap - 4 - okeepenauk be also of round shape , find in dry ground : some be of the bigness of a man head . they be to be eat as they be take out of the ground : for by reason of their dryness they will neither roast nor seethe . their taste be not so good as of the former root : notwithstanding for want of bread , and sometime for variety the inhabitant use to eat they with fish or flesh , and in my judgement they do as well as the household bread make of rye here in England . 
 Kaishucpenauk , a white kind of root about the bigness of hen egg , and near of that form : their taste be not so good to our seem as of the other , and 364 
 1586. therefore their place and manner of grow not so much care for by we : the inhabitant notwithstanding use to boil and eat many . 
 Tsinaw , a kind of root much like unto that which in England be call the china root bring from the east Indies . and we know not any thing to the contrary but that it may be of the same kind . Theise root grow many together in great cluster , and do bring forth a brier stalk , but the leaf in shape far unlike : which be support by the tree it grow near unto , will reach or climb to the top of the high . from these root while they be new or fresh , be chop into small piece , and stamp , be strain with water a juice that make bread , and also be boil , a very good spoonmeat in manner of a jelly , and be much better in taste , if it be temper with oil . This Tsinaw be not of that sort , which by some be cause to be bring into England for the china root ; for it be discover since , and be in use as be aforesaid : but that which be bring hither be not yet know , neither by we nor by the inhabitant to serve for any use or purpose , although the root in shape be very like . 
 coscushaw some of our company take to be that kind of root which the Spaniard in the west Indies call cassavy , whereupon also many call it by that name : it grow in very muddy pool , and moist ground . be dress accord to the country manner , it make a good bread , and also a good spoonmeat , and be use very much by the inhabitant . the juice of this root be the juice of poison , and therefore heed must be take before any thing cofushaw u be mad therewithal ! : either the root must be first slice and dry in the sun , or by the fire , and then be pun into flower , will make good bread : or else while they be green they be to be pare , cut in piece , and stamp : loaf of the same to be lay near or over the fire until it be sour ; and then be well pun again , bread or spoonmeat very good in taste and wholesome may be make thereof . 
 365 
 Habascon be a root of hot taste , almost of the form and bigness of a parsnip : off it self it be no victuali , but only a help , be boil together with other meat . 
 there be also leek , differ little from we in England , that grow in many place of the country ; of which , when we come in place where they be , we gather and eat many , but the natural inhabitant never . 
 of fruit . 
 chestnut there be in diverse place great store : some they use to eat raw , some they stamp and boil to make spoonmeat , and with some be sodden , they make such a manner of dough bread as they use of their bean before mention . 
 walnut . there be two kind of walnut , and of they infinite store : in many place , where be very great wood for many mile together , the three part of tree be walnut tree . the one kind be of the same taste and form , or little differ from we of England , but that they be hard and thick shell : the other be great , and have a very ragged and hard shell : but the kernel great , very oily and sweet . beside their eat of they after our ordinary manner , they break they with stone , and pun they in mortar with water , to make a milk which they use to put into some sort of their spoonemeat : also among their sod wheat , pease , bean and pompion , which make they have a far more pleasant taste . 
 medlar , a kind of very good fruit : so call by we chief for these respect : first in that they be not good until they be rot , then in that they open at the head as our medlar , and be about the same bigness : otherwise in taste and colour they be far different ; for they be as red as cherry , and very sweet : but whereas the cherry be sharp sweet , they be luscious sweet . 
 Mutaquesunnauk , a kind of pleasant fruit almost of the shape and bigness of english pear , but that they be 366 
 of a perfect red colour aswell within as without . they there be Hi. grow on a plant who leaf be very thick , and full of ^dfofTmua prickle as sharp as needle . some that have be in 
 the Indies , where they have see that kind of red die of nofruithbring-great price , which be call cochinile , to grow , do de - eth forth . the scribe his plant right like unto this of Metaquesunnauk ; Gothinillo . but whether it be the true cochinile , or a bastard or wild kind , it can yet be certify , see that also , as i hear , cochinile be not of the fruit , but find on the leaf of the plant : which leave for such matter we have not so special observe . 
 grape there be of two sort , which i mention in the merchantable commodity . 
 strawberry there be as good and as great as those which we have in our english garden . 
 mulberry , applecrab , hurt or hurtlebery , such as 
 we have in England . 
 sacquenummene , a kind of berry almost like unto caper , but somewhat great , which grow together in cluster upon a plant or herb that be find in shallow water : be boil eight or nine hour accord to their kind , be very good meat and wholesome ; otherwise if they be eat they will make a man for the time frantic or extreme sick . 
 there be a kind of reed which bear a seed almost like unto our rye or wheat ; and be boil be good meat . 
 in our travel in some place we find wild pease like unto we in England , but that they be less , which be also good meat . 
 of a kind of fruit or berry in form of acorn . 
 there be a kind of berry or acorn , of which there be five sort that grow on several kind of tree : the one be call sagatemener , the second osamener , the three pummuckoner . Theise kind of acorn they use to dry upon hurdle make of reed , with fire underneath , almost after the manner as we dry malt in England . when they 367 
 be to be use , they first water they until they be soft , and then be sodden , they make a good victuali , either to eat so simple , or else be also pun to make loaf or lump of bread . Theise be also the three kind , of which i say before the inhabitant use to make sweet oil . 
 another sort be call sapummener , which be boil or parch , do eat and taste like unto chestnut . they sometime also make bread of this sort . 
 the five sort be call Mangummenauk , and be the acorn of their kind of oak , the which be dry after the manner of the first sort , and afterward water , they boil they , and their servant , or sometime the chief themselves , either for variety or for want of bread , do eat they with their fish or flesh . 
 of beast . 
 deer , in some place there be great store : near unto the sea coast they be of the ordinary bigness of we in England , and some less : but further up into the country , where there be better food , they be great : they differ from we only in this , their tail be long , and the snag of their home look backward . 
 cony . those that we have see , and all that we can hear off be of a grey colour like unto hare : in some place there be such plenty that all the people of some town make they mantle of the fur or fly of the skin of those which they usual take . 
 saquenuckot and Maquowoc , two kind of small beast great than cony , which be very good meat . we never take any of they our self but sometime eat of such as the inhabitant have take and bring unto we . 
 squirrel , which be of a grey colour , we have take and eat . 
 bear , which be off black colour . the bear of this country be good meat . the inhabitant in time of winter do use to take and eat many : so also sometime do we . they be take common in this sort : in 368 
 some island or place where they be , be hunt for , assoon as they have espial of a man , they present run away , and then be chase , they climb and get up the next tree they can : from whence with arrow they be shoot down stark dead , or with those wound that they may after easy be kill . we sometime shoot they down with our caliver . 
 i have the name of eight and twenty several sort of beast , which i have hear of to be here and there disperse in the country , especial in the main : of which there be only twelve kind that we have yet discover ; and of those that be good meat we know only they before mention . the inhabitant sometime kill the lion , and eat he : and we sometime as they come to our hand of their wolves or wolvish dog , which i have not set down for good meat , lest that some will understand my judgement therein to be more simple than need , although i can allege the difference in taste of those kind from we , which by some of our company have be experiment in both . 
 of foul . 
 TUrkie cock and turquoise hen , stockdove , partridge , crane , Hernes , and in winter great store of swan and goose . of all sort of foul i have the name in the country language of fourscore and six , of which number , beside those that be name , we have take , eat , and have the picture as they be there draw , with the name of the inhabitant , of several strange sort of water foul eight , and seventeen kind more of land foul , although we have see and eat of many more , which for want of leisure there for the purpose , can not be picture : and after we be better furnish and store upon further discovery with their strange beast , fish , tree , plant , and herb , they shall|be also publish . 
 there be also parrot , falcon , and Marlin hauk , vin 369 2 a 
 in the gulf of California they use the like fish . 
 which although with we they be not use for meat , yet for other cause i think good to mention . 
 of fish . 
 for four month of the year , February , march , April and may , there be plenty of sturgeon . 
 and also in the same month of herring , some of the ordinary bigness of we in England , but the most part far great , of eighteen , twenty inch , and some two foot in length and better : both these kind of fish in those month be most plentiful ! , and in best season , which we find to be most delicate and pleasant meat . 
 there be also trout , porpoise , ray , oldwife , mullet , plaice , and very many other sort of excellent good fish , which we have take and eat , who name i know not but in the country language : we have the picture of twelve sort more , as they be draw in the country , with their name . 
 the inhabitant use to take they two manner of way ; the one be by a kind of wear make of reed , which in that country be very strong : the other way , which be more strange , be with pole make sharp at one end , by shoot they into the fish after the manner as irish man cast dart , either as they be row in their boat , or else as they be wade in the shallows for the purpose . 
 there be also in many place plenty of these kind which follow : 
 sea-crab , such as we have in England . 
 oyster , some very great , and some small , some round , and some of a long shape : they be find both in salt water and brackish , and those that we have out of salt water be far better than the other , as in our country . 
 also muscle , scalop , periwinkle , and crevice . 
 Seekanauk , a kind of crusty shellfish , which be good meat , about a foot in breadth , have a crusty tail many leg like a crab , and her eye in her back . they 37° 
 1586. be find in shallows of water , and sometime on the shore . 
 there be many tortoise both of land and sea kind , their back and belly be shell very thick ; their head , foot , and tail , which be in appearance , seem ugly , as though they be member of a serpent or venomous beast ; but notwithstanding they be very good meat , as also their egg . some have be find of a yard in breadth and better . 
 and thus have i make relation of all sort of victuali that we feed upon for the time we be in Virginia , as also the inhabitant themselves , as far forth as i know and can remember , or that be special worthy to be remember . 
 the three and last part of such other thing as be behooveful for those which shall plant and inhabit to know of , with a description of the nature and manner of the people of the country . 
 of commodity for building and other necessary use . 
 hose other thing which i be more to make rehearsal of , be such as concern building , and other mechanical necessary use , as diverse sort of tree for house and ship-timber , and other use else : also lime , stone , and brick , lest that be not mention some might have 
 be doubt of , or by some that be malicious the contrary report . 
 oak there be as fair , straight , tall , and as good timber as any can be , and also great store , and in some place very great . 
 Walnut tree , as i have say before very many , some have be see excellent fair timber of four and five 
 371 
 fathom , and above fourscore foot straight without bough . 
 fir tree fit for mast of ship , some very tall and great . 
 Rakiock , a kind of tree so call that be sweet wood , of which the inhabitant that be near unto we do common make their boat or canoas of the form of trow , only with the help of fire , hatchet of stone , and shell : we have know some so great be make in that sort of one tree , that they have carry well 20. man at once , beside much baggage : the timber be great , tall , strait , soft , light , and yet tough enough i think ( beside other use ) to be fit also for mast of ship . 
 cedar , a sweet wood good for ceiling , chest , box , bedstead , lute , virginal , and many thing else , as i have also say before . some of our company which have wander in some place where i have not be , have make certain affirmation of Cyprus , which for such and other excellent use be also a wood of price and no small estimation . 
 Maple , and also which-hazel , whereof the inhabitant use to make their bow . 
 holly , a necessary thing for the make of birdlime . 
 willow good for the make of wear and weeles to take fish after the english manner , although the inhabitant use only reed , which because they be so strong as also flexible , do serve for that turn very well and sufficient . 
 beech and Ashe , good for cask-hoop , and if need require , plow work , as also for many thing else . 
 Eime . } { sassafras tree . 
 Ascopo a kind of tree very like unto laurel , the bark be hot in taste and spicy , it be very like to that tree which monardes describe to be cassia Lignea of the west Indies . 
 there be many other strange tree who name i know not but in the virginian language , of which i be 372 
 not now able , neither be it so convenient for the present to trouble you with particular relation : see that for timber and other necessary use , i have name sufficient . and of many of the rest , but that they may be apply to good use , 1 know no cause to doubt . 
 now for stone , brick , and lime , thus it be . near unto the sea coast where we dwell , there be no kind of stone to be find ( except a few small pebble about four mile off ) but such as have be bring from further out of the main . in some of our voyage we have see diverse hard raggy stone , great pebble , and a kind of grey stone like unto marble of which the inhabitant make their hatchet to cleave wood . upon inquiry we hear that a little further up into the country be of all sort very many , although of quarry they be ignorant , neither have they use of any store whereupon they shall have occasion to seek any . for if every household have one or two to crack nut , grind shell , whet copper , and sometime other stone for hatchet , they have enough : neither use they any dig , but only for grave about three foot deep : and therefore no marveile that they know neither quarry , nor lime-stone , which both may be in place near than they wot of . 
 in the mean time until there be discovery of sufficient store in some place or other convenient , the want of you which be and shall the planter therein may be as well supply by brick : for the make whereof in diverse place of the country there be clay both excellent good , and plenty , and also by lime make of oyster shell , and of other burn , after the manner as they use in the isle of tenet and shepy , and also in diverse other place of England : which kind of lime be well know to be as good as any other . and of oyster shell there be plenty enough : for beside diverse other particular place where be abundance , there be one shallow sound along the coast , where for the space of many mile together in length , and two or three mile in breadth , the ground be 
 373 
 Jaques Cartier , voyage 2 , chapter 8. 
 nothing else , be but half a foot or a foot under water for the most part . 
 thus much can i say furthermore of stone , that about 120. mile from our fort near the water in the side of a hill , be find by a gentleman of our company , a great vein of hard rag stone , which i think good to remember unto you . 
 