the four voyage of the Frenchman into Florida , under the conduct of captain Gourgues , in the year , 1567. 
 aptaine Gourgues a gentleman bear in the country near unto Bourdeaux incite with a desire of revenge , to repair the honour of his nation , borrowed of his friend and sell part of his own good to set forth and furnish three ship of indifferent burden with 
 all thing necessary , have in they a hundred and fifty soldier , and fourscore choose mariner under captain Cazenove his lieutenant , and Francis Bourdelois master over the mariner . he set forth the 22 of August 1567. and have endure contrary wind and storm for a season , at length he arrive and go 100 
 on shore in the isle of Cuba . from thence he pass to the cape of saint Antony at the end of they he of Cuba , about two hundred league distant from Florida , where the captain disclose unto they his intention which hitherto he have conceal from they , pray and exhort they not to leave he be so near the enemy , so well furnish , and in such a cause : which they all swear unto he , and that with such courage that they will not stay the full moon to pass the channel of Bahama , but speedy discover Florida , channel of where the Spaniard salute they with two canon Bahama be-shot from their fort , suppose that they have be of n^the hie* their nation , and Gourgues salute they again to enter - ofLucayos . take they in this error , that he may surprise they at more advantage , yet sail by they , and make as though he go to some other place until he have sail out of sight of the place , so that about evening , he land 15 league from the fort , at the mouth of the the TrenchRiver Tacatacouru , which the Frenchman call Seine , because they think it to be like Seine in France . 
 afterwards perceive the shore to be cover with savage with their bow and arrow , ( beside the sign of peace and amity which he make they from his ship ) he send his trumpeter , to assure they , that they be come thither for none other end but to renew the amity and ancient league of the french with they . 
 the trumpeter do his message so well ( by reason he have be there before under Laudonniere ) that he bring back from king Satourioua , the great of all the other king , a kid and other meat to refresh we , beside the offer of his friendship and amity . afterwards they retire dance in sign of joy , to advertise all the king satouriouaes kinsman to repair thither the next day to make a league of amity with the Frenchman . whereupon in the mean space our general go about to sound the chanel of the river to bring in his ship , and the better to traffic and deal with the savage , of who the chief the next day in the morning 
 ioi 
 complaint of the savage against the Spaniard . 
 two chain of silver give to Gourgues . 
 present themselves , namely the great king Satourioua , tacatacourou , halmacanir , athore , harpaha , Helmacape , Helicopil6 , Molloua , and other his kinsman and ally , with their accustom weapon . then send they to entreat the french general to come on shore , which he cause his man to do with their sword and harquebusy , which he make they leave behind they , in token of mutual assurance , leave his man but their sword only , after that the savage complain thereof have leave and likewise send away their weapon at the request of Gourgues . this do satourioua go to meet he , cause he to sit on his right hand in a seat of wood of lentisque cover with moss make of purpose like unto his own . than two of the elder of the company pull up the bramble and other weed which be before they , and after they have make the place very clean , they all sit round about they on the ground . afterwards Gourgues be about to speak , Satourioua prevent he , declare at large unto he the incredible wrong , and continual outrage that all the savage , their wife and child have receive of the Spaniard since their come into the country and massacre of the Frenchman , with their continual desire if we will assist they thorough to revenge so shameful a treason , aswell as their own particular grief , for the firm good will they always have bear unto the Frenchman . whereupon Gourgues give they his faith , and make a league between they and he with a oath give they certain present of dagger , knife , look glass , hatchet , ring , bell , and such other thing , trifle unto we , but precious unto these king : which moreover , see his great liberality , demand each one a shirt of he to wear only on their festival day , and to be bury in at their death . which thing after that they have receive , and Satourioua have give in recompense to captain Gourgues two chain of silver grain which hang about his neck , and each of the king certain dear skin dress after their manner , they retire 
 102 
 themselves dance and very jocund , with promise to keep all thing secret , and to bring unto the say place good company of their subject all well arm to be avenge thorough on the Spaniard . in the mean space Gourgues very narrow examine Peter de Br^ Peter de Bri bear in Newhaven , which be but a young stripling escape out ot the tort into the wood while the span - yeera yard murder the rest of the french , and be afterward Satourioua . bring up with Satourioua , which at that time bestow he on our general , who advice stand he in great stead : whereupon he send to discover the fort and the estate of the enemy by certain of his man , be guide by Olotacara satouriouaes nephew which he have give he for this purpose and for assurance of estampe a gentleman of Cominges , and other which he send to descry the state of the enemy . Moreover he give he three fledge a son of his stark naked as all of they be , and his wife which he love best of all the rest , of eighteen satoi^ioua . year old , apparel with the moss of tree , which for 3 day space be in the ship , until our man return from descry the state of the enemy , and the king have furnish their preparation at their rendezvous . their march be conclude , and the savage rendezvous be appoint they beyond the river Salinacani , of our man call Somme , they all drink the river of with great solemnity their drink call Cassine , make of the juice of certain herb ( as they be wont to do , fa French when they go to any place of danger , ) which have such force , that it take from they hunger and thirst for 24 hour , and Gourgues be fain to make as though he drink thereof for company . afterwards they lift up their hand and swear all that they will never forsake he . Olotocara follow he with pike in hand . 
 be all meet at the river of Sarauahi , not without great the river of trouble , by reason of the rain and place full of water Sarauahi . which they must needs pass , which hinder their passage , they be distress with famine find nothing by the way to eat , their bark of provision be not arrive , 
 103 
 the estate of the Spaniard in Florida . 
 the river of saracary , or Sarauahi . 
 which be to come unto he from the ship , the oversight and charge whereof he have leave unto Burdelois with the rest of the mariner . now he have learn that the Spaniard be four hundred strong , divide into three fort build and flank , and well fortify upon the river of May , the great fort especial begin by the french , and afterward repair by they : upon the most dangerous and principali land place whereof , two league low and near toward the river mouth , they have make two small fort , which be defend , the river pass between they , with six score soldier , good store of artillery and other munition , which they have in the same . from saracary unto these small fort be two league space , which he find very painful , because of the bad way and continual rain . after - 
 ward he depart from the river Catacouru with 10 , shot , to view the first fort , and to assault it the next day in the morning by the break of day , which he can not do , because of the foul weather , and darkness of the night . king helicopile see he out of quiet in that he have fail of his purpose there , assure he to guide he a more easy way , though it be far about . insomuch as lead he through the wood , he bring he within sight of the fort , where he discern one quarter which be but begin to be entrench . thus after he have sound the small river that fall down thereby , he stay until ten of the clock in the morning for a ebb water , that his man may pass over there , unto a place where he have see a little grove between the river and the fort ( that he may not be see to pass and set his soldier in array ) cause they to fasten their flask to their morion , and to hold up their sword and kaliver in their hand , for fear least the water , which reach up to their girdle , shall not wet they : where they find such abundance of great oyster , and shell which be so sharp , that many have their leg cut with they , and many other lose their shoe . notwithstanding assoon as 
 104 
 they be pass over , with a french courage they prepare themselves to the assault on the Sunday eve next after easter day , in April 1568. insomuch that Gourgues to employ the ardent heat of this good affection , give twenty shot to his lieutenant Cazenove , and ten mariner lade with pot and ball of wild fire to burn the gate : and then he assault the fort assault on another side , after he have make a short speech unto ^ " f^ his man of the strange treason which the Spaniard ' 
 have play their companion . but be descry as they come hold down their head within two hundred pace from the fort , the gunner be upon the terrace of the fort , after he have cry , be i , arm , these be French man , discharge twice upon they a culverin , whereon the arm of France be grave , which have be take from Laudonniere . but as he go about to 
 charge it the three time , Olotocara , which have not va^ure of learned to keep his rank , or rather move with rage , ot < , cara-lept on the platform , and thrust he through the body with his pike and slay he . whereupon Gourgues advance forward , and after he have hear Cazenove cry , that the Spaniard which issue out arm at the cry of the alarm , be flee , he draw to that part , and so hem they in between he and his lieutenant , that of threescore there escape not a man , save only fifteen reserve unto the same death which they have put the french unto . the Spaniard of the other fort in the meanwhile cease not to play with their ordinance , which much annoy the assailant : although to answer they they have by this place and oftentimes point the four piece find in the first fort where - the assault upon Gourgues be accompany with fourscore shot go aboard the bark which meet he there to good ' 
 purpose to pass into the wood near unto the fort , out of which he suppose the Spaniard will issue to save themselves through the benefit of the wood in the great fort , which be not pass one league distant from you same . 
 afterwards the Savages not stay for the return of 
 Io5 
 the Spaniard of the second fort allslaine . 
 note . 
 a notable spanish subtlety . 
 [ he . 359-j 
 the bark , leap all into the water hold up their bow and arrow in one hand , and swim with the other , so that the Spaniard sing both the shore cover with so great a number of man , think to flee towards the wood : but be charge by the french , and afterward repulse by the savage , towards who they will have retire , they be soon than they will bereave of their life . to conclude they all there end their day save 15 of those which be reserve to be execute for the example of other . whereupon captain Gourgues have cause all that he find in the second fort to be transport unto the first , where he mean to strengthen himself to take resolution against the great fort , the state whereof he do not understand : in fine a sergeant of a band one of the prisoner assure he that they may be there very near 300 well furnish under a brave governor , which have fortify there , attend far succour . thus have obtain of he the platform , the height , the fortification and passage unto it , and have prepare eight good lather , and raise all the country against the Spaniard , that he neither may have news , nor succour , nor retract on any side , he determine to march forward . in the mean while the governor send a Spaniard disguise like a savage to spy out the state of the french . and though he be discover by olotocara , yet he use all the cunning he can possible to persuade they that he be one of the second fort , out of which have escape , and see none but savage on every side , he hope more in you frenchmens than their mercy , unto who he come to yield himself disguise like a savage , for fear lest if he shall have be know , he shall have be massacre by those barbarian : but the spy be bring face to face with the sergeant of the band , and convict to be one of the great fort , be reserve until a other time : after that he have assure Gourgues that the bruit be that he have 2000 Frenchman with he for fear of who the 200 and 
 106 
 threescore Spaniard which remain in the great fort , be great astonish . whereupon Gourgues be resolve to set upon they , while they be thus amaze , and leave his standard-bearer and a captain with fifteen shot to keep the fort , and the entry of the river , he cause the savage to depart by night to lie in ambush within the wood on both side of the river , than he depart in the morning , lead the sergeant and the spy fast bind along with he , to show he that in deed , which they have only make he understand before in paint . as they march Olotocara a resolute savage which never leave the captain , say unto he , that he have serve he faithful , and do whatsoever he have command he , that he be assure to dye in the conflict at the great fort , wherein nevertheless he will not fade , though it be to save his life : but he pray he to give that unto his wife , if he escape not , which he have mean to bestow on he , that she may bury the same with he , that thereby he the cause why may be better welcome unto the village of the soul F^^ , ans or spirit depart . to who captain Gourgues swith answer , after he have commend his faithful valour , they . 
 the love towards his wife , and his noble care of immortal ! honour , that he desire rather to honour he alive then dead , and that by god help he will bring he home again with victory . after the discovery of the fort , the Spaniard be not niggard of their canon shoot , nor of two double colverine , which be mount upon a bulwark , command all along the river , which make captain Gourgues to get to the hill cover with wood , at the foot whereof the fort begin , and note . the forest or wood continue and stretch forth beyond it : so that he have sufficient coverture to approach thereunto without offence . he purpose also to remain there until the morning , wherein he be resolve to assault the Spaniard by scale their wall on the side towards the hill , where the trench seem not sufficient flank for the defence of the curtain , and from 
 107 
 whence part of his man may draw they that be besiege , which shall show themselves to defend the rampart while the rest be come up . but the governor hasten his unhappy destiny , cause threescore shot to sally forth , which pass through the trench , advance forward to descry the number and valour of the french , whereof twenty under the conduct of Cazenove , get between the fort and they which now be issue forth , cut off their repassage , while Gourgues command the rest to charge they in the front , but not to discharge but near at hand , and so that they may be sure to hit they , that afterward with more ease they may cut they in piece with their sword . so that turn their back assoon as they be charge and compass in by his lieutenant , they they slaughter remain all slay upon the place . whereat the rest °iardsofth at be besiege be so astonish , that they know none hird fort other mean to save their life , but by flee into the wood adjoin , where nevertheless be encountered again by the arrow of the savage which lie in wait there for they ( whereof one run through the target and body of a Spaniard , which therewithal ! fell down stark dead ) some be constrain to turn back , choose rather to dye by the hand of the french , which pursue they : assure themselves , that none of they can find any favour neither with the one nor the other nation , who they have alike and so out of measure cruel entreat , save those which be reserve to be a example for the time to come . the take of the fort when it be take , be find well provide the three fort of a | j necessary ; namely of five double colverine , and four minion , with diverse other small piece of all sort , and eighteen gross cake of gunnepowder , all sort of weapon , which Gourgues cause with speed to be embark , save the powder and other moveable , by reason it be all consume with fire through the negligence of a savage , which in seethe of his fish , set fire on a train of powder which be make and hide by 108 
 the Spaniard , to have feast the french at the first assault , thus blow up the store house , and the other house build of pine tree . the rest of the Spaniard be lead away prisoner with the other , after that the general have show they the wrong which they have do without occasion to all the french nation , be all hang on the bough of the same tree , whereon the french hang : of which number five be hang by one Spaniard , which perceive himself in the like miserable estate , confess his fault , and the just judgement which God have bring upon he . but in stead of the writing which Pedro Melendes have hang over they , import these word in spanish , i do not this as unto french man , but as unto lutheran , Gourgues cause to be imprint with a sear iron in a table of Firrewood , i do not this as unto Spaniard , nor as unto mariner , but as unto traitor , robber , and murderer . afterwards consider he have not man enough to keep his fort which he have win , much less to store they , fear also lest the Spaniard which have dominion near adjoin shall renew his force , or the savage shall prevail against the french man , unless his majesty will send thither , he resolve to raze they . and indeed , after he have assemble , and in the end persuade all the savage king so to do , they cause their subject to run thither with such affection , that they overthrow all the three fort flat even with the ground in one day . this do by Gourgues , that he may return to his ship which be leave in the river of Seyne call Tacatacourou , fifteen league distant from thence , he send Cazenove and the artillery by water : afterward with fourscore harquebusier , arm with corslet , and match light , follow with forty mariner bear pike , by reason of the small confidence he be to have in so many savage , he march by land always in battle ray , find the way cover with savage , which come to honour he with present and praise , as the deliverer of all the country round about adjoin . 
 109 
 A.D. 
 1568. 
 the write hang over the french and Spaniards slay in Florida . 
 the three fort raze . 
 great honour do by the savage to Gourgues . 
 a old woman among the rest say unto he , that now she care not any more to dye , since she have see the Frenchman once again in Florida , and the Spaniard chase out . brief be arrive , and find his ship set in order , and every thing ready to set sail , he counsel the king to continue in the amity and ancient league which they have make with the king of France , which will defend they against all nation : which they all promise , shed tear because of his departure . Olocotara especial : for appease of who he promise they to return within twelve moon , ( so they count the year ) and that his king will send knife in they a army , and store of knife for present , and all great estima - other thing necessary . so that after he have take his tun ’ leave of they , and assemble his man , he thank God of all his success since his set forth , and pray to the three of he for a happy return . the three of May 1568 , all thing be make ready , the rendezvous appoint , and the anchor weigh to set sail so prosperous , that in seventeen day they run eleven hundred the arrival league : continue which course they arrive at rochel °fg°ufg ! fsat the sixth of June , the four and thirty day after their sixth of June , departure from the river or may , have lose but a small 
 pinnace and eight man in it , with a few gentleman and other which be slay in the assault of the fort . after the cheer and good entertainment which he receive of those of rochel , he sail to Bordeaux to inform monsieur Monluc of the thing above mention , albeit he be advertise of eighteen pinnace , and a great ship of two hundred ton full of Spaniard , which be assure of the defeat in Florida , and that che-de Bois , he be at rochel , come as far as che-de Bois , the same day that he depart thence , and follow he as far as Blay ( but he be get already to Bourdeaux ) to make he yield another account of his voyage , then that , wherewith he make many Frenchman right glad . the catholic king be afterward inform that Gourgues can not easy be take , offer a great sum of 
 iio 
 money to he that can bring he his head , pray moreover king Charles to do justice on he as of the author of so bloody a act contrary to their alliance and good league of friendship . in so much as come to Paris to present himself unto the king , to signify unto he the success of his voyage , and the mean which he have to subdue this whole country unto his obedience , ( wherein he offer to employ his life , and all his good ) he find his entertainment and answer so contrary to his expectation , that in fine he be constrain to hide himself a long space in the court of Roan , about the year 1570. and without the assistance of precedent Marigny , in who house he remain certain day , and of the receiver of vacquieulx , which always be his faithful friend , he have be in great danger . which grieve not a little Dominique de Gourgues , consider the service which he have do aswell unto he as to his predecessor king of France . he be the birth , bear in mount Marsan in Guyenne , and employ for lifiand death the service of the most christian king in all the army make since these twenty five or thirty year : at last he have the charge and honour of a captain , which in a place near unto see , with thirty soldier sustain the brunt of a part of the spanish army , by which be take in the assault , and have all his man cut in piece , he be put into a galley in token of the good war and singular favour which the Spaniard be wont to show we . but as the galley be go towards Sicillie , be take by the Turk , lead away to Rhodes , and thence to Constantinople , it be short afterward recover by Romeguas , commander over the army of Malta . by this mean return home , he make a voyage on the coast of Africa , whence he take his course to Bresil , and to the south sea at length be desirous to rapayre the honour of France , he set upon Florida with such success as you have hear . so that be become by his continual warlike action both by land and sea no less valiant captain then skilful mariner , he have 
 make himself fear of the Spaniard , and acceptable unto the queen of England for the desert of his virtue . to conclude , he die in the year 1582 , to the great grief of such as know he . 
 