the content of those letter be these . 
 captain Laudonniere , because some of they which letter of they be return from Florida speak indifferent of lordadmtrall the country , the king desire your presence , to the end , that accord to your trial , he may resolve to ’ bestow great cost thereon , or whole to leave it : and therefore i send captain John Ribault to be governor there , to who you shall deliver whatsoever you have 
 85 ' 
 in charge , and inform he of all thing you have discover . and in a postscript of the letter be thus write . think not , that whereas i send for you , it be for any evil opinion or mistrust that i have of you , but that it be for your good and for your credit , and assure your self that during my life you shall find i your good master . Chastillon . 
 now after i have long discourse with captain Ribault , captain la Grange accost i , and tell i of a accusation infinite number of false report which have be make of against he . i to my great hindrance : and among other thing ’ he inform i , that my lord admiral take it very 2. evil that i have carry a woman with i : likewise that some body have tell he that i go about to counter ’ feit the king , and to play the tyrant : that i be too +• cruel unto the man that go with i : that i seek to be advance by other mean then by my lord 5 - admiral : and that i have write to many lord of they . i - court , which i ought not to have do . whereunto Laudonnieres j answerej that the woman be a poor chambermaid , answer there - .. , t , , , . t / . ' 
 unto . which encage have take up in a inn , to oversee my household business , to look to a infinite sort of diverse beast , as sheep and poultry which i carry over with i to store the country withal : that it be not meet to put a man to attend this business : likewise , consider the length of the time that i be to abide there , i think it shall not offend any body to take a woman with i , aswell to help my soldier in their sickness , as in my own , whereinto i fall afterward . and how necessary her service be for we , each one at that time may easy perceive : that all my man think so well of she , that at one instant there be six or seven which do demand she of i in manage ; as in very 2. deed one of they have she after our return . touch that which be say that i play the king , these report be make , because i will not bear with any thing which be against the duty of my charge , and the 
 king service . Moreover , that in such enterprise it be necessary for a governor to make himself know and obey , for fear lest every body will become a master , perceive themselves far from great force . and that 3. if the tale-teller call this rigour , it rather proceed of their disobedience , then of my nature less subject to cruelty than they be to rebellion . for the two 4-last point , that i have not write to any of the lord of the court but by the advice and commandment of my lord admiral , which will i at my departure to send part of such thing as i shall find in the country unto the lord of the counsel : to the end that be move by this mean , they may deal with the queen mother for the continuance of this enterprise : that have be so small time in the country , continual hinder with building of fortress , and unlade of my ship , i be not able to come by any new or rare thing to send they , whereupon i think it best to content they in the mean while with letter , until such time as i may have long space to search out the country , and may recover something to send they : the distribution of which letter i mean not otherwise but to refer to my lord admiral good pleasure : that if the bearer have forget himself so far , as that he have break the cover of the letter , and present they himself for hope of gain , it be not my commandment . and 5. that i never honour noble man so much , nor do to any man more willing and faithful service then to my lord admiral , nor ever seek advancement but by his mean . you see how thing pass for this day . the next day the Indians come in from all part , to know what people these be : to who i signify that this be he which in the year 1562. arrive in this country , and erect the pillar which stand at the entry of the river . some of they know he : for in truth he be easy to be know by reason of the great beard which he wear . he receive many present of they which be of the village near adjoin , 87 
 the mountain of apalatcy wherein be mine of perfect gold . 
 Sieroa Pira red mettle . 
 perfect gold . 
 good mean to avoid the danger of fire . 
 September 4. 
 among who there be some that he have not yet forget . the king homoloa , Serauahi , Alimacani , Malica , and Casti come to visit he and welcome he with diverse gift accord to their manner . i advertise they that he be send thither by the king of France , to remain there in my room , and that i be send for . than they demand and pray he , if it may stand with his good pleasure , to cause the merchandise that he have bring with he to be deliver they , and that in few day they will bring he to the mountain of apalatcy , whither they have promise to conduct i , and that in case they perform not their promise , that they be content to be cut in piece . in those mountain , as they say , be find red copper , which they call in their language Sieroa Pira , which be as much to say as red mettle , whereof i have a piece , which at the very instant i show to captain Ribault , which cause his gold-fine to make a assay thereof , which report unto he that it be perfect gold . about the time of these conference , come and go of the king of the country , be weaken with my former travail , and fall into a melancholy upon the false report that have be make of i , i fall into a great continual fever , which hold i eight or nine day : during which time captain Ribault cause his victual to be bring on shore , and bestow the most part thereof in the house which my lieutenant have build about two hundred pase without the fort : which he do to the end they may be the better defend from the weather , and likewise to the intent that the meal may be near to the bakehouse , which i have build of purpose in that place , the better to avoid the danger of the fire , as i say before . but lo how oftentimes misfortune do search and pursue we , even then when we think to be at rest baptize lo see what happen after that captain Ribault have bring up three of his small ship into the river , which be the four of September ! six great spanish ship arrive in the road , where four 
 of our great ship remain , which cast anchor , assure our man of good amity . they ask how the chief T& Spaniards captain of the enterprise do , and call they all by 
 their name and surname . i report i to you if it y prench . can be otherwise but these man before they go out of Spain must needs be inform of the enterprise and of those that be to execute the same . about the break of day they begin to make towards our man : but our man which trust they never a deal , have hoist their sail by night , be ready to cut the string that tie they . wherefore perceive that this make towards our man of the Spaniard be not to do they any pleasure , and know well that their furniture be too small to make head against they , because that the most part of their man be on shore , they cut their cable , leave their anchor , and set sail . 
 the Spaniard see themselves discover , lend they certain vollei of their great ordinance , make sail after they , and chase they all day long : but our man get way of they still towards the sea . and the Spaniard see they can not reach they , by reason that the french ship be better of sail than they , and also because they will not leave the coast , turn back and go on shore in the river Seloy , which we call the the river river of dolphin 8 or 10 league distant from the orj^t place where we be . our man therefore find they - g ' or self better of sail than they , follow they to descry io league what they do , which after they have do , they return over land from unto the river of May , where captain Ribault have but descry they , embark himself in a great boat to know what news they have . be at the entry of the cape sea . river he meet with the boat of captain couset ship , wherein there be a good number of man which make relation unto he of all the Spaniard do : and how the great ship name the Trini tie have keep the sea , and that she be not return with they . they tell he moreover that they have see three spanish ship enter into the river of dolphin , and the other 
 dangerous flaw of wind on the coast of Florida in September . 
 king Emola . 
 a village and river both of that name . 
 three remain in the road ; far that they have put their soldier , their victual and munition on land . after he understand these news he return to the fortress , and come to my chamber where i be sick , and there in the presence of the captain , la grange , S. marie , Ottigny , visty , Yonville , and other gentleman , he propound , that it be necessary for the king service , to embark himself with all his force , and with the three ship that be in the road to seek the spanish fleet , whereupon he ask our advice . i first reply , and show unto he the consequence of such a enterprise , advertise he among other thing of the perilous flaw of wind that rise on this coast , and that if it chance that he be drive from the shore , it will be very hard for he to recover it again , that in the mean while they which shall stay in the fort shall be in fear and danger . the captain , saint marie , and la grange declare unto he far , that they think it not good to put any such enterprise in execution , that it be far better to keep the land , Sc do their best endeavour to fortify themselves : and that after that the Trinity ( which be the principali ship ) be return , there will be much more likelihood to enterprise this voyage . this notwithstanding he resolve to undertake it , and that which moor be , after he understand by king Emola , one of our neighbour which arrive upon the handle of these matter , that the Spaniard in great number be go on shore , which have take possession of the house of Seloy , in the most part whereof they have place their negro , which they have bring to labour , and also lodge themselves and have cast diverse trench about they . thus for the consideration which he have , and doubt ( as he may well do ) that the Spaniard will encamp themselves there to molest we , and in the end to chase we out of the country , he resolve and continue in his embarkment , cause a proclamation to be make , that all soldier that be under his charge 
 shall present with their weapon embark they , and that his two ensign shall march : which be put in execution . he come into my chamber , and pray i to lend he my lieutenant , my ensign , and my sergeant , and to let all my good soldier , which i have , go with he , which i deny he , because my self be sick , there be no man to stay in the fort . thereupon he answer i that i need not to doubt at all , and that he will return the morrow after , that in the mean space monsieur de Lys shall stay behind to look to all thing . than i show unto he that he be chief in this country , and that i for my part have no further authority : that therefore he will take good advisement what he do , for fear lest some inconvenience may ensue . than he tell i that he can do no less , than to continue this enterprise , and that in the letter which he have receive from my lord admiral , there be a postscript , which he show i write in these word : captain John Ribault , as i be enclose up this letter , i receive a certain advice , that don Pedro Melendes depart from Spain to go to the coast of new France : see you that you suffer he not to encroach upon you , no more than he will that you shall encroach upon he . you see ( quoth he ) the charge that i have , and i leave it unto your self to judge , if you can do any less in this case , consider the certain advertisement that we have , that they be already on land , and will invade we . This stop my mouth . thus therefore confirm or rather obstinate in this enterprise , and have regard rather unto his particular opinion then unto the advertisement which i have give he , and the inconvenience of the time whereof i have forewarn he , he embark himself the eight of September , and take my ensign and eight and thirty of my man away with he . i report i to those that know what war mean , if when a ensign march , any soldier that have any courage in he will stay behind , to forsake his ensign : thus no man 
 9i 
 A.D. 
 1565. 
 a advertisement of my lord admiral to captain Ribault . 
 captain ri-baidts em-barkment Sept. 8. 
 of commandement stay behind with i , for each one follow he as chief , in who name straight after his arrival , all cry and proclamation be make . captain Grange , which like not very well of this enterprise , the ten of be unto the ten of the month with i , and will September . not have go aboard , if it have not be for the instant request that captain Ribault make unto he , which stay two day in the road attend until la Grange be come unto he : who be come aboard , they set sail altogether , and from that time forward i never see a mighty they moor . the very day that he depart , which be l^uhof^eit th® ten September , there rise so great a tempest ’ accompany with such storm , that the indian themselves assure i that it be the worst weather that ever be see on the coast : whereupon two or three day after , fear lest our ship may be in some distress , i send for monsieur du Lewis unto i , to take order to assemble the rest of our people to declare unto they what need we have to fortify our self : which be do accord : and then i give they to understand the necessity and inconvenience whereinto we be like to fall , aswell by the absence of our ship , as by the nearness of the Spaniard , at who hand we can look for no less than a open and sufficient proclaim war , see they have take land and fortify themselves so near unto we . and if any misfortune be fall unto our man which be at sea , we ought to make a full account with our self that we be to endure many great misery , be in so small number , and so many way afflict as we be . thus every one promise i to take pain : and therefore consider that their proportion of victual be small , and that so continue , they will not be able to do any Laudtmmere great work , i augment their allowance : although that 
 after the arrival of captain Ribault my portion of victual be allot unto i as unto a common soldier , neither be i able to give so much as part of a bottle of wine to any man which deserve it : for i be so far from 92 
 a muster of the man leave in the fort by Ribault . 
 Rene Laudonniere a.d. 
 ... 15651 have mean to do so , that the captain himself take two of my boat , wherein the rest of the meal be , which be leave i of the biscuit which i cause to be make to return into France : so that if i shall say that i receive more favour at the hand of the Englishman be stranger unto i , i shall say but a truth . we begin therefore to fortify our Laudonniere self and to repair that which be break down , continue ™ 0 principal towards the water side , where 1 cause three - fortify they . score foot of tree to be plant , to repair the palissado with the plank which i cause to be take of the ship which i have build . nevertheless notwithstanding all our diligence and travail , we be never able full to repair it by reason of the storm , which common do we so great annoy , that we can not finish our enclosure . perceive my self in such extremity i take a muster of the man , which captain Ribault have leave i , to see if there be any that want weapon : i find nine or ten of they whereof not past two or three have ever draw sword out of a scabbard , as i think . let they which have be bold to say , that i have man enough leave i , so that i have mean to defend my self , give ear a little now unto i , and if they have eye in their head , let they see what man i have . of the nine there be four but young stripling , which serve captain Ribault and keep his dog , the five be a cook : among those that be without the fort , and which be of the foresay company of captain Ribault , there be a carpenter of threescore year old , one a beer-brewer , one old crossbow maker , two shoemaker , and four or five man that have their wife , a player on the virginal , two servant of monsieur du Lewis , one of monsieur de Beauhaire , one of monsieur de la grange , and about fourscore and five or six in all , count aswell lackey as woman and child . behold the goodly troop so sufficient to defend themselves , and so courageous as they have esteem they to be : and for my part i leave it to 
 93 
 fourscore and five leave in the fort with Laudonniere . 
 other consideration to imagine whether captain Ribault will have leave they with i to have borrow my man , if they have be such . those that be leave i of my own company be about sixteen or seventeen that can bear arm , and all of they poor and lean : the rest be sick and maim in the conflict which my lieutenant have against utina . this view be thus take , we set our watch , whereof we make two centinel , that the soldier may have one night free . than we bethink our self of those which may be most sufficient , among who we choose two , one of who be name Monsieur saint Cler , and the other monsieur de la Vigne , to who we deliver candle and lantern to go round about the fort to view the watch , because of the foul and foggy weather . i deliver they also a sandglasse or clock , that the centinel may not be trouble more one then another . in the mean while i cease not , for all the foul weather nor my sickness which i have , to oversee the corpse de garde . the night between the nineteenth and twenty of September la Vigne keep watch with his company , wherein he use all endeavour , although it rain without cease . when the day be therefore come , and that he see that it rain still worse than it do before , he pity the centinel so too moil and wet : and think the Spaniard will not have come in such a strange time , he let they depart , and to say the truth , he go himself unto his lodging . in the mean while one which have something to do without the fort , and my trumpet which go up unto the thespanyard rampart perceive a troop of Spaniard which come down from a little knap . where incontinent they i p ' begin to cry alarm , and the trumpeter also : which assoon as ever i understand , forthwith i issue out , with my target and sword in my hand , and get i into the midst of the court , where i begin to cry upon my soldier . some of they which be of the forward sort go towards the breach , which be on the 
 Southside , and where the munition of the artillery lie , where they be repulse and slay . by the self same place two ensign enter , which immediate be the Spaniard plant on the wall . two other ensign also enter enter firton the other side towards the west , where there be another breach : and those which be lodge in this quarter , and which show themselves , be likewise defeat . as i go to succour they which be defend the breach on the southwest side , i encountered by chance a great company of Spaniards , which have already repulse our man and be now enter , which drive i back unto the court of the fort : be there i espy with they one call Francis Jean , which Francis Jean be one of the mariner which steal away my bark , atraitourto and have guide and conduct the Spaniard thither . t na tm ' assoon as he see i , he begin to say , this be the captain . this troop be lead by a captain who name , as i think , be don Pedro Melendes : these don Pedro make certain push at i with their pike which light on my tarket . but perceive that 1 be not able Spaniards . to withstand so great a company , and that the court be already win , and their ensign plant on the rampart , and that i have never a man about i , save one only who name be Bartholomew , i enter into the yard of my lodging , into which they follow i , and have it not be for a tent that be set up , i have be take : but the Spaniard which follow i be occupy in cut of the cord of the tent , and in the mean while i save my self by the breach which be on the west side near unto my lieutenant lodging , and gate away into the wood : where i find certain laudonnier of my man which be escape , of which number there esc0pe-were three or four which be sore hurt . then speak i thus unto they : sir , since it have please God that this mischance be happen unto we , we must needs take the pain to get over the marsh unto the ship which be at the mouth of the river . some will needs go to a little village which be in the wood , the rest fol - 
 John du che-min a faithful servant . 
 the diligence of the mariner to save they that escape out of the fort . 
 among these be Jaques Morgues painter sometime live in the Blackfriar in London . 
 low i through the reed in the water , where be able to go no far by reason of my sickness which i have , i send two of my man which be with i , which can swim well , unto the ship , to advertise they of that which have happen , and to send they word to come and help i . they be not able that day to get unto the ship to certify they thereof : so i be constrain to stand in the water up to the shoulder all that night long , with one of my man which will never forsake i . the next day morning , be scarce able to draw my breath any more , i betake i to my prayer with the soldier which be with i , who name be John du chemin : for i feel my self so feeble , that i be afraid i shall die sudden : and in truth if he have not embrace i in both his arm , and so hold i up , it have not be possible to save i . after we have make a end of our prayer , i hear a voice , which in my judgement be one of they which i have send , which be over against the ship and call for the ship boat , which be so in deed : and because those of the ship have understanding of the take of the fort by one call John de Hais , master Carpenter , which flee unto they in a shallop ; they have set sail to run along the coast to see if they may save any : wherein doubtless they do very well their endeavour . they go straight to the place where the two man be which i have send , and which call they . assoon as they have receive they in and understand where i be , they come and find i in a pitiful case . five or six of they take i and carry i into the shallop : for i be not able by any mean to go one foot . after i be bring into the shallop some of the mariner take their clothes from their back to lend they i , and will have carry i present to their ship to give i a little aqua vitae . howbeit i will not go thither , until i have first go with the boat along the reed , to seek out the poor soul which be scatter abroad , where we gather up 18 or 20 of they . the last that i take 96 
 in be the nephew of the treasurer le Beau. after we be all come to the ship , i comfort they as well as i can , and send back the boat again with speed to see if they can find yet any more . upon her return , the mariner tell i how that captain James Ribault which be in his ship about two musket shoot distant from the fort , have part with the Spaniard , and that Francis Jean come unto his ship , where he stay a long space , whereat they great marveil , consider he be the cause of this enterprise , how he will let he escape . after i be come into the ship call the greyhound , captain James Ribault and captain Valvot come to see i : and there we conclude to return into France . now forasmuch as i find the ship unfurnish of captain , pilot , master , and masters-mate , i give advice to choose out one of the most able man among all the mariner , and that by their own voice . i take also six man out of another small ship , which we have sink because it want ballast and can not be save . thus i increase the furniture of the ship wherein i be my self embark , and make one , which have be masters-mate in the foresay small ship , master of i . and because i lack a pilot , i pray James Ribault that he will grant i one of the four man that he have in his ship , which i shall name unto he , to serve i for a pilot : he promise to give i they , which nevertheless he do not at the instant when we be ready to depart , notwithstanding all the speech i use to he , in declare that it be for the king service . i be constrain to leave the ship behind i which i have buy of the english captain , because i want man to bring she away . for captain James Ribault have take away her furniture : i take away her ordinance only , which be all dismount , whereof i give nine piece to James Ribault to carry into France , the other five i put into my ship . the 25 of September we set sail to return into France , and captain James Ribault and i keep company all that ix 97 g 
 A.D. 
 1565. 
 Francis Jean cause of this enterprise . 
 the bad deal of James Ribault . 
 our return into France the 25. of September 1565. 
 day and the next until three or four a clock in the afternoon : but because his ship be better at bowline than we , he keep he to the wind and leave we then same day . thus we continue our voyage , wherein we have marvelous flaw of wind . and about the October 28. eight and twenty of October in the morning at the break of the day we descry the isle of Flores , one of the azore , where immediate upon our approach to the land we have a mighty gust of wind which come from the north-east , which cause we to bear against it four day : afterward the wind come south and southeast , and be always variable . in all the time of our passage we have none other food save November 10. biscuit and water . about the ten or eleven of November , after we have sail a long time , and suppose we be not far from land , i cause my man to sound , where they find threescore and afteene fathom water , whereat we all rejoice , and praise God because we have sail so prosperous . immediate after i cause they to set sail again and so we continue our way : but forasmuch as we have bear the chanel of too much towards the north-east we enter into saint saint George . George channel , a place much fear of all sailor , and whereas many ship be cast away : but it be a fair gift of God that we enter in it when the weather be clear . we sail all the night , suppose we have be shoot into the narrow sea between England and France , and by the next day to reach diepe , but we be deceive of our longing : for about two or three of the clock after midnight as i walk upon the hatch , i descry land round about i , whereat we be astonish . immediate i cause they to strike sail and sound : we find we have not under we past 8 fathom of water , whereupon i command they to stay till break of day : which be come , and see my mariner tell i that they know not this land , i command they to approach unto it . be near thereunto i make they cast anchor , and send the boat on 
 1565-shore to understand in what country we be . word be bring i that we be in wale a province of England . i go incontinent on land , where after i have take the air , a sickness take i whereof i think i shall have dye . in the mean while i cause the ship to be bring into the bay of a small town call Swansey , where i find merchant of saint Laudonnieres malo , which lend i money , wherewith i make certain apparel for my self and part of my company that be in Qiamorgan . with i : and because there be no victual in the ship , fare in south i buy two ox , and salt they , and a ton of wale . beer , which i deliver into his hand which have charge of the ship , pray he to carry it into France , which he promise i to do : for my own part i purpose with my man to pass by land , and after i have take leave of my mariner , i depart from Swansey , and come that night with my company to a place call Morgan , where the lord of the place , understand what i be , stay i with he for the space of 6 or 7 day , and at my departure move with pity to see i go on foot , especial be so weak as i be , give i a little hackney . thus i pass on my journey first to Bristol , and then to London , where i go to do my duty to monsieur de Foix , which for the present be the king ambassador , and help i with money in my necessity . from thence i pass to Caleis , afterward to Paris , where i be inform that the king be go to molin to sojourn there : incontinent , and with all the haste i can possible make , i gate i thither with part of my come 
 pany . thus brief you see the discourse of all that the conclusion . happen in new France since the time it please the king majesty to send his subject thither to discover those part . the indifferent and unpassionate reader may easy weigh the truth of my do , and be upright judge of the endeavour which i there use . for my own part i will not accuse nor excuse any : it suffice i to have follow the truth of the history , whereof many be able to bear witness , which 
 99 
 the courtesy of one master Morgan . 
 Bristol . 
 London . 
 monsieur de Foix ambassador for the french king in England . 
 thecauseswhy the french lose Florida . 
 the french fleet cast away on the coast of Florida . 
 be there present . i will plain say one thing , that the long delay that captain John Ribault use in his embark , and the 15. day that he spend in rove along the coast of Florida , before he come to our fort Caroline , be the cause of the loss that we sustain . for he discover the coast the 14 of August , and spend the time in go from river to river , which have be sufficient for he to have discharge his ship in , and for i to have embark my self to return into France . i wot well that all that he do be upon a good intent : yet in my opinion he shall have have more regard unto his charge , then to the devise of his own brain , which sometime he print in his head so deep , that it be very hard to put they out : which also turn to his utter undo : for he be no soon depart from we , but a tempest take he , which in fine wrack he upon the coast , where all his ship be cast away , and he with much ado escape drown , to fall into their hand which cruel massacre he and all his company . 
 