a voyage make by m. Roger Bodenham to saint John de ullua in the bay of Mexico , in the year 1564. 
 Roger Bodenham have a long time live in the city of Sivil in Spain , be there marry , and by occasion thereof use trade and traffic to the part of Barbary , grow at length to great loss and hindrance by that new trade begin by i in the city of Fez : whereupon be 
 return into Spain , i begin to call my wit about i , and to consider with my self by what mean i may recover and renew my state ; and in conclusion , by the aid of my friend , i procure a ship call the bark fox , pertain to London , of the burden of eight or nine score ton ; and with the same i make a voyage to the west India , have obtain good favour with the spanish merchant , by reason of my long abode , and marriage in the country . my voyage be in the company of the general don Pedro Melendes for Nova Hispania : who be himself appoint general for terra firma and Peru , make his son general for new Spain , although Pedro Melendes himself be the principali man and directer in both fleet . we all depart from Cadiz together the last day of may in the year 1564 : and i with my ship be under the conduct of the son of don Pedro aforesaid , arrive with he in Nova Hispania , where immediate i take order for the discharge of my merchandise at the port of Vera Cruz , otherwise call villa Rica , to be transport thence to the city of Mexico , which be sixty and odd league distant from the say port of Villa Rica . in the way be many good town , as namely , Pueblo de los angel , and another call Tlaxcalan . the city of Mexico have three great causey to bring man to it , compass with a lake , so that it need no wall , 359 
 a nevi trade begin in the city of Fez. by Roger Bodenham . 
 the place where cochinilla grow , and the price thereof . 
 be so defend by the water . it be a city plentiful of all necessary thing , have many fair house , church , and monastery . i have continue in the country the space of nine month , return again for Spain with the spanish fleet , and deliver the merchandise and silver which i have in the ship into the contractation house , and there receive my fraught , which amount outward and homeward to the value of 13000 ducat and more . i observe many thing in the time of my abode in Nova Hispania , aswell touch the commodity of the country as the manner of the people both Spaniard and Indians : but because the spanish history be full of those observation , i omit they , and refer the reader to the same : only this i say , that the commodity of Cochinilla grow in great abundance about the town of Pueblo de los angel , and be not there worth above forty penny the pound . 
 