the testimoniali of the company of the desire touch their lose of their general , which appear to have be utter against their meaning . 
 the 26 of August 1591 we who name be here under write , with diverse other depart from Plymouth under m. Thomas candish our general , with 4 ship of he , to wit , the Galeon , the Robuck , the desire , and the black pinnace , for the performance of a voyage into the south sea . the 190 ? November we fall with the bay of Salvador in Brasil . the 16. of December we take the town of Santos , hope there to revictuall our self , but it fall not out to our contentment . the 24 of January we set sail from Santos , shape our course for the strait of Magellan . the 8 of February by violent storm the say fleet be part : the Robuck and the desire arrive in porte desire the 6 of march . the 16 of march the black pinnace arrive there also : and the 18 of the same our admiral come into the road ; with who we depart the 20 of march in poor and weak estate . the 8 of April 1592 we enter the strait of Magellan . the 21 of April we anchor beyond cape froward , within 40 league of the south sea , where we ride until the 15 of May . in which time we have great store of snow , with some gusty weather , the wind continue still at westnorthwest against we . in this time we be enforce for the preserve of our victual , to live the most part upon muscle , our provision be so slender ; so that many of our man die in this hard extremity . than our general return for Brasil there to winter , and to procure victual for this voyage against the next year . so we depart the strait the 15 of May . the 21 be thwart of port desire 30 league off the shore , the wind then at Northeast and by north , at five of the clock at night lie north-east , we sudden cast about 397 
 the manner how they lose theirgenerall . 
 lie southeast and by south , and sometime southeast : the whole fleet follow the admiral , our ship come under his lee shoot ahead he , and so frame sail fit to keep company . this night we be sever , by what occasion we protest we know not , whither we lose they or they we . in the morning we only see the black pinnace , then suppose that the admiral have overshoot we . all this day we stand to the eastwards , hope to find he , because it be not likely , that he will stand to the shore again so sudden . but miss he towards night , we stand to the shoareward , hope by that course to find he . the 22 of may at night we have a violent storm , with the wind at northwest , and we be enforce to hull , not be able to bear sail , and this night we perish our main tressle-tree , so that we can not more use our main topsail , lie most dangerous in the sea . the pinnace likewise receive a great leak , so that we be enforce to seek the next shore for our relief . and because famine be like to be the best end , we desire to go for port desire , hope with seal and penguin to relieve our self , - and so to make shift to follow the general , or there to stay his come from Brasil . the 24 of may we have much wind at north . the 25 be calm , and the sea very lofty , so that our ship have dangerous foul weather . the 26 our fore-shrowd break , so that if we have not be near the shore , it have be impossible for we to get out of the sea . and now be here more in port desire , our shroud be all rot , not have a run rope whereto we may trust , and be provide only of one shift of sail all wear , our topsail not able to abide any stress of weather , neither have we any pitch , tar , or nail , nor any store for the supply of these want ; and we live only upon seal and muscle , have but five hogshead of pork within board , and meal three ounce for a man a day , with water for to drink . and forasmuch as it have please 
 398 
 god to separate our fleet , and to bring we into such hard extremity , that only now by his mere mercy we expect relief , though otherwise we be hopeless of comfort , yet because the wonderful work of God in his exceed great favour towards we his creature be far beyond the scope of man capacity , therefore by he we hope to have deliverance in this our deep distress . also forasmuch as those upon who God will bestow the favour of life , with return home to their country , may not only themselves remain blameless , but also manifest the truth of our action , we have think good in christian charity to lay down under our hand the truth of all our proceed even till the time of this our distress . 
 give in port desire the 2 of June 1592. beseeching the almighty god of his mercy to deliver we from 
 this misery , how or when majesty . 
 John Davis captain . ‘ 
 Randolph Cotton . 
 John pery . 
 William Maber gunner . 
 Charles Parker . 
 Roland miller . 
 Edward smith . 
 Thomas purpet . 
 Matthew stub . 
 John Jenkinson . 
 Thomas Edward . " 
 Edward Granger . 
 John Lewis . 
 William Hayman . 
 George Straker . 
 Thomas Walbie . 
 William Wyeth . 
 Richard Alard . 
 Stephan Popham . 
 Alexander coal . 
 it shall please his divine 
 ' Thomas Watkins . George Cunington . John Whiting . James Ling. the boatswain . Francis smith . John lay . 
 the boatswain mate . Fisher . 
 John Austin . Francis Copstone . Richard Garet . James Eversby . Nicolas Parker . 
 Leonard . John pick . 
 Benjamin . William Maber . 
 James not Christopher Hauser . 
 399 
 a isle near port desire abound with seal and penguin . 
 they depart the second time from port desire for the strait of Magellan . 
 after they have deliver this relation unto our captain under their hand , than we begin to travel for our life , and we build up a smith forge , and make a colepit , and burn coal , and there we make nail , bolt , and spike , other make rope of a piece of our cable , and the rest gather muscle , and take smelte for the whole company . three league from this harbour there be a isle with four small isle about it , where there be great abundance of seal , and at the time of the year the penguin come thither in great plenty to breed . we conclude with the pinnace , that she shall sometime go thither to fetch seal for we ; upon which condition we will share our victual with her man for man ; whereunto the whole company agree . so we part our poor store , and she labour to fetch we seal to eat , wherewith we live when smelte and muscle fail : for in the nepe stream we can get no muscle . thus in most miserable calamity we remain until the sixth of August , still keep watch upon the hill to look for our general , and so great be our vexation and anguish of soul , as i think never flesh and blood endure more . thus our misery daily increase , time pass , and our hope of the general be very cold , our captain and master be full persuade , that the general may perhaps go direct for the strait , and not come to this harbour : whereupon they think no course more convenient than to go present for the strait , and there to stay his come , for in that place he can not pass , but of force we must see he : whereunto the company most willing consent , as also the captain and master of the pinnace ; so that upon this determination we make all possible speed to depart . 
 the sixth of August we set sail , and go to Penguinisle , and the next day we salt twenty hogshead of seal , which be as much as our salt can possible do , and so we depart for the strait the poor 
 400 
 last voyage of Thomas candish a.d. 
 1592. 
 wretch that ever be create . the seven of August toward night we depart from penguinisle , shape our course for the strait , where we have full confidence to meet with our general . the nine we have a sore storm , so that we be constrain to hull , for our sail be not to endure any force . the 14 we be drive in among certain isle never before this - certain isle cover by any know relation , lie fifty league n ™ er before or better from the shore east and northerly from the northstreight : in which place , unless it have please God east off they of his wonderful mercy to have cease the wind , we strait . must of necessity have perish . but the wind shift to the east , we direct our course for the strait , and the 18 of August we fall with the cape in a very thick fog ; and the same night we 
 anchor ten league within the cape . the 19 day we the first and pass the first and the second strait . the 21 we s‘con ? double cape froward . the 22 we anchor in savage coove , so name , because we find many savage ward . there : notwithstanding the extreme cold of this place , savage coove . yet do all these wild people go naked , and live in the wood like satyr , paint and disguise , and fly from you like wild dear . they be very strong , and throw stone at we of three or four pound weight a incredible distance . the 24 in the morning we depart from this coove , and the same day we come into the northwest reach , which be the last reach of the strait . the northwest the 25 we ankor in a good coove , within fourteen league of the south sea : in this place we purpose to s ets shall stay for the general , for the strait in this place be scarce three mile broad , so that he can not pass but we must see he . after we have stay here a fortnight in the deep of winter , our victual consume , ( for our seal stink most vile , and our man die pitiful through cold and famine , for the great part of they have not clothes to defend the extremity of the winter cold ) be in this heavy distress , our captain and master think it the best course to depart from the strait 
 xi 401 3 c 
 their first entrance into you south sea . 
 they enter the south sea the second time . 
 into the south sea , and to go for the isle of Santa Maria , which be to the northward of Baldivia in 37 degree and a quarter , where we may have relief , and be in a temperate clime , and there stay for the general , for of necessity he must come by that isle . so we depart the 13 of September , and come in sight of the south sea . the 14 we be force back again , and recover a coove 3 league within the strait from the south sea . again we put forth , and be 8 or 10 league free of the land , the wind rise furious at westnorthwest , we be enforce again into the strait only for want of sail ; for we never dare bear sail in any stress of weather , they be so weak : so again we recover the coove three league within the strait , where we endure most furious weather , so that one of our two cable break , whereby we be hopeless of life . yet it please God to calm the storm , and we unrive our sheate , tack , hallier , and other rope , and more our ship to the tree close by the rock . we labour to recover our anchor again , but can not by any mean , it lie so deep in the water , and as we think clean cover with oaze . now have we but one anchor which have but one whole flouke , a cable splice in two place , and a piece of a old cable . in the midst of these our trouble it please God that the wind come fair the first of October ; whereupon with all expedition we loose our moring , and weigh our anchor , and so tow off into the chanel ; for we have mend our boat in port desire , and have five oar of the pinnace . when we have weigh our anchor , we find our cable break , only one strand hold : than we praise God ; for we see apparently his mercy in preserve we . be in the chanel , we rive our rope , and again rig our ship , no man hand be idle , but all labour even for the last gasp of life . here our company be divide ; some desire to go again for port desire , and there to be set on shore , where they may travel for their life , and some stand with the captain and master to proceed . whereupon 
 402 
 the captain say to the master : master , you see the wonderful extremity of our estate , and the great doubt among our company of the truth of your report , as touch relief to be have in the south sea : some say in secret , as i be inform , that we undertake these desperate attempt through blind affection that we bear to the general . for my own part i plain make know unto you , that the love which i bear to the general cause i first to enter into this action , whereby i have not only heap upon my head this bitter calamity now present , but also have in some sort procure the dislike of my best friend in England , as it be not unknown to some in this company . but now be thus entangle by the providence of God for my former offence ( no doubt ) i desire , that it may please his divine majesty to show we such merciful favour , that we may rather proceed , than otherwise : or if it be his will , that our mortali be shall now take a end , i rather desire that it may be in proceed then in return . and because i see in reason , that the limit of our time be now draw to a end , i do in christian charity entreat you all , first to forgive i in whatsoever i have be grievous unto you ; second that you will rather pray for our general , then use hard speech of he ; and let we be full persuade , that not for his cause and negligence , but for our own offence against the divine majesty we be present punish ; last , let we forgive one another and be reconcile as child in love and charity , and not think upon the vanity of this life : so shall we in leave this life live with our glorious redeemer , or abide in this life , find favour with God . and now ( good master ) forasmuch as you have be in this voyage once before with your master the general , satisfy the company of such truth , as be to you best know ; and you the rest of the general man , which likewise have be with he in his first voyage if you hear any thing contrary to the truth , spare not to reprove it , i pray you . and so i beseech the lord to 
 403 
 this Santos stand upon the coast of Peru in 9 deg . of southerly latitude . 
 they enter the south sea the three time . 
 bestow his mercy upon we . then the master begin in these speech : captain , your request be very reasonable , and i refer to your judgement my honest care , and great pain take in the general service , my love towards he , and in what sort i have discharge my duty , from the first day to this hour . i be command by the general to follow your direction , which hitherto i have perform . you all know , that when i be extremely sick , the general be lose in my mate watch , as you have well examine : since which time , in what anguish and grief of mind i have live , God only know , and you be in some part a witness . and now if you think good to return , i will not gainsay it : but this i assure you , if life may be preserve by any mean , it be in proceed . for at the isle of Santa Maria i do assure you of wheat , pork , and root enough . also i will bring you to a isle , where pelican be in great abundance , and at Santos we shall have meal in great plenty , beside all our possibility of intercept some ship upon the coast of Chili and Peru. but if we return there be nothing but death to be hope for : therefore do as you like , i be ready , but my desire be to proceed . Theise his speech be confirm by other that be in the former voyage , there be a general consent of proceed ; and so the second of October we put into the south sea , and be free of all land . this night the wind begin to blow very much at westnorthwest , and still increase in fury , so that we be in great doubt what course to take : to put into the strait we dare not for lack of ground tackle : to bear sail we doubt , the tempest be so furious , and our sail so bad . the pinnace come room with we , and tell we that she have receive many grievous sea , and that her rope do every hour fail she , so as they can not tell what shift to make : we be unable in any sort to help they , stand under our corpse in view of the lee-shore , still expect our ruinous end . 
 404 
 the four of October the storm grow beyond all reason furious , the pinnace be in the wind of we , strike sudden ahull , so that we think she have receive some grievous sea , or spring a leak , or that her sail fail she , because she come not with we : but we dare not hull in that unmerciful storm , but sometime try under our main coarse , sometime with a haddock of our sail , for our ship be very leeward , and most laboursome in the sea . this night we lose the pinnace , and never see she again . 
 the five , our foresail be split , and all to turn : than our master take the mizzen , and bring it to the foremast , to make our ship work , and with our spritsail we mend our foresail , the storm continue without all reason in fury , with hail , snow , rain , and wind such and so mighty , as that in nature it can not possible be moor , the sea such and so lofty , with continual breach , that many time we be doubtful whether our ship do sink or swim . 
 the ten of October be by the account of our captain and master very near the shore , the weather dark , the storm furious , and most of our man have give over to travel , we yield our self to death , without further hope of succour . our captain sit in the gallery very pensive , i come and bring he some rosa solis to comfort he ; for he be so cold , that he be scarce able to move a joint . after he have drink , and be comfort in heart , he begin for the ease of his conscience to make a large repetition of his forepass time , and with many grievous sigh he conclude in these word : oh most glorious God , with who power the mighty thing among man be matter of no moment , i most humble beseech thou , that the intolerable burden of my sin may through the blood of Jesus Christ be take from i : and end our day with speed , or show we some merciful sign of thy love and our preservation . have thus end , he desire i not to make know to any of the company 405 
 A.D. 
 1592 - 
 the black pinnace lose in the south sea . 
 his intolerable grief and anguish of mind , because they shall not thereby be dismay . and so sudden , before i go from he the sun shine clear ; so that he and the master both observe the true elevation of the pole , whereby they know by what course to recover the strait . wherewithal ! our captain and master be so revive , and give such comfortable speech to the company , that every man rejoice , as though we have receive a present deliverance . the next day be the 11 of October , we see Cabo Deseado be the cape on the south shore ( the north shore be nothing but a company of dangerous rock , isle , and shold . ) this cape be within two league to leeward off we , our master great doubt , that we can not double the same : whereupon the captain tell he : you see there be no remedy , either we must double it , or before noon we must die : therefore loose your sail , and let we put it to God mercy . the master be a man of good spirit resolute make quick dispatch and set sail . our sail have not be half a hour aboard , but the footrope of our foresail break , so that nothing hold but the eyelet hole . the sea continual break over the ship poop , and fly into the sail with such violence , that we still expect the tear of our sail , or oversetting of the ship , and withal to our utter discomfort , we perceive that we fall still more and more to leeward , so that we can not double the cape : we be not we come within half a mile of the cape , and so near the shore , that the counter-suff of the sea will rebound against the ship side , so that we be much dismay with the horror of our present end . be thus at the very pinch of death , the wind and sea rage beyond measure , our master vear some of the main sheate ; and whether it be by that occasion , or by some current , or by the wonderful power of God , as we very think it be , the ship quicken her way , and shoot past that rock , where we think she will have shore . then between 
 406 
 last voyage of Thomas candish a.d. 
 the cape and the point there be a little bay ; so that we be somewhat far from the shore : and when we be come so far as the cape , we yield to death : yet our good God the father of all mercy deliver we , and we double the cape about the length of our ship , or very little moor . be shoot past the cape , we present take in our sail , which only God have preserve unto we : and when we be shoot in between the high land , the wind blow trade , without any inch of sail , we spoon before the sea , three man be not able to guide the helm , and in six hour we be put five and twenty league within the strait , where we find a sea answerable to the ocean . 
 in this time we free our ship from water , and after we have rest a little , our man be not able to move ; their sinew be stifle , and their flesh dead , and many of they ( which be most lamentable to be report ) be so eat with lice , as that in their flesh do lie cluster of lice as big as peason , yea and some as big as bean . be in this misery we be constrain to put into a coove for the refresh our man . our master know the shore and every coove very perfect , put in with the shore , and more to the tree , as beforetime we have do , lay our anchor to the seaward . here we continue until the twenty of October ; but not be able any long to stay through extremity of famine , the one and twenty we put off into the channel , the weather be reasonable calm : but before night it blow most extreme at westnorthwest . the storm grow outrageous , our man can scarce stand by their labour ; and the strait be full of turn reach we be constrain by discretion of the captain and master in their account to guide the ship in the hell-dark night , when we can not see any shore , the channel be in some plice scarce three mile broad . but our captain , as we first pass through the strait draw such a exquisite plat of the same , as i be assure it can in 407 
 1592. 
 the cape deseado most dangerous double , after they have be nine day in the south sea . 
 a excellent plat of the strait of Magellan . 
 penguinisle within three league of port desire . 
 any sort be better : which plat he and the master so often peruse , and so careful regard , as that in memory they have every turn and creek , and in the deep dark night without any doubt they convey the ship through that crooked channel : so that i conclude , the world have not any so skilful pilot for that place , as they be : for otherwise we can never have pass in such sort as we do . 
 the 25 we come to a island in the strait name penguinisle , whither we send our boat to seek relief , for there be great abundance of bird , and the weather be very calm ; so we come to a anchor by the island in seven fathom . while our boat be at shore , and we have great store of penguin , there arise a sudden storm , so that our ship do drive over a breach and our boat sink at the shore . captain Cotton and the lieutenant be on shore leap in the boat , and free the same , and throw away all the bird , and with great difficulty recover the ship : my self also be in the boat the same time , where for my life i labour to the best of my power . the ship all this while drive upon the lee-shore , when we come aboard , we help to set sail , and weigh the anchor ; for before our come they can scarce hoist up their yard , yet with much ado they set their fore-coarse . thus in a mighty fret of weather the seven and twenty day of October we be free of the strait , and the thirty of October we come to penguinisle be three league from port desire , the place which we purpose to seek for our relief . 
 when we be come to this isle we send our boat on shore , which return lade with bird and egg ; and our man say that the penguin be so thick upon the isle , that ship may be lade with they ; for they can not go without tread upon the bird , whereat we great rejoice . then the captain appoint Charles Parker and Edward smith , with twenty other to go on shore , and to stay upon the isle , for the kill and dry of those penguin , and promise 408 
 last voyage of Thomas candish a.d. 
 i59x 
 after the ship be in harbour to send the rest , not only for expedition , but also to save the small store of victual in the ship . but Parker , smith , and the rest of their faction suspect , that this be a devise of the captain to leave his man on shore , that by these mean there may be victual for the rest to recover their country : and when they remember , that this be the place where they will have slay their captain and master , sure ( think they ) for revenge hereof will they leave we on shore . which when our captain understand , he use these speech unto they : i understand that you be doubtful of your security through the perverseness of your own guilty conscience : it be a extreme grief unto i , that you shall judge i bloodthirsty , in who you have see nothing but kind conversation : if you have find otherwise , speak bold , and accuse i of the wrong that i have do ; if not , why do you then measure i by your own uncharitable conscience ? all the company know indeed , that in this place you practise to the utmost of your power , to murder i and the master causeless , as God know , which evil in this place we do remit you : and now i may conceive without do you wrong , that you again purpose some evil in bring these matter to repetition : but God have so shorten your confederacy , as that i nothing doubt you : it be for your master sake that i have forbear you in your unchristian practice : and here i protest before God , that for his sake alone i will yet endure this injury , and you shall in no sort be prejudice or in any thing be by I|be command : but when we come into England ( if God so favour we ) your master shall know your honesty : in the mean space be void of these suspicion , for , God i call to witness , revenge be no part of my thought . they give he thank , desire to go into the harbour with the ship , which he grant . so there be ten leave upon the isle , and the last of October 
 we enter the harbour . our master at our last be the three time . 409 
 here have take careful ! notice of every creek in the river , in a very convenient place , upon sandy oaze , run the ship on ground , lay our anchor to seaward , and with our run rope more she to stake upon the shore , which he have fasten for that purpose ; where the ship remain till our departure . 
 the three of November our boat with water , wood , and as many as she can carry , go for the isle of penguin : but be deep , she dare not proceed , but return again the same night . then Parker , smith , Townesend , purpet , with five other , desire that they may go by land , and that the boat may fetch they Penguin isle when they be against the isle , it be scarce a mile scarce a mile from the shore . the captain bid they do what they ne^ think best , advise they to take weapon with they : for ( say he ) although we have not at any time see people in this place , yet in the country there may be savage . they answer , that here be great store of deer , and ostrich ; but if there be savage , they will devour they : notwithstanding the captain cause they to carry weapon , caliver , sword , and target : so the sixth of November they depart by land , and the Hine man lose , boat by sea ; but from that day to this day we never hear of our man . the 11 while most of our man be at the isle , only the captain and master with six a great mul - other be leave in the ship , there come a great multi-w^swith ' tude savage to the ship , throw dust in the air , wizard , or leap and run like brute beast , have vizard on face like unto their face like dog face , or else their face be dog dog face . face indeed . we great fear lest they will set our ship on fire , for they will sudden make fire , whereat we much marvel : they come to windward of our ship , and set the bush on fire , so that we be in a very stink smoke : but as soon as they come within our shot , we shoot at they , and strike one of they in the thigh they all present flee , so that we never hear nor see more of they . hereby we judge that these canibal have slay our 9 man . when we consider what 
 410 
 last voyage of Thomas candish a.d. 
 J592 - 
 they be that thus be slay , and find that they be the principali man that will have murder our captain and master , with the rest of their friend , we see the just judgement of God , and make supplication to his divine majesty to be merciful unto we . while we be in this harbour , our captain and master go with the boat to discover how far this river do run , that if need shall enforce we to leave our ship , we may know how far we may go by water . so they find , that far than 20 mile they can not the river of go with the boat . at their return they send the boat P°rtDestr^ to the isle or penguin ; whereby we understand that passabie the penguin dry to our heart content , and that the boat . multitude of they be infinite . This Penguin have the shape of a bird , but have no wing , only two stump in the place of wing , by which he swim under water with as great swiftness as any fish . they live upon smelt , whereof there be great abundance upon this coast : in eat they be neither fish nor flesh : they lie great egg , and the bird be of a reasonable bigness , very near twice so big as a duck . all the time that we be in this place , we fare pass well with egg , penguin , young seal , young guile , beside other bird , such as i know not : of all which we have great abundance . in this place we find a herb call scurvygrasse , which we fry the great with egg , use train oil in stead of butter . this herb do so purge you blood , that it take away all kind gcurvygrasse of swell , of which many die , and restore we to perfect health of body , so that we be in as good case as when we come first out of England . we stay in this they stay in harbour until the 22 of December , in which time we have week in port dry 20000 penguin ; and the captain , the master , desire-and my self have make some salt , by lay salt water pretty de - 
 upon the rock in hole , which in 6 day will be t0 ma^e kern . thus God do feed we even as it be with ’ manna from heaven . 
 the 22 of December we depart with our ship for the isle , where with great difficulty , by the skilful industry 411 
 the isle of Placencia in Brasill . 
 of our master we get 14000 of our bird , and have almost lose our captain in labour to bring the bird aboard : and have not our master be very expert in the set of those wicked tide , which run after many fashion , we have also lose our ship in the same place : but God of his goodness have in all our extremity be our protector . So the 22 at night we depart with 14000 dry penguin , not be able to fetch the rest , and shape our course for Brasil . now our captain rate our victual , and bring we to such allowance , as that our victual may last six month ; for our hope be , that within six month we may recover our country , though our sail be very bad . So the allowance be two ounce and a half of meal for a man a day , and to have so twice a week , so that 5 ounce do serve for a week . three day a week we have oil , three spoonful for a man a day ; and 2 day in a week peason , a pint between 4 man a day , and every day 5 penguin for 4 man , and 6 quart of water for 4 man a day . this be our allowance ; wherewith ( we praise God ) we live , though weak , and very feeble . ' the 30 of January ' we arrive at the he of Placencia in Brasill , the first place that outward bound we be at : and have make the shall , our ship lie off at sea , the captain with 24 of the company go with the boat on shore , be a whole night before they can recover it . the last of January at sunrising they sudden land , hope to take the Portugal in their house , and by that mean to recover some casavi-meale , or other victual for our relief : but when they come to the house , they be all raze , and burn to the ground , so that we think no man have remain on the hand . then the captain go to the garden , and bring from thence fruit and root for the company , and come aboard the ship , and bring she into a fine creek which he have find out , where we may moor she by the tree , and where there be water , and hoop to trim our cask . our case be 
 412 
 last voyage of Thomas candish a.d. 
 1593-very desperate , we present labour for dispatch away ; some cut hoop , which the cooper make , other labour upon the sail and ship , every man travel for his life , and still a guard be keep on shore to defend those that labour , every man have his weapon like wise by he . the 3 of February our man with 23 shot go again to the garden , be 3 mile from we upon the north shore , and fetch cazavi-root out of the ground , to relieve our company instead of bread ; for we spend not of our meal while we stay here . the 5 of February be Monday , our captain and master haste the company to their labour ; so some go with the Cooper to gather hoop , and the rest labour aboard . this night many of our man in the ship dream of murder and ominous and slaughter : in the morning they report their dream , fir^aming one say to another ; this night i dream , that thou ‘ be slay ; another answer , and i dream , that thou be slay : and this be general through the ship . the captain hear this , who like wise have dream very strange himself , give very strait charge , that those which go on shore shall take weapon with they , and see they himself deliver into the boat , and send some of purpose to guard the labourer . all the forenoon they labour in quietness , and when it be ten of the clock , the heat be extreme , they come to a rock near the wood side ( for all this country be nothing but thick wood ) and there they boil cazavi-root , and dine : after dinner some sleep , some wash themselves in the sea , all be strip to their shirt , and no man keep watch , no match light , not a piece charge . sudden as they be thus sleep and sport , have get themselves into a corner out of sight of the ship , there come a multitude of Indians and Portugal upon they , and slay they sleep : only two escape , one very sore hurt , the other not touch , by who we understand of this miserable massacre : with all speed we man our 
 4X3 
 thirteen man lose at the lie of Placencia by their own extreme negligence . 
 boat , and land to succour our man ; but we find they slay , and lay naked on a rank one by another , with their face upward , and a cross set by they : and withal we see two very great pinnace come from the river of Jenero very full of man ; who we mistrust come from thence to take we : because there come from Jenero soldier to Santos , when the general have take the town and be strong in it . of 76 person which depart in our ship out of England , we be now leave but 27 , have lose 13 in this place , with their chief furniture , as musket , caliver , powder , and shoot . our cask be all in decay , so that we can not take in more water than be in our ship , for want of cask , and that which we have be marvellous ill condition : and be there more by tree for want of cable and anchor , we still expect the cut of our moring , to be beat from our deck with our own furniture , and to be assail by they of Jenero : what distress we be now drive into , i be not able to express . to depart with 8 ton of water in such bad cask be to starve at sea , and in stay our case be ruinous . Theise be hard choise ; but be thus perplex , we make choice rather to fall into the hand of the lord , then into the hand of man : for his exceed mercy we have taste , and of the other cruelty we be not ignorant , so conclude to depart , the 6 of February we be off in the channel , with our ordinance and small shot in a readiness , for any assault that shall come , and have a small gale of wind , we recover the sea in most deep distress . then bemoan our estate one to another , and recount over all our extremity , nothing grieve we moor , than the loss of our man twice , first by the slaughter of the cannibal at port desire , and at this he of Placencia by the Indians and Portugal . And consider what they be that be lose , we find that all those that conspire the murder of our captain and master be now slay by savage , the 
 414 
 gunner only except . be thus at sea , when we come to cape Frio , the wind be contrary ; so that 3 week we be grievous vex with cross wind , and our water consume , our hope of life be very small . some desire to go to Baya , and to submit themselves to the Portugal , rather than to die for thirst : but the captain with fair persuasion alter their purpose of yield to the Portugal . in this distress it please God to send we rain in such plenty , as that we be well water , and in good comfort to return . but after we come near unto the sun , our dry penguin begin to corrupt , and there breed in they a most loathsome and ugly worm of a inch long . this worm do so mighty increase , and devour our victual , that there be in reason no hope how we shall avoid famine , but be devour of these wicked creature : there be nothing that they do not devour , only iron except : our clothes , boot , shoe , hat , shirt , stocking : and for the ship they do so eat the timber , as that we great fear they will undo we , by gnaw through the ship side . great be the care and diligence of our captain , master , and company to consume these vermin , but the more we labour to kill they , the more they increase ; so that at the last we can not sleep for they , but they will eat our flesh , and bite like mosquito . in this woeful case , after we have pass the equinoctial towards the north , our man begin to fall sick of such a monstrous disease , as i think the like be never hear of : for in their ankle it begin to swell ; from thence in two day it will be in their breast , so that they can not draw their breath , and then fall into their cod ; and their cod and yard do swell most grievous , and most dreadful to behold , so that they can neither stand , lie , nor go . whereupon our man grow mad with grief . our captain with extreme anguish of his soul , be in such woeful case , that he desire only a speedy end , and though he be scarce able to speak 
 415 
 A.D. 
 1593 - 
 Cabo Frio 30 league east off the lie of Placencia . 
 a moststrange and noisome kind of worm breed of unsalted penguin . 
 for sorrow , yet he persuade they to patience , and to give God thanks , and like dutiful child to accept of his chastisement . for all this diverse grow rage mad , and some die in most loathsome and furious pain . it be incredible to write our misery as it be : there be no man in perfect health , but the captain and one boy . the master be a man of good spirit with extreme labour bear out his grief , so that it grow not upon he . to be short , all our man die except 16 , of which there be but 5 able to move . the captain be in good health , the master indifferent , captain Cotton and my self swell and short wind , yet better than the rest that be sick , and one boy in health : upon we 5 only the labour of the ship do stand . the captain and master , as occasion serve , will take in , and heave out the topsail , the master only attend on the spritsail , and all of we at the capsten without sheat and tack . in fine our misery and weakness 
 be so great , that we can not take in , nor heave out a sail : so our topsail and spritsail be tear all 
 in piece by the weather . the master and captain take their turn at the helm , be mighty distress and monstrous grieve with the most woeful lamenta - 
 they arrive atbear-haven in Ireland the 11 of June « 593 - 
 cion of our sick man . thus as lose wanderer upon the sea , the 11 of June 1593 , it please God that we 
 arrive at bearhaven in Ireland , and there run the ship on shore : where the irish man help we to take in our sail , and to more our ship for hoot : which slender pain of they cost the captain some ten pound before he can have the ship in safety . thus without victual , sail , man , or any furniture God only guide we into Ireland , where the captain leave the master and three or four of the company to keep the ship ; and within 5 day after he and certain other 
 have passage in a english fisherboat to Padstow in Cornwall . in this manner our small remnant by God only mercy be preserve , and restore to our country , to who be all honour and glory world without end . 
 