451 
 prematica . 
 452 
 examination of spanish pilot a.d. 
 .. 1586. 
 the same in english . 
 the examination of the master and pilot which sail in the fleet of Spain to the west Indies : write in the spanish tongue by Pedro Dias a spanish pilot take by sir Richard Grinville 1585. 
 first they make suit unto the pilot major ( who at this present be call Alonzo de chiavez ) that he will admit they to examination , because they be natural Spaniard , and sufficient for the same . 
 hereupon the pilot major command the party to the witness be examine , to give information that he be a mariner , °ffive or , ixe and well practise in those part , about which he desire ° x‘ to be examine . and then immediate he bring five or six pilot before examine to give testimony that he be a good mariner , and sufficient to become a pilot , that he be a Spaniard bear , and that he be not of the race of the moor , Jew or negro . 
 have make this information , he present it unto the pilot ad-the pilot major . and the pilot major see the information to be good , will the king public reader king reader . of navigation ( who be now Roderigo Zamorano ) to admit he to his lecture . whither there do resort fourteen or fifteen person that desire to be examine : and they they hear the come to a certain house which the king reader have rea^eri appoint unto he for the same purpose , at eight of the clock in the morning : and then they stay two hour , for two and two hour likewise in the afternoon : in one of mrneth . 
 453 
 their disputation of the art of navigation before the king reader who be their moderator . 
 the hall of examination . 
 the manner oj the young pilot examination . 
 which hour Zamorano read unto they , and in the other they ask one another many particular concern the art of navigation in the presence of the say king reader : and he that answer not to the purpose the say reader instruct more perfect , and tell he how everything be . and this exercise continue two month , during which time the examinate must not fail to be present twice in a day , as be aforesaid . 
 and have hear the king reader those two month , they resort then unto the hall of examination which be in the contractation house , where there be assemble the pilot major and diverse other pilot , to the number of 25 at the least ; who all sit there in order , the pilot major demand of he that will be examine , of what part of the Indies he desire to be examine : whereto the examinate answer , that he will be examine concern Nueva Espanna , or of number de dios and Tierra firma . and other that be not experience in those part , crave to be examine of Santo Domingo , Puerto rico , and Cuba . 
 then the pilot major command the examinate to spread a sea-chart upon the table , and in the presence of the other pilot to depart or show the course from the bar of Sant Lucar to the canarie-island , and from thence to the Indies , till he come to that place whereof he be to be examine , and then also to return back to the bar of Sant Lucar in Spain , from whence he depart . also the pilot major ask he , if when he sail upon the sea , he be take with a contrary wind , what remedy he be to use , that his ship be not too much turmoil upon the sea ? and the examinate answer he aswell as he can . 
 then one of the other pilot oppose he about the rule of the sun and of the north-star , and how he ought to use the declination of the sun at all time of the year : who the examinate be bind to answer in every thing that he demand . then another ask he of the sign and mark of those 454 
 land which lie in his way to that haven whereof he be examine . and then another demand , that if his mast shall be break by tempest , what remedy he will use ? other ask he , if his ship shall take a leak , to the hazard of the life of himself and his company , what remedy he will find to stop the same with least danger ? other ask he , what remedy , if his rudder shall chance to fail ? other oppose he about the account of the moon and of the tide ? other ask he if a pirate shall take he and leave he destitute of his chart , his astrolabe , and his other instrument serve to take the height of the sun and of the star , what course he will take in that extremity ? other demand other question needful for a mariner to know , which desire to be a pilot . unto all which the examinate be very attentive , and answer to every particular . 
 after they have all ask he so much as they think expedient , they bid he depart out of the hall , to the end that every one of they may several be swear upon a book , that they will speak the truth . than they put into a certain vessel of silver stand there for the same purpose so many bean , and so many peason as there be pilot within the hall : and every one put his hand into the vessel in order , he that think the party examine to be sufficient , take up a bean , and he that think he not sufficient , take up a pease . and after that all have take out what they please , the pilot major look what voice the examinate have : and if he find he to have as many voice for he as against he , he command he to make another voyage : but if he have more voice for he then against he , than they give he letter testimoniali of his examination sign by the pilot major , by the1 king reader , and the secretary , and seal with the seal of the contractation house . and upon the receipt of these letter testimoniali , the new pilot give a present unto the pilot major , and the king reader , for their glove and hen , every one 455 
 the manner of their election . 
 letter testimoniali of every new pilot examination and approbation , under the hand of the pilot major , the king reader , and the secretary , and seal of the contractation house . 
 the order of the contracta-tion house . 
 accord to his ability , which be ordinary some two or three ducat . # 
 and than he may take upon he to be pilot in any ship whatsoever , unto that place for which he be examine : and if he find in the Indies any ship under the charge of a pilot not before examine , he may put he out of his office , and may himself take charge of that ship for the same wage that the other pilot agree for . 
 the pilot wage for make a voyage outward and homeward be accord to the burden of the ship . if she be of 100 ton , he have 200 or 250 ducat : and if she be of 400 or 500 ton , he take for his wage 500 or 550 ducat : and if she be big , he have a great allowance : over and beside all which , he have every day while he remain on land , four real for his diet . and the great ship be always commit unto the more ancient pilot , because they be of great experience and better skill , than the young sort which new take upon they to be pilot . 
 the pilot undertake no far travel nor care , but in direct the course or navigation : for the master of the ship take charge of the freight and prepare their ship , and to pay the mariner , and to do all thing needful for the ship ; for the pilot come not unto the ship , until the visitor come to visit the same , to see whether he have all thing necessary for the voyage . 
 the visitor be four man which be appoint by the king , and these be man of great understanding : and they come to visit the ship before they take in their lade , to see whether they be well prepare to make the voyage . and after the ship be lade , they return again to visit they the second time , to see whether they have all thing necessary , accord to the order , of the contractation house : and whether they have all their mariner , victual , powder , shot , and ordinance , and all other thing necessary for the voyage . and if they want any thing , they charge they upon grievous penalty , , to provide the same before they set out of the haven . 
 the ship that go to the Indies be wont each of they to have with they a notary , who charge be to keep a note of remembrance of all the merchandise which be lade in the ship , and to take the mark thereof , thereby to deliver the commodity in the ship to their particular owner , after they have finish their voyage , and he serve likewise to make will , and other instrument , which be wont to be make by a notary , if any man chance to fall sick . and his wage in each voyage be as much as the wage of two mariner . 
 the general of the fleet use continual , after thefirstbarke he be arrive in the Indies , to send into Spain a bark °f Aviso . of Aviso , to advertise the king of the state of his arrival ; 
 and after the fleet be ready to come home , he dis-patcheth another pinnace of Aviso to certify they how secon^ the fleet be now ready to set sail , with other particularity . there go with the fleet two great ship , ' the one as admiral , the other as vice-admiral , of the burden of 400 or 500 ton , which carry nothing but victual and soldier for the waft of the rest of the fleet , and these be pay out of the merchandise which come in the fleet , after the rate of one in the hundred , and sometime at one and a half in the hundred . 
 there be in the contractation house of Sivil a table which serve for a Aranzel , or table of rate or taxation , write in letter of gold , wherein the value of all kind of merchandise , which be embark for the Indies , be set down . 
 lie this table a man may know how many botija g® or jar make a ton of wine , or how many pack , or how many quintal , or how many 
 barrel , or how many chest make a ton . 
 and all merchandise have their rate set down , to pay the king his custom and the master his due fraught . 
 a table of rate , etc set up in the contractation house . 
 457 
 and therein be set up in write that no master may carry any passenger to the Indies , without licence , especial not learn man , nor any fryer , or clergyman , nor any body else without licence of the king : nor any stranger not bear in the kingdom of Spain . 
 moreover , that they may not carry away any merchandise not comprise in the foresay order , under pain of death : and that all good which they carry with they , they ought to carry the same register ; under pain of death . 
 furthermore , that no master nor pilot may carry any chart , nor astrolabe , nor cross-staff , nor regiment , without they be sign and seal by the pilot major Alonzo de chiavez , and the cosmographer the king reader Rodrigo Zamorano . 
 moreover , that go in company with the fleet , they do and obey all such thing , as their general shall command they , under pain of death . 
 write by i Pedro Dias bear in the isle of it Palma one of the canary , upon the request and gratification of m. Richard Hakluyt , in February 1586. 
 end of volume xi . 
 