reasonable , and contenting me well : wherewith I will conclude this narration and description of the Newfound land , and proceed to the rest of our voyage , which ended tragically . WHile the better sort of us were seriously occupied in repairing our wants , and contriving of matters for the commodity of our voyage : others of another sort Misdemeanour 8c disposition were plotting of mischief . Some casting ** ° ur come to steal away our shipping by night , watching opor - ? ante ' tunitie by the Generals and Captains lying on the shore : whose conspiracies discovered , they were prevented . Others drew together in company , and carried away out of the harbors adjoining , a ship laden with fish , setting the poor men on shore . A great many more of our people stole into the woods to hide themselves , attending time and means to return home by such shipping as daily departed from the coast . Some were sick of fluxes , and many dead : and in brief , by one means or other our company was diminished , and many by the general licensed to return home . Insomuch as after God brought together these men into the ship ordained to perish , who before had committed such outrage . Why sir Humf . Gilbert went in the Frigate . Liberalise of the Portugals . August 20 S . Johns in 47 deg . 40 min . Cape Raze in 46 degrees z 5 minutes . we had reviewed our people , resolved to see and end of our voyage , we grew scant of men to furnish all our shipping : it seemed good therefore unto the general to leave the Swallow with such provision as might be spared for transporting home the sick people . The Captain of the Delight or Admiral returned into England , in whose stead was appointed Captain Maurice brown , before Captain of the Swallow : who also brought with him into the Delight all his men of the Swallow , which before have be noted of outrage perpetrated and committed upon fishermen there met at sea . The general made choice to go in his frigate the Squirrel ( whereof the Captain also was among them that returned into