. Also , that all trade of Merchandise which shall be used to and from those parts , which by this discovery shall be found out , shall appertain only to the Adventurers which first shall disburse their money for this discovery , with prohibition to all other her Majesties subject ' s , and other Merchants to deal in the said parts , 148 without the consent of the first Adventurers , upon loss of ship and goods , and punishment of their persons , that so shall adventure in trade of merchandise : or otherwise by imprisonment at the Companies pleasure . That no person shall hereafter adventure in this discovery as Adventurers for the profits mentioned in the first Articles , but such only as do disburse their money in this first preparation : and they shall not adventure hereafter any greater sum , then ratably according to their proportion of this their first adventure . Also , the profit which by this discovery shall be attained unto , either by land which may be conquered , or otherwise got : as also such profit which by this discovery shall be obtained by mines , or otherwise got , that eke one shall have his part rate and rate like , according to the proportion of their first adventure , and not otherwise . The Adventurers in this first preparation shall , at their own free will and liberty , choose whither they will supply hereafter any further charge or not : if there do fallen out any such occasion to require the same . And yet withal shall for ever hold to them the freedom of the trade which shall grow in any of these parts : notwithstanding their said refusal to bear any further charge . That in the Patent which is to be obtained , be granted , that all her Majesties subject ' s may transport themselves thither that shall be contented to go . And that the Patentee or his assigns may ship thither from time to time , so many and such persons , men , women , and children , as they shall think meet . And the same persons to inhabit or remain there at their pleasure , any law to the contrary notwithstanding , with express prohibition , as is mentioned in the third article , against all others , which shall go thither without the licence of the patentee or his assigns first obtained . That it shall not be lawful for any of her Majesties subject ' s , or any other to inhabit or traffic within 149 A . D . 1583 . [ III . 189 . J one hundred leagues any way of the place , where the general shall have settled his chiefest being or residence . IJ9I . The fieete of Canada . Cape Raze . The Isles of S . Peter . Cape de Rey . The Isles of Aponas . .