, Foureteene of our men brought out of New fund land in a ship of St . John the Lui , . fir , and very great birch trees . Where we came on land we made a little house with boughs , where we rested all that night . In the morning I divided the company three and three to go every way to see what food they could find to sustain themselves , and appointed them to meet there all again at noon with such food as they could get . As we went aboard we found great store of peason as good as any we have in England : a man would think they had be sowed there . We rested there three days and three nights and lived very well with peas and berries , we nam the place Saint Laurence , because it was a very goodly river like the river of S . Laurence in Canada , and we found it very full of Salmons . When we had well rested our selves we rowed our boat along the shore , thinking to have gone to the Grande Bay to have come home with some Spanyards which are yearly there to kill the Whale : And when we were hungry or a thirst we put our boat on land and gathered peas and berries . Thus we rowed our boat along the shore five days : about which time we came to a very goodly river that ran far up into the Country and saw very goodly grown trees of all sorts . There we happened upon a ship of Saint John de Luz , which ship brought us into Biskay to and Harbour called The Passage . The Master of the ship was our great friend , or else we had be put to death if he had not kept our counsel . For when the visitors came aboard , as it is the order in Spaine , they demanding what we were , he said we were poor fishermen that had cast away our ship in Newfound land , and so the visitors inquired no more of the matter at that time . Assoon as night was come he put us on land and bade us shift for our selves . Then had we but tenne or twelve miles into France , which we went that night , and then cared not for the Spanyard . And so shortly after we came into England towards the end of the year 1583 . .