were but threescore leagues from the land , ( when they were seventie ) all to put them in comfort . Thus we continued the third and fourth day without any sustenance , save only the weeds that swam in the Sea , and salt water to drink . The fifth day Hedly died and another moreover : then we desired all to die : for in all these five days and five nights we saw the Sun but once and the Star but one night , it was so foul weather . Thus we did remain the sixt day : then we were very weak and wished all to die saving only my self which did comfort them and promised they should come soon to land by the help of God : but the company were very importunate , and were in doubt they should never come to land , but that I promised them the seventh day they should come to shore , or else they should cast me over board : which did happen true the seventh day , for at eleven of the clock we had sighed - of the land , and at 3 . of They came on the clock at afternoon we came on land . All these land they day seven days and seven nights , the wind kept continually South . If the wind had in the mean time shifted upon any other point , we had never come to land : we were no sooner come to the land , but the wind came clean contrary at North within half and hour after our arrival . But we were so weak that one could scarcely help another of us out of the boat , yet with much ado being come all on shore we kneeled down upon our knees and gave God praise that he had dealt so mercifully with us . Afterwards those which were strongest help their fellows unto a fresh brook , where we satisfied our selves with water and berries very well . There Thefruitfal - were of all sorts of berries plenty , & as goodly a Coun - ness ^ trey as ever I saw : we found a very raire plain ^ ewfoun / Champion ground that a man might see very far every land . way : by the Sea side was here and there a little wood with goodly trees as good as ever I saw any in Norway , able to mast any ship , of pine trees , spruse trees