. Here our men took certain Sea - oxen , but nothing such numbers as they might have had , if they had come in due season , which they had neglected . The ship called the Marigold fell with Cape Saint Francis in Newfoundland the eleventh of Julie , and from thence we went into the Bay Rogneuse , and afterwards doubled Cape Razo , and sailing towards the straight of Saint Peter ( which is the entrance between Newfoundland and Cape Briton , ) being unacquainted with the place , beat up and down a very long time , and yet missed it , and at length over shot it , and fell with Cape Briton . The English Here diverse of our men went on land upon the very men land upon Qapej where , at their arrival they found the spittes of ape rtton . Savages which had roasted meat a little before . And as they viewed the country they saw diverse beasts and fowls , as black Foxes , Dear , Otters , great Fowls with red legs , Pengwyns , and certain others . But having found no people here at this our first landing we went again on shipboorde , and sailed farther foure leagues to the West of Cape Briton , where we saw They go on many Seals . And here having need of fresh water tn “ n we went again on shore . And passing somewhat more ? ' into the land , we found certain round ponds artificially made by the Savages to keep fish in , with certain wears in them made to take fish . To these ponds we repaired to fill our cask with water . we had not be 158 long here , but there came one Savage with black long The people of hair hanging about his shoulders who called unto us , tfie trey weaving his hands downward towards his belhe , using our men these words , Calitogh Calitogh : as we drew towards him one of our men ' s musket unawares shot off : whereupon he fell down , and rising up suddenly again he cried thrice with a loud voice Chiogh , Chiogh , Chiogh . Thereupon nine or tenne of his fellows running right up over the bushes with great agility and swiftness came towards us with white staves in their hands like half pikes , and their dogs of colour black not so big Black dogs . as a greyhound followed them at the heals ; but we retired unto our boat