The voyage of the Grace of Bristol of M . Rice Jones , a Bark of thirty five Tons , up into the Bay of Saint Laurence to the Northwest of Newefoundland , as far as the Isle of Assumption or Natiscotec , for the barbs or fynnes of Whale ' s and train Oil , made by Silvester Wyet , Shipmaster of Bristoll . Ee departed with the aforesaid Bark manned with twelve men for the place aforesaid from ----- Bristoll the 4 of Aprill 1594 . and fell with Cape d ’ Espere on the coast of Newefoundland the nineteneth of May in the height of 47 . We went thence for Cape Raz , being distant from thence 18 or 19 leagues , the very same day . 162 * 594 - The 20 . day we were thwart of Cape Raz . Cape Raz . Then we set our course Northwest for Cape S . Marry , Cape S . which is distant from Cape Raz 19 leagues , and is on the Marie - Eastside of the great Bay of Placentia almost at the entry thereof . From thence we shaped our course for the Islands of S . Pedro passing by the broken Islands of the Martyers : The Islands of and when we were thwart of the said Isles of the Martyers the Martym - our course to the Isles of S . Pedro was West and by The Isles of North . In these Isles of S . Pedro there is a fair harbour , s - Peter ' which we went into with our bark , and found there 2 ships of Sibiburo fishing for Cod : where we stayed 2 days , and took in balest for our ship . There are as fair and tall fir trees growing therein , as in any other part of Newfoundland . Then we departed thence , and as we came out of the harbours mouth we laid the ship upon the lee , and in 2 hours space we took with our hooks 3 or 4 hundred great Cods for our provision of our ship . Then we departed from the Isle of S . Pedro to enter into the gulf of S . Laurence between Cape Briton and the said Isle , and set our course West North West , and fell with Cape de Rey which we found to be distant from Cape de Rey . the Isles of S . Pedro 42 leagues . From Cape de Rey to Cape de Angullie we set our course Northnorthwest being Cape the An - distant thence 12 or 13 leagues . From the Cape de Angullie into the Bay of S .