without any hurt at all received . Howbeit one of them brake and hogshead which we had filled with fresh water , with a great branch of a tree which lay on the ground . Upon which occasion we bestowed half a dousen muskets shot upon them , which they avoided by falling flat to the earth , and afterward retired themselves to the woods . One of the Savages , which seemed to be their Captain , beware a long mantle of beasts skins hanging on one of his shoulders . The rest were all naked except their privities , which were covered with a skin tied behind . After they had escaped our shot they made a great fire on the shore , belike to give their fellows warning of us . The kinds of trees that we noted to be here , were goodly Oaks , Fir trees of a great height , a kind of tree called of us Quickbeame , and Cherie trees , and diverse other kinds to us unknown , because we stayed not long with diligence to observe them : and there is great show of rosen , pitch , and tar . we found in both the places where we went on land abundance of Raspeses , Strawberries , Hurts , and herbs of good smell , and diverse good for the skurvie , and grass very rank and of great length . we saw five or sixe boats sailing to the Southwestwardes of Cape Briton , which we judged to be Christians , which had some trade that way . we saw also , while we were on shore , the manner of their * 59 A secret trade to the Southwest of Cape Briton . a . d . the ENGLISH VOYAGES J593 ’ .. hanging up of their fish and flesh with withes to dry in the air : they also lay them upon rafts and hurdles and make a smoke under them , or a soft fire , and so dry them as the Savages use to do in Virginia . Soundings to While we lay foure leagues South of Cape Briton Southwest we sounded and had sixtie fathoms black ozy ground . ward of Cape sailing thence Westward nine or ten leagues ofF Briton . the shore , we had twenty foure fathoms red sand , and small whitish stones . we continued our course so far to the Southwest , that we brought our selves into thee They sail 50 latitude of fourtie foure degrees and and half , having sailed or