A brief note concerning the voyage of M . George Drake of Apsham to Isle of Ramea in the aforesaid year 1593 . KRSN the beginning of the former relation written by Richard Fisher servant to the worshipful Master pjjp open Rejriffe JS } as yOU read , a brief report of their losing of their consort the ship of Master George Drake of Apsham : which though she came directly to the Isle of Ramea , yet because she was not ready so soon by two months as she ought to have be , she was not only the hindrance of her consort the Marigold , & lost the season of the year for the making of her voyage of killing the Morses or Sea Oxen , which are to be taken in Aprill , May , and June : but also suffered the fit places and harboroughs in the Isle which are but two , as far as I can learn , to be forestalled and taken up by the Britons of Saint Malo and the Basks of Saint John de Luz , by coming a day after the Fair , as we say . Which lingering improvidence of our men hath be the overthrow of many a worthy enterprise and of the undertakers of the same . The relation of this voyage at large I was promised by the Author himself : but the same not coming to my hands in time I am constrained to leave it out . The want whereof , for the better understanding of the state of the said Island , the frequenting of that gainful trade by the aforesaid nations or the Britons and Basks , may in part be supplied by the voyage of Master Charles vin 161 L Leigh to the said Island of Ramea : which also coming much too late thither , as Master George Drake had done , was wholly prevented and shut out to his and his friends no small detriment and mischief , and to the discouraging of others hereafter in the said gainful and profitable trade . Nevertheless albeit hitherto the success hath not answered our expectation through our own default , as is abovesaid , yet I was very willing to set down in brief and homely style some mention of these three voyages of our own men . The first of M . George Drake , the second of M . Silvester Wyet , the third of M . Charles Leigh , because they are the first , for ought that hitherto is come to my knowledge , of our own Nation , that have conducted English ships so far within this gulf of S . Laurence , and have brought us true relation of the manifold gain which the French , Britaynes , Basks , and Biskaines do yearly return from the said parts ; while we this long time have stood still and have be idle lookers on , making courtisie who should give the first adventure , or once being given , who should continue or prosecute the same . .