The third voyage of discovery made by Captain Jaques Cartier , 1540 . unto the Countries ' of Canada , Hochelaga , and Saguenay . King Francis the first having herd the report of Captain Cartier his Pilot generail in his two former Voyages of discovery , as well by writing as by word of mouth , touching that which he had found and seen in the Wester ne parts discovered by him in the parts of Canada and Hochelaga , and having also seen and talked with the people , which the said Cartier had brought out of those Countries ' , whereof one was king of Canada , whose name was Donnacona , and others : which after that they had be a long time in France and Britaine , were baptised at their own desire and request , and died in the said country of Britaine . And albeit his Majesty was advertized by the said Cartier of the death and decease of all the people which were brought over by him ( which were tenne in number ) saving one little girl about tenne years old , yet he resolved to send the said Cartier his Pilot thither again , with John Francis de la Roche , Knight , Lord of Roberval , whom he appointed his Lieutenant and Governor in the Countries ' of Canada and Hochelaga , and the said Cartier Captain generail and leader of the ships , that they might discover more then was done before in the former voyages , and attain ( if it were possible ) unto the knowledge of the Country of Saguenay , whereof the people brought by Cartier , as is declared , made mention unto the King , that there were great riches , and very good countries ' . And the King caused a certain sum of money to be delivered to furnish out the said voyage with five ships : which thing was performed by the said Monsieur Roberval and Cartier . After that they had agreed together to rig the said five ships at Saint Malo in Britaine , where the two 263 Ten Savages brought into France . John Francis de la Roche , lord of Roberval . Great riches & very good soil in Saguenay , which is beyond you saults . 23 . of May , 1540 . The great mischiefs of leesing the season . former voyages had been prepared and set forth . And the said Monsieur Roberval sent