The description of the aforesaid River and Haven . THe said River is small , not passed 50 . pases broad , and ships drawing three fathoms water may enter in at a full sea : and at a low water there is nothing but a channel of a foot deep or thereabouts . On both sides of the said River there are very good and fair grounds , full of as fair and mighty trees as any be in the world , and diverse sorts , which are above tenne fathoms higher then Trees above ■ $. the rest , and there is one kind of tree above three fathoms fathms abQUt - about , which they in the Country call Hanneda , which hath the most excellent virtue of all the trees of the world , whereof I will make mention hereafter . Moreover there are great store of Okes the most excellent that ever I saw in my life , which were so laden with Mast that they cracked again : beside this there are fairer Arables , Cedars , Beeches , and other trees , then grow in France : and hard unto this wood on the South side the ground is all covered with Vines , which we found laden with grapes as black as Mulberries , but they be not so kind as those of France because the Vines be not tilled , and because they grow of their own accord . Moreover there are many white Thorns , which bear leaves as big as oaken leaves , and fruit like unto Meddlers . To be short , it is as good a Country to blow and manure as a man should find or desire . We sowed seeds here of our Country , as Cabbages , Naveaus , Lettises and others , which grew and sprung up out of the ground in eight days . The mouth of the river is towards the South , and it windeth Northward like unto a snake : and at the mouth of it towards the East there is a high and steep cliff , where we made a way in manner of a pair of stairs , and aloft we made a Fort to keep the neither Fort and the ships , and all things that might pass aswell by the great as by this small river . Moreover a man may behold a great extension of ground apt for tillage , strait and handsome and somewhat inclining towards the South , as easy to be brought to tillage as 267 Hanneda the most excellent tree of the