and knives : whereat the said Lord seemed highly to rejoice , and thanked the Captain . This done , the Captain and his company departed from that place : And we sailed with so prosperous a wind , that we arrived the eleventh day of the month at the first Salt of water , which is two leagues distant from the Town of Tutonaguy . And after we were arrived there , we determined to go and pass as far up as it was possible with one of the boats , and that the other should stay there till it returned : and we double manned her to row up against the course or stream of the said Salt . And after we had passed some part of the way from our other boat , we found bad ground and great rocks , and so great a current , that we could not possibly pass any further with our Boat . And the Captain resolved to go by land to see the nature and fashion of the Salt . And after that we were come on shore , we found hard by the water side a way and beaten path going towards the said Saults , by which we took our way . And on the said way , and soon after we found and habitation of people which made us great cheer , and entertained us very friendly . And after that he had signified unto them , that we were going towards the Saults , and that we desired to go to Saguenay , foure young men went along with us to show us the way , and they brought us so far that we came to another village or habitation of good people , which dwell over against the second Salt , which came and brought us of their victuals , as Pottage and Fish , and offered us of the same . After that the Captain had inquired of them as well by signs as words , how many more Saults we had to pass to go to Saguenay , and what distance and way it was thither , this people showed us and gave us to understand , that we were at the 270 1540 . second Salt , and that there was but one more to pass , They were at that the River was not navigable to go to Saguenay , and that the said Salt was but a third part farther then ' r - wgr vtz had travailed , showing us the same with certain little navigable to sticks , which they laid upon the ground in a certain pass to Sague - distance , and afterwards laid other small branches be - na9 ' tween both , representing the Saults . And by the said