How after the departure of the two ships which were sent back into Britaine , and that the Fort was begun to be built , the Captain prepared two boats to go up the great River to discover the passage of the three Saults or falls of the River . THE said Captain having dispatched two ships to return to carry news , according as he had in charge from the king , and that the Fort was begun to be built , for preservation of their victuals and other things , determined with the Viscount of Beaupre , and other Gentlemen , Master ' s , and Pilots chosen for counsel , to make a voyage with two boats furnished with men and victuals to go as far as Hochelaga , of purpose to view and understand the fashion of the Saults of water , which are to be passed to go to Saguenay , that he might be the readier in the spring to pass farther , and in the Winter time to make all things needful in a readiness for their business . The foresaid boats being made ready , the Captain and Martine de Painpont , with other Gentlemen and the remnant of the Mariners departed from the said place of Charlesburg Royal the seventh day of September in the year aforesaid 1540 . And the Viscount of Beaupre stayed behind for the guarding and government of all things in the Fort . And as they went up the river , the Captain went to see the Lord of Hochelay , which dwells between Canada and Hochelaga : which in the former voyage had given unto the said Captain a little girl , and had oftentimes informed him of the treasons which Taignoagny and Domagaya ( whom the Captain in his former voyage had carried into France ) would have wrought against him . In regard of which his courtesy the said Captain would not pass by without visiting of him , and to let him understand that the Captain thought himself beholding unto him , he gave unto him two young boys , 269 The Viscount of Beaupre and the rest of their council . The rich country of Saguenay situated beyond the Saults which are in 44 . deg . They depart from Charlesburg Royal the 7 . of Septem . The Town ofTutonaguy . bade ground and a great current . A Town of friendly people . Another village of good people which dwell over against the second Salt . and left them with him to learn their language , and bestowed upon him a cloak of Paris read , which cloak was set with yellow and white buttons of Tin , and small bells . And withal he gave him two Basins of Laton , and certain hachets