through those storms lost companyone of another , all save two that kept together , to wit that wherein the Captain was , and the other wherein went the Viscount of Beaupre , until at length at the end of one month we met all together at the Haven of Carpont in Newfoundland . But the length of time which we were in passing between Britayne and Newfoundland was the cause that we stood in great need of water , because of the cattle , aswell Goats , Hogs , as other beasts which we carried for breed in the Country , which we were constrained to water with Sider and other drink . Now therefore because we were the space of three months in sailing on the sea , and staying in Newfoundland , waiting for Monsieur Roberval , and taking in of fresh water and other things necessary , we arrived not before the Haven of Saint Croix in Canada , ( where in the former voyage we had remained eight months ) until the 23 . day of August . In which place the people of the Country came to our ships , making show of joy for our arrival , and namely he came thither which had the rule and government of the Country of Canada , nam Agona , which was appointed king there by Donacona , when in the former voyage we carried him into France : And he came to the Captains ship with 6 . or 7 . boats , and with many women and children . And after the said Agona had inquired of the Captain where Donacona and the rest were , the Captain answered him , That Donacona was dead in France , and that his body rested in the earth , and that the rest stayed there as great Lords , and were married , and would not return back into their Country : the said Agona made no show of anger at all these speeches : and I think he took it so well because he remained Lord and Governor of the country by the death of the said Donacona . After which conference the A . D . 1540 . Carpont Haven . Transporting of diverse sorts of cattellfir breed . The 23 . of August . The new king of Canada . said Agona took a piece of tanned leather of a yellow skin edged about with Esnoguy ( which is their riches and 265 the