thing which they esteem most precious , as we esteem gold ) which was upon his head in stead of a crown , and he put the same on the head of our Captain , and took from his wrists two bracelets of Esnoguy , and put them upon the Captains arms , colling him about the neck and showing unto him great signs of joy : which was Great dis - all dissimulation , as afterwards it well appeared . The cap - simulatimt of tajne took his said crown of leather and put it again a UpOn his head , and gave him and his wives certain small presents , signifying unto him , that he had brought certain new things , which afterwards he would bestow upon him : for which the said Agona thanked the Captain . And after that he had made him and his company eat and drink , they departed and returned to the shore with their boats . After which things the said Captain went with two of his boats up the river , beyond Canada and the Port of Saint Croix , to view a Haven and a small river , A good road which is about 4 . leagues higher : which he found better +• f and more commodious to ride in and lay his ships , then “ croix . mnC 1 the former . And therefore he returned and caused all his ships to be brought before the said river , and at a low water he caused his Ordinance to be planted to place his ships in more safety , which he meant to keep and stay in the Country , which were three : which he did the day following , and the rest remained in the road in the midst of the river ( In which place the victuals and other furniture were discharged , which they had brought ) from the 26 . of August until the second of September , what time they departed to return for S . Malo , in which ships he sent back Mace Jolloberte his brother in law , and Steven Noel his Nephew , skilful and excellent pilots , with letters unto the king , and to advertise him what had be done and found : and how Monsieur de Roberval was not yet come , and that he feared that by occasion of contrary winds and tempests he was driven back again into France . .