The manners of the Savages . TO dedare unto you the state of the Savages , they are people of a goodly stature , and well made , they are very white , but they are all naked : and if they were appareled as the French are , they would be as white and as fair : but they paint themselves for fear of heat and sun burning . In stead of apparel , they wear skins upon them like mantles ; and they have a small pair of breeches , wherewith they cover their privities , as well men as women . They have hosen and shoes of leather excellently made . And they have no shirts : neither cover they their heads , but their hair is trussed up above the crown of their heads , and plaited or broided . Touching their victuals , they eat good meat , but all unsalted , but they dry it , and afterwards they broil it , as well fish as flesh . They have no certain dwelling place , and they go from place to place , as they think they may best find food , as Aloses in one place , and other fish , Salmons , Sturgeons , Mullets , Surmullets , Barz , Carps , Eels , Pinperneaux , and other fresh water fish , and store of Porposes . They feed also of Stags , wild Boars , Bugles , Porkespynes , and store of other wild beasts . And there is as great store of Foul as they can desire . Touching their bred , they make very good : and it is of great mill : and they live very well ; for they take care for nothing else . They drink Seal oil , but this is at their great feasts . They have a King in every Country , and are wonderful obedient unto him : and they do him honour according unto their manner and fashion . And when they travail from place to place , they carry all their goods with them in their boats . Their apparel . So have they of Ceula , and Quivira , and Meta Incognita . Their victuals . They remove from place to place . Fish . Beasts . Foul . Their bred of great Myl or Maiz . Drink of Seal oy le at their great feasts . Their government . The women nurse their children with the breast , and they fit continually , and are wrapped about the bellies with skins of fur . .