The foresaid Francis Lopez de Gomara in his general historic or the West Indies , Chap . 215 . writeth in manner following of certain great and strange beasts never seen nor herd of in our known world of Asia , Europe , and Africa : which somewhat resembling our oxen , having high bunches on their backs like those on the backs of Camels , are therefore called by him Vacas corcobados , that is to say , Crookbacked oxen , being very deformed & terrible in show , and fierce by nature : which notwithstanding for food , apparel , and other necessary uses , are most serviceable and beneficial to the inhabitants of those countries ' . He reported also in the same chapter of certain strange sheep as big as horses , and of dogs which use to carry burdens of 50 . pound weight upon their backs . A LI the way between Cicuic and Quivira is a most plain soil , without trees and stones , and hath but few and small towns . The men cloth and shoe themselves with leather ; and the women which are esteemed Captain Fro - for their long locks , cover their heads and secrets with bisher brought the same . They have no bred of any kind of grain , int0 England as they say : which I account a very great matter . Mita Their chiefest food is flesh , and that oftentimes they 5 ' eat raw , either of custom or for lack of wood . They eat the fat as they take it out of the Ox , and drink the blood hot , and die not therewithal ! , though the ancient writers say that it kills , as Empedocles and others affirmed , they drink it also cold dissolved in water . They sees not the flesh for lack of pots , but rost it , or to say more properly , warm it at a fire of Ox - dung : when they eat , they chew their meat but little , and raven up much , and holding the flesh with their teeth , they cut it with razors of stone , which seems to be great bestiality : but such is their manner of living and fashion . They go together in companies , and move from one place to 167 The description of the oxen ofQuivira . Sheep as big as horses . Mighty dogs carrying 50 . pound weight . another , as