which Mines and silver Mines : and the King of the country 15 4 °°- is a mighty King , and he will not become subject to his Majesty . There were certain Spaniards sent to westward . that king from the Viceroy in and ambassage : It is thought that they are slain , for we can hear no news of them . The other news that I can certify you of at this instant is , that there is a Judge of the city of Guadalajara called dONE Nunno de villam Inscensia lately married . Also the kings Attorney of Guadalajara married his daughter of 8 . years old with a boy of 12 . years old . But the Viceroy says that he hath a warrant from his Majesty , that if any Judge whatsoever dwelling in that kingdom of Guadalajara should marry any son in that jurisdiction , that then the said Viceroy is to deprive him of his office . And therefore he went about to deprive the Judge & the kings Attourney of their offices . Whereupon the people of that province would 205 A dangerous rebellion In Guadalajara a province of Nova Hispania . not thereunto consent , nor suffer them to be dismissed of their offices , nor to be arrested , nor carried prisoners to Mexico . When the viceroy had intelligence thereof , & that the Country did resist his commandment , and would not suffer them to be apprehended , he sent certain Captains with soldiers to go and apprehend the Judge , the kings Attourney , and as many as did take their parts . So the citizens of Guadalajara withstood the viceroys forces , & put themselves in defence ; and are up in arms against the viceroy : yet they do not rebel against the king , but say : God save king Philip , and will submit themselves to his Majesty , but not to the viceroy . So that all the kingdom of Guadalajara is up in arms , and are all in a mutiny against us of Mexico . I beseech Almighty God to remedy it , and that it may be qualified in time : or else all Nova Spania will be utterly spoiled . I write this thing , because it is publicly known in all places . And thus I rest , from Mexico the 30 . of May 1590 . Bartholomew Canon . .