A Letter written by the most honourable Lord DONE Antonio de Mendosa , Viceroy of Nueva Espanna , to the Emperor ' s Majesty . Of certain Noblemen which sought to discover the end of the firm land of Nueva Espanna towards the North . The arrival of Vazquez de Coronado with Frier Marco at S . Michael of Culiacan , with commission to the Governors of those parts , to pacific the Indians , and not to make them slaves any more . N the ships that went last from hence ( whereof Michael de Usnago was Admiral ) I wrote unto your Majesty , how I had sent two Franciscan Friars to discover the end of this firm land , which stretcheth to the North . And because their journey fell out to greater purpose then was looked for , I will declare the whole matter from the beginning . It may please your Majesty to call to mind how often I wrote unto your Highness , that I desired to know the end of this Province of Nueva Espanna , because it is so great a country , and that we have yet no knowledge thereof . Neither had I only this desire ; for Nunno de Guzman departed out of this city of Mexico with 400 . horsemen , and 14000 . Indians footmen born in these Indias , being the best men , & the best furnished , which have be seen in these parts : and he did so little with them , that the most part of them were consumed in the enterprise , & could not enter nor discover any more then already was discovered . After this the said Nunno Guzman being Governor of Nueva Galicia , sent Captains and Horsemen forth diverse times , which sped no better then he had done . Likewise the Marks de valle Hernando Cortez sent a captain with 2 . ships to discover the coast : which 2 . ships and the captain perished . After that he sent again 2 . other ships , one of the which 121 This was the Port of Santa Cruz , in the Isle of California . was divided from her consort , and the Master and certain mariners slew the captain , & usurped over the ship . After this they came to and Island , where the Master with