, as some ten , some twelve , etc . Next unto him which bore the sceptre , was the king himself , with his Guard about his person , clad with Conie skins , and other skins : after them followed the naked common These are like chains of Esurnoy in Canada and Hochelage . sort of people , every one having his face painted , some with white , some with black , and other colours , and having in their hands one thing or other for a present , not so much as their children , but they also brought their presents . In the mean time , our general gathered his men together , and marched within his fenced place , making against their approaching , a very warlike show . They being trooped together in their order , and a general salutation being made , there was presently a general silence . Then he that bore the sceptre before the king , being informed by another , whom they assigned to that office , with a manly and lofty voice , proclaimed that which the other spoke to him in secret , continuing half and hour : which ended , and a general Amen as it were given , the king with the whole number of men , and women ( the children excepted ) came down without any weapon , who descending to the foot of the hill , set themselves in order . In coming towards our bulwarks and tents , the sceptre bearer began a song , observing his measures in a dance , and that with a stately countenance , whom the king with his Guard , and every degree of persons following , did in like manner sing and dance , saving only 323 The king resignes his crown and kingdom to Sir Francis Drake . Great riches in Nova Albion . the women which danced and kept silence . The General permitted them to enter within our bulwark , where they continued their song and dance a reasonable time . When they had satisfied themselves , they made signs to our general to fit down , to whom the king , and diverse others made several orations , or rather supplication , that he would take their province and kingdom into his hand , and become