navigable little more then 2 . leagues before it entereth into the river of Ometepec , where it is 5 . leagues from the sea . Hard by it is the town of Tlacolula abovenamed ; and 3 . leagues from it is the town of Azoyoque and old manor of Tlapa . The town of Chilsiztlahuaca hath but 3 . Indians ; and the town of Azoyoque hath more then 300 . Indians . But because in this haven must be the building of ships , the provinces of Tlapa and Tututepec may stand them in great stead ; the province of Tututepec being neighbour to the river of Tlacamama , and the province of Tlapa to the river of Tlacolula . For they may , as I have said , carry the timber in lighters or rafts down the rivers , and may use the Indians in the towns thereabouts to fell , and draw the same out of the cold mountains ; for in the warm countries the most is plain ground , whereas with very few men and oxen it may be brought unto the place where it should be embarked . There may come flat bottoms , and canoas unto the towns thereabouts , and lade themselves with victuals : For they have already come by that river to the road of Ometepec , & made there provision at the mansion of DONE Mattheo , and at the farms , at that time when his Majesty did people the plains which are between these rivers , containing a large and void country sufficient for the erecting of 20 . manors , being a country well furnished with water and pasture without any danger or peril , according to the description hereunto annexed . This small harbour of Tecuanapa being seen and viewed , seems very commodious for to built ships 472 in , by reason of the great abundance of mountains full Tecuanapa a of good timber for that purpose , with the commodities of most fit har - rivers , and with the service and victuals from the towns p ^ idMpsfior thereabouts , which be very good for coast towns . South sea . The desire of him that made this relation , hath be with zeal to serve your excellency ; who therewithal ! desires the Lord God to give the success . .