of a friar was delivered out of prison ( which cost him all the merchandise he brought with him in his ship ) and so returned with dead freight to the sum of 200 pound that afterwards Andrew Barker discharged . In recompense of which injury ( for that no suit prevails against the inquisition of Spaine ) & also to recover his loss of the Spaniards themselves , at his own charge with the help of his friends he furnished two barks for the West Indies , the greater of which barks was called the Ragged staff , himself being captain , & Philip Roche Master thereof , the other nam the Bear had one William Coxe of Limehouse for her Master and captain . And thus all our company being embarked at Plimmoth on Whitsonday in the beginning of June , we set forward , & in our course we met with a ship of London , & afterwards with another ship , but took nothing from either of them . Our first arrival was at one of the Island of Cape Verde , nam Del sal , vz . the Isle of salt , where we took certain fish Isla del sal . called Tortoises : and there we remained one night and half the day following . And from thence we came to the Isle of Maio , being distant from Isla del sal , 14 or 15 leagues , where we took in fresh water and trafficked with certain Portugals inhabiting in ' that place , of whom we had some victuals for knives and beads : and there we remained one day and one night : but our trumpeter was treacherously slain by those Portugals , in revenge of which murder we set Two villages on fire two of their small villages . From this Island urnt - we shaped our course over the main Ocean towards The Isle of the West Indies , and arrived happily at the Island of Tnmdad . Trinidad , and had conference with certain Indians inhabitants thereof , who gave us very friendly and courteous entertainment : and here we set up a pinnace which we carried forth in the Ragged staff , and trafficked with the foresaid Indians for victuals . And after we had spent sixe days in this place we The Isle of departed , and arrived next at the Isle of Margarita , Margarita . where we took a small Spanish ship