vessels which carry goods up and down the river , whereof there are above fiftie there , and pass up to the lodging of the Crosses , called Panama being and open place is easy to be taken . Havana easy to be taken . in Spanish Venta de Cruzes , which is five leagues from Panama , which because it is and unwalled town may easily be taken . And Havana also will be in great danger , which albeit it have a fortress , yet it is but little and weak , and bringing his great ordinance on shore he may take the same with great facility . And beside these domages which he may do , according to this discourse , it will not be the least to cut ofF The Indian fleet may be taken . the navigation of the Indies , to take the West Indian fleet , if they chance to be there . What course is to be taken to prevent these mischiefs . r I ' ' Oh dispatch Caravels with all possible diligence to the A viceroys and governors of the Indias , advertising them of the news of the English army , that they may be provided , and make themselves ready for them . Albeit , considering the number of ships which have be set 94 1585 . forth out of England , I assure my self , that some part Sir Barnard of them are gone out of those parts unto Newfoundland Drake took For the Queen hath taken careful order to send to intercept the ships of the fishermen that go to Baccalaos . Jugali And it is likewise to be thought that she hath done fishers re - the like for the intercepting of the fleet of the Indies , turningfrom And considering that according to our intelligence out of England , above fourescore ships , and the army of Drake His ’ lntM - have be set forth from thence , it is meet that his gence was too majesty should prepare another army to seek the English as s ‘ Me fleet , and to fight with it , commanding that the Galleons which belong to the crown of Portugall , and those of his Admiralty . majesty which lie in the river of Sivill be prepared to send against them , and to give them the Carena , that they may be in a readiness for any voyage how long soever it be :