Tapia caused a tire of ordinance to be shot from the castle at the ship , for she bore in directly with the haven . When the Englishmen saw this , they withdrew themselves out , and those that were in the shipboate , god themselves with all speed on shipboard . And in truth the warden of the castle committed and oversight : for if the ship had entered into the haven the men thereof could not have come on land without leave both of the city and of the castle . Therefore the people of the ship seeing how they were received , sailed towards the Hand of S . John , and entering into the port of S . Germaine , the English men parted with those of the town , requiring victuals and things needful to furnish their ship , and complained of the inhabitants of the city of S . Domingo , saying that they came not to do any harm , but to trade and traffic for their money and merchandise . In this place they had certain victuals , and for recompense they gave and paid them with certain vessel of wrought tin and other things . And afterwards they departed towards Europe , where it is thought they arrived not : for we never herd any more news of them . Thus far proceedeth Gonsalvo de Oviedo , who though it please him to call the captain of this great English ship a rover , yet it appears by the Englishmens own words , that they came to discover , and by their traffiq ' ue for pewter vessel and other wares at the town of S . Germane in the Hand of S . John de puerto rico , it cannot be denied but that they were furnished with wares for honest traffic and exchange . But whosoever is conversant in reading the Portugal ! and Spanish writers of the East and West Indies , shall commonly find that they account all other nations for pirates , rovers and thieves , which visit any heathen coast that they have once sailed by or looked on . Howbeit their passionate and ambitious reckoning ought not to be prejudicial ! to other men ' s chargeable and painful enterprises and honourable travels in discovery . .