A summary and true discourse of sir Francis Drakes West Indian voyage , begun in the year 1585 . Wherein were taken the cities of Saint Iago , Santo Domingo , Cartagena , and the town of Saint Augustine in Florida ; Published by M . Thomas Cates . His worthy knight for the service of his Prince and country having prepared his whole fleet , and got them down to Plimmouth in Devonshire , to the number of five and twenty sail of ships and pinnaces , and having assembled of soldiers and mariners , to the number of 2300 . in the whole , embarked them and himself at Plimmouth aforesaid , the 12 . day of September 1585 . being accompanied with these men of name and charge , which hereafter follow : Master Christopher Carleil Lieutenant general , a man x 97 G of long experience in the wars as well by sea as land , who had formerly carried high offices in both kinds in many fights , which he discharged always very happily , and with great good reputation . Anthonie Powel Sergeant Major . Captain Matthew Morgan , and Captain John Sampson , Corporals of the field . These officers had commandment over the rest of the land - Captaines , whose names hereafter follow . Captain Anthony Plat . ' Captain Edward Winter . Captain John Goring . Captain Robert Pew . Captain George Barton . " Captain John Merchant . Captain William Cecill . « Captain Walter Bigs . Captain John Hannam . Captain Richard Stanton . Captain Martine Frobisher Viceadmiral , a man of great experience in seafaring actions , who had carried the chief charge of many ships himself , in sundry voyages before , being now shipped in the Primrose . Captain Francis Knolles , Reereadmirall in the Galeon Leicester . Master Thomas Vennor Captain in the Elizabeth Bonad - venture under the general . Master Edward Winter Captain in the Aid . Master Christopher Carleil the Lieutenant general , Captain of thee Tygar . Henry White Captain of the sea Dragon . Thomas Drake Captain of the Thomas . Thomas Seely Captain of the Minion . Baily Captain