of the river of Santo Domingo . And as we sailed to Cape Tiburon , three leagues to the Westward of Santo Domingo we took a boat of fifteene tons , which had certain jars of malosses or unrefined sugar , with three men ; which men with their boat we carried with us to Cape Tiburon , which , in respect of service done unto us in furnishing us with fresh water , we dismissed . Thus contrary to other Englishmens courses we shaped ours to the Southward of Jamaica , and our shallop with Jamaica . 12 men ranged the coast but found nothing . Thence we ranged the three islands of the Caimanes , and landed at Grand Caiman , being the Westermost , where we found no people , but a good river of fresh water ; and there we mw turned up threescore great tortoises ; and of them we took our choice , to wit , fifteene of the females , which caima „ tO are the best and fullest of eggs , whereof two served and 191 hundred men a day . And there with stones we might kill turtle doves , wild geese , & other good fowls at our pleasures . Thence we came to Cape de Corrientes on Cuba to water , and from thence to Cape S . Antonio , and so went over for the Tortugas , without taking of any new prize : and thence cut over to Rio de puercos on the coast of Cuba . There we took a small bark of twenty tons , with foure men and forty live hogs , with certain dried pork cut like leather jerkins along , and dried hogs tongues and neats tongues , and 20 ox hides . Then passing thence , within foure days we took a ship of 80 tons laden with hides , indico , & salsa perilla , North of and headland called Corugna : thence the current set us to the East to the old channel . There we took a frigate of 20 tons , having certain pieces of Spanish broad cloth & other small pillage : there continuing ofF the Matan $ as 12 days , with the wind so Westerly that we could hardly recover Havana in the month of May . Here we took two boats laden with tortoises , which we sunk , saving some of the tortoises , & setting the men on shore . Then at length we recovered up to Havana , where we came so near to the forts , that for one hours fight they overreached us with their long ordinance