The voyage made to the bay of Mexico by M . William King Captain , M . Moore , M . How , and M . Boreman Owners , with the Salomon of 200 tons , and the Jane Bonaventure of 40 tons of Sir Henry Palmer , from Ratcliffe the 26 of January 1592 . He Salomon was manned with and hundred men , all mariners , and the Jane with sixe and twenty , all like wise mariners . we came first to the Downs in Kent , and never struck sail in passing thence , until we came to Cape S . Vincent on the coast of Portugall . From thence we shaped our course to Lancerota one of the Canary islands , where we landed threescore men , and fetched a caravel out of and harbour on the South side , and from a small Island we took a demy - canon of brass in despite of the inhabitants , which played upon us with their small shot at our first landing : of whom we slew three ; and gave them the repulse . Thence we went to the Grand 190 Canaria , where we boarded a bark lying at anchor : out of which we were driven by great store of shot from the Island . From thence we directed our course for the West Indies , and fell with the isle of Dominica about the tenth of April . There at a watering place we took a ship of and hundred tons come from Guiny , laden with two hundred and seventy Negroes , which we carried with us to S . Juan de Puerto Rico , and there coming thorough El passaje , we gave chase to a frigate which went in to S . Juan de Puerto Rico , and in the night we sent in our shallope with foureteene men . And out of the harbour we took away and English ship of seventy tons , laden with threescore tons of Canary - wines , in despite of the castle and two new bulwarks , being within caliver shot . These two prizes we carried away to the Westermost part of the island , and put the Negroes , except fifteene , all on land in a Spanish caravel which the Jane Bonaventure took : and we carried away one of the former prizes , and set fire on the other . We passed thence by the isle of Mona , where we watered , and refreshed our selves with potatos and plantans , and so came to the isle of Saona : and from thence arrived at the mouth