A voyage of Master William Parker of Plymouth gentleman , to Margarita , Jamaica , Truxillo , Puerto de Cavallos situate within the bay of Honduras , and taken by sir Anthony Sherley and him , as likewise up Rio dolce : with his return from thence , and his valiant and happy enterprise upon Campeche the chief town of Yucatan , which he took and sacked with sixe and fifty men , and brought out of the harbour a Frigate laden with the kings tribute , and surprised also the town of Sebo . N the year 1596 , Master William Parker of Plimmouth gentleman being furnished with a tall ship and a bark at his own charges , the ship called the Prudence of one hundreth and twenty tons , wherein himself went captain , and the bark called the Adventure of five and twentie tons , whereof was captain one Richard Hen , departed from the foresaid haven of Plimmouth in the month of November , having one hundreth men in his company . The first place where we touched in the West Indies was the Isle of Margarita on the coast of Tierra firma , where we took a Spanish gentleman and others , who for his ransom set at liberty Master James Willis , and five other Englishmen which were prisoners in Cumana , who otherwise were never like to have come from thence . Thus passing from thence , we sailed over to the Isle of Jamaica , where the second of March we met with sir Anthony Sherley , who before our coming had taken the chief town in the Island , and was now almost in a readiness to depart . And here consorting our selves with him , we departed from Jamaica 277 Margarita . Sixe English men redeemed . Truxillo the sixt of March , and resolved to set upon the strong assailed . town of Truxillo near the mouth of the bay of the Honduras . And having sailed to Cape de Corrientes upon Cuba , to seek a bark of mine for our better strength ; but not finding her , we went for the cape of Honduras , where we purposed to entrap the watch , and so to have sacked the town of Truxillo . But the watch discovering us , made great fires , and the town presently shot ofF a great piece , and answered with fires . Notwithstanding , the next day being the one and thirtieth of March , we brought our ships under the fort , and landed our men : but it was a vain pur - pose , for the town is invincible by nature , and stands upon the top of a very