thousand Indians . The multitude of the Spaniards which fled upon my first assault by ten of the clock in the morning assembling together renewed their strength , and set furiously upon me and my small company . In which assault I lost some sixe of my men , and my self was shot under the left breast with a bullet , which bullet lies still in the chine of my back . Being thus put unto our shifts we devised on the sudden a new stratagem : for having diverse of the townsmen A new prisoners , we tied them arm in arm together , and strata & m . placed them in stead of a barricado to defend us from the fury of the enemies shot . And so with ensign displayed , taking with us our sixe dead men , we retired with more safety to the haven , where we took a frigate which road ready fraught with the kings tribute in silver and other good commodities , * which were * To the valve presently to be transported to S . Juan de Ullua , and 5 °°° brought the same and our Periago or Canoa to my ship , * own ‘ which lay in two fathom water sixe leagues from the town , being not able to come any nearer for the sholds upon that coast . Over against the place where our ship an Indian road , stood a town of 300 or 400 Indians called Sebo , town taken . 279 which we likewise took , where we found Champeche - wood good to die withal , with wax , and honey . This done we left this coast , and turned up to Cape de Cotoche again , and ankored every day at noon , because of the brizes , and in turning up I lost my bark called the Adventure , which was taken by 2 frigates of war , which were manned out from Campeche : wherein Captain Hen and thirteen of my men were taken , and afterwards executed , as since we understand by some Spanish prisoners that were taken in those parts . After we had stayed five weeks on this coast , we shaped our course for Havana , where finding nothing , we disemboqued , and came along by the Isle of Bermuda , and crossed over to The bank near Cape Raze in 22 fathoms : and from thence sailing for England , we fell with Silly about the first of July , and within two days after arrived at Plimmouth , where we found the Right honourable the Earl of Essex setting forth with a great fleet for the Isles of the Azores . .