should have been conveyed , were converted into ashes : what might it signify ? Certes , as it does evidently prove , that El Dorado hath undoubted credit & account in their judgements : so pointeth it at us , while we only to entertain idle time , fit listening for Guiana news , & instantly forget it , as if it were nought else , but a pleasing dream of a golden fancy . If we with our selves shall expostulate , how this comes to pass , that the advantage wholly resting on our side , in respect that Berreo was this last year beaten out , the country thoroughly discovered , & the Inhabitants made desirous of her sacred Majesties happy government ; they notwithstanding by entering before us , have now got you start of us : what may we think ? Shall we judge that their native country is less deer , or more wearisome unto them , then ours is unto us ? Their Peruleri , who going bore & empty out of Spaine , do again within 3 . or 4 . years return from Peru , rich and in good estate , do apparently disprove all such conceits of them . Shall we say that they have more spare men to be employed in such actions ? It is no secret to 444 know the contrary . Are they subject to penury ? In all parts of Christendom , where money is not scant , all other things are plentiful . Or is their land not able to sustain their numbers of people ? They buy many slaves to follow their husbandry , & themselves disdaining base idleness & beggary , do all honour military profession , highly esteeming it in their mercenaries and strangers . Is it then want of ability , in those that are willing , lack of encouragement , or default of speedy order and direction for those that do voluntarily offer themselves , their substance , & best endeavour to further this cause ; that makes us to be thus coated of the Spaniard ? The first is no question . The later needs no answer . The profit then by their example to be gathered , is , not to lose opportunity by delay , or to seem fearful and dismayed , where there is no cause of