corrupt hireling , that we think , write , and discourse of nothing else . Neither can I imagine , that to conceal our knowledge herein ( which to conceal may perhaps prove , 8c be hereafter taken for worse then parricide ) would be of better purpose , then to hood wink our selves , as who would say , No man shall see us . Beside , if the actium were wholly to be effected at her Majesties charge ; then might it at her Highness pleasure be shadowed with some other drift , and never be discovered , until it were acted . But since it craves the approbation and purses of many Adventurers , who cannot be so prodigal both of their possessions and lives , as voluntarily to run themselves out of breath , in pursuing they know not what : great reason it is , that where assistance is to be asked , due causes be yielded to persuade 8c induce them unto it . The Spaniard is not so simple , unsettled , 8c uncertain in his determinations , as to built them on our breath , or to make our papers his Bulwarks ; nor so slow as to expect a precedent of our forwardness . His proceedings are suffi - 443 ciently strengthened with the travails , reports , & substantial proofs of his own men , that have above 60 . years beaten round about this bush . And to say a truth , the expedition that he hath used in sending so many ships in February last to people this country , & disappoint us ; as it does consequently show , that he finds his chiefest force and sinews to consist in gold : so doth he thereby plainly to our faces exprobrate our remissness & long deliberations , that in 12 . months space have done , or sought to do nothing worthy the ancient fame & reputation of our English In June 1 ^ 6 . nation , interested in so weighty business . * His late provision of a new supply of whole families to the number of 600 . persons , bound for Guiana , but that it pleased God , that by means of that right honourable service most resolutely performed in the sea - fight , and sacking of Cadiz , the ships wherein they