And abstract taken out of certain Spaniards letters concerning Guiana and the countries lying upon the great river Orenoque : with certain reports also touching the same . And advertisement to the Reader . Hose letters out of which the abstracts following are taken , were surprised at sea as they were passing for Spaine in the year 1594 . by Captain George Popham : who the next year , and the same that Sir Walter Ralegh discovered Guiana , as he was in a voyage for the West Indies , learned also the reports annexed . All which , at his return , being two months after Sir Walter , as also so long after the writing of the former discourse , hearing also of his discovery : he made known and delivered to some of her Majesties most honourable privy Council & others . The which seeing they confirm in some part the substance , I mean , the riches of that country : it hath be thought fit that they should be thereunto adjoined . Wherein the Reader is to be advertised , that although the Spaniards seem to glory much of their formali possession taken before Morequito the Lord of Aromaya , and others thereabouts , which thoroughly understood them not at that time , whatsoever the Spaniards otherwise pretend : yet , according to the former discourse , and as also it is related by Cayworaco , the son of Topiawary now chief Lord of the said Aromaya , who was brought into England by Sir Walter Ralegh , and was present at the same possession and discovery of the Spaniards mentioned in these letters ; it appears that after they were gone out of their country , the Indians then having farther consideration of the matter , and more then conjecture of their intent , having known and herd of their former 432 cruelties upon their borderers and others of the Indians elsewhere : At their next coming , there being ten of them sent and employed for a farther discovery , they were provided to receive and entertain them in and other manner of sort then they had done before ; that is to say , they slew them and buried them in the country so much sought . They gave them by that means a full and complete possession , the which before they had but begun . And so they are minded to do , to as many Spaniards as come after . Other possession they have had none since . Neither do the Indians mean , as they protest , to give them any other . One other thing to be remembered is that in these letters the Spaniards seem to call Guiana and other countries near it , bordering upon the river of Orenoque , by the name of Nueva Dorado , because of the great plenty of gold there in most places to be found . Alluding also to the name of El Dorado which was given by Martinez to the great city of Manoa , as is in the former treatise specified . This is all I thought good to advertise . As for some other matters , I leave them to the consideration and judgement of the indifferent Reader . W . R . .