purpose . By which occasion he found means to pass so far , until he came to and Indian Cacique , nam Garamental , who entertained him with all kindness , and gave him for a present some rich jewels of gold , sixe seemly pages , tenne young slaves , and three nymphs very beautiful , which bore the names of three provinces from whence they were sent to Garamental chief commander of all that country . Their names were Guanba , Gotoguane , and Maiarare . These provinces are of and excellent temperature , very healthful , and have and admirable influence in producing fair women . The Spaniards afterwards to requite the manifold courtesies that they received in that country , took and carried away , beside all the gold that they could get , all the Indians that they could lay hold on : they conveyed them in irons to Cubagua , and should them for slaves . Delgado afterwards was shot in the eye by and Indian : of which hurt he died . 17 Diego de Losada succeeded in his brother ' s place . He had many more men ; who in the end wasted themselves in mutinies : those that lived returned to Cubagua . 18 Reynoso undertook this journey : but having endured exceeding troubles , in the discomfort of his mind , he gave it over , and was buried in Hispaniola . 19 Pedro de Orsua , in the year 1560 . sought it with 400 . Spaniards by the river of Orellana . He embarked his men in the country of the Motijones . As they passed down the river , they found Synamom trees . 498 His men murdered him , and afterwards the said rebels beheaded lady Anes his wife , who forsook not her lord in all his travels unto death . 20 Frier Francis Montesino was in the province of Maracapana with 100 . soldiers bound for Guiana , when Lopez Aguirri the tyrant made insurrection in all those parts of the Indies . What became of this intended journey is not expressed . In this discovery of Guiana you may read both of Orellana , who discovered the river of Amazones An . 1542 . and of Berreo , with others that have trodden this maze , and lost themselves in seeking to find this country . .