The second voyage ofM . William Haukins to Brasil . A king of Brasil brought into England . with the Negroes , and took of them Elephants teeth , and other commodities which that place yields : and so arriving on the coast of Brasil , he used there such discretion , and behaved himself so wisely with those savage people , that he grew into great familiarity and friendship with them . Insomuch that in his second voyage , one of the savage kings of the country of Brasil , was contented to take ship with him , and to be transported hither into England : whereunto M . Haukins agreed , leaving behind in the Country as a pledge for his safety and return again , one Martin Cockeram of Plimmouth . This Brasilian king being arrived , was brought up to London and presented to K . Henry the 8 , lying as then at White - hall : at the sighed of whom the King and all the Nobility did not a little marvel , and not without cause : for in his cheeks were holes made according to their savage manner , and therein small bones were planted , standing and inch out from the said holes , which in his own Country was reputed for a great bravery . He had also another hold in his neither lip , wherein was set a precious stone about the bigness of a peas : All his apparel , behaviour , and gesture , were very strange to the beholders . Having remained here the space almost of a whole year , and the king with his sighed fully satisfied , M . Hawkins according to his promise and appointment , purposed to convey him again into his country : but it fell out in the way , that by change of air and alteration of diet , the said Savage king died at sea , which was feared would turn to the loss of the life of Martin Cockeram his pledge . Nevertheless , the Savages being fully persuaded of the honest dealing of our men with their prince , restored again the said pledge , without any harm to him , or any man of the company : which pledge of theirs they brought home again into England , with their ship freighted , and furnished with the commodities of the country . RENIGER , BOREY AND PUDSEY a . d . 1540 - 42 . Which Martin Cockeram , by the witness of Sir John Hawkins , being and officer in the town of Plimmouth , was living within these few years . .