or a hundred & fiftie jars of oil . Also in London you may lade in the said ship these parcels of commodities or wares , as follows : ' In primis , Foure pieces of hollands of middle sort . Item , One piece of fine holland . Foure hundred else of osenbriges very fine . Foure dozen of sizzors of all sorts . Sixteene kintals of pitch of the Canaries . Twentie dozen of great knives which be made in farthels , of a low price . Foure dozen of a small sort . Sixe pieces of bays of the lowest sort . One very fine piece of bays . Foure hundred else of Manchester - cottons , most black , green , some yellow . Eight or tenne dozen of hats , the one half - trimmed with tafiata , the other plain , with the bans of Cypress . Sixe dozen of course shirts . Three dozen of doublets of canvas . Three dozen of doublets of stitched canvas . One piece of fine Millan - fustian barred . Sixe dozen of locks for doors and chests . Sixe thousand of all manner of fish hooks . Foure dozen reams of paper . Two dozen of glasses of diverse sorts . Two dozen of Venice glasses , the one half great , the other middle sort . Two dozen of mantles of freeze , of the lowest price that can be . Three dozen of freeze gowns . ' Foure hundred pound of tin of the use of Portugall , most small dishes and trenchers . Foure pound of silk of all colours . Twentie pound of spices , cloves , cinamom , pepper , and saffron . Two kintals of white soap . Three pound of thread , white , black , and blew . Three pound of fine white thread . Item , half a dozen of Northern karsies of diverse colours . Foure sorting clothes , blue , read , yellow , and green . Sixe Northern dozens of diverse colours . One fine blue cloth of eight pound . One fine stamell of tenne or twelve pound . One fine sheeps coloured cloth of twelve pound . < One fine black karsie . } { One fine stamell karsie . Sixe yards of black velvet . Three barrels of nails for chests . Two barrels of nails for ships and barks . Sixe kintals of Occom . Two dozen of velvet girdles without hangers . Foure yards of taffeta read , black , and blew ,