Of certain Englishmen to the river of Plate situate in 35 degrees of southerly latitude : together with and exact ruttier and description thereof , and of all the main branches , so far as they are navigable with small barks , by which river the Spaniards of late years have frequented and exceeding rich trade to and from Peru , and the mines of Potossi , as also to Chili , and other places . A report of a voyage of two Englishmen in the company of Sebastian Cabota , intended for the Malucos by the Straights of Magellan , but performed only to the river of Plate in April 1527 . Taken out of the information of M . Robert Thorn to Doctor Ley Ambassador for King Henry the eight , to Charles the Emperor , touching the discovery of the Malucos by the North . N a float of three ships and a caravel This was the that went from this city of Sivil armed wherein by the merchant ' s of it , which departed grg ^ the ^ er in Aprill last passed , I and my partner of Plate , have one thousand foure hundred ducats i526 - Two that we employed in the said fleet , En & slimen principally for that two Englishmen , friends of mine , which are somewhat learned in Cos - discovery . mographie , should go in the same ships , to bring me certain relation of the situation of the country , and to be expert in the navigation of those seas , and there to have informations of many other things , and advice that I desire to know especially . Seeing in those quarters are ships and mariners of that country , and cards by which they sail , though much unlike ours : that they should procure to have the said cards , and learn how they understand them , and especially to know what navigation they have for those Islands Northwards and Northeastward . The Islands of For if from the said Islands the sea does extend the Maltuos . w ; thought interposition of land to sail from the North point to the Northeast point one thousand seven hundred or one thousand eight hundred leagues , they The New should come to The new round Islands that we dis - found Hands covered & so we should be nearer to the said Spicery the English , by almost 200 leagues then the Emperor , or the king of Portugall are . .