from March forward there blow favourable winds from the fi ™ ™ 1 the sea to go from this Cape to enter into the Streits , from favourabie for this said Cape the Streits go in to the Northwest 14 the Streits . Cabo de San Gregorio a good roadstead for any winds from the Northwest to the Southwest . The Indians about Gape de San Gregorio in the Streits are very treacherous . The second Strait called Nuestra Sen - nora de Gracia . Punta de Santa Anna in 53 deg . and a half . Rincones . La Ciudad deal dONE Philippe : which is now utterly ruined . leagues : and the channel waxes narrower and narrower unto the first Strait which runneth Eastnortheast , and Westsouthwest . And coming out of the mouth thereof a man must keep himself a point to the Northward , because there be rocks and shoalds . And if you see beds of weeds , take heed of them , and keep off from them : and after you be passed this Straight you must stir Westsouthwest 8 leagues unto Cabo de San Gregorio , which is a high white cliff , and is a good road for any wind from the Northwest to the Southwest . But men must beware and not trust the Indians of this Cape : for they be subtle and will betray a man . From this Cape begins the second Strait which is called Nuestra Sennora de Gracia , and lies Eastnortheast and Westsouthwest 3 leagues . And coming out of this Strait thou shalt see 3 little Islands , lying West off " this Strait : thou mayest go between them , for there is no danger : provided always that thou keep well off from the bays on both sides , lest thou be imbayed . And from these Islands thou must keep forward in the channel Westsouth west two leagues : and then the coast lies North and South unto 53 degrees and a half , unto a place called Punta de Santa Anna : and to the Northwest thereof in a corner or nook ( which is one of the rincones or nooks ) was the town built called La Ciudad deal DONE Philippe . Thou must come to and anchor to the Northward thereof , after thou art passed the castle and a great tree . .