the Tenbuis by this narrow arm upward unto the Quiloacas , which is another nation , are twentie leagues ; and all up this river is great store of people . From the Quiloacas , to a place where the Spaniards now have built a town , are fifteene leagues . From this town unto the people called Los Mequaretas is twentie leagues . Here are many sholds which continue thirtie leagues . All these thirtie leagues are sunken lands : where are many Isles , flats , and nations , which are our enemies . From the Mequaretas unto the people called Mepenes are these thirtie leagues . And from hence begin the coasts of the firm land unto the mouth of the river Paraguai ; saving that there are eight leagues more of sunken ground . From the Mepenes unto the mouth of the river of Paraguai are thirtie leagues : it is a river that cannot be mistaken although it hath many arms and Islands and dangers , it hath a mark two leagues beneath the mouth on the East side , to wit , and high land , where are 7 points , which we call the 7 currents : and immediately above these currents there is and Island as you pass up the river over against the point aforesaid stands the mouth of Paraguai . This mouth is very plain to be found in seeking whereof a man cannot be deceived . From this mouth the river of Parana is divided , which is a very great river : and it goes unto the town of Piquiri , which is and hundred and seventie leagues : and it runneth all this space IOO North and South , and in the way are many flats and shoalds ; and great store of people , which are a bad nation , although they be divided . From the place where these two rivers are divided , that is to say , from the mouth of Paraguai are sixtie leagues unto the city of Assumption . This is a good river , and better to sail then all the rest of the rivers , which are in this country . And from this town to Los Xaraes are 200 . leagues , very well inhabited with people of diverse nations , which serve the Spanyards . THE TWO FAMOUS VOYAGES .