appurtenances , which were sent to him from our merchants of London . The 18 . day the captain of Santos came aboard our ship , by whom we had knowledge of foure great French ships of war , that had be at the river of Jenero , which there took three Canoas , but were driven from thence by their castles & forts , and were looked for here at Santos . Whereupon the Captain requested us to lend them some armour and artillery , and we lent them twentie calivers , and two barrels of powder . The 19 . day our skiff which we had sent to Alcat - The yk of rarzas , and had be away sixe days , came again , and brought good store of great and good fish , and told us ’ that there was good store of fish to be taken there by the hook , and as much wood as we could have of the Palmito - tree . The 20 . day at night Nicholas Gale , one of our company , fell over our ships side , and was drowned in the port of Santos before the town , where our ship road at anchor . The 22 . day two of the Canoas which the Frenchmen took in the river of Jenero , returned to Santos , and reported that the foure French ships were passed to the southwards , as they thought , for the Straights of Magellan , and so into the South sea . The 23 . day the aforesaid Nicholas Gale , who fell overbord two days before , was found again , and taken up three miles from our ship , and our company went to his burial in the Church at Santos . This day the Captain and Justices of Santos wished us to tarry in their road till the last of April , for they had sent a bark of Santos to Baya at the kings charges , to know whither we should have trade there or not , and this bark could not return before that time . About this time there arrived at Fernambuck a ship from Portugall , which brought news that the Islands , Indies , and Portugall it self was molested and troubled by the Spaniards , and that the Portugales had both English and Frenchmen to Lisbone to defend them against Spaine . The 25 . day we sent two of our men , namely Thomas Michael and Simon Thorn to