the rivers side , the governor came thither and received us very courteously . So we remained at his house two days , talking of many matters of Portugall : then we departed from him , and came down the river . Three days after , I hired a warehouse by my self , and landed my commodities . And now I am selling them as fast as I can ; and fell them very well , and to great profit : for I have sold all our hats . I would I had brought forty or fifty dozen , by reason of the great utterance of them up into Peru , and into the new kingdom of Granada , by the way of the river of Plate . For here is passage every three or foure months with barks of thirty and forty tons a piece , which are laden with sugars , rice , taffataes , hats , and other kinds of commodities of this country , which are carried up the said river of Plate in the said barks , and thence are conveyed up into Peru . And these barks are but tenne or twelve days going up the said river to Peru . And within foure and 40 five months after , the said barks come down this river again laden with reals of plate , and bring down from those places no other commodities but treasure . It is a wondered thing to behold the great gain and profit which is got in this river and in this country . I am ashamed to write it , fearing that I shall not be believed . For the employment of one hundred ducats in Spaine , being brought hither , will yield twelve hundred and fifteen hundred ducats profit . This trade hath been used but within this year . For we can go up to the mines of Potosi , which are the best and the richest mines in all Peru . If the merchant ' s of Spaine and Portugall did know this trade , they would not send nor venture so much merchandise to Cartagena as they do . For up this river is a great deal the nearer way , and the easier to go to Peru . For the Peruleros or merchant ' s of Peru , which dwell there , come down to this harbour and river of Jenero , and bring with them fifteene thousand and twentie thousand ducats in