which friars told him of two great tO ! iese English ships , and a pinnace , which had taken them , ers ' but took nothing from them , nor did them any harm , but only asked them for the king of Spaines ships . Hereupon Diego Flores knowing that these English ships would go for the Streits , determined to go thither , although it was in the month of Februarie , and choosing 10 ships of the 15 that were left , he left two ships which were not in case to go to sea at the Island , and into the other three ships which were old , and shaken with the storm he put all the women and sick men in all the fleet , and sent them to the river of Jenero , and he with the other 10 returned again for the Streits . fight betwixt our 2 English ships & three Spanish ships . They victual at Spirit » Santo . RichardFaire - vieather remaineth in the river of Plate . John Drake proceedeth on to the river of Plate . The three ships in which the sick men and women were , went to Brasil , and there they found within the port of S . Vincent the two ships before mentioned . They would have had the English men to have gone out of the harbour , and thereupon they fell to fight , and because that these three ships were weak with the storm , and the men that they had were the worst in all the fleet , the Englishmen easily put them to the worst , and sunk one of them , and might have sunk another , if the Englishmen would : but they minded not the destruction of any man : for that is the greatest virtue that can be in a man , that when he may do hurt , yet he will not do it . So the Englishmen went from this port to Spirit © Santo , where they had victuals for their merchandise , and so they went back for England , without doing of any harm in the Country . The cause why these English ships under the conduct of M . Fenton went not to the streits , I know not : but some say that they were put back by foul weather : other some say that it was for fear of the kings ships . But the pinnace of these two ships went from them , in which was Captain John Drake : the cause why they parted I know not , but the pinnace came into the river of Plate , and within five leagues of Seal Island ,