, but he willed that whatsoever Thomas Babington did write , no credit should be given to it . And further he wished us presently to depart for Sant Sebastian , and there to dispatch our business , and then to send back for Babington and himself to Guaybea , where he ( if he were well ) would give his attendance to come aboard . As we rid two leagues a seaboard the bar of Santos Their dewee broke a cable in the open sea , which happened the 15 . day of this month . ’ We arrived at S . Sebastian the 15 . day , and there shifted our ballast , and had in stones , and hailed our ship a ground to stop our leaks , & carried our cask a shore to be hooped for water , which indeed might better have be done in Santos , before the Ministrador came thither : yet we finished all things pertaining to our ship , by the 22 . of this month , at S . Sebastian . The first day of July Thomas Babington came aboard with William Euet , in our pinnace , and the rest of our men that went for them : but there was no Pilot brought according to promise to carry us to Baya . The things that we observed and noted in the time of our being at Santos , were these . All such wares and merchandizes as owe no custom in Brasill , their use is , to set a price upon the same , how they shall sold : which is done by the magistrates of the town , according to the ordinances of their king . Some part of Peru but 12 . days journey from Santos . The Portu - galesforbidden to use their mines . But for all such merchandizes as do owe custom there , the merchants are to fell them according as they may , to the greatest profit and advantage that they can . Concerning the province of Peru , we learned that one part of it by land & water is but twelve days journey from the town of Santos , and from thence it may be about foure or five days journey by water to the main river of Plate . From the head of the river of Plate , and from their chief towns there , they do trade and traffic by land into Peru by wagons , and horses or mules . The