Baya in a bark that went thither from Santos . The two and twentie day of Aprill our Master and Thomas Babington having some talk and conference with the Padres of Santos , they ( our men being ready to go to the River of Jenero ) told them , that they were sorry for our banishment from the Church , and that the Ministrador had written from Rip de Jenero , that forasmuch as these twentie years or more the English nation had denied the Church of Rome and her proceedings , therefore the Ministrador commanded that none of us should come to their Church : the Padres willed us herein to have patience , and to take it in good part , and promised to stand our friends in their word and writing , both to the Ministrador and to the Bishop at Baya , and further requested all our English company to have no ill opinion of them . Their lading The 28 . of April we jaded sugars into our ships . of sugars . The 2I _ of Pvlay we took in fresh victuals from Santos . The 10 . day of June we gratified one losto Thorno , dwelling in Santos , with some of our English victuals , and entertained him in good sort in our ship , and this day we were promised to have a Pilot at Santos to carry us to Baya . The 11 . day we went to fish , to make provision for our ship and men , and from that time till the eighteenth day we fetched water , and cut wood for our fire , and trimmed 36 our ship of the harms and leaks which the worms had Leaks in the made in her while we rid at the island of S . Sebastian , pinion made and in the mean time we departed from before the w ° rmes - towne of Santos . Our Master sent his skiff from the bar of Santos , thinking to have brought Thomas Babington and William Euet with the Pilot , which we had tarried for three days : and as the skiff was going , William Euet being by the Rivers side , called to our pinnace , and sent a letter to our * Master , which Thomas * Whose name Babington had written , wherein were not news , but that the Ministrador was arrived at Santos from the River of ' Jenero , and would speak with our Master