A petition made by certain of the company of the Delight of Bristol unto the Master of the said ship Robert Burnet , one of the consorts of M . Chidley , being in the Straights of Magellan the 12 . of February 1589 . E have thought good to show unto you ( being our Master ) our whole minds and griefs in writing : that whereas our Captain Matthew Hawlse , and Walter Street do begin to take into the Captains cabin this 12 . of Febr . both bred and butter , ( such as was put in for the provision of the ship and company ) only to feed themselves , and a few others , which are of their mess : meaning thereby rather to starve us , then to keep us strong and in health : And likewise upon the same , he hath taken into his cabin certain furniture , as swords , calivers , and musquets : We therefore not well knowing their intents herein , except by certain words cast out unwares , we may conjecture , , that your death , which God forbid , by them hath be determined : do all most humbly desire you being our Master , and having charge of the ship , and us , this present voyage committed unto you , to consider : First , that by Gods visitation we have lost 16 . men , and that so much the rather because they were not allotted such necessary provision , as was in the ship to be had . Also to consider the great loss of 15 . of our men with our , boat at Penguin - yland within the Straights of Magellan : and of 7 . good and serviceable men beside near Port famine : and of three anchors , and our Carpenter . Over and beside all these calamities to consider how you have ( without all reason and conscience ) be overthwarted , disgraced , and outcountenanced by your mate Street , and Matthew Hawlse : Also what danger you now are subject unto , your death having be so often XI 385 2 B conspired , and what danger we should be in , if it were ( which God forbid ) effected . Furthermore , to weigh with your self the great want of many necessaries in our ship : namely that we have but 6 . sailors , ( beside your self and your mate Street , whom we dare not trust , ) Also that we have but one anchor