A brief note concerning and extreme Northern province of Japan called Zuegara , situate thirtie days journey from Miac6 , which argue the Isle of Japan to be of greater extension Northward , then it is ordinarily described in maps , or supposed to be : together with mention of a certain nation of Tartars called Jeza inhabiting on the main to the North of China , never herd of in these parts before : taken out of and Epistle written 1596 from Japan by Fryer Luis Frois unto Claudius Aquaviva , etc . Printed in Latin at Mentz in Germanic 1599 . Ot many days ago was baptised a certain honourable personage called John Vongui the son of Taigarandono , who is governor of a certain princedom situate on the borders of Japan towards the North , being distant from Miac6 thirtie days journey . And after a few lines it follows . This Taigorandono being the most Northerly governor in all Japan hath traffic with the Jezi , who are a nation of Tartars , which from the main continent resort unto the Isle of Mateumai , being about twelve or Bf fifteene leagues distant from the foresaid Northerly Mateumai - princedome of Zuegara ; where they fell fish , the skins of beasts , and certain herbs of the sea used by 441 Jezi a nation of ‘ Tartars dweUingonthe continent to the North of China using cloth . The Master . the Japonians for food , with other such like commodities . On the other side the said Jezi Tartari buy of the Japonians , cloth to make them garments , with weapons and other instruments . These Tartars ( they say ) are a most barbarous kind of people , of a brown colour , with long hair on their heads and beards like the Moscovites : they live by hunting and fishing , and neglect husbandry . This Northerly princedom of Zuegara ( as the said governor reported to our Father ' s ) aboundeth with excellent grapes both black and white , which without the labour of man grow naturally in all places , and he promised the Father ' s to bring some of these vines to Miac6 , that they might be planted there . .