THe long and wondered voyage of Frier John de Plano Carpini , sent ambassador by Pope Innocentius the iiii . An. Do. 1246 to the great CAN of Tartaria ; wherein he passed through Bohemia , Polonia , Russia , and so to the city of Kiow upon Boristhenes , and from thence road continually post for the space of sixe months through Comania , over the mighty and famous rivers of Tanais , Volga , and laic , & through the countries of the people called Kangittae , Bisermini , Karakitay , Naimani , & so to the native country of the Mongals or Tartars , situate in the extreme Northeaster ne parts of all Asia : and thence back again the same way to Russia , and Polonia , and so to Room ; spending in the whole voyage among the said Tartars one whole year & above foure months : Taken out of the 32. book of Vincentius Beluacensis his Speculum historial . 
 LIBRI XXXII . 
 Ascelinus . 
 Tartarorum species . 
 Tonsura . 
 Habitus . 
 1 97 oh 
 Temperantia . 
 Castitas . 
 Sordes , 
 Temulentia , 
 101 
 25 - 
 102 
 103 
 Chingis salutatur Imperator . Cathaynorum lite ree & religio . 
 104 
 105 
 Burithabeth regio . 
 107 
 Interitus . 
 Nepotes . 
 Duces . 
 109 
 Barchin civitas . 
 51 VideMecho-vium , lib . 1. ca. 3. 
 110 
 + impugnare : nec postea reversion sunt in terram suam usque 
 Tartarorum militaris disciplina . 
 1 113 H 
 Tartaros 
 Ferri temperamentum . 
 Lituani . 
 117 
 Legationis mandata . 
 [ I - +7-1 
 118 
 Qualiter recepti sunt apud Bathy magnum Principem . Cap. 22. 
 119 
 Bathy audit legatos . 
 120 
 Qualiter recedentes a Bathy per terram Comanorum 
 121 
 A.D. 
 I246 . 
 Burin . 
 Oceanus ab Aquilone . Syban , frater Bathy . 
 Nigri Cathayni . 
 Mare parvum . 
 Plures insula . 
 Terra 
 125 
 Qualiter in imperium sublimatus fuit . Cap. 27. 
 126 
 127 
 Studium 
 1 129 1 
 Chingay internuntius . 
 I3I 
 Novemb. 13. 
 Bathy . 
 133 
 [ The voyage 
 The voyage of Johannes de Plano Carpini unto the Northeast parts of the world , in the year of our Lord , 1246. 
 Of the first sending of certain Friars Predicants and Minorites unto the Tartars , taken out of the 32. Book of Vincentius Beluacensis his Speculum Historial : beginning at the second Chapter . 
 Ascellinus . 
 [ I - 54-1 
 Bout this time also , Pope Innocentius the fourth sent Frier Ascelline being one of the order of the Predicants , together with three other Friars ( of the same authority whereunto they were called ) consorted with him out of diverse Covens of their order , with letters Apostolical unto the Tar 
 tars camp : wherein he exhorted them to give over their bloody slaughter of mankind , and to receive the Christian faith . And I , in very deed , received the relations concerning the deeds of the Tartars only , ( which , according to the congruence of times , I have above inserted into this my work ) from a Friar Minorite , called Simon de Sanct. Quintin , who lately returned from the same voyage . And at that very time also , there was a certain other Friar Minorite , namely Friar John de Plano Carpini , sent with certain associates unto the Tartars , who likewise ( as himself witnesseth ) abided and conversed with them a year and three months at the least . For both he & one Friar Benedict a Polonian being of the same order , and a partaker of all his misery and tribulation , received straight commandment from the Pope , that both of them should diligently search out all things that concerned the state of the Tartars . And therefore this Friar John hath written a little Historic ( which is come to our hands ) of such things , as with his own eyes he saw among the Tartars , or which he herd from diverse Christians worthy of credit , remaining there in captivity . Out of which historic I 
 134 
 thought good by way of conclusion , to insert somewhat for the supply of those things which are wanting in the said Friar Simon . 
 Of the situation and quality of the Tartars land , By Johannes de Plano Carpini . Chap. 3. 
 THere is towards the East a land which is called Mongal or Tartaria , lying in that part of the world which is thought to be most North Easterly . On the East part it hath the country of Kythay and of the people called Solangi : on the South part the country of the Saracens : on the South east the land of the Huini : and on the West the province of Naimani : but on the North side it is environed with the Ocean Sea. In some part thereof it is full of mountains , and in other places plain and smooth ground , but every where sandy and barren , neither is the hundreth part thereof fruitful . For it cannot bear fruit unless it be moistened with river waters , which be very rare in that country . Whereupon they have neither villages , nor cities among them , except one which is called Cracurim , and is said to be a proper town . We our selves saw not this town , but were almost within half a days journey thereof , when we remained at Syra Orda , which is the great court of their Emperor . And albeit the foresaid land is otherwise unfruitful , yet is it very commodious for the bringing up of cattle . In certain places thereof are some small store of trees growing , but otherwise it is altogether destitute of woods . Therefore the Emperor , and his noble men and all other warm themselves , and dress their meat with fires made of the dung of oxen , and horses . The air also in that country is very intemperate . For in the midst of Summer there be great thunders and lightnings , by the which many men are slain , and at the same time there falls great abundance of snow . There be also such mighty tempests of cold winds , that sometime men are not able to sit on horseback . Whereupon , being 
 A description of Tartaria . 
 The North Ocean . 
 The intemperature of the air . 
 What Orda 
 near unto the Orda ( for by this name they call the signifies . 
 * 35 
 Like unto Frobishers men . 
 Their tabernacles . 
 habitations of their Emperors and noble men ) in regard of the great wind we were constrained to lie groveling on the earth , and could not see by reason of the dust . There is never any rain in Winter , but only in Summer , albeit in so little quantity , that sometime it scarcely suffices to allay the dust , or to moisten the roots of the grass . There is often times great store of hail also . Insomuch that when the Emperor elect was to be placed in his Imperial throne ( my self being then present ) there fell such abundance of hail , that , upon the sudden melting thereof , more then 160. persons were drowned in the same place : there were many tents and other things also carried away . Likewise , in the Summer season there is on the sudden extreme heat , and suddenly again intolerable cold . 
 Of their form , habit , and manner of living . Chap. 4. 
 THe Mongals or Tartars , in outward shape , are unlike to all other people . For they are broader between the eyes , and the balls of their cheeks , then men of other nations be . They have flat and small noses , little eyes , and eye lids standing straight upright , they are shaved on the crowns like priests . They wear their hair somewhat longer about their ears , then upon their foreheads : but behind they let it grow long like woman's hair , whereof they braid two locks binding eke of them behind either ear . They have short feet also . The garments , as well of their men , as of their women are all of one fashion . They use neither cloaks , hats , nor caps . But they wear Jackets framed after a strange manner , of buckram , scarlet , or Baldakines . Their shoubes or gowns are hairy on the outside , and open behind , with tails hanging down to their hammes . They use not to wash their garments , neither will in any wise suffer them to be washed , especially in the time of thunder . Their habitations be round and cunningly made with wickers and staves in manner of 136 
 a tent . But in the midst of the tops thereof , they have a window open to convey the light in and the smoke out . For their fire is always in the midst . Their walls be covered with felt . Their doors are made of felt also . Some of these Tabernacles may quickly be taken asunder , and set together again , and are carried upon beasts backs . Other some cannot be taken insunder , but are stowed upon carts . And whithersoever they go , be it either to war , or to any other place , they transport their tabernacles with them . They are very rich in cattle , as in camels , oxen , sheep , and Their cattle . goats . And I think they have more horses and mares then all the world beside . But they have no kine nor other beasts . Their Emperor's , Dukes , & other of their nobles do abound with silk , gold , silver , and precious stones . Their victuals are all things that may be eaten : Their for we saw some of them eat lice . They drink milk in victuals . great quantity , but especially mares milk , if they have 55-1 it : They sees Mill also in water , making it so thin , that they may drink thereof . Every one of them drinks off a cup full or two in a morning , and sometime they eat nought else all the day long . But in the evening each man hath a litde flesh given him to eat , and they drink the broth thereof . Howbeit in summer time , when they have mares milk enough , they seidome eat flesh , unless perhaps it be given them , or they take some beast or bird in hunting . 
 Of their manners both good and bad . Chap. 5. 
 THeir manners are partly praiseworthy , and partly Their detestable : For they are more obedient unto their obedience . 
 lords and master's , then any other either clergy or laie-people in the whole world . For they do highly reverence them , and will deceive them , neither in words nor deeds . They seidome or never fallen out among themselves , and , as for fightings or brawlings , wounds or manslaughters , they never happen among them . There Their are neither thieves nor robbers of great riches to be d ” ttr > ence . 
 137 
 Their insolency against strangers . 
 found , and therefore the tabernacles and carts of them that have any treasures are not strengthened with locks or bars . If any beast go astray , the finder thereof either lets it go , or drives it to them that are put in office for the same purpose , at whose hands the owner of the said beast demandeth it , and without any difficulty receives it again . One of them honoureth another exceedingly , and bestoweth banquets very familiarly and liberally , notwithstanding that good victuals are dainty and scarce among them . They are also very hardy , and when they have fasted a day or two without any manner of sustenance , they sing and are merry as if they had eaten their bellies full . In riding , they endure much cold and extreme heat . There be , in a manner , no contentions among them , and although they use commonly to be drunken , yet do they not quarrel in their drunkenness . Noe one of them despises another but helpeth and furthereth him , as much as conveniently he can . Their women are chaste , neither is there so much as a word uttered concerning their dishonesty . Some of them will notwithstanding speak filthy and immodest words . But towards other people , the said Tartars be most insolent , and they scorn and set nought by all other noble and ignoble persons whatsoever . For we saw in the Emperors court the great duke of Russia , the kings son of Georgia , and many great Sultans receiving no due honour and estimation among them . So that even the very Tartars assigned to give attendance unto them , were they never so base , would always go before them , and take the upper hand of them , yea , and sometime would constrain them to fit behind their backs . Moreover they are angry and of a disdainful nature unto other people , and beyond all measure deceitful , and treacherous towards them . They speak fair in the beginning , but in conclusion , they sting like scorpions . For crafty they are , and full of falsehood , circumventing all men whom they are able , by their sleights . Whatsoever mischief they intend to practise against a man , they 
 138 
 keep it wonderfully secret , so that he may by no means provide for himself , nor find a remedy against their conspiracies . They are unmannerly also and uncleanly in taking their meat and their drink , and in other actions . Drunkenness is honourable among them , and when any of them hath taken more drink then his stomach can well bear , he casts it up and falls to drinking again . They are most intolerable exacters , most covetous possessors , and most niggardly givers . The slaughter of other people is accounted a matter of nothing with them . 
 Of their laws and customs . Chap. 6. 
 MOreover , they have this law or custom , that Punishments whatsoever man or woman be manifestly taken °f adultery . 
 in adultery , they are punished with death . A virgin likewise that hath committed fornication , they slay together with her mate . Whosoever be taken in of theft . robbery or theft , is put to death without all pi tie . Also , of secrets if any man disclose their secrets , especially in time of disclosed . war , he receives and hundreth blows on the back with a bastinado , laid on by a tall fellow . In like sort when any inferiors offend in ought , they find no favour at their superiors hands , but are punished with grievous stripes . 
 They are joined in matrimony to all in general , yea , Laws of even to their near kinsfolks except their mother , matrimome-daughter and sister by the mother's side . For they use to marry their sister by the father's side only , and also the wife of their father after his decease . The younger brother also , or some other of his kindred , is bound to marry the wife of his elder brother deceased . For , at the time of our abode in the country , a certain duke of Andreas duke Russia nam Andreas , was accused before duke Baty for °f^ussia-conveying the Tartars horses out of the land , and for selling them to others : and although it could not be proved , yet was he put to death . His younger brother and the wife of the party deceased hearing this , came & made their supplication unto the forenamed duke , that 
 139 
 the dukedom of Russia might not be taken from them . But he commanded the youth to marry his deceased brother's wife , and the woman also to take him unto her husband , according to the custom of the Tartars . She answered , that she had rather die , then so haynously transgress the law . Howbeit , he delivered her unto him , although they both refused as much as they could . Wherefore carrying them to bed , they constrained the youth , lamenting and weeping , to lie down and commit incest with his brother's wife . To be short , after the death of their husbands , the Tartars wives use very seidome to marry the second time , unless perhaps some man takes his brother's wife or his stepmother in marriage . They make no difference between the son of their wife and of their concubine , but the father gives what he pleases unto each one : For of late the king of Georgia having two sons , one lawfully begotten called Melich ; but the other David , born in adultery , at his death left part of his land unto his base son . Hereupon Melich ( unto whom the kingdom fell by right of his mother , because it was governed before time by women ) went unto the Emperor of the Tartars , David also having taken his journey unto him . Now both of them coming to the court and proffering large gifts , the son of the harlot made suit , that he might have justice , according to the custom of the Tartars . Well , sentence passed against Melich , that David being his elder brother , should have superiority over him , and should quietly and peaceably possess the portion of land granted unto him by his father . Whensoever a Tartar hath many wives , each one of them hath her family and dwelling place by her self . And sometime the Tartar eateth , drinketh and lies with one , and sometime with another . One is accounted chief among the rest , with whom he is oftener conversant , then with the other . And notwithstanding ( as it hath been said ) they are many , yet do they seidome fall out among themselves . 
 140 
 Of their superstitious traditions . Chap. 7. 
 BUt by reason of certain traditions , which either they or their predecessors have devised , they account some things indifferent to be faults . One is to thrust a knife into the fire , or any way to touch the fire with a knife , or with their knife to take flesh out of the cauldron , or to hew with and hatchet near unto the fire . For they think by that means to take away the head or force from the fire . Another is to lean upon the whip , wherewith they beat their horses : for they ride not with spurs . Also , to touch arrows with a whip , to take or kill young birds , to strike and horse with you rain of their bridle , and to break one bone against another . Also , to pour out milk , meat , or any kind of drink upon the ground or to make water within their tabernacle : which whosoever does willingly , he is slain , but otherwise he must pay a great sum of money to the enchanter to be purified . Who likewise must cause the tabernacle with all things therein , to pass between two fierce . Before it be on this wise purified , no man dare once enter into it , nor convey any thing thereout . Beside , if any man hath a morsel given him , which he is not able to swallow , and for that cause casts it out of his mouth , there is and hold made under his tabernacle , by which he is drawn forth and slain without all compassion . Likewise , whosoever treads upon the threshold of any of their dukes tabernacles , he is put to death . Many other things there be , like unto these , which they take for heinous offences . But to slay men , to invade the dominions of other people , and to rifle their goods , to transgress the commandments and prohibitions of God , are with them no offences at all . They know nothing concerning eternal life , and everlasting damnation , and yet they think , that after death they shall live in another world , that they shall multiply their cattle , that they shall eat and drink and doe other things which living men perform here upon earth . At a new moon , or a full moon , they begin all enterprises 
 141 
 A.D. 
 I246 . 
 Ridiculous traditions . 
 The Tartars 
 ■ worship the moon . 
 that they take in hand , and they call the moon the Great Emperor , and worship it upon their knees . All men that abide in their tabernacles must be purified with Their custom fire : Which purification is on this wise , They kindle two of purifying . flreSj anJ pitch two Javelins into the ground near unto 
 the said fires , binding a cord to the tops of the Javelins . And about the cord they tie certain jagges of buckram , under which cord , and between which fires , men , beasts , and tabernacles do pass . There stand two women also , one on the right side , and another on the left casting water , and repeating certain charms . If any man be slain by lightning , all that dwell in the same tabernacle with him must pass by fire in manner aforesaid . For their tabernacles , beds , and carts , their felts and garments , and whatsoever such things they have , are touched by no man , yea , and are abandoned by all men as things unclean . And to be short , they think that all things are to be purged by fire . Therefore , when any ambassadors , princes , or other personages whatsoever come unto them , they and their gifts must pass between two fires to be purified , lest peradventure they have practised some witchcraft , or have brought some poison or other mischief with them . 
 [ I . 57-1 
 The people of Tartaria . 
 The original y the exploits of Chingis . 
 Of the beginning of their empire or government . Chap. 8. 
 THe East country , whereof we have entreated , which is called Mongal , is reported to have had of old time foure sorts of people . One of their companions was called Yeka Mongal , that is the great Mongals . The second company was called Sumongal , that is , the Water-Mongals , who called themselves Tartars of a certain river running through their country nam Tartar . The third was called Merkat , and the fourth Metrit . All these people had one and the same person , attire of body and language , albeit they were divided by princes and provinces . In the province of Yeka Mongal , there was a certain man called Chingis . This man 
 142 
 became a mighty hunter . For he learned to steal men , & to take them for a prey . He ranged into other countries taking as many captives as he could , and joining them unto himself . Also he allured the men of his own country unto him , who followed him as their captain and ringleader to do mischief . Then began he to make war upon the Sumongals or Tartars , and slew their captain , and after many conflicts , subdued them unto himself , and brought them all into bondage . Afterwards he used their help to fight against the Merkats , dwelling by the Tartars , whom also he vanquished in battle . Proceeding from thence , he fought against the Metrites , and conquered them also . The TheNaimani . Naimani hearing that Chingis was thus exalted , greatly disdained thereat . For they had a mighty & puissant Emperor , unto whom all the foresaid nations paid tribute . Whose sons , when he was dead , succeeded him in his Empire . Howbeit , being young and foolish , 
 they knew not how to govern the people , but were The discord of divided , and fell at variance among themselves . Now brothers . Chingis being exalted , as is aforesaid , they nevertheless invaded the forenamed countries , put the inhabitants to the sword , and carried away their goods for a prey . Which Chingis having intelligence of , gathered all his subject's together . The Naimani also , and the people called Karakitay assembled and banded themselves at a certain straight valley , where , after a battle foughten they were vanquished by the Mongals . And being thus vanquished , they were , the greater part of them , slain ; and others , which could not escape , were carried into captivi tie . In the land of the foresaid Karakytayans , Occoday Cham , the son of Chingis Cham , after he was Occoday created Emperor , built a certain city , which he called Cham-Chanyl . Near unto which city , on the South side , there is and huge desert , wherein wild men are certainly reported to inhabit , which cannot speak at all , and are destitute of joints in their legs , so that if they fallen , they cannot rise alone by themselves . Howbeit , they are of 
 143 
 discretion to make felts of Camels hair , wherewith they cloth themselves , and which they hold against the wind . And if at any time , the Tartars pursuing them , chance to wound them with their arrows , they put herbs into their wounds , and fly strongly before them . 
 Of the mutual victories between them , and the people of Kythay . Chap. 9. 
 Hay than & TO ) Ut the Mongals returning home into their own Paulus jj country , prepared themselves to battle against the VthemUS Cal1 * Kythayans : Which their Emperor hearing , set forward * Cathayans . against them with his army , and they fought a cruel battle , wherein the Mongals were overcome , and all their nobles in the army , except seven , were slain . And for this cause , when they , purposing to invade any region , are threatened by the inhabitants thereof to be slain , they do , to this day , answer : in old time also our whole number beside being slain , we remained but seven of us alive , and yet notwithstanding we are now grown unto a great multitude , think not therefore to daunt us with such brags . But Chingis and the residue that remained alive , fled home into their country : And having breathed 
 New victories , him a little , he prepared himself to war , and went forth against the people called Huyri : These men were Chris - 
 Letters . tians of the sect of Nestorius . And these also the Mongals overcame , and received letters or learning from them : for before that time they had not the art of writing , and now they call it the hand or letters of the Mongals . Immediately after , he marched against the country of Saruyur , and of the Karanites , and against the land of Hudirat ; all which he vanquished . Then returned he home into his own country , and breathed himself . Afterwards , assembling his warlike troops , they marched with one accord against the Kythayans , and waging war with them a long time , they conquered a great part of their land , and shut up their Emperor into his greatest city : which city they had so long time besieged , that they began to want necessary provision for their 
 144 
 army . And when they had no victuals to feed upon , Chingis Cham commanded his soldiers , that they should eat every tenth man of the company . But they of the city fought manfully against them , with engines , darts , and arrows , and when stones wanted they threw silver , and especially melted silver : for the same city abounded with great riches . Also , when the Mongals had fought a long time and could not prevail by war , they made a great trench underneath the ground from the army unto the midst of the city , and there issuing forth they fought against the citizens , and the remnant also without the walls fought in like manner . At last , breaking open the gates of the city , they entered , and putting the Emperor , with many other to the sword , they took possession thereof and conveyed away the gold , silver , and all the riches therein . And having appointed certain deputies over the country , they returned home into their own land . This is the first time , when the Emperor of the Kythayans being vanquished , Chingis Cham obtained the Empire . But some part of the country , because it lies within the sea , they could by no means conquer unto this day . The men of Kytay are Pagans , having a speciali kind of writing by themselves , and ( as it is reported ) the Scriptures of the old and new Testament . They have also recorded in histories the lives of their forefathers : and they have Eremites , and certain houses made after the rftanner of our Churches , which in those days they greatly resorted unto . They say that they have diverse Saints also , and they worship one God . They adore and reverence CHRIST JESUS our Lord , and believe the article of eternal life , but are not baptised . They do also honourably esteem and reverence our Scriptures . They love Christians , and bestow much alms , and are a very courteous and gentle people . They have no beards , and they agree partly with the Mongals in the disposition of their countenance . In all occupations which men practise , there are not better artificers in the whole world . 
 I 145 K 
 Silver cast at the enemy in stead of stones . 
 Part of Cathay in the sea . 
 The letters , bl the religion of the Cathayans . 
 Their excellent workmanship . 
 Their country is exceeding rich , in corn , wine , gold , silk , and other commodities . 
 Thossut Can son of Chinas . 
 The stratagem of the king of India . 
 Of their war against India major and minor . Chap. 10. 
 A Nd when the Mongals with their emperor Chingis Cham had a while rested themselves after the foresaid victory , they divided their armies . For the Emperor sent one of his sons nam Thossut ( whom also they called Can , that is to say , Emperor ) with and army against the people of Comania , whom he vanquished with much war , and afterwards returned into his own country . But he sent his other son with and army against the Indians , who also subdued India minor . These Indians are the black Saracens , which are also called / Ethiopians . But here the army marched forward to fight against Christians dwelling in India major . Which the King of that country hearing ( who is commonly called Presbyter John ) gathered his soldiers together , and came forth against them . And making men's images of copper , he set each of them upon a saddle on horseback , and put fire within them , and placed a man with a pair of bellows on the horse back behind every image . And so with many horses and images in such sort furnished , they marched on to fight against the Mongals or Tartars . And coming near unto the place of the battle , they first of all sent those horses in order one after another . But the men that sat behind laid I wot not what upon the fire within the images , and blew strongly with their bellows . Whereupon it came to pass , that the men and the horses were burned with wild fire , and the air was darkened with smoke . Then the Indians cast darts upon the Tartars , of whom many were wounded and slave . And so they expelled them out of their dominions with great confusion , neither did we hear , that ever they returned thither again . 
 146 
 How being repelled by monstrous men shapen like dogs , they overcame the people of Burithabeth . Chap. 11. 
 BUt returning through the deserts , they came into a certain country , wherein ( as it was reported unto us in the Emperors court , by certain clergy men of Russia , and others , who were long time among them , and that by strange strong and steadfast affirmation ) they found certain report of cer-monsters resembling women : who being asked by many wmen a „ worser interpreters , where the men of that land were , they dogs . answered , that whatsoever women were born there , were endued with the shape of mankind , but the males were like unto dogs . And delaying the time , in that country they met with the said dogs on the other side of the river . And in the midst of sharp winter , they cast themselves into the water : Afterwards they wallowed in the dust upon the main land , and so the dust being mingled with water , was frozen to their backs , and having often times so done , the ice being strongly frozen upon them , with great fury they came to fight against the Tartars . And when the Tartars threw their darts , or shot their arrows among them , they rebounded back again , as if they had lighted upon stones . And the rest of their weapons could by no means hurt them . Howbeit , the Dogs made and assault upon the Tartars , and wounding some of them with their teeth , and slaying others , at length they drave them out of their countries . And thereupon they have a Proverb of the same matter , as yet rife among them , which they speak in jesting sort one to another ; My father or my brother was slain of Dogs . The women which they took , they brought into their own country , who remained there till their dying day . And in traveling homewards , the said army of the Mongals came unto Theregion of the land of Burithabeth ( the inhabitants whereof are Burtthabeth-Pagans ) and conquered the people in battle . These people have a strange or rather a miserable kind of 
 custom . For when any men father deceaseth , he The manners assembleth all his kindred , and they eat him . These of the people . men have no beards at all , for we saw them carry a certain iron instrument in their hands , wherewith , if any hairs grow upon their chin , they presently pluck them out . They are also very deformed . From thence the Tartars army returned to their own home . 
 Another expedition of Chinas . 
 How they had the repulse at the Caspian mountains , and were driven back by men dwelling in caves . Chap. 12. 
 MOreover Chingis Cham , at the same time when he sent other armies against the East , he himself marched with a power into the land of Kergis , which notwithstanding , he conquered not in that expedition , and as it was reported unto us , he went on forward even to the Caspian mountains . But the mountains on that part where they encamped themselves , were of adamant , and therefore they drew unto them their arrows , and weapons of iron . And certain men contained within those Caspian mountains , hearing , as it was thought , the noise of the army , made a breach through , so that when the Tartars returned unto the same place tenne years after , they found the mountain broken . And attempting to go unto them , they could not : for there stood a cloud before them , beyond which they were not able to pass , being deprived of their sighed so soon as they approached thereunto . But they on the contrary side thinking that the Tartars durst not come nigh them , gave the assault , & when they came at the cloud , they could not proceed for the cause aforesaid . Also the Tartars , before they came unto the said mountains , passed for the space of a month and more , through a vast wilderness , & departing thence towards the East , they were above a month traveling through another huge desert . At length , they came unto a land wherein they saw beaten ways , but could not find any people . Howbeit , at the last , diligently seeking , they found a man & his wife , whom they presented before 
 148 
 Chingis Cham : and demanding of them where the people of that country were , they answered , that the people inhabited under the ground in mountains . Then Chingis Cham keeping still the woman , sent her husband unto them , giving them charge to come at his command . And going unto them , he declared all things that Chingis Cham had commanded them . But they answered , that they would upon such a day visit him , to satisfy his desire . And in the mean season , by blind & hidden passages under the earth , assembling themselves , they came against the Tartars in warlike manner , and suddenly issuing forth , they slew a great number of them . This people were not able to endure the terrible noise , which in that place the Sun made at his uprising : for at the time of the Sun rising , they were enforced to lay one ear upon the ground , and to stop the other close , lest they should hear that dreadful found . Neither could they so escape , for by this means many of them were destroyed . Chingis Cham therefore and his company , seeing that they prevailed not , but continually lost some of their number , fled and departed out of that land . But the man and his wife aforesaid they carried along with them , who all their life time continued in the Tartars country . Being demanded why the men of their country do inhabit under the ground , they said , that at a certain time of the year , when the sun riseth , there is such and huge noise , that the people cannot endure it . Moreover , they use to play upon cymbals , drums , and other musical instruments , to the end they may not hear that sound . 
 A fabulous narration of the sun rising . 
 Of the statutes of Chingis Cham , of his death , of his sons , and of his dukes . Chap. 13. 
 BUt as Chingis Cham returned out of that country , his people wanted victuals , & suffered extreme famine . 
 Then by chance they found you fresh entrails of a beast : which they took , & casting away the dung thereof , caused it to be sodden , brought it before Chingis Cham , & did The tawe eat thereof . And hereupon Chingis Cham enacted ; that Chingis . 
 149 
 neither the blood , nor the entrails , nor any other part of a beast which might be eaten , should be cast away , save only the dung . Wherefore he returned thence into his own land , and there he ordained laws and statutes , which the Tartars do most strictly and inviolably observe , The death of of the which we have before spoken . He was afterwards Chingis . slain by a thunderclap . He had foure sons : the first ts sons . called Occoday , the second Thossut Can , the third 
 Thiaday : the name of the fourth is unknown . From these foure descended all the dukes of the Mongals . The His grand - first son of Occoday is Cuyne , who is now Emperor : children . h ; s brother's be Cocten and Chyrinen . The sons of 
 Thossut Can are Bathy , Ordu , Siba , and Bora. Bathy , next unto the Emperor , is richer and mightier then all the rest . But Ordu is the seignior of all the dukes . The sons of Thiaday be Hurin and Cadan . The sons of Chingis Cham his other son , whose name is unknown , are Mengu , Bithat , and certain others . The mother of Mengu was nam Seroctan , and of all others most honoured among the Tartars , except the Emperor's mother , and mightier then any subject except Bathy . The Tar - These be the names of the dukes : Ordu , who was in 
 tarian dukes . Poland and in Hungarie : Bathy also & Hurin & Cadan , and Siban , and Ovygat , all which were in Hungarie . In like manner Cyrpodan , who is as yet beyond the sea , making war against certain Sultans of the Saracens , and other inhabitants of far countries . Others remained in the land , as namely Mengu , Chyrinen , Hubilai , Sinocur , Cara , Gay , Sybedey , Bora , Berea , Corrensa . There be many other of their dukes , whose names are unknown unto us . 
 Of the authority of the Emperor , and of his dukes . Chap. 14. 
 The absolute r “ 
 and lordly A that Oreo ver , the Emperor of the Tartars hath a 
 ‘ Tartarian^ dominion over all his subject's . For no 
 Emperor over man are abide in any place , unless he hath assigned him his subject's . to be there . Also he himself appoints to his dukes 
 150 
 where they should inhabit . Likewise the dukes assign places unto every Millenary , or conducter of a thousand soldiers , the Millenaries unto each captain of and too . the captains unto every corporali of ten . Whatsoever is given them in charge , whensoever , or wheresoever , be it to fight or to loose their lives , or howsoever it be , they obey without any gainsaying . For if he demandeth any men daughter , or sister being a virgin , they presently deliver her unto him without all contradiction : yea , often times he makes a collection of virgins throughout all the Tartars dominions , and those whom he means to keep , he retaineth unto himself , others he bestoweth upon his men . Also , whatsoever messenger he sends , or whithersoever , his subject's must without delay find them horses and other necessaries . In like sort , from what country soever tribute payers , or ambassadors come unto him , they must have horses , carriages , and expenses allowed them . Notwithstanding ambassadors coming from other places do suffer great misery , and are in much want both of victuals , and of apparel : especially when they come to any of the dukes , and there they are constrained to make some lingering abided . Then ten men Their are allowed so little sustenance , that scarcely two could barbarous live thereof . Likewise , if any injuries be ottered them , towar^s they cannot without danger make complaint . Many gifts ambassadors . also are demanded of them , both by dukes and others , which if they do not bestow , they are basely esteemed , and set at nought . And hereupon , we were of necessity inforced to bestow in gifts a great part of those things which were given us by well disposed people , to defray our charges . To be short , all things are so in the power and possession of the Emperor , that no man dare say , This is mine , or , this is my neighbours ; but all , both goods , cattle and men are his own . Concerning this matter also he published a statute of late . The very same authority and jurisdiction , do the dukes in like sort exercise upon their subject's . 
 I51 
 The title of Barchin . 
 [ I . 61. J Orna . 
 Of the election of Emperor Occoday , and of the expedition of duke Bathy . Chap. 15. 
 AFter the death of Chingis Cham aforesaid , the dukes assembled themselves and chosen Occoday his son to be their Emperor . And he , entering into consultation with his nobles , divided his armies , and sent duke Bathy his nephew against the country of Altisoldan , and against the people called Bisermini , who were Saracens , but spoke the language of Comania . The Tartars invading their country , fought with them and subdued them in battle . But a certain city called Barchin resisted them a long time . For the citizens had cast up many ditches and trenches about their city , in regard whereof the Tartars could not take it , till they had filled the said ditches . But the citizens of Sarguit hearing this , came forth to meet them , yielding themselves unto them of their own accord . Whereupon their city was not destroyed , but they slew many of them and others they carried away captive , and taking spoils , they filled the city with other inhabitants , and so marched forth against the city of Orna . This town was very populous and exceeding rich . For there were many Christians therein , as namely Gasarians , Russians , and Alanians , with others , and Saracens also . The government of the city was in the Saracens hand . It stands upon a mighty river , and is a kind of port town , having a great mart exercised therein . And when the Tartars could not otherwise overcome it , they turned the said river , running through the city , out of his channel , and so drowned the city with the inhabitants and their goods . Which being done , they set forward against Russia , and made foul havoc there , destroying cities and castles and murdering the people . They laid siege a long while unto Kiow the chief city of Russia , and at length they took it and slew the citizens . Whereupon , traveling through that country , we found and innumerable multitude of dead men's skulls and bones lying upon the earth . For it was 
 a very large and a populous city , but it is now in a manner brought to nothing : for there do scarce remain 200. houses , the inhabitants whereof are kept in extreme bondage . Moreover , out of Russia and Comania , they proceeded forward against the Hungarians , and the Polonians , and there many of them were slain , as is aforesaid : and had the Hungarians manfully withstood them , the Tartars had been confounded and driven back . Returning from thence , they invaded the country of the Morduans being pagans , and conquered The them in battle . Then they marched against the people Morduans-called Byleri , or Bulgaria magna , & utterly wasted the Bulgaria country . From hence they proceeded towards the mag ™ - North against the people called Bastarci or Hungaria Hungaria magna , and conquered them also . And so going on mag ™ - further North , they came unto the Parossitae , who having Parossita - . little stomachs and small mouths , eat not any thing at all , but seething flesh they stand or sit over the pot , and receiving the steam or smoke thereof , are therewith only nourished , and if they eat any thing it is very little . From hence they came to the Samogetae , who live Samogeta : . only upon hunting , and use to dwell in tabernacles only , and to wear garments made of beasts skins . From thence they proceeded unto a country lying upon the Ocean sea , where they found certain monsters , who in The North all things resembled the shape of men , saving that their ocean-feete were like the feet of and ox , and they had in deed men's heads but dogs faces . They spoke , as it were , Northern two words like men , but at the third they barked like monsters . dogs . From hence they retired into Comania , and there some of them remain unto this day . 
 Of the expedition of duke Cyrpodan . Chap. 16. 
 AT the same time Occoday Can sent duke Cyrpodan Kergls . 
 with and army against Kergis , who also subdued them in battle . These men are Pagans , having no beards at all . They have a custom when any of their father's die , for grief and in token of lamentation to 
 153 
 draw as it were , a leather thong overthwart their faces , from one ear to the other . This nation being conquered , duke Cyrpodan marched with his forces Southward against the Armenians . And travailing through certain desert places , they found monsters in the shape of men , which had each of them but one arm & one hand growing out of the midst of their breast , and but one foot . Two of them used to shoot in one bow , and they ran so swiftly , that horses could not overtake them . They ran also upon that one foot by hopping and leaping , and being weary of such walking , they went upon their hand and their foot , turning themselves round , as it were in a circle . And being weary of so doing , they ran again according to their wonted manner . Isidore Cyclopedes . calls them Cyclopedes . And as it was told us in court , by the clergy men of Russia , who remain with the foresaid Emperor , many ambassadors were sent from them unto the Emperors court , to obtain peace . From thence they proceeded forth into Armenia , which they Armenia 13 conquered in battle , and part also of Georgia . And the Georgia other part is under their jurisdiction , paying as yet every 
 conquer . year unto them for tribute , 20000. pieces of coin called 
 Yperpera . From thence they marched into the dominions of the puissant and mighty Soldan called Deurum , whom also they vanquished in fight . And to be short , they went on farther sacking and conquering , even unto thee The Soldan of Soldan of Aleppo his dominions , and now they have subdued that land also , determining to invade other countries ’ beyond it : neither returned they afterwards into their own land unto this day . Likewise the same army The Caliph of marched forward against the Caliph of Baldach his Baldach . country , which they subdued also , & exacted at his hands the daily tribute of 400. Byzantines , beside Baldakines and other gifts . Also every year they send messengers unto the Caliph moving him to come unto them . Who sending back great gifts together with his tribute beseecheth them to be favourable unto him . Howbeit the Tartarian Emperor receives all his gifts , 
 * 54 
 & yet still nevertheless sends for him , to have him come . 
 How the Tartars behave themselves in war . Chap. 17. 
 / ^•Hingis Cham divided his Tartars by captains of The military ten , captains of and 100. and captains of a 1000. discipline of 
 And over ten Millenaries or captains of a 1000 , he tfie artars‘ placed , as it were , one Colonel , and yet notwithstanding over one whole army he authorised two or three dukes , but yet so that all should have especial regard unto one of the said dukes . And when they join battle against any other nation , unless they do all with one consent give back , every man that flies is put to death . And if one or two , or more of ten proceed manfully to the battle , but the residue of those ten draw back & follow not the company , they are in like manner slain . Also , if one among ten or more be taken , their fellows , if they rescue them not , are punished with death . Moreover they are enjoined to have these weapons following . Two long bows or one Their good one at the least , three quivers full of arrows , & one weapons . axe , and ropes to draw engines withal . But the richer sort have single edged swords , with sharp points , and somewhat crooked . They have also armed horses with their shoulders and breasts defenced , they have helmets and brigandines . Some of them have jacks , and caparisons for their horses made of leather artificially doubled or trebled upon their bodies . The upper part of their helmet is of iron or steel , but that part which com-passeth about the neck and the throat is of leather . Howbeit some of them have all their foresaid furniture of iron framed in manner following . They beat out many thin plataeae a finger broad , and a handful long , and making in every one of them eight little holes , they put thereunto three strong and straight leather thongs . So they join the plataeae one to another , as it were , ascending by degrees . Then they tie the plataeae 
 155 
 Their experience & cunning in warns . 
 Their manner of passing over rivers . 
 unto the said thongs , with other small and slender thongs , drawn through the holes aforesaid , and in the upper part , on each side thereof , they fasten one small doubled thong unto another , that the plataeae may firmly be knit together . These they make , as well for their horses caparisons , as for the armour of their men : And they skowre them so bright that a man may behold his face in them . Some of them upon the neck of their lance have and hook , wherewithal ! they attempt to pull men out of their saddles . The heads of their arrows are exceedingly sharp cutting both ways like a two edged sword , and they always carry a file in their quivers to whet their arrowheads . They have targets made of wickers , or of small rods . Howbeit they do not ( as we suppose ) accustom to carry them , but only about the tents , or in the Emperors or dukes guards , & that only in the night season . They are most politic in wars , having be exercised therein with other nations for the space of these 42. years . When they come at any rivers , the chief men of the company have a round and light piece of leather , about the borders whereof making many loops , they put a rope into them to draw it together like a purse , and so bring it into the round form of a ball , which leather they fill with their garments and other necessaries , trussing it up most strongly . But upon the midst of the upper part thereof , they lay their saddles and other hard things , there also do the men themselves fit . This their boat they tie unto and horse tail , causing a man to swim before , & to guide over the horse , or sometime they have two oars to row themselves over . The first horse therefore being driven into the water , all the other horses of the company follow him , and so they pass through the river . But the poorer sort of common soldiers have every man his leather bag or satchel well sown together , wherein he packs up all his trinkets , and strongly trussing it up hangs it at his horses tail , and so passes over , in manner aforesaid . 
 t56 
 How they may be resisted . Chap. 18. 
 IDeeme not any one kingdom or province able to resist them : because they use to take up soldiers out of every country of their dominions . And if so be the neighbour province which they invade , will not aid them , utterly wasting it , with the inhabitants thereof , whom they take from thence with them , they proceed on to fight against another country . And placing their captives in the forefront of the battle , if they fight not courageously , they put them to the sword . Wherefore , if Christians would withstand them , it is expedient , that the provinces and governors of countries should agree in one , and so by common counsel , should give them resistance . Their soldiers also must be furnished with strong hand-bowes & crossbows , which they greatly dread , & with sufficient arrows , with maces also of good iron , or and axe with a long handle or staff . When they make their arrow heads , they must ( according to you Tartars custom ) dip them redhot into water mingled with salt , that they may be strong to pierce the enemies armour . They that will may have swords also & lances with hooks at the ends , to pull them from their saddles , out of which they are easily removed . They must have helmets likewise & other armour to defend themselves & their horses from 
 Counsel how to wage war against the Tartars . 
 A notable temper of iron or steel . 
 the Tartars weapons & arrows , & they that are unarmed , must ( according to you Tartars custom ) march behind their fellows , and discharge at the enemy with long bows and crossbows . And ( as it is above said of the Tartars ) they must orderly dispose their bands and troops , and ordain laws for their soldiers . Whosoever runneth to the prey or spoil , before the victory be achieved , must undergo a most severe punishment . For such a fellow is put to death among the Tartars without all pity or mercy . The place of battle must be chosen , if it be possible , in a plain field , where they may see round about , neither must 
 * 57 
 all be in one company , but in many and several bands , not very far distant one from another . They which give the first encounter must send one band before , and must have another in a readiness to relieve and second the former in time convenient . They must have spies also on every side to give them notice when the rest of the enemies bands approach . For therefore ought they always to send forth band against band & troop against troop , because the Tartar ever practiseth to get his enemy in the midst and so to environ him . Let our bans take this caveat also , if the enemy retire , not to make any long pursuit after him , lest peradventure ( according to his custom ) he might draw them into some secret ambush : for the Tartar fights more by policy then by main force . And again , lest our horses be tired : for we are not so well stored with horses as they . Those horses which the Tartars use one day , they ride not upon three or foure days after . Moreover , if the Tartars draw homeward , our men must not therefore depart and casseir their bands , or separate themselves asunder : because they do this upon policy , namely to have our army divided , that they may more securely invade and waste the country . And in very deed , our captains ought both day and night to keep their army in a readiness : and not to lie out of their armour , but at all assays , to be provided for battle . For the Tartars like devils are always watching and devising how to practise mischief . Furthermore , if in battle any of the Tartars be cast ofF their horse backs , they must presently be laid hold on and taken , for being on foot they shoot strongly , wounding and killing both horses and men . 
 * Johannes de Of the journey of friar * John unto the first 
 plano Carpini guard of the Tartars < Chap 
 WE therefore by the commandment of the sea apostolic setting forth towards the nations of the East , chosen first to travel unto the Tartars , because 158 
 we feared that there might be great danger imminent The journey of upon the Church of God next unto them , by their frfr invasions . Proceeding on therefore , we came to the Legate° ™ king of Bohemia , who being of our familiar acquaintance , advised us to take our journey through Polonia and Russia . For we had kinsfolks in Polonia , by whose assistance , we might enter into Russia . Having given us his letters , he caused our charges also to be defrayed , in all his chief houses and cities , till we 
 came unto his nephew Boleslaus duke of Slesia , who Boleslaus duke also was familiar and well known unto us . The like favour he showed us also , till we came unto Conradus duke of * Lautiscia , unto whom then ( by Gods especial * Mazovla . favour towards us ) lord Wasilico duke of Russia was come , from whose mouth we herd more at large concerning the deeds of the Tartars : for he had sent ambassadors thither , who were returned back unto him . 
 Wherefore , it being given us to understand , that we must bestow gifts upon them , we caused certain skins of bevers and other beasts to be bought with part of that money , which was given upon alms to succour us by the way . Which thing duke Conradus and the * duchess Grlmslaua . of Cracow , and a bishop , and certain soldiers being advertised of , gave us likewise more of the same skins . And to be short , duke Wasilico being earnestly requested by the duke of Cracow , and by the bishop and barons , on our behalf , conducted us with him , unto his own land , and there for certain days , entertained us at his own charges , to the end that we might refresh our selves a while . And when , being requested by us , he had caused his bishops to resort unto him , we read before them the Popes letters , admonishing them to return unto the unity of the Church . 
 To the same purpose also , we our selves admonished them , and to our ability , induced as well the duke as the bishops and others thereunto . Howbeit because duke Daniel the Daniel brother of Wasilico aforesaid ( having as then taken his brother unto journey unto Baty ) was absent , they could not at that time , ast tc° ' make a final answer . After these things duke Wasilico 
 159 
 sent us forward with one of his servants as far as Kiow the chief city of Russia . Howbeit we went always in The danger of our lives by reason of the Lituanians , who did Lithuanians . often invade you borders of Russia , even in those very places by which we were to pass . But in regard of the foresaid servant , we were out of the Russians danger , the greatest part of whom were either slain , or carried into captivity by the Tartars . Moreover , at Danilon we were feeble even unto the death . ( Notwithstanding we caused our selves to be carried in a wagon through the snow and extreme cold . ) And being come unto Kiow , we consulted with the Millenary , 8c other noble men there concerning our journey . They told us , that if we carried those horses , which we then had , unto the Tartars , great store of snow lying upon the ground , they would all die : be cause they knew not how to dig up the grass under The fodder of the snow , as the Tartarian horses do , neither could there the Tartarian bee ought found for them to eat , the Tartars having neither horses . hay nor straw , nor any other fodder . We determined therefore to leave them behind at Kiow with two servants appointed to keep them . And we were constrained to bestow gifts upon the Millenary , that we might obtain his favour to allow us post horses and a guide . Wherefore beginning our journey the second day after the feast of the Purification , we arrived at the town of Canow , which was immediately under the dominion of the Tartars . The governor whereof allowed us horses and a guide unto Mich^as the another town , wherein we found one Michaeas to be ma iduus . governor , a man full of all malice and despite . Who 
 notwithstanding , having received gifts at our hands , according to his manner conducted us to the first guard of the Tartars . 
 How he and his company were at the first received of the Tartars . Chap. 20. 
 WHerefore , the first Saturday next after Ash Wednesday , having about the Suns going down , taken up our place of rest , the armed Tartars came rushing upon 160 
 us in uncivil and horrible manner , being very inquisitive of us what manner of persons , or of what condition we were : & when we had answered them that we were the Popes Legates , receiving some victuals at our hands , they immediately departed . Moreover in the morning rising and proceeding on our journey , the chief of them which were in the guard met with us , demanding why , or for what intent and purpose we came thither ? and what business we had with them ? Unto whom we answered , We are the legates of our lord the Pope , who is the father & lord of the Christians . He hath sent us as well unto your The contents . Emperor , as to your princes , and all other Tartars for °fthe this purpose , because it is his pleasure , that all Christians should be in league with the Tartars , and should have peace with them . It is his desire also that they should become great or in favour with God in heaven , therefore he admo-nisheth them aswell by us , as by his own letters , to become Christians , and to embrace the faith of our Lord Jesu Christ , because they could not otherwise be saved . Moreover , he gives them to understand , that he much mar-veileth at their monstrous slaughters & massacres of mankind , & especially of Christians , but most of all of Hungarians , Mountaineirs , 8c Polonians , being all his subject's , having not injuried them in ought , nor attempted to do them injury . And because the Lord God is grievously offended thereat , he adviseth them from henceforth to beware of such dealing , & to repent them of that which they had done . He requesteth also , that they would write and answer unto him , what they purpose to do hereafter , and what their intention is . All which things being herd and understood , the Tartars said that they would appoint us post horses and a guide unto Corrensa . And immedi - Corrensa . ately demanding gifts at our hands , they obtained them . 
 Then receiving the same horses , from which they dismounted , together with a guide we took our journey unto Corrensa . But they riding a swift pace , sent a * messenger before unto the said duke Corrensa , to signify the message , which we had delivered unto them . This marches . 
 1 161 L 
 The manner of saluting the Tartarian princes . 
 [ I . 65. J 
 Duke Bathy y his power . 
 duke is governor of all them , which lie in guard against the nations of the West , lest some enemy might on the sudden and at unawares break in upon them . And he is said to have 60000. men under him . 
 How they were received at the court of Corrensa . Chap. 21. 
 BEing come therefore unto his court , he caused our tent to be placed far from him , and sent his agents to demand of us with what we would incline unto him , that is to say , what gifts we would offer , in doing our obeisance unto him . Unto whom we answered , that our lord the Pope had not sent any gifts at all , because he was not certain that we should ever be able to come at them : for we passed through most dangerous places . Notwithstanding , to our ability , we will honour him with some part of those things , which have be , by the goodness of God , & the favour of the Pope , bestowed upon us for our sustenance . Having received our gifts , they conducted us unto the Orda or tent of the duke , & we were instructed to bow thrice with our left knee before the door of the tent , and in any case to beware , lest we set our foot upon the threshold of the said door . And that after we were entered , we should rehearse before the duke and all his nobles , the same words , which we had before said , kneeling upon our knees . Then presented we the letters of our lord the Pope : but our interpreter whom we had hired and brought with us from Kiow was not sufficiently able to interpret them , neither was there any other esteemed to be meet for the same purpose . Here certain post horses and three Tartars were appointed for us to conduct us from hence with all speed unto duke Bathy . This Bathy is the mightiest prince among them except the Emperor , & they are bound to obey him before all other princes . We began our journey towards his court the first tuesday in Lent , and riding as fast as our horses could trot ( for we had fresh horses almost thrice or foure times a day ) we posted from morning till night , yea very often in 
 162 
 the night season also , and yet could we not come at him before Maundie thursday . All this journey we went through the land of Comania , which is all plain ground , and hath foure mighty rivers running through it : The first is called J Neper , on the side whereof towards Russia , duke Corrensa & Montii marched up and down , which 
 Montii on the other side upon the plains is greater then he . The second is called J DONE , upon the bank whereof tO Tanais . marches a certain prince having in marriage the sister of 
 Baty , his name is Tirbon . The third is called J Volga , which is and exceeding great river , upon the banks whereof duke Bathy marches . The fourth is called J laec , upon which two Millenaries do march , on each side of the river one . All these , in the winter time , descend down to the sea , & in summer ascend back by the banks of the said rivers up to the mountains . The sea last nam is the II Great sea , out of which the arm of S. George proceedeth , which runneth by Constantinople . These rivers do abound with plenty of fish , but especially Volga , & they exon - 
 \Bha . 
 | | Pontus Euxinus . He is deceived , 
 erate themselves into the Grecian sea , which is called Mare Neper y DONE 
 major . Over Neper we went many days upon the ice . run into Mare Along the shore also of the Grecian sea we went very dan - 
 gerously upon the ice in sundry places , & that for many int0 days together . For about the shore the waters are frozen three leagues into the sea . But before we came unto 
 Caspian sea . 
 Bathy , two of our Tartars road afore , to give him intelligence of all the sayings which we had uttered in the presence of Corrensa . 
 How we were received at the court of the great prince Bathy . Chap. 22. 
 MOreover , when we came unto Bathy in the land of Comania , we were seated a good league distant from his tabernacles . And when we should be conducted unto his court , it was told us that we must pass between two fires . But we would by no means be induced thereunto . Howbeit , they said unto us : you may pass through without all danger : for we would have you to do it for 163 
 A ceremony of passing between two fierce . 
 none other cause , but only that if you intend any mischief against our lord , or bring any poison with you , fire may take away all evil . Unto whom we answered , that to the end we might clear ourselves from all suspicion of any such matter , we were contented to pass through . When therefore we were come unto the Orda , being demanded 
 Eyed gay . by his agent Eldegay with what present or gift we would 
 do our obeisance ? we gave the sameanswere which we did at the court of Corrensa . The gifts being given and received , the causes of our journey also being herd , they brought us into the tabernacle of the prince , first bowing our selves at the door , & being admonished , as before , 
 Bathy hears not to tread upon the threshold . And being entered , we the Legates . Spoke unto him kneeling upon our knees , & delivered him our letters , and requested him to have interpreters to translate them . Who accordingly on good friday were sent unto us , and we together with them , diligently translated our said letters into the Russian , Tartarian , and Saracen languages . This interpretation was presented unto Bathy , which he read , & attentively noted . At length we were conducted home again unto our own lodging , howbeit no victuals were given unto us , except it were once a little Millet in a dich , the first night of our 
 He behaves coming . This Bathy caries himself very stately & himself hke magnificently , having porters and all officers after the a , ns ' manner of the Emperor , and sits in a lofty seat or throne together with one of his wives . The rest , namely , as well his brothers and sons , as other great personages fit underneath him in the midst upon a bench , and others fit down upon the ground , behind him , but the men on the right hand and the women on the left . He hath very fair and large tents of linen cloth also , which were once the kings of Hungaria . Neither dare any man come into his tent ( beside them of his own family ) unless he be called , be he never so mighty and great , except perhaps it be known that it is his pleasure . we also , for the same cause , sat on the left hand ; for so do all ambassadors in going : but in returning from the Emperor , we were 
 164 
 always placed on the right hand . In the midst stands his table , near unto the door of the tent , upon the which there is drink filled in golden and silver vessels . Neither does Bathy at any time drink , nor any other of the Tartarian princes , especially being in a public place , but they have singing and minstrilsie before them . And always , when he rides , there is a canopy or small tent carried over his head upon the point of a javelin . And so do all the great princes of the Tartars , & their wives also . The said Bathy is courteous enough unto his own men , and yet is he had in great awe by them : he is most cruel in fight : he is exceedingly prudent and politic in war , because he hath now continued a long time in martial affairs . 
 ‘ Their custom of drinking at the found of music . 
 How departing from Bathy , they passed through the land of Comania , and of the Kangittas . 
 Chap. 23. 
 MOreover , upon Easter even we were called unto the tent , and there came forth to meet us the foresaid agent of Bathy , saying on his master's behalf , that we should go into their land , unto the Emperor Cuyne , detaining certain of our company with this pretence , that they would send them back unto the Pope , to whom we gave letters of all our affairs to deliver unto him . But being come as far as duke Montii aforesaid , there they were kept until our return . Upon Easter day , having said our prayers , and taken a slender breakfast , in the company of two Tartars , which were assigned unto us by Corensa we departed with many tears , not knowing whither we went to death or to life . And we were so 
 They traveled post from Easter day to the 22. of July Eastward of Volga . 
 feeble in body , that we were scarce able to ride . For all that Lent through , our meat was Millet only with a little water and salt . And so likewise upon other fasting days . Neither had we ought to drink , but snow melted in a skillet . And passing through Comania we road most earnestly , having change of horses five times or oftener in a day , except when we went through deserts , for i65 
 The land of the Kangitta . 
 Jeroslaus duke of Russia . 
 then we were allowed better and stronger horses , which could undergo the whole labour . And thus far had we travailed from the beginning of Lent until eight days after Easter . The land of Comania on the North side immediately after Russia , hath the people called Morduyni Byleri , that is , Bulgaria magna , the Bastarci , that is , Hungaria magna , next unto the Bastarci , the Parositae and the Samogetae . Next unto the Samogetae are those people which are said to have dogs faces , inhabiting upon the desert shores of the Ocean . On the South side it hath the Alani , the Circassi , the Gazari , Greece and Constantinople ; also the land of Iberia , the Cathes , the Brutaches who are said to be Jewes shaving their heads all over , the lands also of Scythia , of Georgia , of Armenia , of Turkey . On the West side it hath Hungaria , and Russia . Also Comania is a most large and long country . The inhabitants whereof called Comani the Tartars slew , some notwithstanding fled from them , and the rest were subdued under their bondage . But most of them that fled are returned again . Afterwards we entered the land of the Kangittae , which in many places hath great scarcety of waters , wherein there are but few inhabitants by reason of the foresaid defect of water . For this cause diverse of the servants of Jeroslaus duke of Russia , as they were traveling towards him into the land of Tartaria , died for thirst , in that desert . As before in Comania , so likewise in this country , we found many skulls and bones of dead men lying upon the earth like a dunghill . Through this country we were traveling from the eight day after Easter until Ascension day . The inhabitants thereof were Pagans , and neither they nor the Comanians used to till the ground , but lived only upon cattle , neither built they any houses but dwelled in tents . These men also have the Tartars rooted out , and do possess and inhabit their country , howbeit , those that remained are reduced into their bondage . 
 166 
 How they came unto the first court of the new Emperor . Chap. 24. 
 MOreover , out of the land of the Kangittas , we entered Thelandofthe into the country of you Bisermini , who speak the Bisermini . 
 language of Comania , but observe the law of the Saracens . In this country we found innumerable cities with castles ruined , & many towns left desolate . The lord of this country was called Soldan Alti , who with all his progeny , Alti Soldanus . was destroyed by the Tartars . This country hath most huge mountains . On the South side it hath Jerusalem Huge moun-and Baldach , and all the whole country of the Saracens . tamesIn the next territories adjoining doe inhabit two carnail brother's dukes of the Tartars , namely , Burin and Cadan , Burin and the sons of Thyaday , who was the son of Chingis Cadan-Can . On the North side thereof it hath the land of the 
 black Kythayans , and the Ocean . In the same country Syban the brother of Bathy remains . Through this country we were traveling from the feast of Ascension , until eight days before the feast of S. John Baptist . And then we entered into the land of the black Kythayans , in which the Emperor built and house , where we were called in to drink . Also the Emperors deputy in that place caused the chief men of the city and his two sons to 
 The North ocean . 
 Syban brother unto Bathy . 
 The black Kythayans . 
 dance before us . Departing from hence , we found a certain small sea , upon the shore whereof stands a little A small sea . mountain . In which mountain is reported to be a hold , from whence , in winter time such vehement tempests of winds do issue , that travellers can scarcely , and with great danger pass by the same way . In summer time , the noise in deed of the wind is herd there , but it pro-ceedeth gently out of the hold . Along the shores of the foresaid sea we travailed for the space of many days , which Many days . although it be not very great , yet hath it many islands , and we passed by leaving it on our left hand . In this 
 land dwells Ordu , whom we said to be ancient Orducap . 13. unto all the Tartarian dukes . And it is the Orda or 
 court of his father which he inhabiteth , and one of his 167 
 The first court of the Emperor . 
 The land of ' Naymani . 
 The 22. of July . 
 wives bears rule there . For it is a custom among the Tartars , that the Courts of Princes or of noble men are not dissolved , but always some women are appointed to keep and govern them , upon whom certain gifts are bestowed , in like sort as they are given unto their Lords . And so at length we arrived at the first court of the Emperor , wherein one of his wives dwelled . 
 How they came unto Cuyne himself , who was forthwith to be chosen Emperor . Chap. 25 - 
 BUt because we had not as yet seen the Emperor , they would not invite us nor admit us into his Orda , but caused good attendance and entertainment , after the Tartars fashion , to be given unto us in our own tent , and they caused us to stay there , and to refresh our selves with them one day . Departing thence upon the even of Saint Peter and Saint Paul , we entered into the land of the Naymani , who are Pagans . But upon the very feast day of the said Apostles , there fell a mighty snow in that place , and we had extreme cold weather . This land is full of mountains , and cold beyond measure , and there is little plain ground to be seen . These two nations last mentioned used not to till their ground , but , like unto the Tartars , dwelled in tents , which the said Tartars had destroyed . Through this country we were travailing many days . Then entered we into the land of the Mongals , whom we call Tartars . Through the Tartars land we continued our travail ( as we suppose ) for the space of some three weeks , riding always hastily and with speed , and upon the day of Marie Magdalene we arrived at the court of Cuyne the Emperor elect . But therefore did we make great haste all this way , because our Tartarian guides were straightly commanded to bring us unto the court Imperiali with all speed , which court hath been these many years , ordained for the election of the Emperor . Wherefore rising early , we travailed until night without eating of any thing , and oftentimes we 
 168 
 came so late unto our lodging , that we had no time to eat the same night , but that which we should have eaten over night , was given us in the morning . And often changing our horses , we spared no Horseflesh , but road swiftly and without intermission , as fast as our horses could trot . 
 How Cuyne entertained the Minorite Friars . Chap. 26. 
 BUt when we were come unto the court of Cuyne , he caused ( after the Tartars manner ) a Tent and all expenses necessary to be provided for us . And his people entreated us with more regard and courtesy , then they did any other Ambassadors . Howbeit we were not called before his presence , because he was not as yet elected , nor admitted unto his empire . Notwithstanding , the interpretation of the Popes letters , and the message which we delivered , were sent unto him by the foresaid Bathy . And having stayed there five or sixe days , he sent us unto his mother , under whom there was maintained a very solemn and royal court . And being come thither , we saw and huge tent of fine white cloth pitched , which was , to our judgement , of so great quanti tie , that more then two thousand men might stand within it , and round about it there was a wall of planks set up , painted with diverse images . we therefore with our Tartars assigned to attend upon us , took our journey thither , and there were all the Dukes assembled , eke one of them riding up and down with his train over the hills and dales . The first day they were all clad in white , but the second in scarlet robes . Then came Cuyne unto the said tent . Moreover , the third day they were all in blue robes , and the fourth in most rich robes of Baldakin cloth . In the wall of boards , about the tent aforesaid , were two great gates , by one of the which gates , the Emperor only was to enter , and at that gate there was no guard of men appointed to stand , although it stood continually open , because none durst go in or come out the same way : all that were admitted , entered by another gate , 169 
 The courtesy of Cuyne towards Ambassadors . 
 The tent royal . 
 A general assembly . 
 at which there stood watchmen , with bows , swords , & arrows . And whosoever approached unto the tent beyond the bounds and limit assigned , being caught , was beaten , but if he fled , he was shot at with arrows or iron . There were many that to our judgement , had upon their bridles , trappers , saddles , and such like furniture , to the valve of 20. marks in pure gold . The foresaid Dukes ( as we think ) communed together within the tent , and consulted about the election of their Emperor . But all the residue of the people were placed far away without the walls of board , & in this manner they stayed almost till noon . The banquet of Then began they to drink mares milk , & so continued the Nobles . drinking till even tide , and that in so great quantity , as it 
 was wonderful . And they called us in unto them , and gave us of their ale , because we could not drink their mares milk . And this they did unto us in token of great honour . But they compelled us to drink so much , that in regard of our customary diet , we could by no means endure it . Whereupon , giving them to under - stand , that it was hurtful unto us , they ceased to compel JenslausDuke us any more . Without the door stood Duke Jeroslaus ofSusdal . of Susdal , in Russia , and a great many Dukes of the 
 Kythayans , and of the Solangi . The two sons also of the king of Georgia , the ligier of the Caliph of Baldach , who was a Soldan , and ( as we think ) above ten Sultans Ambassadors of the Saracens beside . And , as it was told us by the of sundry na - agents , there were more then 4000. ambassadors , partly tims ' of such as paid tributes , and such as presented gifts , and other Sultans , and Dukes , which came to yield themselves , and such as the Tartars had sent for , and such as were governors of lands . All these were placed without the lists , and had drink given unto them . But almost continually they all of them gave us and Duke Jeroslaus the upper hand , when we were abroad in their company . 
 170 
 How he was exalted to his Empire . Chap. 27. 
 A Nd to our remembrance , we remained there , about 
 the space of foure weeks . The election was to our Thebegynnings thinking there celebrated , but it was not published and °f Cuyne his proclaimed there . And it was greatly suspected so to be , because always when Cuyne came forth out of the tent , he had a noise of music , and was bowed unto , or honoured with fair wands , having purple wool upon the tops of them , and that , so long as he remained abroad : which service was performed to none of the other Dukes . 
 The foresaid tent or court is called by them Syra Orda . Sir a Orda . Departing thence , we all with one accord road 3. or 4. leagues unto another place , where , in a goodly plain , by a rivers side , between certain mountains , there was another tent erected , which was called the golden Orda . For ‘ The golden there was Cuyne to be placed in the throne Imperial , Crda . upon the day of the Assumption of our Lady . But , for T5-the abundance of hail which fell at the same time , as is above said , the matter was deferred . There was also a tent erected upon pillars , which were covered with plataeae of gold , and were joined unto other timber with golden nails . It was covered above with Baldakin cloth , but does . there was other cloth spread over that , next unto the air . we abided there unto the feast of Saint Bartholomew , what time there was assembled and huge multitude standing with their faces towards the South . And a certain number of them being a stones cast distant from the residue , making continual prayers , and kneeling upon their knees , proceeded farther and farther towards the South . Howbeit we , not knowing whither they used enchantments , or whither they bowed their knees to God or to some other , would not kneel upon the ground with them . And having done so a long time , they returned to the tent , and placed Cuyne in his throne imperiali , and his Dukes bowed their knees before him . Afterward the whole multitude kneeled down in like manner , except our selves , for we were none of his subject's . 
 171 
 Of his age and demeanour , and of his seal . Chap. 28. 
 THis Emperor , when he was exalted unto his government , seemed to be about the age of fourty or fourty five years , He was of a mean stature , very wise and politic , and passing serious and grave in all his demeanour . A rare thing it was , for a man to see him laugh or behave himself lightly , as those Christians report , which abided continually with him . Certain Christians of his family earnestly and strongly affirmed unto us , that he himself was about to become a Christian . A token and argument whereof was , that he retained diverse Clergy men of the Christians . He had likewise at all times a Chapel of Christians , near unto his great Tent , where the Clerks ( like unto other Christians , and according to the custom of the Grecians ) do sing publicly and openly , and ring bells at certain hours , be there never so great a multitude of Tartars , or of other people in presence . And yet none of their Dukes do the like . It is the manner of the Emperor never to talk his own self with a stranger , though he be never so great , but hears and answereth by a speaker . And when any of his subject's ( how great soever they be ) are in propounding any matter of importance unto him , or in hearing his answer , they continue kneeling upon their knees unto the end of their conference . Neither is it lawful for any man to speak of any affairs , after they have been determined of by the Emperor . The said Emperor , hath in his affairs both public and private , and Agent , and Secretary of estate , with Scribes and all other Officials , except advocates . For , without the noise of pleading , or sentence giving , all things are done according to the Emperors will and pleasure . Other Tartarian princes do the like in those things which belong unto them . But , be it known unto all men , that whilst we remained at the said Emperor's court , which hath been ordained and kept for these many years , the 172 
 said Cuyne being Emperor new elect , together with all his princes , erected a flag of defiance against the Church of God , & the Roman empire , and against all Christian War ™ in - . kingdoms and nations of the West , unless peradventure ^iQ^tians ( which God forbid ) they will condescend unto those j things , which he hath enjoined unto our lord the Pope , L & to all potentates and people of the Christians , namely , that they will become obedient unto him . For , except Christendom , there is no land under heaven , which they stand in fear of , and for that cause they prepare themselves to battle against us . This Emperor's father , namely Occoday was poisoned to death , which is the cause why they have for a short space abstained from war . But their intent and purpose is ( as I have above said ) to subdue the whole world unto themselves , as they were commanded by Chingis Can . Hence it is that the Emperor in his letters writeth after this manner : The power of God , & Emperor of all men . Also , upon his seal , there is this posy engraven : God in heaven , and Cuyne Can upon earth , the power of God : the seal of the Emperor of all men . 
 Of the admission of the Friars and Ambassadors 
 unto the Emperor . Chap. 29. 
 IN the same place where the Emperor was established Cuyneheareth into his throne , we were summoned before him . And the Legates . 
 Chingay his chief secretary having written down our names , and the names of them that sent us , with the name of the Duke of Solangi , & of others , cried out with a loud voice , rehearsing the said names before the Emperor , and the assembly of his Dukes . Which being done , each one of us bowed his left knee foure times , & they gave us warning not to touch the threshold . And after they had searched us most diligently for knives , and could not find any about us , we entered in at the door upon the East side : because no man dare presume to enter at the West door , but the Emperor only . In like manner , every Tartarian Duke entereth on the West side into his tent . Howbeit the inferior sort do not 
 173 
 greatly regard such ceremonies . This therefore was the first time , when we entered into the Emperors tent in his presence , after he was created Emperor . Likewise all other ambassadors were there received by him , but very few were admitted into his tent . And there were preGifts presen - scented unto him such abundance of gifts by the said ted unto him . Ambassadors , that they seemed to be infinite , namely in 
 Samites , robes of purple , and of Baldakin cloth , silk girdles wrought with gold , and costly skins , with other gifts also . Likewise there was a certain Sun Canopy , or small tent ( which was to be carried over the Emperors head ) presented unto him , being set full of precious stones . And a governor of one Province brought unto him a company of camels covered with Baldakins . They had saddles also upon their backs , with certain other instruments , within the which were places for men to sit upon . Also they brought many horses & mules unto him furnished w‘ trappers and caparisons , some being made of leather , and some of iron . And we were demanded whither we would bestow any gifts upon him or no ? But we were not of ability so to do , having in a manner spent all our provision . There were also upon and hill standing a good distance from the tents , 500. Cartsful more then 500. carts , which were all full of silver and of of treasure . gold , and silk garments . And they were all divided be - 
 tween the Emperor and his Dukes , and every Duke bestowed upon his own followers what pleased him . 
 Of the place where the Emperor and his mother took their leaves one of another , and of Jeroslaus Duke of Russia . Chap. 30. 
 A tent of T'XEparting thence , we came unto another place , where purple . a wonderful brave tent , all of read purple , given by 
 the Kythayans , was pitched . we were admitted into that also , and always when we entered , there was given unto us ale and wine to drink , & sodden flesh ( when we would ) to eat . There was also a lofty stage built of boards , where the Emperors throne was placed , being 174 
 very curiously wrought out of ivory , wherein also there thnne of was gold and precious stones , and ( as we remember ) lvme-there were certain degrees or stairs to ascend unto it . 
 And it was round upon the top . There were benches placed about the said throne , whereon the ladies sat toward the left hand of the Emperor upon stools , ( but none sat aloft on the right hand ) and the Dukes sat upon benches below , the said throne being in the midst . Certain others sat behind the Dukes , and every day there resorted great company of Ladies thither . The three tents whereof we spoke before , were very large , but the Emperor his wives had other great and fair tents made of white felt . This was the place where the Emperor parted company with his mother : for she went into one part of the land , and the Emperor into another to execute justice . For there was taken a certain Concubine of this Emperor , which had poisoned his father to death , at the same time when the Tartars army was in Hungarie , which , for the same cause returned home . Moreover , upon the foresaid Concubine , and deatJl of many other of her confederates sentence of judgement was Gccoda^ re~ pronounced , and they were put to death . At the same 6 ' time Jeroslaus the great Duke of Soldal , which is a part Or of Russia , deceased . For being ( as it were for honours sake ) invited to eat and drink with the Emperors mother , and immediately after the banquet , returning unto his lodging , he fell sick , and within seven days , died . And after his death , his body was of a strange blue colour , and it was commonly reported , that the said Duke was poisoned , to the end that the Tartars might freely and totally possess his Dukedom . 
 How the Friars coming at length unto the Emperor , gave , and received letters . 
 Chap. 31. 
 TO be short , the Tartars brought us unto their Emperor , who when he had herd of them , that we were come unto him , commanded that we should 175 
 Cuyne dissem-bleth with the Legates . 
 return , unto his mother . For he was determined the next day , ( as it is abovesaid ) to set up a flag of defiance against all you countries of the West , which he would have us in no case to know . Wherefore returning , we stayed some few days with his mother , and so returned back again unto him . With whom we continued for the space of one whole month in such extreme hunger and thirst , that we could scarce hold life and soul together . For the provision allowed us for foure days , was scantly sufficient for one day . Neither could we buy us any sustenance , because the market was too far off . Howbeit the Lord provided for us a Russian goldsmith , nam Cosmas , who being greatly in the Emperors favour , procured us some sustenance . This man showed unto us the throne of the Emperor , which he had made , before it was set in the proper place , and his seal , which he also had framed . Afterwards the Emperor sent for us , giving us to understand by Chingay his chief Secretary , that we should write down our messages & affairs , and should deliver them unto him . Which thing we performed accordingly . After many days he called for us again , demanding whither there were any with our Lord the Pope , which understood the Russian , the Sarracen , or the Tartarian language ? To whom we answered , that we had none of those letters or languages . Howbeit , that there were certain Saracens in the land , but inhabiting a great distance from our Lord the Pope . And we said , that we thought it most expedient , that when they had written their minds in the Tartarian language , and had interpreted the meaning thereof unto us , we should diligently translate it into our own tongue , and so deliver both the letter and the translation thereof unto our Lord the Pope . Then departed they from us , and went unto the Emperor . And after the day of S. Martine , we were called for again . Then Kadac principal agent for the whole empire , and Chingay , and Bala , with diverse other Scribes , came unto us , and interpreted the letter word for word . And having written 
 176 
 it in Latin , they caused us to interpret unto them eke sentence , to wit if we had erred in any word . And when both letters were written , they made us to read them over twice more , lest we should have mistaken ought . For they said unto us : Take heed that you understand all things thoroughly , for if you should not understand the whole matter aright , it might breed some inconvenience . They wrote the said letters also in the Saracen tongue , that there might be some found in our dominions which could read and interpret them , if need should require . 
 How they were licensed to depart . Chap. 32. 
 A Nd ( as our Tartars told us ) the Emperor was purposed to send his ambassadors with us . Howbeit , he was desirous ( as we thought ) that we our selves should crave that favour at his hands . And when one of our Tartars being and ancient man , exhorted us to make the said petition , we thought it not good for us , that the Emperor should send his ambassadors . Wherefore we gave him answer , that it was not for us to make any such petition , but if it pleased the Emperor of his own accord to send them , we would diligently ( by Gods assistance ) see them conducted in safety . Howbeit , we thought it expedient for us , that they should not go , and that for diverse causes . First , because we feared , lest they , seeing the dissensions and wars which are among us , should be the more encouraged to make war against us . Secondly , we feared , that they would be instead of spies and intelligencers in our dominions . Thirdly , we misdoubted that they would be slain by the way . For our nations be arrogant and proud . For when as those servants ( which at the request of the Cardinali , attended upon us , namely the legates of Almain ) returned unto him in the Tartars attire , they were almost stoned in the way , by the Dutch , and were compelled to put ofF those garments . And it is the Tartars custom , never to be reconciled unto such as have slain their Ambassadors , till they have revenged themselves . Fourthly , lest they should be taken from us 
 i 177 M 
 The Legates are loath to have any Ambassadors sent from the Tartars to the Christians . 
 They are rewarded with 
 The soar journeys of the Legates in returning . 
 Bathy . 
 by main force . Fiftly , because there could come no good by their ambassade , for they were to have none other commission , or authority , but only to deliver their Emperors letter unto the Pope , and to the Princes of Christendome , which very same letters we our selves had , and we knew right well , that much harm might ensue thereof . Wherefore , the third day after this , namely , upon the feast of Saint Brice , they gave us our passport and a Letter sealed with the Emperors own seal , sending us unto the Emperors mother , who gave unto eke of us a gown made of Foxe-skinnes , with the fur on the outside , and a piece of purple . And our Tartars stole a yard out of every one of them . And out of that which was given unto our servant , they stole the better half . Which false dealing of theirs , we knew well enough , but would make no words thereof . 
 How they returned homeward . Chap. 33. 
 THen taking our journey to return , we travailed all 
 Winter long , lying in the deserts oftentimes upon the snow , except with our feet we made a piece of ground bore to lie upon . For there were no trees , but the plain champion field . And oftentimes in the morning , we found our selves all covered with snow driven over us by the wind . And so travailing till the feast of our Lords Ascension , we arrived at the court of Bathy . Of whom when we had inquired , what answer he would send unto our Lord the Pope , he said that he had nothing to give us in charge , but only that we should diligently deliver that which the Emperor had written . And , having received letters for our safe conduct , the thirteenth day after Pentecost , being Saterday , we were proceeded as far as Montii , with whom our foresaid associates and servants remained , which were withheld from us , and we caused them to be delivered unto us . From hence we travailed unto Corrensa , to whom , requiring gifts the second time at our hands , we gave none , because we had not wherewithal ! . And he appointed us two 
 178 
 Comanians , which lived among the common people of the Tartars , to be our guides unto the city of Kiow in Russia . Howbeit one of our Tartars parted not from us , till we were passed the utmost guard of the Tartars . But the other guides , namely the Comanians , which were given us by Corrensa , brought us from the last guard unto the city of Kiow , in the space of sixe days . And there we arrived fifteene days before the feast of Saint John Baptist . Moreover , the Citizens of Kiow having intelligence of our approach , came forth all of them to meet us , with great joy . For they rejoiced over us , as over men that had be risen from death to life . So like wise they did unto us throughout all Russia , Polonia , and Bohemia . Daniel and his brother Wasilico made us a royal feast , and entertained us with them against our wills for the space of eight days . In the mean time , they with their Bishops , and other men of account , being in consultation together about those matters which we had propounded unto them in our journey towards the Tartars , answered us with common consent , saying : that they would hold the Pope for their speciali Lord and Father , and the Church of Rome for their Lady & mistress , confirming likewise all things which they had sent concerning this matter , before our coming , by their Abbate . And for the same purpose , they sent their Ambassadors and letters by us also , unto our Lord the Pope . 
 