A Chronicle of the Kings of Man , taken out of M. Camdens Chorography . 
 N the year of our Lord 1066. Edward King of England , of famous memory deceased , whom Harald son of Godwin succeeded in his kingdom ; against which Harald the king of Norwaie called Harald Harfager fought a battle at Stainford bridge , where the English winning the 
 field put all the Norwegians to flight : out of which flight one Godredus surnamed Crovan ( the son of Harald the black , who had before time fled out of Island ) repaired unto Godred son of Syrric , who then reigned in Man , and was right friendly and honourably entertained by him . 
 In the very same year William the Conqueror subdued England , and Godred the son of Syrric , king of Man , deceased , after whom succeeded his son Fingal . Fingal . 
 In the year 1066. Godredus Crovan gathered a fleet of ships , and sailed unto Man , and giving battle unto the people of the country , was vanquished and put to flight . The second time also having gathered his army and ships together , he came unto Man , fought with the inhabitants , lost the victory , and was chased away . Yea , the third time he assembled a great multitude , and coming by night unto the port which is called Ramsa , hid 300. of his men in a wood standing upon the side of the hill called Scacafel . The Sun was no sooner up , but the Mannians arranged themselves and with great fury set upon Godred . 
 Boats having not passed three iron nails in them . 
 And in the midst of the skirmish , the foresaid 300. men rising out of their ambush , and coming upon the backs of the Mannians , molested them so soar , that they were inforced to fly . But when they saw you they were overcome and had no place of refuge to retire unto ( for the tide of the sea had filled the channel of the river of Ramsa ) and seeing the enemy so fiercely pursuing them on the other side , they which remained , with lamentable outcries beseeched Godred to spare their lives . Then he being moved with compassion , and pitying their extreme calamity , because he had be of late sustained and nourished among them , sounded a retreat and forbade his soldiers to make any longer pursuit . The day following Godred put his soldiers to their choice , whither they would divide Man among themselves and inhabit it , or whither they would take the wealth of the country , and so return unto their own home . Howbeit , it pleased them better to waste the whole Island and to enrich themselves with the commodities thereof , and so to return from whence they came . Now Godred himself with a few Islanders which had remained with him , took possession of the South part of the Island , and unto the remnant of the Mannians he granted the North part thereof , upon condition , that none of them should at any time afterwards dare once to challenge any parcel of the said ground by title of inheritance . Whereupon it comes to pass , that unto this day the whole Island is the kings own Fee-simple , and that all the revenues thereof pertain unto him . Also Godredus subdued Dublin unto himself & a great part of Lainestir . And he so tamed the Scots , that none of them durst built a ship or a boat , with above three iron nails in it . He reigned 16. years and died in the Island called Isle . He left behind him three sons , Lagman , Harald , and Olavus . Lagman being the eldest challenged the kingdom and reigned seven years . Howbeit Harald his brother rebelled against him a long time , but being at length taken by Lagman , he was gelded and had his eyes put out . After-26 
 ward Lagman repenting him that he had put out the eyes of his brother , did of his own accord relinquish his kingdom , and taking upon him the badge of the cross , he went on pilgrimage to Jerusalem , in which journey also he died . 
 In the year 1075. all the principali men of the Islands having intelligence of the death of Lagman , sent messengers unto Murecardus O-Brien King of Irland , requesting him that he would send some well-disposed person of his own kindred and blood royal , until Olavus son of Godred were come to full age . The king most willingly [ I . 11 . J condescended unto their request , and sent unto them one Dopnald the son of Tade , charging and commanding him that with all meekness and modesty , he should govern that kingdom , which of right belonged not unto him . Howbeit he , after he had once attained unto the kingdom , neglecting the commandment of his lord , usurped the government with great tyrannic , committing many heinous crimes , and so he reigned very disorderly for the space of three years . Then all the princes of the Islands making a generail conspiracy , banded themselves against him , and expelled him out of their dominions . And he flying into Irland returned no more unto them . 
 In the year 1077. one Ingemundus was sent from the king of Norway , to take possession of the kingdom of the Islands . And being come unto the Island of Leodus , Lewis . he sent messengers unto all the princes of the Islands to come unto him , commanding them to assemble themselves , and to appoint him to be their King . In the mean season he and his companions spent their time in robbing and rioting , ravished women and virgins , and addicted themselves to filthy pleasures and to the lusts of the flesh . And when these things were reported unto the princes of the Islands , who had assembled themselves to choose him king , being mightily incensed thereat , they made haste towards him , and coming upon him in the night , they burned the house wherein he was , and slew 
 both him and the rest of his company , partly with sword , and partly with fire . 
 In the year 1098. the abbey of S. Maries at Cistertium was founded . In the same year also Antiochia was taken by the Christians , and a Comet appeared . 
 Moreover , the same year there was a battle fought between the inhabitants of Man , at Santwat , and they of the North obtained the victory . In which battle were slain Earl Othor and Mac-Maras , chieftains of both parts . 
 The same year Magnus king of Norway , son of Olavus , son of Harald Harfagre , being desirous to view the corpse of S. Olavus king and Martyr , gave commandment that his monument should be opened . But the Bishop and the Clergy withstanding this his attempt , the king went very boldly and by his kingly authority , caused the cophin ' to be opened . And when he had seen with his eyes , and handled with his hands the incorrupt body of the foresaid King and Martyr , a sudden fear came upon him , and he departed with great haste . The night following Olavus king and Martyr appeared unto him in a vision , saying : Choose ( I say ) unto your self one of these two , either within 30. days to loose your life with your kingdom , or else to depart from Norway and never to see it again . The King so soon as he was awaked out of sleep , called his Princes and Senators , and expounded the foresaid vision unto them . And they also being astonished thereat gave him this counsel , that with all speed he should depart out of Norway . Then he without any further delay caused a Navy of 160. ships to be provided , and so sailed unto the Islands of Orkney , which he presently subdued , and passing along through all the Islands and conquering them , at length he came unto the Isle of Man , where he was no sooner arrived , but he went unto the Isle of S. Patric to see the place of battle , where the inhabitants of Man had of late fought , because many of the dead bodies were as yet unburied . And seeing that it was a 28 
 most beautiful Island , it pleased him exceeding well , and therefore he made choice to inhabit therein his own self , and built forts there which are at this day called by his own name . He had the people of Galway in such awe , that he constrained them to cut down their own timber , and to bring it unto his shore for the building of his forts . He sailed on further unto the Isle of Anglesey near unto Wales , and finding two Earls therein ( either of them being called by the name of Hugo ) he slew the one , and the other he put to flight , and so subdued the Island . But the Welshmen presented many gifts unto him , and so bidding them farewell he returned unto Man. Unto Murecard king of Irland he sent his shoes , commanding him that he should carry them on his shoulders , upon the birthday of our Lord through the midst of his Palace , in the sighed of his Ambassadors , that thereby it might appear unto them , that he was subject unto king Magnus . Which when the Irishmen herd , they took it grievously and disdained much thereat . But the King being better advised , I had rather ( said he ) not only bear his shoes , but eat his shoes , then that king Magnus should destroy any one province in Irland . Wherefore he fulfilled his commandment , and honourably entertained his Ambassadors . Many gifts also he sent unto king Magnus by them , and concluded a league . But the messengers returning unto their lord , told him of the situation of Irland , of the beauty thereof , of the fruitfulness of the soil , and of the holesomnesse of the air . Magnus hearing these things was fully resolved to conquer all Irland unto himself . And for the same purpose he commanded that a Fleet should be made ready . But he taking his voyage with sixteene ships , & being desirous to view the land , when he had undiscreetly departed from his Navy , he was suddenly environed by the Irish , and was himself slain , together with all that were with him almost . He was interred near unto the Church of S. Patric in Armagh . He sixe years . After his death the Princes of the 29 
 A.D. 
 1098. 
 Islands sent for Olavus the son of Godredus Crovan , who lived in the Court of Henry King of England son unto William the Conqueror . 
 In the year 1102. Olavus son of Godredus Crovan began his reign and reigned fourtie years : he was a peaceable man being in league with all the Kings of Scotland and Irland in his time . He took to wife Affrica the daughter of Fergusius of Galway , of whom he begat Godredus . Of his concubines he begat Regnaldus , Lagmannus , and Haraldus , and many daughters , whereof | | Argile , one married unto Sumerledus king of II Herergaidel , which afterwards occasioned the overthrow of the whole kingdom of the Islands . He begat foure sons by her , namely Dulgallus , Raignaldus , Engus , and Olavus . 
 In the year 1134. Olavus gave unto Yvo the Abbot of Furnes a portion of his own ground in Man to built and Abbey in the place which is called Russin . Also he enriched with revenues and endued with privileges all places of religion within his Islands . 
 In the year 1142. Godredus the son of Olavus sailed unto the K. of Norway called Hinge , and doing his homage unto him he remained with him , & was by him honorably entertained . The same year the 3. sons of Harald brother unto Olavus , who were brought up at the city of Dublin , gathering together a great multitude of people , and all the fugitives and vagabonds of the kingdom resorted unto Man , and demanded of the said king the one half of all the kingdom of the Islands . Which thing when the king herd , being desirous to pacific them , he answered that he would consult about that matter . And a day and place being appointed , where the consultation should be kept , in the mean time those miscreants conspired together , about the murdering of the King . And when the day appointed was come , both companies assembled themselves unto the haven town called Ramsa , and they sat in order , the king with his nobility on the one side , and they with their confederates on the other side . Howbeit Regnaldus who had and 
 intention to slay the king , stood aside in the midst of the house talking with one of the Princes of the land . And being called to come unto the king he turned himself about as if he would have saluted him , and lifting up his glittering axe , he chopped the kings head quite off at a blow . Now 1143 • having committed this outrageous villainy , within a short space they divided the Island between themselves , and gathering and army together sailed unto Galway , intending to subdue that also ; howbeit the people of Galway assembled themselves , and with great fury encountered with them . Then they immediately turning their backs with great confusion fled unto Man. And as touching all the Galwedians which inhabited in the said Island , some of them they slew , and the residue they banished . 
 In the year 1143. Godredus son of Olavus returning out of Norway was created king of Man ; who in revenge of his father's death , put out the eyes of two of Haralds sons and slew the thirde . 
 In the year 1144. Godredus began his reign , and he reigned thirtie years . In the thirde year of his reign the citizens of Dublin sent for him and created him king of Dublin , against whom Murecardus king of Irland made war , and encamping himself at the city called Coridelis , he sent his brother Osibel with 3000. horsemen unto Dublin , who was slain by Godred and the Dubliners , the rest of his company being put to flight . These things being thus finished , Godredus returned unto Man , and began to exercise tyrannic , disinheriting certain of his nobles , of whom one called Thorfinus the son of Oter , being mightier then the rest , went unto Sumerledus , and nam Dubgal the son of Sumerledus , king of the Islands , and subdued many of the said Islands on his behalf . Whereof when Godred had intelligence by one Paulus , providing a Navy , he went to meet Sumerledus coming against him with 80. ships : and in the year 1156. upon the night of the feast of Epiphanie , there was 1156. a Sea-battell fought , and many being slain on both parts , the day following they were pacified , and divided the 
 kingdom of the Islands among themselves , and it continued two kingdoms from that day unto this present time . And this was the cause of the ruin of the monarchic of the Islands , from which time the sons of Sumerled enjoyed the one half thereof . 
 In the year 1158. Sumerled came unto Man with 53. ships , putting Godred to flight and wasting the Island : and Godred sailed unto Norway to seek for aid against Sumerled . In the year 1164. Sumerled gathered a fleet of 160. ships together ; and arrived at Rhinfrin , intending to subdue all Scotland unto himself : howbeit , by Gods just judgement being overcome by a few , together with his son , and and innumerable multitude of people , he was slain . The very same year there was a battle fought at Ramsa , between Reginald the brother of Godred , and the inhabitants of Man , but by the stratagem of a certain Earl the Mannians were put to flight . Then began Reginald to usurp the kingly authority . Howbeit his brother Godred within foure days after , coming out of Norway with a great power of armed men , apprehended his brother Reginald , gelded him , and put out his eyes . The same year deceased Malcolme the king of Scots , and his brother William succeeded in the kingdom . 
 In the year 1166. two Comets appeared in the month of August , before the rising of the Sun , one to the South and another to the North . 
 In the year 1171. Richard earl of Penbroke sailed into Irland , and subdued Dublin with a great part of Irland . 
 In the year 1176. John Curcy conquered Ulster unto himself . And at the same time also Vivianus legate from the sea of Rome came into Man , & caused king Godred to be lawfully wedded unto his wife Phingola , daughter of Maclotlen son of Murkartac king of Irland , mother of Olavus , who was then 3. years old . Silvanus the abbot married them , unto whom the very same day , king Godred gave a portion of ground in Mirescoge , where he 32 
 built a Monastery : howbeit , in process of time , the said land with the monks , was granted unto the abbey of Russin . 
 In the year 1172. Reginaldus the son of Eacmarcat ( a man descended of the blood royal ) coming into Man with a great multitude of people , in the absence of the king , at the first conflict he put to flight certain watchmen which kept the shore , & slew about 30. persons . Whereupon the very same day the Mannians arranging themselves put him , & almost all his followers to the sword . 
 In the year 1183. O-Fogolt was viscount of Man. 
 In the year 1185. the Sun was eclipsed upon the feast of S. Philip and Jacob. 
 In the year 1187. deceased Godred king of the Islands , upon the 4. of the Ides of November , and the next summer his body was translated unto the island of Hy. He left 3. sons behind him , Reginaldus , Olavus , and Yvarus . In his life time he ordained his son Olavus to be his heir apparent , because he only was born legitimate . But the Mannians , when Olavus was scarce ten years old , sent unto the islands for Reginald and created him king . 
 In the year 1187. began Reginald the son of Godred to reign over the islands : and Murchardus a man of great power throughout all the kingdom of the islands was put to death . 
 In the year 1192. there was a battle fought between Reginald and Engus the two sons of Sumerled : but Engus obtained the victory . The same year was the abbey of Russin removed unto Dufglas , howbeit within foure years after the monks returned unto Russin . 
 In the year 1203. Michael bishop of the islands deceased at Fontanas , and Nicholas succeeded in his room . 
 In the year 1204. Hugo de Lacy invaded Ulster with and army and encountered with John de Curcy , took him prisoner & subdued Ulster unto himself . Afterwards he permitted the said John to go at liberty , who coming unto king Reginald was honourably entertained by him , i 33 c 
 King John passed into Irland with 500. sails . 
 because he was his son in law , for John de Curcy had taken to wife Affrica the daughter of Godredus , which founded the abbey of S. Marry de jugo domini , and was there buried . 
 In the year 1205. John de Curcy & Reginald king of the islands invading Ulster with a hundreth ships at the port which is called Stranfeord did negligently besiege the castle of Rath : but Walter de Lacy coming upon them with his army , put them to flight , & from that time Curcy never recovered his land . In the year 1210. Engus the son of Sumerled & his 3. sons were slain . 
 At the same time John king of England conducted a fleet of 500. ships into Irland , and subdued it unto himself : and sending a certain earl nam Fulco , unto the isle of Man , his soldiers almost utterly wasted it in the space of 15. days , and having taken pledges they returned home into their own country . King Reginald and his nobles were at this time absent from Man. 
 In the year 1217. deceased Nicolas bishop of the islands , and was buried in Ulster , in the house of Benchor , whom Reginald succeeded . 
 I think it not amiss to report somewhat more concerning the two foresaid brothers Reginaldus and Olavus . 
 REginald gave unto his brother Olavus , the island called Lodhus or Lewes , which is said to be larger then the rest of the islands , but almost destitute of inhabitants , because it is so full of mountains & quarreis , being almost no where fit for tillage . Howbeit the inhabitants thereof do live for the most part upon hunting and fishing . Olavus therefore went to take possession of this Island , and dwelled therein leading a poor life : and when he saw that it would by no means suffice for the sustentation of himself & his followers , he went boldly unto his brother Reginald , who as then remained in the islands , & spoke on this wise unto him . My brother ( Said he ) and my lord and king , you know that the 
 1223-kingdom of the islands pertained unto me by right of inheritance , howbeit because the Lord had chosen you to bear the sceptre , I do not envy that honour unto you , neither doth it any whit grieve me that you are exalted unto this royal dignity . Now therefore I beseech you to provide me some portion of land in the islands , whereby I may honestly live . For the Island of Lewis which you gave me is not sufficient for my maintenance . Which his brother Reginald hearing said that he would consult about the premises . And on the morrow , when Olavus was sent for to parley , Reginald commanded him to be attached , and to be carried unto William king of Scotland , and with him to remain prisoner : and Olavus remained in prison almost for the space of 7. years . But at the 7. years end William king of Scots deceased , and Alexander his son reigned in his stead . The foresaid William , before his death , commanded that all prisoners should be set at liberty . Olavus therefore being at liberty came unto Man , and immediately with a great company of nobles took his journey unto S. James : and his brother Reginald caused the said Olavus to take unto wife , the daughter of a certain noble man of Kentyre , cousin germane unto his own wife , & by name being called Lavon , and he granted unto him the possession of Lewis . After a few days Reginald the bishop of the Islands having gathered a Synod , separated Olavus and Godred his son , and Lavon his wife , namely because she was cousin germane unto his former wife . Afterwards Olavus married Scristina daughter unto Ferkarus earl of Rosse . 
 Hereupon the wife of Reginald Queen of the Islands being incensed , sent letters unto the Island of Sky in K. Reginald his name to her son Godred willing him to take Olavus . Which commandment Godred putting in practice , & entering the isle of Lewis for you same purpose , Olavus fled in a little skiff unto his father in law the earl of Rosse , & in the mean time Godred wasted the isle of Lewis . At the very same time Pol the son of Book 35 
 The Isle of Man advanced to a kingdom . 
 viscount of Sky , being a man of power in all the Islands , because he would not consent unto Godred , fled , & dwelled together with Olavus in the dominions of the earl of Rosse , & making a league with Olavus , they went both in a ship unto Sky . To be short , sending certain spies , they were informed that Godred remained secure with a small company in a certain Isle called you isle of S. Columba . And uniting unto themselves their friends and acquaintance , & others that would go voluntarily with them , in the dead of the night , having launched 5. ships from the next seashore , which was distant about the space of 2. furlongs from the foresaid Island , they environed the said Island on all sides . Now Godred and his company rising early in the morning , and seeing themselves beset with their enemies on all sides , they were utterly astonished . Howbeit arming themselves they began stoutly to make resistance , but altogether in vain . For about 9. of the clock in the morning , Olavus and the foresaid viscount Pol , with all their soldiers , entered the Island , and having slain all whom they found without the precincts of the Church , they apprehended Godred , gelding him , and putting out his eyes . Unto which actium Olavus gave not his consent , neither could he withstand it , by reason of the forenamed viscount the son of Book . This was done in the year of Christ 1223. The next summer following Olavus having received pledges from all the chief men of the Islands , with a fleet of 32. ships sailed unto Man , and arrived at Rognolfwaht . At the same time Reginald and Olavus divided the kingdom of the Islands between themselves , Man being granted unto Reginald , & beside his portion the name of a king also . Olavus having received certain victuals of the people of Man , returned , together with his company , unto his own portion of Islands . The year following Reginald taking unto him Alanus lord of Galway , together with his subject's of Man , sailed unto the Islands , that he might take away that portion of ground from his brother Olavus , which he had granted unto him , and subdue it unto himself . How - 
 1228. , beit , by reason that the people of Man had no list to fight against Olavus or the Islanders , because they bore good will towards them , Reginald and Alanus lord of Galway being defeated of their purpose , returned home unto their own . Within a short space after Reginald , under pretense of going unto the Court of his lord the king of England , received and 100. marks of the people of Man , and took his journey unto Alanus lord of Galway . Which the people of Man hearing took great indignation thereat , insomuch that they sent for Olavus , and appointed him to be their king . 
 In the year 1226. Olavus recovered his inheritance , that is to say the kingdom of Man and of the Islands , which Reginald his brother had governed for the space of 38. years , and he reigned two years in safety . 
 In the year 1228. Olavus with all his nobles of Man , and the stronger part of his people , sailed unto the Islands . A short space after Alanus lord of Galway , Thomas earl of Athol , & king Reginald came unto Man with a mighty army , and wasted all the South part of Man , spoiled the Churches , and slew all the men whom they could take , insomuch , that the South part of the said Island was brought almost into desolation . And then Alanus returned with his army into his own land , leaving behind him bailiffs and substitutes in Man , which should gather up and render unto him the tribute of the country . Howbeit king Olavus came suddenly upon them , chased them away and recovered his kingdom . And the Mannians which of late were dispersed and scattered abroad , began to unite themselves , and to inhabit without fear . The same year , in the time of Winter , upon the sudden , and in the very dead of the night came king Reginald out of Galway with five ships , and burned all the ships of his brother Olavus , and of the nobles of Man , at the Isle of S. Patric , & concluding a peace with his brother , remained at the port of Ragnolwath 40. days : in the mean while he allured unto himself all the Islanders upon the South part of Man , who sware , that 
 they would adventure their lives , until he had got the one half of his kingdom : contrariwise Olavus joined unto himself them of the North part , & upon the 14. of February in the place called Tingvalla , a field was fought between the two brother's , wherein Olavus god the victory , and Reginald the king was by certain soldiers slain without the knowledge of his brother . Also certain pirates coming to the south part of Man , wasted & spoiled it . The monks of Russin conveyed the body of K. Reginald , unto the abbey of S. Marry of Furnace , & there he was interred in the place , which his own self had chosen for the purpose . After these things Olavus traveled unto the king of Norway , but before he was arrived there , Haco king of Norway appointed acertaine noble man nam Husbac the son of Owmund , to be king of the Islands of the Hebrides & called his name Haco . Then came the said Haco with Olavus & Godred DONE the son of Reginald , and a multitude of Norwegians , unto the islands : and while they were giving and assault unto a castle in the island of Both , Haco being hit with a stone died , and was buried in Iona . 
 In the year 1230. came Olavus , with Godredus DONE , & certain Norwegians unto Man , and they parted the kingdom among themselves , Olavus still retaining Man. Godred as he was going unto the islands , was slain in the isle of Lewis , & Olavus enjoyed the kingdom of the islands also . 
 In the year 1237. upon the 12. of the Kalends of June , Olavus son of Godred king of Man deceased in the isle of S. Patric , and was interred in the abbey of Russin . He reigned 11. years , two while his brother was alive , and nine after his death . 
 Haraldus his son being of the age of 14. years , succeeded , and he reigned 12. years . The first year of his reign taking his journey unto the islands , he appointed one Loglen his kinsman to be his deputy in Man. The Autumn following Haraldus sent the three sons of Nel , namely Dufgaldus , Torquellus , & Molmore , and his friend 3 » 
 Joseph unto Man , that they might enter into consultation together . Wherefore the 25. day they assembled themselves at Tingvalla : and malice growing between the sons of Nel , and Loglen , they fell to blows and skirmished soar on both parts , Molmore , Dufgald , and the foresaid Joseph being all slain in the fray . The Spring following , king Harald came into the isle of Man , and Loglen fleeing into Wales , was himself , together with Godred the son of Olavus his pupil , and 40. others , drowned by shipwreck . 
 In the year 1238. Gospatricius and Gillescrist son of Mac-Kerthac came from the king of Norway unto Man , expelling Harald out of the said island , and taking tribute on the behalf of the Norwegian king , because the said Harald refused to come unto his Court . 
 In the year 1240. Gospatricius deceased and was buried in the abbey of Russin . 
 In the year 1239. Haraldus went unto the king of Norway , who within two years confirmed unto him , his heirs and successors , under seal , all the islands which his predecessors enjoyed . 
 In the year 1242. Haraldus returned out of Norway unto Man , and being honourably received by the inhabitants , he lived in peace with the kings of England and Scotland . 
 In the year 1247. Haraldus ( like as his father also before him ) was knighted by the king of England , and so being rewarded with many gifts , he returned home . The same year he was sent for by the king of Norway , and he married his daughter . And in the year 1249. as he was returning home with his wife , with Laurence the elect of Man , and with many other nobles , near unto the confines of Radland , he was drowned in a tempest . 
 In the year 1249. Reginald the son of Olavus , and brother unto Harald began to reign the day next before the Nonce of May : and upon the 30. day of the same month he was slain by Yvarus a soldier , and other of his accomplices , in the South part of a certain meadow , 
 39 
 A.D. 
 X249 . 
 near unto the Church of the holy Trinitie , and he was buried at the Church of S. marry at Russin . 
 The same year Alexander king of Scots provided a great navy of ships , that he might conquer the islands unto himself : howbeit falling into and ague at the isle of Ker-wary , he deceased . 
 Then Haraldus the son of Godred DONE usurped the name of a king over the islands , he banished also all the princes of Harald the son of Olavus , and ordained his fugitives to be princes and nobles in their stead . 
 In the year 1250. Haraldus the son of Godred DONE being summoned by letters went unto the king of Norway , who detained him in prison because he had unjustly possessed the kingdom . The same year Magnus the son of Olavus , and John the son of Dugalt arrived at Roghalwaht , which John nam himself king , but the Mannians taking it grievously , that Magnus was not nominated , drave them from their shore , and many of the company perished by shipwreck . 
 In the year 1252. came Magnus the son of Olavus unto Man , and was ordained king . The year following he took his journey unto the king of Norway , & there he remained one whole year . 
 In the year 1254. Haco king of Norway ordained Magnus the son of Olavus king of the Islands , confirming them to him and to his heirs , and by name unto Harald his brother . 
 In the year 1256. Magnus took his journey into England , and was by the king of England created knight . 
 In you year 1257. the Church of S. Maries of Russin was dedicated by Richard bishop of Soder . 
 In the year 1260. Haco king of Norway came into the parts of Scotland , and without achieving ought , turning his course towards the Orcades he there deceased at Kir-was , and was buried at Bergen . 
 In the year 1265. Magnus the son of Olavus king of Man and of the Islands died at the castle of Russin , and was buried at the Church of S. Marry at Russin . 
 In the year 1266. the kingdom of the Islands was translated unto Alexander king of Scots . 
 That which follows was written in a new character or letter , and of a diverse kind from the former . 
 IN the year 1270. upon the seventh day of October the Fleet of Alexander king of Scots arrived at Roghalwath , and the next day before the Sun rising there was a battle fought between the Mannians and the Scots , in the which conflict there were slain 535. Mannians : whereupon a certain versifier writeth to this effect : 
 Five hundreth fourtie men are slain : against ill haps , 
 Ye Mannians arm your selves , for fear of afterclaps . 
 In the year 1313. Robert king of Scots besieged the castle of Russin , which Dingaway Dowil held against him , howbeit at the last the king took the castle . 
 In the year 1316. upon the feast of Ascension , Richard le Mandevile and his brothers , with diverse great personages of Irland arrived at Ramaldwath , demanding to have victuals and money ministered unto them , because they had be spoiled by their enemies , which made continual war upon them . But when the whole company of the Mannians answered that they would give nothing , they proceeded against them in warlike manner with two bans , till they were come under the side of the hill called Warthfel , in the field where John Mandevile remained , and there having fought a battle , the Irish overcame the people of Man , and spoiled the Island and the Abbey of Russin also : and when they had revealed a whole month in the Island , lading their ships they returned home . 
 41 
 