Part of the great Charter granted by king Edward the first to the Barons of the Cinque ports , in the sixt year of his reign 1278. for their good services done unto him by sea : wherein is mention of their former ancient Charters from Edward the Confessor , William the Conqueror , William Rufus , Henry the second , king Richard the first , king John , and Henry the third continued unto them . 
 Dward by the grace of God king of England , lord of Ireland , & duke of Gascoigne , to all Archbishop's , Bishops , Abbots , Priors , Earls , Barons , Justices , Sheriffs , Provosts , Officers , & to all Bailiffs and true subject's greeting . You shall know that for the faithful service 
 that our Barons of the five Ports hitherto to our predecessors kings of England , & unto us lately in our army of Wales have done , and for their good service to us and our heirs kings of England , truly to be continued in time to come , we have granted & by this our Charter confirmed for us and our heirs , to the same our Barons and to their heirs , all their liberties and freedoms . So that they shall be free from all toll , and from all custom ; that is to say from all lastage , tallage , passage , carriage , 293 
 Edward the confessor . 
 rivage , asponsage , and from all wreck , and from all their sale , carrying and recarying through all our realm and dominion , with sock and souke , toll and theme . And that they shall have Infangthefe , and that they shall be wreckefree , lastagefree , and lovecopfree . And that they shall have Den and Strand at great Yarmouth , according as it is contained in the ordinance by us thereof made perpetually to be observed . And also that they are free from all shires and hundreds : so that if any person will plead against them , they shall not answer nor plead otherwise then they were wont to plead in the time of the lord , king Henrie our great grandfather : And that they shall have their findelles in the sea and in the land : And that they be free of all their goods and of all their merchandises as our freemen . And that they have their honours in our court , and their liberties throughout all the land wheresoever they shall come . And that they shall be free for ever of all their lands , which in the time of Lord Henrie the king our father they possessed : that is to say in the 44. year of his reign , from all manner of summonces before our Justices to any manner of pleadings , journeying in what shire soever their lands are . So that they shall not be bound to come before the Justices aforesaid , except any of the same Barons do implead any man , or if any man be impleaded . And that they shall not plead in any other place , except where they ought , and where they were wont , that is to say , at Shepeway . And that they have their liberties and freedoms from henceforth , as they and their predecessors have had them at any time better , more fully and honourably in the time of the kings of England , Edward , William the first , William the second , Henrie the king our great grandfather , and in the times of king Richard , and king John our grandfathers , and lord king Henrie our father , by their Charters : as the same Charters which the same our Barons thereof have , and which we have seen , do reasonably testify . And we forbid that no man unjustly trouble them nor their merchandise upon our 
 29+ 
 forfeiture of ten pounds . So nevertheless , that when the same Barons shall fail in doing of Justice or in receiving of Justice , our Warden , and the wardens of our heirs of the Cinque Portes , which for the time shall be , their Ports and liberties may enter for to do their full Justice . 
 So also that the said Barons and their heirs , do unto us and to our heirs kings of England by the year their full service of 57. ships at their costs by the space of fifteene 57 - " f days at our somounce , or at the somounce of our heirs . 
 We have granted also unto them of our speciali grace that they have Outfangthefe in their lands within the Ports king 1^ . days aforesaid , in the same manner that Archbishop's , Bishops , at their mne Abbots , Earls and Barons , have in their manors in thee . county of Kent . And they be not put in any Assizes , Juries , or Recognizances by reason of their foreign tenure against their will : and that they be free of all their own wines for which they do travail of our right prize , that is to say , of one tun before the mast , and of another behind the mast . We have granted furthermore unto the said Barons for us and our heirs , that they for ever have this liberty , that is to say , That we or our heirs shall not have the wardship or marriages of their heirs by reason of their lands , which they hold within the liberties and Ports aforesaid , for the which they do their service aforesaid : and for the which we and our progenitors had not the wardships and marriages in time past . But we our aforesaid confirmation upon the liberties and freedoms aforesaid , and our grants following to them of our especial grace , of new have caused to be made , saving always in all things our kingly dignity : And saving unto us and to our heirs , plea of our crown , life and member . Wherefore we will and surely command for us and our heirs that the aforesaid Barons and their heirs for ever have all the aforesaid liberties and freedoms , as the aforesaid Charters do reasonably testify . And that of our especial grace they have outfangthefe in their lands within the Ports aforesaid after the manner that Archbishop's , Bishops , 
 295 
 Abbots , Earls and Barons have in their manors in the county of Kent . And that they be not put in Assizes , Juries , or Recognizances by reason of their foreign tenure against their will . And that they be free of their own wines for which they travail of our right price or custom , that is to say of one tun of wine before the mast , and of another tun behind the mast . And that likewise for ever they have the liberty aforesaid : that is to say : That we and our heirs have not the wardships or marriages of their heirs by reason of their lands which they hold within the liberties and Ports aforesaid , for which they do their service aforesaid , and for which we and our predecessors the wardships and marriages have not had in times past . But our aforesaid confirmation of their liberties and freedoms aforesaid and other grants following to them of our especial grace of new we have caused to be made . Saving always and in all things our regal dignity . And saving unto us and our heirs the pleasant of our crown of life and member as is aforesaid . These being witnesses , the reverend father Robert of Portuens Cardinali of the holy Church of Rome , friar William of Southhampton Prior povincial of the friars preachers in England , William of Valencia our uncle , Roger of the dead sea , Roger of Clifford , Master Robert Samuel deane of Sarum , Master Robert of Scarborough the Archdeacon of East Riding , Master Robert of Seyton , Bartholomew of Southley , Thomas of Wayland , Walter of Hoptan , Thomas of Normannel , Steven of Pennes-ter , Frances of Bonava , John of Lenetotes , John of Metingham and others . Given by our hand at Westminster the fourteenth day of June , in the sixth year of our reign . 
 