Now as concerning the cities of the Hans . 
 Hamburg . TO Nprimis the Hamburgers exhibited nine articles , wherein X they demanded restitution for certain damages offered , as they said , by the English men , the valve of which losses amounted unto the sum of 9117. nobles , 20. pence . For the which , after due examination , there was promised restitution to the sum of 416. nobles , 5. shillings . Beside the two articles propounded against them of Scardeburg , the sum whereof was 231. pounds , 15. S. 8.d . concerning thee which there was sentence given in England by the commissioners of our lord the king , the 34 
 execution whereof was promised unto the said Hamburgers by the ambassadors of England : leave and licence being reserved unto the said Hamburgers , of declaring or explaining certain obscure articles by them exhibited , which declaration was to be made at the feast of Easter then next to come , or within one year next ensuing the said feast , unto the chancellor of England for the time being , and of proving the said articles and others also , which have not as yet sufficiently be proved . Which being done they are to have full compliment and execution of justice . 
 Also by the Hamburgers there are demanded 445. nobles from certain of the inhabitants of Linne in England . Which sum , if it shall proved to be due unto any English men , the Hamburgers are to rest contented with those goods , which they have already in their possessions . 
 Item , they of Breme propounded sixe articles , wherein Breme . the sum contained amounteth unto 4414. nobles . And there was no satisfaction promised unto them . But the same liberty and licence was reserved unto them , in like manner as before unto the Hamburgers . 
 Item , they of Stralessund propounded 23. articles , Stralessund . whereof the sum amounted unto 7415. nobles , 2o . worser . for the which there was promised satisfaction of 253. 
 nobles , 3-q . Also here is a caveat to be observed : that they of Stralessund had of English men's goods a great sum particularly to be declared , which will peradventure suffice for a recompense . And some of their articles are concerning injuries offered before 20 , 22 , 23 , 24. years past . Also their articles are so obscure that they will never , or very hardly be able to declare or prove them . Howbeit there is reserved the very same liberty unto them , that was before unto the Hamburgers . 
 Item , they of Lubec propounded 23. articles , the Lubec . sum whereof extended unto 8690. nobles and and half : whereupon it was agreed , that they should have paid unto them 550. nobles . There was reserved the same liberty unto them , which was unto the men of Stralessund . 
 GnpeswM . Item , they of Gripeswold exhibited 5. articles , the sum whereof amounted unto 2092. nobles and and half . For the which there was promised satisfaction of 153. nobles and and half . And the said men of Gripeswold have of the goods of English men in possession , to the valve of 22015. nobles , 18. S , as it is reported by them of Linne . And the same liberty is reserved unto them that was unto the Hamburgers . 
 Campen . Item , they of Campen propounded ten articles , the sum whereof extended unto 1405. nobles . There is no satisfaction promised unto them : but the same liberty is reserved unto them , which was unto the other above mentioned . 
 Item , the ambassadors of England demanded of the citizens of Rostok & Wismer , for damages & injuries by them committed against the subject's of the foresaid sovereign king 32407. nobles , 2 . s . ro . worser . And albeit every of the foresaid cities sent one of their burgomasters unto the town of Hage in Holland , to treat with the English ambassadors , it was in the end found out , that they had not any authority of negotiating or concluding ought at all And therefore they made their faithful promises , that every of the said cities should send unto our sovereign Lord the king one or two procurator or procurators sufficiently instructed to treat & conclude with our said sovereign lord the king about the damages and injuries aforesaid at the feast of the nativity of Saint John the Baptist . 
 