A Catalogue of the great Master's of the Order of the Dutch knights , commonly called the Hospitalaries of Jerusalem : and what great exploits every of the said Master's hath achieved , either in conquering the land of Prussia , or in taming and subduing the Infidels , or else in keeping them under their obedience and subjection , taken out of Munster . 
 He order of the Dutch knights had their first original at Jerusalem in the year of our Lord 1190. within the Hospitali of the blessed Virgin : and the first Master of the said order was called Henrie of Walpot , under whom many good things , and much wealth and riches 
 were throughout all Germanie and Italie procured unto the order : and the said Hospitali was removed from Jerusalem unto Ptolemais , otherwise called Aeon , and the foresaid Order grew and mightily increased , whereof I will hereafter discourse more at large in my Treatise of Syria . Henrie of Walpot deceased in the year of Christ 1200. The 2. Master was Otto of Kerpen , and he continued Master of the Order for the space of sixe years . The 3. was Hermannus Bart a godly and devout person , who deceased in the year 1210. being interred at Aeon , as his predecessors were . The 4. was Hermannus the Saltza , who thirtie years together governed the said Order , and managed the first expedition of 
 11 
 The first war moved against the Prussian infidels , anno dom . 1239. 
 war against the infidels of Prussia , and ordained another Master also in Prussia to be his Deputy in the same region . In the year 1239. thee knights of the sword , who traveled into Livonia to convert the inhabitants thereof unto Christ , seeing they were not of sufficient force to perform that enterprise , and that their enemies increased on all sides , they united themselves unto the famous Order of the Dutch knights in Prussia , that their worthy attempt might be defended and promoted by the aid and assistance of the said Duch knights . At the very same time the ensign of the cross was exalted throughout all Germanie against the Prussians , and a great army of soldiers was gathered together , the Burgrave of Meidenburg being general of the army , who combining themselves unto the Dutch knights , joined battle with the Infidels , and slew about five hundred Gentiles , who beforetime had made horrible invasions and inroads into the dominions of Christians , wasting all with fire and sword , but especially the land of Colm , and Lubonia , which were the Provinces of Conradus Duke of Massovia . Now , the foresaid knights having made so huge a slaughter , built the castle of Reden , between Pomerania and the land of Colm , and so by degrees they got footing in the land , and daily erected more castles , as namely , Crutzburg , Wissenburg , Resil , Bartenstein , Brunsburg , and Heilsburg , and furnished them all with garrisons . The fift Master of the Order was Conradus Landgravius , the brother of Lodo-vick , which was husband unto Lady Elizabeth . This Conradus , by his father's inheritance , gave great riches and possessions unto the Order , and caused Lady Elizabeth to be interred at Marpurg , within the religious house of his said Order . Under the government of this Master , Aeon in the land of Palestina was subdued unto the Saracens . Moreover , in the year 1254. there was another great army of Soldiers prepared against Prussia , by the Princes of Germanie . For Octacer , alias Odoacer king of Bohemia , Otto Marques of 
 Brandeburg , the Duke of Austria , the Marks of Moravia , the Bishops of Colen and of Olmutz came marching on with great strength of their Nobles and common soldiers , and invading the land of Prussia in the Winter season , they constrained the inhabitants thereof to receive the Christian faith , and to become obedient unto the knights . After which exploit , by the advice and assistance of king Odoacer , there was a castle built upon a certain hill of Samogitia , which immediately after grew to be a great city , being at this day the seat of the Prince of Prussia : and it was called by Odoacer Kunigsberg , that is to say , Kings Mount , or Mount royal , being finished in the year 1255. Out of this fort the knights did bridle and restrain the fury of the Infidels on all sides , and compelled them to obedience . The sixt Master was called Boppo ab Osterna , under whom the city of Kunigsberg was built . At the very same instant the knights being occupied about the war of Curland , the Prussians conspiring together , and abandoning the Christian faith , in furious manner armed themselves against you Christians , defaced and burned down Churches , slew Priests , and to the utmost of their ability , banished all faithful people . The report of which misdemeanour being published throughout all Germanie , and huge army was levied and sent for the defence and succour of the knights , which marching into the land of Natan , made many slaughters , & through the inconstancy of fortune sometime woonne , and sometime lost the victory . Also the Infidels besieged these three castles , namely , Barsten-stein , Crutzberg and Kunigsberg , and brought extreme famine upon the Christians contained within the said forts . Again , in the year of our Lord 1262. the Earl of Juliers , with other Princes and great chivalry came down , and giving charge upon the Prussians , put three thousand of them to the edge of the sword . Afterwards the Prussians banding themselves together , were determined to spoil the castle of Kunigsberg , but 
 The Prussians abandon Christianitie . 
 A.D. 
 1262. 
 their confederacy being disclosed , they had the repulse . And when the knights had prevailed against them , they laid in pledges , and yet for all that were not afraid to break their fidelity . For upon a certain time , after they had given diverse pledges , they slew two noble knights of the Order , and so by that means incensed the principali of the said order , insomuch that they caused two pair of galloues to be set up beside the castle , & thirtie of the Prussians pledges to be hanged thereupon . Which severity so vexed and provoked the Prussians , that in revenge of the said injury , they renewed bloody and cruel wars , slew many Christians , yea , and put 40. knights with the master of the Order , and the Marshal , unto the edge of the sword . There was at the same instant in Pomerania a Duke called Suandepolcus , professing the Christian faith , but being joined in league with the Prussians , he endeavoured for many years , not only to expel the knights , but all Christians whatsoever out of the land of Prussia , in which war the foresaid knights of the Order suffered many abuses . For they lost almost all their castles , and a great number of themselves also were slain . This Suandepolcus put in practice many lewd attempts against religion . For albeit he was baptised , he did more mischief then the very Infidels themselves , until such time as the knights being assisted by the Princes of Germanie , brought the said Duke and the Prussians also into such straights , that ( maugre their heads ) they were constrained to sue for peace . Afterwards Swandepolcus lying at the point of death , admonished his sons that they should not do any injury unto the knights of the order , affirming that himself never prospered so long as he urged war against them . Howbeit his sons for a certain time observed not their father's counsel , until at length one of them nam Warteslaus , was created one of the Order , and the other called Samborus bestowed by legacy his goods and possessions upon the said Order , receiving maintenance and exhibition from 
 the said Order , during the term of his life . It fortuned also under the government of the foresaid Master Boppo , that one Sir Martine a Golin being accompanied with another knight , went into the country to see how the Prussians were employed . And meeting with three Prussians , they slew two , and the thirde they reserved to guide them the directest way . But this guide betrayed them into their enemies hands . Which when they perceived , they slew the Traitor . Then five Prussian horsemen came riding and took [ I . 14-6 . } them , delivering them bound to the custody of two . And the other three pursued the horses of the two , which broke lose in the time of the fray . And they tarrying somewhat long , the other two would have beheaded the two Knights in the mean season . And memorable as one of them was striking with his drawn sword , strata&me-at the neck of Sir Martine , he said unto them : Sirs , you do unwisely in that you take not off my garment before it be defiled with blood . They therefore losing the cords wherewith he was bound , to take off his garment , set his arms more at liberty . 
 Which Sir Martine well perceiving reached his keeper such a box , that his sword fell to the ground . Which he with all speed taking up , slew both the keepers and unbound his fellow Knight . Moreover , seeing the other three Prussians coming furiously upon them , with stout courageous hearts they made toward the said Prussians , and slew them , and so escaped the danger of death . The seventh great Master was Hanno the Sangershusen , who deceased in the year one thousand two hundreth seventie five . The eight was Hartmannus ab Heldringen who deceased in the year 1282. The ninth was Burckardus a Schuvenden being afterward made knight of the order of Saint Johns . The tenth was Conradus a Feuchtuvang : under this man the City of Aeon in Palestina was sacked by the Soldan , and many people were slain . The Templars which were therein returned home out of Fraunce , where they had 
 great revenues . The Knights of Saint John , who also had and Hospitali at Aeon , changed their place , and went into the Isle of Cyprus , and from thence departing unto Rhodes , they subdued that Island unto themselves . Now the Dutch Knights abounded with wealth and possessions throughout all Germanie , being Lords of a good part of Prussia , Livonia , and Curland , whose chief house was then at Marpurg , till such time as it was removed unto Marieburg , a Town of Prussia . The eleventh great Master was Godfrey Earl of Hohenloe . Under this man the knights sustained a great overthrow in Livonia : but having strengthened 4000. their army , they slew near unto Rye foure thousande of their enemies . The twelfth Master was Sifridus a Feuchtuvang . Under this man , the principali house of the Order was translated from Martpurg to Marieburg , which in the beginning was established at Aeon , and from thence was removed unto Venice , and from Venice unto Martpurg . This Sifridus deceased in the year 1341. The thirteenth Master was called Charles Beflart of Triers . This man built a fort upon the river of Mimmel , and it was nam Christmimmel . The fourteenth was Warnerus ab Orsele , whom a certain knight of the Order slew with his sword . The 15. was Ludolphus Duke of Brunswick , who built the Town of Ylgenburg , and deceased 1352. The sixteenth was Theodoricus Earl of Aldenborg , and he built the Town of Bartenstein . The seventeenth was Ludolphus sir nam King . The eighteenth was Henrie a Tusimer . The nineteenth Winricus a Knoppenrodt . In this men time the knights took the king of the Lithuanians nam Kinstut captive , and kept him prisoner in Marieburg half a year , but by the help of a servant , having broken out of the Castle , he escaped away by night . But fearing that he was laid wait for in all places , he left his horse , and went on foot through unknown paths . In the day time he hid himself in secret places , and in the night he continued his 
 journey until he came unto Massovia . But all the Knights joy was turned into sorrow , after they had lost so great and enemy . The twentieth grand Master was Conradus Zolner of Rotenstein . The one and twentieth Conradus Walenrod . The two and twentieth This man sent Conradus a Jungingen , who deceased in the year one hard^tke thousand foure hundreth and seven . The three and se : tnd . twentieth Ulricus a Jungingen . This man died in battle in the year one thousand foure hundreth and tenne : which battle was fought against Vladislaus Father of Casimire . Both parts had levied mighty and huge forces : unto the Polonians the Lithuanians and the Tartars had joined themselves , over whom one Vitol-dus was captain : the Dutch Knights had taken up Soldiers out of all Germanie . And when each army had encamped themselves one within twentie furlongs of another , ( hoping for victory and impatient of delay ) the great Master of the Prussians sent and Herault to denounce war unto the King , and immediately ( alarm being given ) it is reported that there were in both armies fourtie thousand horsemen in a readiness . Vladislaus commanded the Lithuanians and the Tartars to give the first onset , and placed the Polonians in the rearward of the battle : on the contrary side , the Prussians regarded least of all to reserve any strong troops behind , which might rescue such as were weary , and renew the fight , if need should require , but set forward the flower and chivalry of all his Soldiers in the very forefront of the battle . The charge being given certain unarmed Tartars & Lithuanians were slain handsmooth : howbeit the multitude pressed on , neither durst the fearful Polonians turn ’ their backs , and so a cruel battle was fought upon the heaps of dead carcases . The combat continued a long time , terrible slaughters were committed , and the Lithuanians and Tartars were slain like sheep . But when new and fresh enemies continually issued forth , the Dutch knights being wearied , began to fight more faintly . Which 
 Vladislavs no sooner perceived , but in all haste he sends forward his mighty and well armed band of Polonians , who suddenly breaking in renewed the skirmish . The Dutch were not able to withstand the fury of the fresh troops ( great odds there is between the wearied Soldier and him that comes in a fresh ) insomuch that the knights with their people were constrained to flee . The master of the Order seeing his soldiers give way unto the enemy , gathered a company together , and withstood him in the face , howbeit himself was slain for his labour , the flight of his people proved greater and more dishonourable , neither did the Dutch cease to flee , so long as the Polonian continued the chase . There fell on the Knights party many thousands of men , and the Polonians got not the victory without great spoil and damage . This battle was foughten in regard of the bounds of regions in the year 1410. All Prussia following the happy success of the Polonian king ( except Marieburg only ) yielded themselves unto him being Conqueror . Howbeit the Emperor Sigismund taking up the quarrel , peace was ordained between the knights and Polonia , and a league concluded , certain sums of money also were paid unto the Polonian , Prussia was restored unto the knights , neither was the said order disturbed in the possession of their lands until the time of Friderick . The 24. Master was Henrie Earl of Plaen . This man being deposed by the Chapter , was 7. years held prisoner at Dantzik . The 25. Master was Michael Kuchenmeister , that is , master of the Cooks of Sternberg . The 26. was Paulus a Russdorff . The 27. Conradus ab Ellerichshausen . This man , after diverse and sundry conflicts between the Dutch knights , and the king of Polonia , concluded a perpetuali league with the said king . Howbeit the citizens of Dantzig secretly going about to obtain their freedom , that the foresaid Order might have no dominion over them , made suit unto the Polonian king to be their Protector . This 8 
 Conradus died in the year 1450. The 28. was Lewis ab Ellerichshausen . Under this man there arose a dangerous sedition in Prussia between the chief cities and the knights of the Order . The citizens demanded liberty , complaining that they were oppressed with diverse molestations . Whereupon they privily made suit unto Casimir then king of Polonia . The Master of the Order seeing what would come to pass began to expostulate with the king , that he kept not the peace which had be concluded between them to last for ever . Also Frederick the Emperor commanded the Prussians to return unto the obedience of the knights , who by the dint of their swords had released that province out of the hands of Infidels , and had bought it with the shedding of much blood . Notwithstanding the popular sort persisting still in their stubborn determination , proceeded at length to open war . The cities adhering unto the king usurped diverse Castles belonging to the Master , took certain Commanders and knights , yea , and some they slew also . Fiftie and five towns conspired together in that rebellion : but thinking their estate and strength not sure enough against their own governors without foreign aid , they chosen king Casimir to be their lord . Hereupon the Polonian king marched into Prussia with a great army , taking possession of such cities as yielded themselves unto him , and proceeding forward against Marieburg , besieged the castle and the town . In the mean season the Master having hired and army of Germane soldiers , suddenly surprised the king at unawares in his tents , and slew about 300. Polonians , took prisoners 136. noblemen , spoiled their tents , took away their horses , victuals , and armour , insomuch that the king himself hardly escaped upon one horse . These things came to pass in the year 1455. The Master having thus obtained the victory , sent his army into the country , and recovered the castles and cities which he had lost , to the number of 80. putting many 9 
 The great master overcometh the king of Polonia . 
 The king by treason overthroweth the Master . 
 of his enemies also unto the sword . Moreover , he recovered Kunigsberg being one of the foure principali cities , which are by name Thorn , Elburg , Kunigsberg , and Gdanum , that is to say , Dantzig . And when the war was longer protracted then the Master could well bear , and a whole years wages was unpaid unto his captains , those captains which were in the garrison of Marieburg conspired against the Master , and for a great sum of money betrayed the castle of Marieburg unto the king . Which practice being known , the Master fled to Kunigsberg , and new war was begun , and great spoil and desolation was wrought on both sides : until at length , after composition made , the king retained Pomerella , and all the castles and towns therein , together with Marieburg and Elburg : and the master enjoyed Samaitia , Kunigsberg , etc. This composition was concluded in the year 1466. The 29. Master was Henrie Reuss , first being deputy , and afterward Master of Prussia . The 30. was Henrie a Richtenberg , who deceased in the year 1477. The 31. called Martine Truchses died in the year 1489. The 32. John a Tieflen died in the year 1500. The 33. being Duke of Saxonie , and marks of Misn , deceased in the year 1510. This man began to call in question , whither the foresaid composition concluded between the king of Polonia , and the Order , were to be observed or no ? especially since it contained certain articles against equity and reason . Whereupon he appealed unto the Bishop of Rome , unto the Emperor , unto the princes and electors of Germany , and prevailed with them so far forth , that there was a day of hearing appointed at Posna in Polonia . And the Legates of both parts meeting herd complaints and excuses , & dispatched no other business . In the mean time Prince Frederick deceased in the tenth year of his government . The 34. Master was Albertus marks of Brandenburg , whom the King of Polonia did so grievously molest 
 with war , and oppressed all Prussia with such extreme rigour , that the Prince of the country was constrained to make a league of foure years with him , and to yield unto such conditions , as turned to the utter overthrow of the whole Order . And among other conditions are these which follow . Since that the originali of all discord between Polonia and the order doth from hence arise , for that hitherto in Prussia , no lawful heir and successor hath born rule and authority , but diverse and sundry have had the government thereof , by whose means the nations have be provoked one against another , much Christian blood hath been shed , the lands and inhabitants grievously spoiled , and many widows and Orphans made : the Popes , Emperor's , and Princes being often solicited for the establishing of that perpetual league , which Casimir hath heretofore concluded etc. Since also that the truce which hath be agreed upon of both parties is in short time to be expired , and that it is to be feared , that bloody wars will then be renewed , and that all things will prove worse and worse , unless some lawful composition be made , and some good and wholesome devise be put in practice , as well for the benefit of the King and of his posterity , as for the commodity of the whole common weal of Prussia , especially considering that Albertus the Marques refuseth not to submit himself to the Council of the King , etc. 
 A.D. 
 1525 - 
 