To the right noble and valiant knight Sir [ I - 176J William Sturmy sent at this present by the most sovereign King of England etc. as his ambassador unto Dordract , his most sincere friend . 
 Honourable sir , our most entire friend , we received the royal letters of the most mighty prince and lord , our lord the king of England and France and lord of Ireland , sent unto us under the date of the 14. day of February ( which we received at our castle of Marienburgh the n . of April ) containing , among other matters , that his Majesties purpose was once again to send one of his ambassadors , namely your self our very sincere friend unto Dordract , giving you in charge that you would make haste thither & there stay , until « 5 
 some of our subject's might at our commandment , in convenient time repair unto the same place , there ( by Gods assistance ) to bring our matters unto a happy conclusion . And then he requested that we should without delay write our determination unto you , as the conclusion of the said letter imports . Howbeit ( our most deer friend ) the treaties & conferences about the redress or reformation of unjust attempts committed by the subject's of our said lord the king & our subject's , one against another , are both on our behalf , and on the behalf of the common society of the Hans merchants , hitherto had , made , and continued common . And so our commissioners upon our full and absolute commandment , shall , for the managing of these and of other affairs of the foresaid society , many ways urgent and difficult , upon the feast of our Lords Ascension next to come , meet with the said society at Lubec , there to give notice what they have determined to conclude in this present business & in others for their own behalf . For we will give our ambassadors which are there to appear , streightly in charge that according to the kings request aforesaid they do without delay procure and answer to be written unto your honour concerning the determination of the foresaid society . Given at the place and upon the day above nam , in the year of our Lord 1407. 
 Fr. Wernherus de Tettingen , commander in Elbing , general vice-master and lieutenant in the room of the Master general of the Dutch knights of the Order of S. marry etc. of late deceased . 
 The letters of Henry the 4. king of England etc. unto Ulricus de Jungingen Master general of Prussia , 1408. wherein he does ratify and accept the last agreement made at Hage in Holland . 
 HEnry etc. unto the honourable and religious personage Fr. Ulricus de Jungingen Master general of the Dutch knights of S. marry etc. our most deer friend , greeting and daily increase of our accustomed amity and friendship . We do by these presents give your honour to understand , that our faithful & well-beloved William Esturmy knight , and Master John Kington clerk , our ambassadors and messengers sent of late on our behalf , unto the presence of your predecessor for the redressing of certain grievances and damages being contrary to justice offered against us and our liege subject's by the people & subject's of your predecessors , & against them also by our subject's as it is aforesaid , in friendly manner to be procured , of late returning out of the parts of Alemain made relation unto us and to our counsel , that having conferred with your forenamed predecessor about the foresaid affairs , the particulars following were at length concluded : namely first of all , that at a certain day and place they should meet in Holland with his ambassadors and messengers , to hold a friendly conference between them about the redressing and reformation of the grievances and damages aforesaid : and that they should by the equal weight of diligent examination ponder , & in the balance of justice discuss & define all & singular the foresaid grievances & damages inflicted on both parts . Howbeit at length after sundry prorogations then made & continued on this behalf , our ambassadors & messengers aforesaid upon the 28. of August last passed , assembling themselves for our part at the town of Hage in Holland , the hon . & 0f^ug^t2 discreet personages Arnold Heket burgomaster of the 1407. 
 town of Dantzik , & John Crolowe , for the behalf of your subject's of Prussia , and Tidman de Meule , & John Epenscheid for the behalf of Livonia , being assembled as messengers and commissioners about the redress and reformation aforesaid , did then and there demand in certain articles , of our ambassadors and messengers abovenamed 25034. nobles & half a noble , for the grievances & damages offered ( as it was then said ) to your subject's of Prussia , and 24082. nobles , 12. S. 8d . 
 in recompense of the damages offered unto those your subject's of Livonia . And when the substance of those articles about the grievances & losses aforesaid was by the said ambassadors and messengers thoroughly examined and discussed , by their general consent it was finally agreed , that your subject's , in consideration of all and singular the foresaid grievances and damages offered unto them by our people , should within three years after the feast of Easter next ensuing , at three equal payments receive from us , namely they of Prussia , 8957. nobles , and they of Livonia 22496. nobles , sixe pence , half penny , farthing , and no more , so that we our selves thought good to condescend thereunto . Howbeit , forasmuch as certain other articles of your subject's of Prussia , and also certain articles in the behalf of our subject's containing grievous complaints in them , being propounded before the ambassadors & messengers aforesaid , for the attaining of reformation in regard of the damages & grievances offered on both parts , could not as then , for the great obscurity of diverse of the said articles , and also for want of sufficient proof at the last meeting appointed and held by the foresaid ambassadors at the town of Hage in Holland , sufficiently to be examined , discussed , and defined , it was agreed upon by the ambassadors and messengers of both parts , that from the 15. day of October then last expired unto the feast of Easter now next ensuing , and from thenceforth within one whole year immediately following , the plaintiffs of both parts should thoroughly declare before our 
 chancellor of England for the time being , the foresaid obscurities concerning the substance of their articles , and that they should , for the obtaining of execution , and compliment of justice at our said chancelours hands , peremptorily minister necessary probations , under pain of perpetuali exclusion from the petition of those things which are contained in the articles above mentioned . 
 Provided always , that if at the last it shall be by lawful proofs made manifest concerning the sums above written or any part or parcel thereof , that due satisfaction hath been made to him or them unto whom it was due , or that those goods of and for the which complaint hath be made on the behalf of your subject's have pertained or do appertain unto others , or any other just , true , and reasonable cause may lawfully be alleged , why the payment of all the foresaid sums or any of them ought not to be performed : that then so much only is to be cut off or deducted from the said sums as shall be found to be already paid or to pertain unto others , or else upon some true , just , and reasonable cause ( as is aforesaid ) not to be due . We therefore considering that the said friendly conference , and the final agreement ensuing thereupon are agreeable unto reason and equity , do , for our part ratify and willingly accept the very same conference and agreement . And forasmuch as it hath be always our desire , and is as yet our intention , that the league of amity and the integrity of love , which hath of old time be observed between our and your subject's , may in times to come perpetually remain inviolable , and that your and our people may hereafter , not only for the good of our common weal but also for the commodity and peace of both parts , according to their wonted manner , assemble themselves and enjoy the faithful and mutual ! conversation one of another : we will cause in our city of London , with the sum of 8957. nobles satisfaction to be made unto the Prussians , and with the sum of 22496. nobles , sixe pence , half penny , farthing , recom-89 
 pense to be performed unto the Livonians , in regard of the damages and injuries ( which in very deed proceeded not of our consent ) by our subject's offered unto them , as it is afore said , and within three years after the feast of Easter next ensuing the said sums of money to be paid at three payments , and by three equal portions . Conditionally that unto our subject's which be endamaged correspondent satisfaction be likewise on your part within the term of the foresaid three years performed , with paying the sums of 766. nobles and of 4535. nobles , demanded on our behalf , and also with the payment of such sums as within one year immediately ensuing the feast of Easter aforesaid , shall found by sufficient declarations and proofs to be made on the behalf of our subject's ( as is aforesaid ) to be due . Even as we in like manner will make satisfaction unto your subject's within our city aforesaid . Now as touching the request of your ambassadors and of the Livonians , whereby we were required to procure some wholesome remedy for the souls of certain drowned persons , as conscience and religion seems to challenge ( in regard of whom we are moved with compassion , and do for their sakes heartily condole their mishaps ) you are ( our entire friend ) of a certainty to understand , that after we shall be by your letters advertized of the number , state , and condition of the said parties drowned , we will cause suffrages of prayers and diverse other wholesome remedies profitable for the souls of the deceased and acceptable to God and men , religiously to be ordained and provided : upon condition , that for the souls of our drowned country men there be the like remedy provided by you . The almighty grant unto your self and unto your whole Order , that you may prosperously triumph over the enemies of Christ his cross . Given under our privy seal at our palace of Westminster the 26. of March , in the year of our Lord 1408. and in the ninth year of our reign . 
 