Concerning this surprise Albertus Krantzius in the sixt book of his history of Norway , and the 8. Chapter writeth in manner following . 
 IN the mean while Norway enjoyed peace under the government of a woman : until Albertus king of Suecia , who had now seven years continued in captivity under Queen Margaret , was to be set at liberty . Which , when the common soldiers of Rostok & Wismer , called The Vitalians . the Vitalians perceived , ( who , whilst their king was held captive , in the right of the forenamed cities , for the behalf of their lord the king being prince of Mekleburg by birth , undertook and waged war all the time of his captivity ) banding their forces together , they resolved , at their own costs & charges , but in the right of the said cities , to sail into the 3. kingdoms , and to take such spoils as they could lay hold on . These common soldiers therefore , seeing and end of their tyrannical and violent dealing to approach , sailed into Norway , unto the town of Norbern , being a mars town for all the merchants of Germanie : who transporting fish from thence , do bring thither merchandises of all kinds , especially corn , unto the scarcity whereof , unless it be brought out of other countries' , that kingdom ( as we have said ) is very much subject . Departing out of their ships and going on shore , they set upon the town , and by fire and sword they easily compelled the inhabitants dwelling in weak wooden houses , to give place . Thus . these Vitalians entering and surprising the town conveyed such spoils unto their ships as them pleased , and having laden their ships with those booties , they returned home frolic unto the ports of their own cities . Without all respect , they robbed and rifled the goods , aswell of the Germane , as of the Noruagians : and like lewd companions , wasting and making havoc of all things , proved themselves never the wealthier . For it is not the guise of such good fellows to store up or to preserve 68 
 ought . The citizens , at the first , seemed to be enriched : howbeit afterwards , ( no man misdoubting any such calamity ) goods ill got were worse spent . Thus far Krantzius . 
 Item , pitifully complaining , the foresaid merchants Lenne . avouch , verify , and affirm , that upon the 14. day after the feast of S. George , in the year of our Lord next above written , as 4. ships of Lenne , laden with cloth , wine , and other merchandises , were sailing upon the main sea , with all the goods and wares contained in them , for Prussia , sundry malefactors of Wismer and Rostok , with others of the Hans , being in diverse ships , came upon them , and by force of arms and strong hand took the said ships , with the goods and merchandises contained in them : and some of the people which were in the said foure ships , they slew , some they spoiled , and others they put unto extreme ransoms . And carrying away with them those foure ships with the commodities and merchandise therein , they parted stakes therewith , as them listed , to the great impoverishment & loss of the said merchants of Lenne , namely in cloth of William Silesden , Tho. Waterden , Joh. Brandon , Joh. Wesenham , & other merchants of Lenne , to the valve of 3623. IL 5. S. n.d. 
 Item , pitifully complaining the foresaid merchants do Lenne . affirm , that one Henry Lambolt and other his adherents , in the year of our Lord 1396. took upon the main sea between Norway and Scaw , one crayer laden with osmunds , and with diverse other merchandises , pertaining unto John Brandon of Lenne , to the sum and valve of 443. IL 4. S. 2.d . Moreover , they took from John Lakingay 4. lasts and and half of osmunds , to the valve of 22O . lib . IO . S . 
 Item , the foresaid merchants complain , that certain Lenne . malefactors of Wismer , with other their accomplices of the Hans , in the year of our Lord 1396. took from Thomas Ploket of Lenne , out of a certain ship sailing upon the main sea towards Sconeland ( whereof James 
 Snycop was master ) cloth and other merchandise , to the sum and valve of 13 . lib . 13. S. 4.d .. 
 Lenne . Item , the abovenamed merchants complain saying , that certain malefactors of Wismer , with others of the Hans society , in the year of our Lord 1397* wickedly and unjustly took out of a certain ship of Dantzik ( whereof Laurence van Russe was master ) from Ralph Bedingam of Lenne , one farthel of cloth worth 52. IL 7. S. 6.d . Also , for the ransom of his servant , 8.1L 6 . s . 8.d . Item , they took from Thomas Earl diverse goods , to the valve of 24. pounds . 
 Lenne . Item , the foresaid merchants complain , that certain malefactors of Wismer & Rostok , with others of the Hans , in the year of our Lord 1399. wickedly & unjustly took one crayer pertaining unto John Laking-lich of Lenne , laden with diverse goods and merchandise pertaining unto sundry merchants of Lenne , namely from the forenamed John one farthel of cloth , and one chest full of harness , and other things , to the valve of 90 . lib . Item , they took out of the foresaid ship from Roger Hood , one farthel of cloth , and one chest with diverse goods , to the valve of 58 . lib . Item , from John Pikeron , one farthel of cloth , and one chest with diverse goods , to the valve of 44O . lib . Item , from Andrew Purser one farthel of cloth , and one chest with diverse commodities therein , to the valve of ten pounds . 
 Lenne . Item , the abovenamed merchants complain saying , that certain malefactors of Wismer & Rostok , and others of the Hans , namely , Godekin Mighel , Henrie van Hall de Stertebeker , with other of their confederates , in the year of our Lord 1399. wickedly and unjustly took from John Prior of Lenne , out of the ship of Michael van Burgh , namely 160. nests of masers , worth loo . lib . 13. S. 4.d . Item , 30. furs rigges of Kaleber worth 13. S. 4.d . a piece , the sum total amounting to 20.lL Item , 20. furs wombys of Kalebre worth etc. Item , one girdle of silver , and one dagger adorned with silver worth 30. S. Item , two coats , and one long jacket , and 70 
 other goods , to the valve of 30. S. Item , he paid for his ransom 4 . 1ib . 13. S. 4-d . 
 Unto all and singular the articles abovewritten , the ambassadors of England aforesaid doe further add , that the doers and authors of the damages , injuries , and robberies set down in the articles above written , ( of se-whom some are nam in particular , and others in general ) performed and committed all those outrages , ‘ 
 being hired thereunto at the expenses and charges of the common societies of the cities aforesaid . And that the inhabitants of every household in the foresaid cities ( each man according to his ability ) wittingly & purposely set forth one , two , or more men , for the very same expedition , wherein all and singular the foresaid trespasses were committed . 
 The foresaid English ambassadors do exhibit the articles abovewritten unto the procurators of the cities of Wismer and Rostok aforesaid : leave and liberty being always reserved unto the said ambassadors , to enlarge , or to diminish , or to expound all , or every , or any of the said Articles whatsoever , so often as it shall seem expedient unto them . 
 