The Testimony of M. Richard Eden in his Decades , concerning the Book following . 
 ND whereas ( says he ) I have before made mention how Moscovie was in our time discovered by Richard Chancellor in his voyage towards Cathay , by the direction and information of M. Sebastian Cabota , who long before had this secret in his mind : I shall not need here to describe 
 that voyage , forasmuch as the same is largely and faithfully written in the Latin tongue , by that learned young man Clement Adams , schoolmaster to the Queens henshmen , as he received it at the mouth of the said Richard Chancellor . 
 The new Navigation and discovery of the king - dome of Moscovia , by the Northeast , in the year 1553 : Enterprised by Sir Hugh Willoughby knight , and performed by Richard Chancellor Pilot major of the voyage : Written in Latin by Clement Adams . 
 TO what time our Merchants perceived the commodities and wares of England to be in small request with the countries' and people about us , and near unto us , and that those Merchandizes which strangers in the time and memory of our ancestors did earnestly seek and desire , 
 Upon what occasions , and by whom this voyage was set out , and of the discovery of Moscovie by the North . 
 were now neglected , and the price thereof abated , although by us carried to their own ports , and all foreign Merchandises in great account , and their prizes wonderfully raised : certain grave Citizens of London , and men of great wisdom , and careful for the good of their Country , began to think with themselves , how this mischief might be remedied . Neither was a 
 239 
 3 - Ships furnishedfor the discoverle . 
 remedy ( as it then appeared ) wanting to their desires , for the avoiding of so great and inconvenience : for seeing that the wealth of the Spaniards and Portingales , by the discovery and search of new trades and Countries' was marvellously increased , supposing the same to be a course and mean for them also to obtain the like , they thereupon resolved upon a new and strange Navigation . And whereas at the same time one Sebastian Cabota , a man in those days very renowned , happened to be in London , they began first of all to deal and consult diligently with him , and after much speech and conference together , it was at last concluded that three ships should be prepared and furnished out , for the search and discovery of the Northern part of the world , to open a way and passage to our men for travail to new and unknown kingdoms . 
 And whereas many things seemed necessary to be regarded in this so hard and difficult a matter , they first make choice of certain grave and wise persons in manner of a Senate or company , which should lay their heads together , and give their judgements , and provide things requisite and profitable for all occasions : by this company it was thought expedient , that a certain sum of money should publicly be collected to serve for the furnishing of so many ships . And lest any private man should be too much oppressed and charged , a course was taken , that every man willing to be of the society , should disburse the portion of twentie and five pounds a piece : so that in short time by this means the sum of sixe thousand pounds being gathered , the three ships were bought , the most part whereof they provided to be newly built and trimmed . But in this actium , I wot not whither I may more admire the care of the Merchants , or the diligence of the Shipwrights : for the Merchants , they get very strong and well seasoned planks for the building , the Shippewrights , they with daily travail , and their greatest skill do fit them for the dispatch of the ships : they calk them , pitch them , and among the 
 240 
 rest , they make one most staunch and firm , by and excellent and ingenious invention . For they had herd that in certain parts of the Ocean , a kind of worms is bred , which many times pierceth and eateth through the strongest oak that is : and therefore that the Mariners , and the rest to be employed in this voyage might be free and safe from this danger , they cover a piece of the keel of the ship with thin sheets of lead : and having thus built the ships , and furnished them with armour and artillery , then followed a second care no less troublesome and necessary then the former , namely , the provision of victuals , which was to be made Provision of according to the time and length of the voyage . And 
 whereas they afore determined to have the East part of 1 ' ” s‘ the world sailed unto , and yet that the sea towards the same was not open , except they kept the Northern tract , whereas yet it was doubtful whither there were any passage yea or no , they resolved to victuali the ships for eighteene months , which they did for this reason . For our men being to pass that huge and cold part of the world , they wisely foreseeing it , allow them sixe months victuali to sail to the place , so much more to remain there if the extremity of the winter hindered their return , and so much more also for the time of their coming home . 
 Now this provision being made and carried aboard , Chaise of with armour and munition of all sorts , sufficient Captains CaptMnes and governors of so great and enterprise were as yet wanting : to which office and place , although many men , ( and some void of experience ) offered themselves , yet one Sir Hugh Willoughbie a most valiant Gentleman , Sir Hugh and well born , very earnestly requested to have that care and charge committed unto him : of whom before all others , both by reason of his goodly personage ( for he was of a tall stature ) as also for his singular skill in the services of war , the company of the Merchants made greatest account : so that at the last they concluded and made choice of him fo / the general of this voyage , 
 n 241 Q 
 and appointed to him the Admiral with authority and command over all the rest . And for the government of other ships although diverse men seemed willing , and made offers of themselves thereunto , yet by a common consent one Richard Chanceler , a man of great estimation for many good parts of wit in him , was elected , in whom alone great hope for the performance of this business rested . This man was brought up by one Master Henry Sidney , a noble young Gentleman and very much beloved of King Edward , who at this time coming to the place where the Merchants were gathered together , began a very eloquent speech or Oration , and spoke to them after this manner following . 
 My very worshipful friends , I cannot but greatly commend your present godly and virtuous intention , in the serious enterprising ( for the singular love you bear to your Country ) a matter , which ( I hope ) will prove profitable for this nation , and honourable to this our land . Which intention of yours we also of the Nobili tie are ready to our power to help and further : neither do we hold any thing so deer and precious unto us , which we will not willingly forgo , and lay out in so commendable a cause . But principally I rejoice in my self , that I have nourished and maintained that wit , which is like by some means and in some measure , to profit and steed you in this worthy actium . But yet I would not have you ignorant of this one thing , that I do now part with Chancellor , not because 1 make little reckoning of the man , or that his maintenance is burdenous and chargeable unto me , but that you might conceive and understand my good will and promptitude for the furtherance of this business , and that the authority and estimation which he deserveth may be given him . You know the man by report , I by experience , you by words , I by deeds , you by speech and company , but I by the daily trial of his life have a full and perfect knowledge of him . And you are also to remember , into how many perils 
 242 
 for your sakes , and his countries' love , he is now to run : whereof it is requisite that we be not unmindful , if it please God to send him good success . we commit a little money to the chance and hazard of Fortune : He commits his life ( a thing to a man of all things most deer ) to the raging Sea , and the uncertainties of many dangers . We shall here live and rest at home quietly with our friends , and acquaintance : but he in the mean time labouring to keep the ignorant and unruly Mariners in good order and obedience , with how many cares shall he trouble and vex himself ? with how many troubles shall he break himself ? and how many disquietings shall he be forced to sustain ? We shall keep our own coasts and country : He shall seek strange and unknown kingdoms . He shall commit his safety to barbarous and cruel people , and shall hazard his life among the monstrous and terrible beasts of the Sea. Wherefore in respect of the greatness of the dangers , and the excellency of his charge , you are to favour and love the man thus departing from us : and if it fallen so happily out that he return again , it is your part and duty also , liberally to reward him . 
 After that this noble young Gentleman had delivered this or some such like speech , much more eloquently then I can possibly report it , the company then present began one to look upon another , one to question and confer with another : and some ( to whom the virtue and sufficiency of the man was known ) began secretly to rejoice with themselves , and to conceive a speciali hope , that the man would prove in time very rare and excellent , and that his virtues already appearing and shining to the world would grow to the great honour and advancement of this kingdom . 
 After all this , the company growing to some silence , it seemed good to them that were of greatest gravity among them , to inquire , search and seek what might be learned & known , concerning the Easterly part or 243 
 tract of the world . For which cause two Tartarians , which were then of the kings Stable , were sent for , & and interpreter was got to be present , by whom they were demanded touching their Country and the manners of their nation . But they were able to answer nothing to the purpose : being in deed more acquainted ( as one there merrily and openly said ) to toss pots , then to learn the states and dispositions of people . But after much ado and many things passed about this matter , they grew at last to this issue , to set down and appoint a time for the departure of the ships : because diverse were of opinion , that a great part of the best time of the year was already spent , and if the delay grew longer , the way would be stopped and barred by the force of the Ice , and the cold climate : and therefore it was thought best by the opinion of them all , that by the twentieth day of May , the Captains They departed and Mariners should take shipping , and depart from from Ratcliffe Radcliffe upon the ebb , if it pleased God . They having saluted their acquaintance , one his wife , another ’ his children , another his kinsfolks , and another his friends dearer then his kinsfolks , were present and ready at the day appointed : and having weighed anchor , they departed with the turning of the water , and sailing 
 easily , came first to Greenewich . The greater ships are towed down with boats , and oars , and the mariners being all appareled in Watchet or sky coloured cloth , rowed amain , and made way with diligence . And being come near to Greenewich , ( where the Court then lay ) presently upon the news thereof , the Courtiers came running out , and the common people flocked together , standing very thick upon the shore : the privy Counsel , they looked out at the windows of the Court , and the rest ran up to the tops of the towers : the ships hereupon discharge their Ordinance , and shoot off their pieces after the manner of war , and of the sea , insomuch that the tops of the hills sounded therewith , the valleys and the waters gave and Echo , and 244 
 the Mariners , they shouted in such sort , that the sky rang again with the noise thereof . One stood in the poop of the ship , and by his gesture bids farewell to his friends in the best manner he could . Another walks upon the hatches , another climbs the shrowds , another stands upon the main yard , and another in the top of the ship . To be short , it was a very triumph ( after a sort ) in all respects to the beholders . But ( alas ) the good King Edward ( in respect of whom principally all this was prepared ) he only by reason of his sickness was absent from this show , and not long after the departure of these ships , the lamentable and most sorrowful accident of his death followed . 
 But to proceed in the matter . 
 The ships going down with the tIED came at last to Woolwich , where they stayed and cast anchor , with purpose to depart therehence again , as soon as the turning of the water , and a better wind should draw them to set sail . After this they departed and came to Harwich , in which port they stayed long , not without great loss and consuming of time : yet at the last with a good wind they hoised up sail , and committed themselves to the sea , giving their last adieu to their native Country , which they knew not whither they should ever return to see again or not . Many of them looked oftentimes back , and could not refrain from tears , considering into what hazards they were to fallen , and what uncertainties of the sea they were to make trial of . 
 among the rest , Richard Chanceler the Captain of the Edward Bonaventure , was not a little grieved with the fear of wanting victuals , part whereof was found to be corrupt and putrified at Harwich , and the hogsheads of wine also leaked , and were not staunch : his natural and fatherly affection also somewhat troubled him , for he left behind him his two little sons , which were in the case of Orphans if he sped not well : the estate also of his company moved him to care , being in the former respects after a sort unhappy , and were to 
 245 
 abide with himself every good or bad accident : but in the mean time while his mind was thus tormented with the multiplicity of sorrows and cares , after many days sailing , they kenned land afar off , whereunto the Pilots directed the ships : and being come to it , they land , and find it to be Rost Island , where they stayed certain days , and afterwards set sail again , and proceeding towards the North , they espied certain other Islands , which were called the Cross of Islands . From which places when they were a title departed , Sir Hugh Willoughby the General , a man of good foresight and providence in all his actions , erected and set out his flag , by which he called together the chiefest men of the other ships , that by the help and assistance of their counsels , the order of the government , and conduction of the ships in the whole voyage might be the better : who being come together accordingly , they conclude and agree , that if any great tempest should arise at any time , and happen to disperse and scatter them , every ship should endeavour his best to go to Wardhouse , a haven or castle of some name in the kingdom of Norway , and that they that arrived there first in safety should stay and expect the coming of the rest . 
 The very same day in the afternoon , about foure of the clock , so great a tempest suddenly arose , and the Seas were so outrageous , that the ships could not keep their intended course , but some were perforce driven one way , and some another way , to their great peril and hazard : The generail with his loudest voice cried out to Richard Chancellor , and earnestly requested him not to go far from him : but he neither would nor could keep company with him , if he sailed still so fast : for the Admiral was of better sail then his ship . But the said Admiral ( I know not by what means ) bearing all his sails , was carried away with so great force and swiftness , that not long after he was quite out of sighed , and the third ship also with the same storm and like rage was dispersed and lost us . 
 246 
 The ship boat of the Admiral ( striking against thee They retume ship , ) was overwhelmed in the sighed and view of the the next year Mariners of the Bonaventure : and as for them that are already returned and arrived , they know nothing or the come of rest of the ships what was become of them . other 2. ships . 
 But if it be so , that any miserable mishap have overtaken them , If the rage and fury of the Sea have devoured those good men , or if as yet they live , and wander up and down in strange Countries' , 1 must needs say they were men worthy of better fortune , and if they be living , let us wish them safety and a good return : but if the cruelty of death hath taken hold of them , God send them a Christian grave and Sepulchre . 
 Now Richard Chancellor with his ship and company being thus left alone , and become very pensive , heavy , and sorrowful , by this dispersion of the Fleet , he ( according to the order before taken , ) shapeth his course for Wardhouse in Norway , there to expect and abide the arrival of the rest of the ships . And being come thither , and having stayed there the space of 7. days , and looked in vain for their coming , he determined at length to proceed alone in the purposed voyage . And as he was preparing himself to depart , it happened that he fell in company and speech with certain Scottishmen : who having understanding of his intention , and wishing well to his actions , began earnestly to dissuade him from the further prosecution of the discovery , by amplifying the dangers which he was to fallen into , and omitted no reason that might serve to that purpose . But he holding nothing so ignominious and reproachful , as inconstancy and levity of mind , and persuading himself that a man of valour could not commit a more dishonourable part then for fear of danger to avoid and shun great attempts , was nothing at all changed or discouraged with the speeches and words of the Scots , remaining steadfast and immutable in his first resolution : determining either to bring that to pass which was intended , or else to die the death . 
 247 
 They arrive in the Bay of Saint Nicholas . 
 And as for them which were with Master Chancellor in his ship , although they had great cause of discomfort by the loss of their company ( whom the foresaid tempest had separated from them , ) and were not a little troubled with cogitations and perturbations of mind , in respect of their doubtful course : yet notwithstanding , they were of such consent and agreement of mind with Master Chancellor , that they were resolute , and prepared under his direction and government , to make proof and trial of all adventures , without all fear or mistrust of future dangers . Which constancy of mind in all the company did exceedingly increase their Captains carefulness : for he being swallowed up with like good will and love towards them , feared lest through any error of his , the safety of the company should be endangered . To conclude , when they saw their desire and hope of the arrival of the rest of the ships to be every day more and more frustrated , they provided to sea again , and Master Chancellor held on his course towards that unknown part of the world , and sailed so far , that he came at last to the place where he found no night at all , but a continual light and brightness of the Sun shining clearly upon the huge and mighty Sea. And having the benefit of this perpetuali light for certain days , at the length it pleased God to bring them into a certain great Bay , which was of one hundreth miles or thereabouts over . Whereinto they entered , and somewhat far within it cast anchor , and looking every way about them , it happened that they espied a far off a certain fisher boat , which Master Chancellor , accompanied with a few of his men , went towards to common with the fishermen that were in it , and to know of them what Country it was , and what people , and of what manner of living they were : but they being amazed with the strange greatness of his ship , ( for in those parts before that time they had never seen the like ) began presently to avoid and to flee : but he still following them at last overtook them , and being come to them , 248 
 * 553-they ( being in great fear , as men half dead ) prostrated themselves before him , offering to kiss his feet : but he ( according to his great and singular courtesy , ) looked pleasantly upon them , comforting them by signs and gestures , refusing those duties and reverences of theirs , and taking them up in all loving sort from the ground . And it is strange to consider how much favour afterwards in that place , this humanity of his did purchase to himself . For they being dismissed spread by and by a report abroad of the arrival of a strange nation , of a singular gentleness and courtesy : whereupon the common people came together offering to these newcome guests victuals freely , and not refusing to traffic with them , except they had be bound by a certain religious use and custom , not to buy any foreign commodities , without the knowledge and consent of the king . 
 By this time our men had learned that this Country discovery was called Russia , or Moscovie , and that Ivan Vasiliwich ( which was at that time their Kings name ) ruled and governed far and wide in those places . And the barbarous Russes asked likewise of our men whence they were , and what they came for : whereunto answer was made , that they were Englishmen sent into those coasts , from the most excellent King Edward the sixt , having from him in commandment certain things to deliver to their King , and seeking nothing else but his amity and friendship , and traffic with his people , whereby they doubted not , but that great commodity and profit would grow to the subject's of both kingdoms . 
 The Barbarians herd these things very gladly , and promised their aid and furtherance to acquaint their king out of hand with so honest and a reasonable request . 
 In the mean time Master Chanceler entreated victuals for his money of the governor of that place ( who together with others came aboard him ) and required hostages of them likewise for the more assurance of safety to himself and his company . To whom the Governors answered , that they knew not in that case 249 
 the will of their king , but yet were willing in such things as they might lawfully do , to pleasure him : which was as then to afford him the benefit of victuals . 
 Now while these things were a doing , they secretly sent a messenger unto the Emperor , to certify him of the arrival of a strange nation , and withal to know his pleasure concerning them . Which message was very welcome unto him , insomuch that voluntarily he invited them to come to his Court . But if by reason of the tediousness of so long a journey , they thought it not best so to do , then he granted liberty to his subject's to bargain , and to traffic with them : and further promised , that if it would please them to come to him , he himself would bear the whole charges of post horses . In the mean time the governors of the place differed the matter from day to day , pretending diverse excuses , and saying one while that the consent of all the governors , and another while , that the great and weighty affairs of the kingdom compelled them to differ their answer : and this they did of purpose , so long to protract the time , until the messenger ( sent before to the king ) did return with relation of his will and pleasure . 
 But Master Chancellor , ( seeing himself held in this suspense with long and vain expectation , and thinking that of intention to delude him , they posted the matter off so often , ) was very instant with them to perform their promise : Which if they would not do , he told them that he would depart and proceed in his voyage . So that the Moscovites ( although as yet they knew not the mind of their king ) yet fearing the departure in deed of our men who had such wares and commodities as they greatly desired , they at last resolved to furnish our people with all things necessary , and to conduct them by land to the presence of their king . And so Master Chanceler began his journey , which was very long and most troublesome , wherein he had the use of certain sleds , which in that Country are very common , for they are carried themselves upon sleds , and all their 250 
 carriages are in the same sort , the people almost not knowing any other manner of carriage , the cause whereof is the exceeding hardness of the ground congealed in the winter time by the force of the cold , which in those places is very extreme and horrible , whereof hereafter we will say something . 
 But now they having passed the greater part of their journey , met at last with the Sleddeman ( of whom I spoke before ) sent to the king secretly from the Justices or governors , who by some ill happen had lost his way , and had gone to the Sea side , which is near to the Country of the Tartars , thinking there to have found our ship . But having long erred and wandered out of his way , at the last in his direct return , he met ( as he was coming ) our Captain on the way . To whom he The Emper-by and by delivered the Emperors letters , which were °urs c ( > urteous written to him with all courtesy and in the most loving ' 
 manner that could be : wherein express commandment was given , that post horses should be got for him and the rest of his company without any money . Which thing was of all the Russes in the rest of their journey so willingly done , that they began to quarrel , yea , and to fight also in striving and contending which of them should put their post horses to the sledde : so that after much ado and great pains taken in this long and weary journey , ( for they had travailed very near fifteene hundred miles ) Master Chanceler came at last to Mosco the chief city of the kingdom , and the seat of the king : of which city , and of the Emperor himself , and of the principali cities of Moscovie , we will speak immediately more at large in this discourse . 
 Of Moscovie , which is also called Russia . 
 MOscovie , which hath the name also of Russia the white , is a very large and spacious Country , every way bounded with diverse nations . Towards the South and the East , it is compassed with Tartaria : the Northern side of it stretcheth to the Scytian Ocean : upon 251 
 the West part border the Lappians , a rude and savage nation , living in woods , whose language is not known to any other people : next unto these , more towards the South , is Swecia , then Finlandia , then Livonia , and last of all Lituania . This Country of Moscovie , hath also very many and great rivers in it , and is marish ground in many places : and as for the rivers , the greatest and 
 most famous among all the rest , is that , which the Russes in their own tongue call Volga , but others know it by the name of Rha. Next unto it in fame is Tanais , which they call DONE , and the third Boristhenes which at this day they call Neper . Two of these , to wit , Rha , and Boristhenes issuing both out of one fountain , run very far through the land : Rha receiving many other pleasant rivers into it , & running from the very head or spring of it towards the East , after many crooked turnings and windings , dischargeth it self , and all the other waters and rivers that fallen into it by diverse passages into the Caspian Sea. Tanais springing from a fountain of great name in those parts , and growing great near to his head , spreads it self at length very largely , and makes a great lake : and then growing narrow again , does so run for certain miles , until it fallen into another lake , which they call Ivan : and therehence fetching a very crooked course , comes very near to the river Volga : but disdaining as it were the company of any other river , does there turn it self again from Volga , and runs towards the South , and falls at last into the Lake of Moeotis . Boristhenes , which comes from the same head that Rha does , ( as we said before ) carrieth both it self , and other waters that are near unto it , towards the South , not refusing the mixture of other small rivers : and running by many great and large Countries' falls at last into Pontus Euxinus . Beside these rivers , are also in Moscovie certain lake's , and 
 The nightie Poo^es ’ lake's breed fish by the celestial influence : lake of and among them all , the chiefest and most principali is 
 Bealozera . called Bealozera , which is very famous by reason of a 
 252 
 very strong tower built in it , wherein the kings of Moscovie reserve and repose their treasure in all time of war and danger . 
 Touching the Riphean mountains , whereupon the snow lies continually , and where hence in times passed it was thought that Tanais the river did spring , and that the rest of the wonders of nature , which the Grecians feigned and invented of old , were there to be seen : our men which lately came from thence , neither saw them , nor yet have brought home any perfect relation of them , although they remained there for the space of three months , and had got in that time some intelligence of the language of Moscovie . The whole Country is plain and champion , and few hills in it : and towards the North it hath very large & spacious woods , wherein is great store of Fir trees , a wood very necessary , and fit for the building of houses : there are also wild beasts bred in those woods , as Buffs , Bears , and black Wolves , and another kind of beast unknown to us , but called by them Rossomakka : and the nature of the same is very rare and wonderful : for when it is great with young , and ready to bring forth , it seeks out some narrow place between two stakes , and so going through them , presseth it self , and by that means is eased of her burden , which otherwise could not be done . They hunt their buffs for the most part a horseback , but their Bears a foot , with wooden forks . The north parts of the Country are reported to be so cold , that the very ice or water which distilleth out of the moist wood which they lay upon the fire is presently congealed and frozen : the diversity growing suddenly to be so great , that in one and the self same firebrand , a man shall see both fire and ice . When the winter does once begin there it does still more 8c more increase by a perpetuity of cold : neither does that cold slake , until the force of the Sun beams does dissolve the cold , and make glad the earth , returning to it again . Our mariners which we left in the ship in the mean time to keep it , in their going up 253 
 The sharpness of the winter in Moscovie . 
 only from their cabins to the hatches , had their breath oftentimes so suddenly taken away , that they eftsoons fell down as men very near dead , so great is the sharpness of that cold climate : but as for the South parts of the Country , they are somewhat more temperate . 
 Of Mosco the chief City of the kingdom , and of the Emperor thereof . 
 IT remains that a larger discourse be made of Mosco , the principali City of that Country , and of the Prince also , as before we have promised . The Empire and government of the king is very large , and his wealth at this time exceeding great . And because the city of Mosco is the chiefest of all the rest , it seems of it self to challenge the first place in this discourse . Our men say , that in bigness it is as great as the City of London , with the suburbs thereof . There are many and great buildings in it , but for beauty and fairness , nothing Their manner comparable to ours . There are many Towns and of building . Villages also , but built out of order , and with no 
 hansomnesse : their streets and ways are not paved with stone as ours are : the walls of their houses are of wood : the roofs for the most part are covered with shingle boards . There is hard by the City a very fair Castle , strong , and furnished with artillery , whereunto the City is joined directly towards the North , with a brick wall : the walls also of the Castle are built with brick , and are in breadth or thickness eighteene foot . This Castle hath on the one side a dry ditch , on the other side the river Moscua , whereby it is made almost inexpugnable . The same Moscua trending towards the East does admit into it the company of the river Occa . 
 In the Castle aforesaid , there are in number nine Churches , or Chapels , not altogether unhandsome , which are used and kept by certain religious men , over whom there is after a sort , a Patriarch , or Governor , and with him other reverend Father's , all which for the greater part , dwell within the Castle . As for the kings 254 
 Court and Palace , it is not of the neatest , only in form it is foure square , and of low building , much surpassed and excelled by the beauty and elegancy of the houses of the kings of England . The windows are very narrowly built , and some of them by glass , some other by lettisses admit the light : and whereas the Palaces of our Princes are decked , and adorned with hangings of cloth of gold , there is none such there : they built and join to all their walls benches , and that not only in the Court of the Emperor , but in all private men's houses . 
 Now after that they had remained about twelve days in the City , there was then a Messenger sent unto them , to bring them to the Kings house : and they being after a sort wearied with their long stay , were very ready , and willing so to do : and being entered within the gates of the Court , there sat a very honourable company of Courtiers , to the number of one hundred , all appareled in cloth of gold , down to their ankles : and therehence being conducted into the chamber of presence , our men began to wonder at the Majesty of the Emperor : his seat was aloft , in a very royal throne , having on his head a Diadem , or Crown of gold , appareled with a robe all of Goldsmiths work , and in his hand he held a Sceptre garnished , and beset with precious stones : and beside all other notes and appearances of honour , there was a Majesty in his countenance proportionable with the excellency of his estate : on the one side of him stood his chief Secretary , on the other side , the great Commander of silence , both of them arrayed also in cloth of gold : and then there sat the Counsel of one hundred and fiftie in number , all in like sort arrayed , and of great state . This so honourable and assembly , so great a Majesty of the Emperor , and of the place might very well have amazed our men , and have dashed them out of countenance : but notwithstanding Master Chanceler being therewithal ! nothing dismayed saluted , and did his duty to the Emperor , 
 255 
 after the manner of England , and withal , delivered unto King him the letters of our king , Edward the sixt . The etten^ Emperor having taken , & read the letters , began a delivered to question with them , and to ask them of the welfare of our king : whereunto our men answered him directly , & in few words : hereupon our men presented some thing to the Emperor , by the chief Secretary , which at the delivery of it , put of his hat , being before all the time covered : and so the Emperor having invited them to dinner , dismissed them from his presence : and going into the chamber of him that was Master of the Requests to the Emperor , & having stayed there the space of two hours , at the last , the Messenger comes , and calls them to dinner : they go , and being conducted into the golden Court , ( for so they call it , although not very fair ) they find the Emperor sitting upon and high and stately seat , appareled with a robe of silver , and with another Diadem on his head : our men being placed over against him , fit down : in the mids of the room stood a mighty Cupboard upon a square foot , whereupon stood also a round board , in manner of a Diamond , broad beneath , and towards the top narrow , and every step rose up more narrow then another . Upon this Cupboorde was placed the Emperors plate , which was so much , that the very Cupboard it self was scant able to sustain the weight of it : the better part of all the vessels , and goblets , was made of very fine gold : and among the rest , there were foure pots of very large bigness , which did adorn the rest of the plate in great measure : for they were so high , that they thought them at the least five foot long . There were also upon this Cupboard certain silver casks , not much differing from the quantity of our Fyrkins , wherein was reserved the Emperors drink : on each side of the Hall stood foure Tables , each of them laid and covered with very clean table clothes , whereunto the company ascended by three steps or degrees : 
 256 
 all which were filled with the assembly present : the guests were all appareled with linen without , and with rich skins within , and so did notably set out this royal feast The Emperor , when he takes any bred or knife in his hand , does first of all cross himself upon his forehead : they that are in speciali favour with the Emperor fit upon the same bench with him , but somewhat far from him : and before the coming in of the meat , the Emperor himself , according to and ancient custom of the kings of Mos-covy , does first bestow a piece of bred upon every one of his guests , with a loud pronunciation of his title , and honour , in this manner : The great Duke of Moscovie , and chief Emperor of Russia , John Basiliwich ( & then the officer names the guessed ) does give thee bred . Whereupon all the guests rise up , and by & by fit down again . This done , the Gentleman Usher of the Hall comes in , with a notable company of servants , carrying the dishes , and having done his reverence to the Emperor , puts a young Swan in a golden platter upon the table , and immediately takes it thence again , delivering it to the Carver , and seven other of his fellows , to be cut up : which being performed , the meat is then distributed to the guests , with the like pomp , and ceremonies . In the mean time , the Gentleman Usher receives his bred , and tasteth to the Emperor , and afterwards , having done his reverence , he departeth . Touching the rest of the dishes , because they were brought in out of order , our men can report no certainty : but this is true , that all the furniture of dishes , and drinking vessels , which were then for the use of a hundred guests , was all of pure gold , and the tables were so laden with vessels of gold , that there was no room for some to stand upon them . 
 We may not forget , that there were 140. servitors arrayed in cloth of gold , that in the dinner time , changed thrice their habit and apparel , which servitors are in 
 11 257 R 
 like sort served with bred from the Emperor , as the rest of the guests . Last of all , dinner being ended , and candles brought in , ( for by this time night was come ) the Emperor calls all his guests and Noble men by their names , in such sort , that it seems miraculous , that a Prince , otherwise occupied in great matters of estate , should so well remember so many and sundry particular names . The Russes told our men , that the reason thereof , as also of the bestowing of bred in that manner , was to the end that the Emperor might keep the knowledge of his own household : and withal , that such as are under his displeasure , might by this means be known . 
 Of the discipline of war among the Russes . 
 WHensoever the injures of their neighbours do call the King forth to battle , he never armeth a less number against the enemy , then 300. thousand soldiers , 100. thousand whereof he carrieth out into the field with him , and leaveth the rest in garrison in some fit places , for the better safety of his Empire . He presseth no husbandman , nor Merchant : for the Country is so populous , that these being left at home , the youth of the Realm is sufficient for all his wars . As many as go out to warfare do provide all things of their own cost : they fight not on foot , but altogether on horseback : their armour is a coat of made , & a helmet : the coat of mail w'out is gilded , or else adorned with silk , although it pertain to a common soldier : they have a great pride in showing their wealth : they use bows , and arrows , as the Turks do : they carry lances also into the field . They ride with a short stirrup , after the manner of the Turks : They are a kind of people most sparing in diet , and most patient in extremity of cold , above all others . For when the ground is covered with snow , and is grown terrible and hard with the frost , this Russe hangs up his mantle , or soldiers coat , against that part from whence the wind and Snow drives , and so making 258 
 a little fire , lies down with his back towards the weather : this mantle of his serves him for his bed , wall , house and all : his drink is cold water of the river , mingled with oatmeal , and this is all his good cheer , and he thinketh himself well , and daintily fed therewith , and so sitteth down by his fire , and upon the hard ground , roasteth as it were his weary sides thus daintily stuffed : the hard ground is his feather bed , & some block or stone his pillow : and as for his horse , he is as it were a chamberfellow with his master , faring both alike . How justly may this barbarous , and rude Russe condemn the daintiness and niceness of our Captains , who living in a soil & air much more temperate , yet commonly use furred boots , and cloaks ? But thus much of the furniture of their common soldiers . But those that are of higher degrees come into the field a little better provided . As for the furniture of the Emperor himself , it is then above all other times , most notable . The coverings of his tent for the most part , are all of gold , adorned with stones of great price , and with the curious workmanship of plumasiers . As often as they are to skirmish with the enemy , they go forth without any order at all : they make no wings , nor military divisions of their men , as we do , but lying for the most part , in ambush , do suddenly set upon the enemy . Their horses can well abstain two whole days from any meat . They feed upon the barks of trees , and the most tender branches , in all the time of war . And this scant and miserable manner of living , both the horse and his Master can well endure , sometime for the space of two months , lusty , and in good state of body . If any man behave himself valiantly in the field , to the contentation of the Emperor , he bestoweth upon him in recompense of his service , some farm , or so much ground as he and his may live upon , which notwithstanding after his death , returns again to the Emperor , if he die without a male issue . For although his daughters be never so many , yet no part of that inheritance comes to them , except peradventure the Emperor of his good-259 
 A.D. 
 * 553 - 
 ness , give some portion of the land among them , to bestow them withal . As for the man , whosoever he be , that is in this sort rewarded by the Emperors liberality , he is bound in a great sum , to maintain so many soldiers for the war , when need shall require , as that land , in the opinion of the Emperor , is able to maintain . And all those , to whom any land falls by inheritance , are in no better condition : for if they die without any male issue , all their lands fallen into the hands of the Emperor . And moreover , if there be any rich man among them , who in his own person is unfit for the wars , and yet hath such wealth , that thereby many Noble men and warriors might be maintained , if any of the Courtiers present his name to the Emperor , the unhappy man is by and by sent for , and in that instant , deprived of all his riches , which with great pains and travel all his life time he had got together : except perhaps some small portion thereof be left him , to maintain his wife , children and family . But all this is done of all the people so willingly at the Emperors commandment , that a man would think , they rather make restitution of other men's goods , then give that which is their own to other men . Now the Emperor having taken these goods into his hands , bestoweth them among his Courtiers , according to their deserts : and oftener that a man is sent to the wars , the more the favour he thinketh is born to him by the Emperor , although he go upon his own charge , as I said before . So great is the obedience of all men generally to their Prince . 
 Of the Ambassadors of the Emperor of Moscovie . 
 THe Moscovite , with no less pomp , and magnificence , then that which we have spoken of , sends his Ambassadors to foreign Princes , in the affairs of estate . For while our men were abiding in the City of Mosco , there were two Ambassadors sent to the King of Poland , 260 
 accompanied with 500. notable horses , and the greater part of the men were arrayed in cloth of gold , and of silk , and the worst apparel was of garments of blew colour , to speak nothing of the trappings of the horses , which were adorned with gold and silver , and very curiously embroidered : they had also with them one hundred white and fair spare horses , to use them at such times , as any weariness came upon them . But now the time requires me to speak briefly of other Cities of the Moscovites , and of the wares and commodities that the Country yields . 
 Novogorode . 
 NExt unto Mosco , the City of Novogorode is reputed the chiefest of Russia : for although it be in Majesty inferior to it , yet in greatness it goes beyond it . It is the chiefest and greatest Marte Town of all Moscovie : and albeit the Emperors seat is not there , but at Mosco , yet the commodiousness of the river , falling into that gulf , which is called Sinus Finnicus , whereby it is well frequented by Merchants , makes it more famous then Mosco it self . This town excels all the rest in the commodities of flax and hemp : it yields also hides , honey , and wax . The Flemings there sometime had a house of Merchandise , but by reason that they used the like ill dealing there , which they did with us , they lost their privileges , a restitution whereof they earnestly sued for at the time that our men were there . But those Flemings hearing of the arrival of our men in those parts , wrote their letters to the Emperor against them , accusing them for pirates and rovers , wishing him to detain , and imprison them . Which things when they were known of our men , they conceived fear , that they should never have returned home . But the Emperor believing rather the Kings letters , which our men brought , then the lying and false suggestions of the Flemings , used no ill intreaty towards them . 
 [ Yeraslave 
 261 
 The knavery of the Flemmings against our men . 
 YEraslave also is a Town of some good fame , for the commodities of hides , tallow , and corn , which it yields in great abundance . Cakes of wax are there also to be sold , although other places have greater store : this Yeraslave is distant from Mosco , about two hundred miles : and betwixt them are many populous villages . Their fields yield such store of corn , that in conveying it towards Mosco , sometime in a forenoon , a man shall see seven hundred or eight hundred sleds , going and coming , laden with corn and salt fish : the people come a thousand miles to Mosco , to buy that corn , and then carry it away upon sleds : and these are those people that dwell in the North parts , where the cold is so terrible , that no corn does grow there , or if it spring up , it never comes to ripeness . The commodities that they bring with them , are saltfish , skins , and hides . 
 V ologda . 
 Vologda being from Mosco , 550. miles yields the commodities of Hemp and Flax also : although the greatest store of Flax is sold at Novogrode . 
 Plesco . 
 THe Town of Plesco , is frequented of Merchants for the good store of Honey and Wax that it yields . 
 Colmagro . 
 THe North parts of Russia yield very rare and precious skins : and among the rest , those principally , which we call Sables , worn about the necks of our Noble women and Ladies : it hath also Martins skins , white , black , and read Fox skins , skins of Hares , and Ermyns , and others , which they call and term barbarously , as Bevers , Minxes , and Minivers . The sea adjoining , breeds a certain beast , which they call the Mors , which seeks his food upon the rocks , 262 
 climbing up with the help of his teeth . The Russes use to take them , for the great virtue that is in their teeth , whereof they make as great account , as we do of the Elephants tooth . These commodities they carry upon Deeres backs to the town of Lampas : and from thence to Colmagro , and there in the winter time , are kept great Fairs for the sale of them . This City of Colmagro , serves all the Country about it with salt , and salt fish . The Russians also of the North parts , send thither oil , which they call train , which they make in a river called II Una , although it be also made elsewhere : and here they use to boil the water of the sea , whereof they make very great store of salt . 
 Of controversies in Law , and how they are ended . 
 Or , Dwina 
 HAving hitherto spoken so much of the chiefest 
 Cities of Russia , as the matter required : it remains that we speak somewhat of the laws , that the Moscovits do use , as far forth as the same are come to our knowledge . If any controversy arise among them , they first make their Landlords Judges in the matter , and if they cannot end it , then they prefer it to the Magistrate . The plaintiff craves of the said Magistrate , that he may have leave to enter law against his adversary : and having obtained it , the officer fetches the defendant , and beats him on the legs , till he bring forth a surety for him : but if he be not of such credit , as to procure a surety , then are his hands by and officer tied to his neck , and he is beaten all the way , till he come before the Judge . The Judge then asks him ( as for example in the matter of debt ) whither he owes any thing to the plaintiff . If he denies it , then says the Judge , How canst thou deny it ? the defendant answereth , By and other : thereupon the officer is commanded to cease from beating of him , until the matter be further tried . They Have no Lawyers , but every man is his own Advocate , and both the complaint of the accuser , 263 
 and the answer of the defendant , are in manner of petition delivered to the Emperor , entreating justice at his hands . The Emperor himself hears every great controversy , and upon the hearing of it , gives judgement , and that with great equity , which I take to be a thing worthy of speciali commendation , in the Majesty of a Prince . But although he do this with a good purpose of mind , yet the corrupt Magistrates do wonderfully pervert the same : but if the Emperor take them in any fault , he doth punish them most severely . Now at the last , when each party hath defended his cause with his best reasons , the Judge demandeth of the accuser , whither he hath any more to say for himself : he answereth , that he will try the matter in fight by his Champion , or else intreateth , that in fight betwixt themselves the matter may be ended : which being granted , they both fight it out : or if both of them , or either of them seem unfit for that kind of trial , then they have public Champions to be hired , which live by ending of quarrels . These Champions are armed with iron axes , and spears , and fight on foot , and he whose Champion is overcome , is by and by taken , and imprisoned , and terribly handled , until he agree with his adversary . But if either of them be of any good calling , and degree , and do challenge one another to fight , the Judge grants it : in which case they may not use public Champions . And he that is of any good birth , does contemn the other , if he be basely born , and will not fight with him . If a poor man happen to grow in debt , his Creditor takes him , & makes him pay the debt , in working either to himself , or to some other man , whose wages he takes up . And there are some among them , that use willingly to make themselves , their wives , and children , bondslaves unto rich men , to have a little money at the first into their hands , and so for ever after content themselves with meat and drink : so little account do they make of liberty . 
 264 
 IF any man be taken upon committing of theft , he is imprisoned , and often beaten , but not hanged for the first offence , as the manner is with us : and this they call the law of mercy . He that offends the second time hath his nose cut ofF , and is burned in the forehead with a hight iron . The third time , he is hanged . There are many cutpurses among them , and if the rigour of the Prince did not cut them ofF , they could not be avoided . 
 Of their religion . 
 THey maintain the opinions of the Greek Church : they suffer no graved images of saints in their Churches , but their pictures painted in tables they have in great abundance , which they do adore and offer unto , and burn wax candles before them , and cast holy water upon them , without other honour . They say that our images which are set up in Churches , and carved , have no divinity in them . In their private houses they have images for their household saints , and for the most part , they are put in the darkest place of the house : he that comes into his neighbours house does first salute his saints , although he see them not . If any foorme or stool stand in his way , he oftentimes beats his brow upon the same , and often ducking down with his head , and body , worshippeth the chief Image . The habit , and attire of the Priests , and of the Lay men , does nothing at all differ : as for marriage , it is forbidden to no man : only this is received and held among them for a rule , and custom , that if a Priests wife do die , he may not marry again , nor take a second wife : and therefore they of secular Priests , as they call them , are made Monks , to whom then chastity for ever is commanded . Their divine service is all done and said in their own language , that every man may understand it : they receive the Lords Supper with leavened bred , 265 
 and after the consecration , they carry it about the Church in a sauncer , and prohibit no man from receiving and taking of it , that is willing so to do . They use both the Oide and the New Testament , and read both in their own language , but so confusedly , that they themselves that do read , understand not what themselves do say : and while any part of either Testament is read , there is liberty given by custom to prattle , talk , and make a noise : but in the time of the rest of the service they use very great silence and reverence and behave themselves very modestly , and in good sort . As touching the Lords prayer , the tenth man among them knows it not : and for the articles of our raith , and the ten commandments , no man , or at the least very few of them do either know them or can say them : their opinion is , that such secret and holy things as they are should not rashly and imprudently be communicated with the common people . They hold for a Maxim among them , that the old Law , and the commandments also are abolished by the death and blood of Christ : all studies and letters of humanity they utterly refuse : concerning the Latin , Greek , and Hebrew tongues , they are altogether ignorant in them . 
 Every year they celebrate foure several fasts , which they call according to the names of the Saints : the first begins with them , at the time that our Lent begins . The second is called among them the fast of S. Peter . The third is taken from the day of the Virgin Marry . And the fourth and last begins upon S. Philips day . But as we begin our Lent upon Wednesday , so they begin theirs upon the Sunday . Upon the Saturday they eat flesh : whensoever any of those fasting feasts do draw near , look what week does immediately go before them , the same week they live altogether upon white meats , and in their common language they call those weeks , the fast of Butter . 
 In the time of their fasts , the neighbours every 266 
 where go from one to another , and visit one another , and kiss one another with kisses of peace , in token of their mutual love and Christian concord : and then also they do more often then at any other time go to the holy Communion . When seven days are past , from the beginning of the fast , then they do often either go to their Churches , or keep themselves at home , and use often prayer : and for that sevennight they eat nothing but herbs : but after that sevennights fast is once past , then they return to their old intemperancy of drinking , for they are notable tosspots . As for the keeping of their fasting days , they do it very streightly , neither do they eat any thing beside herbs , and salt fish , as long as those fasting days do endure : but upon every Wednesday and Friday , in every week throughout the year , they fast . 
 There are very many Monasteries of the order of S. Benedict , among them , to which many great livings , for their maintenance , do belong : for the Friars and the Monks do at the least possess the third part of the livings , throughout the whole Moscovite Empire . To those Monks that are of this order , there is among them a perpetuali prohibition , that they may eat no flesh : and therefore their meat is only salt fish , milk , and butter : neither is it permitted them by the laws , and customs of their religion , to eat any fresh fish at all : and at those foure fasting times , whereof we spoke before , they eat no fish at all : only they live with herbs , and cucumbers , which they do continually for that purpose cause and take order to grow and spring , for their use and diet . 
 As for their drink , it is very weak , and small . For the discharge of their office , they do every day say service , and that early in the morning's before day : and they do in such sort , and with such observation begin their service , that they will be sure to make and end of it , before day : and about nine of the clock in the morning they celebrate the Communion . When 267 
 they have so done , they go to dinner , and after dinner Note . they go again to service , and the like also after supper : and in the mean time while they are at dinner there is some exposition or interpretation of the Gospel used . 
 Whensoever any Abbot of any monastery dieth , the Emperor takes all his household stuff , beasts , flocks of sheep , gold , silver , and all that he hath : or else he that is to succeed him in his place and dignity does redeem all those things , and buyeth them of the Emperor for money . 
 Their churches are built of timber , and the towers of their churches for the most part are covered with shingle boards . At the doors of their churches , they usually built some entrance or porch as we do , and in their churchyards they erect a certain house of wood , wherein they set up their bells , wherein sometime they have but one , in some two , and in some also three . 
 There is one use and custom among them , which is strange and rare , but yet it is very ridiculous , and that is this : when any man dyeth among them , they take the dead body and put it in a coffin or chest , and in the hand of the corpse they put a little scroule , & in the same there are these words written , that the same man died a Russe of Russes , having received the faith , and died in the same . This writing or letter they say they send to S. Peter , who receiving it ( as they affirm ) reads it , and by and by admits him into heaven , and that his glory and place is higher and greater then the glory of the Christians of the Latin church , reputing themselves to be followers of a more sincere faith and religion then they : they hold opinion that we are but half Christians , and themselves only to be the true and perfect church : these are the foolish and childish dotages of such ignorant Babarians . 
 268 
 Of the Moscovites that are Idolaters , dwelling near to Tartaria . 
 THere is a certain part of Moscovie bordering upon the countries' of the Tartars , wherein those Moscovites that dwell are very great idolaters : they have one famous idol among them , which they call the Golden old wife : & they have a custom that whensoever any plague or any calamity does afflict the country , as hunger , war , or such like , then they go to consult with their idol , which they do after this manner : they fallen down prostrate before the idol , & pray unto it , & put in the presence of the same , a cymbal : & about the same certain persons stand , which are chosen among them by lot : upon their cymbali they place a silver toad , and found the cymbali , and to whomsoever of those lotted persons that toad goes , he is taken , and by and by slain : and immediately , I know not by what illusions of the devil , or idol , he is again restored to life , & then does reveal and deliver the causes of the present calamity . And by this means knowing how to pacific the idol , they are delivered from the imminent danger . 
 Of the form of their private houses , and of the apparel of the people . 
 THe common houses of the country are every where built of beams of Fir tree : the lower beams do so receive the round holownesse of the uppermost , that by the means of the building thereupon , they resist , and expel all winds that blow , and where the timber is joined together , there they stop the chinks with moss . The form & fashion of their houses in all places is foure square , with strait and narrow windows , whereby with a transparent casement made or covered with skin like to parchment , they 
 Aurea vetula , or Zelotibaba . 
 receive the light . The roofs of their houses are made of boards covered without with you bark of trees : within their houses they have benches or griezes hard by their walls , which commonly they sleep upon , for the common people know not the use of beds : they have stooves wherein in the morning they make a fire , and the same fire does either moderately warm , or make very hight the whole house . 
 The apparel of the people for the most part is made of wool , their caps are picked like unto a rike or diamond , broad beneath , and sharp upward . In the manner of making whereof , there is a sign and representation of nobility : for the loftier or higher their caps are , the greater is their birth supposed to be , and the greater reverence is given them by the common people . 
 The Conclusion to Queen Marry . 
 Hese are the things most excellent 
 Queen , which your Subject's newly 
 returned from Russia have brought 
 home concerning the state of that 
 country : wherefore if your majestic shall be favourable , and grant a continuance of the travel , there is no 
 doubt but that the honour and renown of your name will be spread among those nations , whereunto three only noble personages from the very creation have had access , to whom no man hath be comparable . 
 