The other ministered to the Master of the ship , etc. 
 Ou shall swear by the holy contents in that book , that you according and to the uttermost of your knowledge , and good understanding in mariners science and craft , shall in your vocation do your best to conduct the good ship called the N. etc. whereof you now 
 are Master under God , both unto and from the ports of your discovery , and so use your endeavour and faithful diligence , in charging , discharging , lading again , and roomaging of the same ship , as may be most for the benefit and profit of this right worshipful fellowship : and you shall not privately bargein , buy , fell , exchange , barter , or distribute any goods , wares , merchandise , or things whatsoever ( necessary tackles and victuals for the ship only excepted ) to or for your own lucre , gain or profit , neither to nor for the private lucre , gain , or profit of any other person or persons whatsoever . And further , If you shall know any boatswain , mariner , or any other person or persons whatsoever , to buy , fell , barter , truck , or exchange any goods , wares , merchandizes , or things for private account , reckoning , or behalf , you shall do your best to withstand and let the same : and if you cannot com-modiously so do , that then before the discharge of such goods bought for private account , you shall give knowledge thereof to the cape merchant of this said fellowship for the time being . And you shall not receive nor take , nor suffer to be received or taken into your said ship during this voyage any manner person or persons whatsoever , going or returning , but only those mariners which without fraud or guile shall be hired to be of your company , and to serve in mariners craft and science only : So help you God , etc. 
 2l6 
 These foresaid ships being fully furnished with their pinnaces and boats , well appointed with all manner of artillery , and other things necessary for their defence with all the men aforesaid , departed from Ratcliffe , and valed unto Detford , the io . day of May , 1553. 
 The 11. day about two of the clock , we departed from Detford , passing by Greenwich , saluting the kings Majesty then being there , shooting ofF our ordinance , & so valed unto Blackwall , and there remained until the 17. day , and that day in the morning we went from Blackwall , and came to Woolwich by nine of the clock , and there remained one tide , and so the same night unto Heyreth . 
 The 18. day from Heyreth unto Gravesend , and there remained until the twentieth day : that day being Saturday , from Gravesend unto Tilberie Hope , remaining there until the two and twentieth day . MaJ - 
 The 22. day from Tilbery Hope to Holly haven . 
 The 23. day from Holly Haven , till we came against Lee , and there remained that night , by reason that the wind was contrary to us . 
 The 24. day the wind being in the Southwest in the morning , we sailed along the coast over the Spits , until we came against S. Osyth , about sixe of the clock at night , and there came to anchor , and abided there all that night . 
 The 25. day about tenne of the clock we departed from S. Osyth , and so sailed forward unto the Nase , and there abided that night for wind and tide . 
 The 26. day at five of the clock in the morning , we weighed our anchor , and sailed over the Nase , the wind being at the Southwest , until we came to Orwell wands , and there came to and anchor , and abided there until the 28. day . 
 The same day being Trinitie Sunday about 7. of the clock before noon we weighed our anchors , and sailed till we came athwart Walsursye , and there came to and anchor . 
 The 29. day from thence to Holmehead , where we 
 217 
 stayed that day , where we consulted which way , and what courses were best to be held for the discovery of our voyage , and there agreed . 
 The 30. day of May at five of the clock in the morning we set sail , and came against Yermouth about three leagues into the sea , riding there at anchor all that night . 
 The last of May into the sea sixe leagues Northeast , and there tarried that night , where the wind blew very soar . 
 June . The first of June the wind being at North contrary to us , we came back again to Orwell , and remained there until the 15. day , tarrying for the wind , for all this time the wind was contrary to our purpose . 
 The 15 day being at Orwel in the latitude of 52 degrees , in the morning we weighed our anchors , and went forth into the wands about two miles from the town , and lay there that night . 
 The 16 day at eight of the clock we set forward , and sailed until we came athwart Alburrough , and there stayed that night . 
 The 17 day about five of the clock before noon we went back unto Orfordnesse , and there remained until the 19 day . 
 The 19 day at eight of the clock in the morning we went back to Orwel , and abided there three days tarrying for the wind . 
 The 23 day of June the wind being fair in the Southwest we hailed into the seas to Orfordnesse , and from thence into the seas ten leagues Northeast : then being passed the sands , we changed our course sixe leagues Northnortheast : about midnight we changed our course again , and went due North , continuing in the same unto the 27 day . 
 The 27 day about seven of the clock Northnorthwest 42 leagues to the end to fallen with Shotland : then the wind veared to the West , so that we could lie but North and by West , continuing in the same course 40 leagues , 218 
 1553-whereby we could not fetch Shotland : then we sailed North 16 leagues by estimation , after that North and by West , & Northnorthwest , then Southeast , with diverse other courses , traversing and tracing the seas , by reason of sundry and manifold contrary winds , until the 14 day of July : and then the sun entering into Leo , we July . discovered land Eastward of us , unto the which we sailed that night as much as we might : and after we went on shore with our Pinnace , & found little houses to the number of 30 , where we knew that it was inhabited , but the people were fled away , as we judged , for fear of us . 
 The land was all full of little Islands , and that innu - I ” tO ! lis land merable , which were called ( as we learned afterwards ) dwellt cthe ' ' JEgeland and Halgeland , which lies from Orfordnesse ‘ 
 North and by East , being in the latitude of 66 degrees . The distance between Orfordnesse and ^Egeland 250 leagues . Then we sailed from thence 12 leagues Northwest , and found many other Islands , and there came to anchor the 19 day , and manned our Pinnace , and went on shore to the Islands , and found people mowing and making of hay , which came to the shore and welcomed us . In which place were and innumerable sort of Islands , which were called the Isles of Rost , being under the Rost Islands . dominion of the king of Denmarke : which place was in latitude 66 degrees , and 30 minutes . The wind being contrary , we remained there three days , & there was and innumerable sort of fowls of diverse kinds , of which we took very many . 
 The 22 day the wind coming fair , we departed from Rost , sailing Northnortheast , keeping the sea until the 27 day , and then we drew near unto the land , which was still East of us : then went forth our Pinnace to seek harbour , & found many good harbours , of the which we entered into one with our ships , which was called Stanfew , and the land being Islands , were called Stanfew Lewfoot , or Lofoot , which were plentifully inhabited , and very gentle people , being also under the king of Denmarke : but we could not learn how far it was from 
 219 
 the main land : and we remained there until the 30 day , being in latitude 68 degrees , and from the foresaid Rost about 30 leagues Northnortheast . 
 The 30 day of July about noon we weighed our anchors , and went into the Seas , and sailed along these Islands Northnortheast , keeping the land still in sighed until the August . second day of August : then hailing in close aboard the land , to the intent to know what land it was , there came a skiff of the Island aboard of us , of whom we asked many questions , who showed unto us , that the Island was Seynam in 70 called Seynam , which is the latitude of seventy degrees , degrees . anj from Stanfew thirtie leagues , being also under the king of Denmarke , and that there was no merchandise there , but only dried fish , and train oil . Then we being purposed to go unto Finmarke , inquired of him , if we might have a pilot to bring us unto Finmarke , & he said , that if we could bear in , we should have a good harbour , and on the next day a pilot to bring us to Finmarke , unto the wardhouse , which is the strongest hold in Finmarke , and most resorted to by report . But when we would have entered into and harbour , the land being very high on every side , there came such flaws of wind and terrible whirlwinds , that we were not able to bear in , but by violence were constrained to take the sea again , our Pinnace being unshipt : we sailed North and by East , the wind increasing so soar that we were not able to bear any sail , but took them in , and lay a drift , to the end to let the storm over pass . And that night by violence of wind , and thickness of mists , we were not able to keep together within sighed , and then about midnight we lost our pinnace , which was a discomfort unto us . Assoon as it was day , and the fog overpast , we looked about , and at the last we descried one of our ships to Leeward of us : then we spread and hullock of our foresail , and bore room with her , which was the Confidence , but the Edward we could not see . Then the flaw something abating , we and the Confidence hoised up our sails the fourth day , sailing Northeast and by 
 220 
 North , to the end to fallen with the Wardhouse , as we did consult to do before , in case we should part company . Thus running Northeast and by North , and Northeast fiftie leagues , then we sounded , and had 160 fathoms , whereby we thought to be far from land , and perceived that the land lay not as the Globe made mention . Wherefore we changed our course the sixt day , and sailed Southeast and by South eight and fortie leagues , thinking thereby to find the Wardhouse . 
 The eight day much wind rising at the Westnorthwest , we not knowing how the coast lay , strook our sails , and lay a drift , where we sounded and found 160 fathoms as afore . 
 The ninth day , the wind vearing to the South Southeast , we sailed Northeast 25 leagues . 
 The tenth day we sounded , and could get no ground , neither yet could see any land , whereat we wondered : then the wind coming at the Northeast , we ran Southeast about 48 leagues . 
 The 11 day , the wind being at South , we sounded , and found 40 fathoms , and fair sand . 
 The 12 day the wind being at South and by East , we lay with our sail East , and East and by North 30 leagues . 
 The 14 day early in the morning we descried land , which land we bore with all , hoisting out our boat to discover what land it might be : but the boat could not come to land the water was so shoal , where was very much ice also , but there was no similitude of habitation , and this land lies from Seynam East and by North 160 leagues , being in latitude 72 degrees . Then we plied to the Northward the 15 , 16 and 17 day . 
 The 18 day , the wind coming at the Northeast , and the Confidence being troubled with bilge water , and stocked , we thought it good to seek harbour for her redress : then we bore room the 18 day Southsoutheast , about 70 leagues . 
 The 21 day we sounded , and found 10 fathom , after that we sounded again , and found but 7 fathom , so 
 221 
 A.D. 
 I553 - 
 Willoughbie his land , in " z degrees . 
 shoalder and shoalder water , and yet could see no land , where we marveled greatly : to avoid this danger , we bore roomer into the sea all that night Northwest and by West . 
 The next day we sounded , and had 20. fathoms , then shaped our course , and ran West Southwest until the 23. day : then we descried Low land , unto which we bore as nigh as we could , and it appeared unto us unhabitable . Then we plied Westward along by that land , which lies West Southwest , and East Northeast , and much wind blowing at the West , we haled into the sea North and by East 30. leagues . Then the wind coming about at the Northeast , we sailed West Northwest : after that , the wind bearing to the Northwest , we lay with our sails West southwest , about 14. leagues , and then descried land , and bore in with it , being the 28. day , finding shoal water , and bore it till we came to 3. fathom , then perceiving it to be shoal water , and also seeing dry sands , we haled out again Northeast along that land until we came to the point thereof . That land turning to the Westward , we ran along 16. leagues Northwest : then coming into a fair bay , we went on land with our boat , which place was unhabited , but yet it appeared unto us that the people had been there , by crosses , and other signs : from thence we went all along the coast Westward . 
 September . The fourth day of September we lost sighed of land , by reason of contrary winds , and the eight day we descried land again . Within two days after we lost the sighed of it : then running West and by South about 30. leagues , we got the sighed of land again , and bore in with it until night : then perceiving it to be a lee shore , we got us into the sea , to the end to have sea room . 
 The 12. of September we hailed to shoareward again , having then indifferent wind and weather : then being near unto the shore , and the tide almost spent , we came to and anchor in 30. fathoms water . 
 222 
 The 13. day we came along the coast , which lay Northwest and by West and Southeast and by East . 
 The 14. day we came to and anchor within two leagues of the shore , having 60. fathoms . 
 There we went a shore with our boat , & found two or three good harboroughs , the land being rocky , and high , but as for people could we see none . The 15 day we ran still along the coast until the 17 day : then the wind being contrary unto us , we thought it best to return unto the harbour which we had found before , and so we bore roomer with the same , howbeit we could not accomplish our desire that day . The next day being the 18 of September , we entered into the haven , and there came to and anchor at 6 fathoms . This haven runneth into the main , about two leagues , this haven and is in breadth half a league , wherein were very they many seal fish , & other great fish , and upon the main we saw bears , great deer , foxes , with diverse strange beasts , as II guloines , and such other which were | | Or , Elions . to us unknown , and also wonderful . Thus remaining in this haven the space of a week , seeing the year far spent , & also very evil weather , as frost , snow , and hail , as though it had been the deep of winter , we thought best to winter there . Wherefore we sent out three men Southsouthwest , to search if they could find people , who went three days journey , but could find none : after that , we sent other three Westward willoughby foure days journey , which also returned without finding his note , which any people . Then sent we three men Southeast three was written days journey , who in like sort returned without finding of people , or any similitude of habitation . ' 
 These two notes following were written upon the outside of this Pamphlet , or Book . 
 1 The proceedings of Sir Hugh Willoughbie after he was separated from the Edward Bonaventure . 
 2 Our ship being at and anchor in the harbour called Sterfier in the Island Lofoote . 
 223 
 The river or haven wherein Sir Hugh Willoughbie with the company of his two ships perished for cold , is called Arzina in Lapland , near unto Kegor . But it appears by a Will found in the ship that Sir Hugh Willoughbie and most of the company were alive in January 1554. 
 