The coins , weights and measures used in Russia , f1 - 256 - ] written by John Hasse , in the year , 1554. 
 Orasmuch as it is most necessary for all merchants which seek to have traffic in any strange regions , first to acquaint themselves with the coins of those lands with which they do intend to join in traffic , and how they are called from the valuation of the highest 
 piece to the lowest , and in what sort they make their payments , as also what their common weights and measures be : for these causes I have thought good to write some thing thereof according to mine own knowledge and experience , to the end that the merchants of that new adventure , may the better understand how the wealth of that new frequented trade will arise . 
 First , it is to be noted that the Emperor of Russia hath no other coins then silver in all his land , which goes for payment among merchant's , yet notwithstanding there is a coin of copper , which serves for the relief of the poor in Mosco , & no where else , and that is but only for quasse , water and fruit , as nuts , apples , and such other like . The name of which money is called Pole or Poles , of which Poles there go to the least of the silver coins , 18. But I will not stand upon this , because it is no currant money among merchant's . 
 Of silver coins there be three sorts of pieces : the least is a Poledenga , the second a Denga , the third , Nowgrote , which is as much to say in English as halfpenny , penny , and twopence , and for other valued money then this , there is none : there are oftentimes there coins of gold , but they come out of foreign countries' , whereof there is no ordinary valuation , but they pass according to the agreement of merchant's . 
 Their order in summing of money is this : as we say 
 n 
 No coins of gold in Russia , but all of silver . 
 273 
 in England , halfpenny , penny , shilling and pound , so say they Poledenga , Denga , Altine and Rubble : There goes two Poledengas to a Denga , six Denga's to and Altine , and 23 Altines , and two Denga's to a Rubble . 
 Concerning the weights of Russia they are these : There are two sorts of pounds in use among them , the one great , you other small : the great pound is just two small pounds : they call the great weight by the name of Beasemar , and the small they call the Skalla weight : with this small weight they weigh their silver coins , of the which the Emperor hath commanded to put to every small pound three Rubbles of silver , and with the same weight they weigh all Grocery wares , and almost all other wares which come into the land , except those which they weigh by the Pode , as hops , salt , iron , led , tin & batrie with diverse others , notwithstanding they use to weigh batrie more often by the small weight then by the great . 
 Whensoever you find the princes of your wares rated by the Pode , consider that to be the great weight , and the pound to be the small . Also they divide the small pound into 48 parts , and they call the eight and fortieth part a Slotnike , by the which Slotnike the retailers fell their wares out of their shops , as Goldsmiths , Grocers , Silkesellers and such other like as we do use to retail by the ounce : and as for their great weight which they call the Beasemar , they sei by pode , or shippond . The pode does contain of the great weight , 40 pounds , and of the small 80 : there go 10. podes to a shippond . 
 Yet you must consider that their great weight is not full with ours : for I take not their great pound to be full 13 ounces , but above 12 I think it be . But for your just proof , weigh 6 Rubbles of Russia money with our pound weight , and then shall you see what it lacketh : for 6 Rubbles of Russia is by the Emperor's standard , the great pound : so that I think it the next way to know the just weight , as well of the great pound as of the small . 
 274 
 There is another weight needful to be known , which The weight of is the weight of Wardhouse , for so much as they weigh Wardhouse . all their dry fish by weight , which weight is the Beasemar , as they of Russia do use , notwithstanding there is another sort in it : the names of those weights are these : the mark pound , the great pound , the weie , and the shippond . The mark pound is to be understood as our pound , and their great pound is 24 of their mark pound : the weie is 3 great pound , and 8 weie is a shippound . 
 Now concerning their measures . As they have two The Russia sorts of weights , so they have also two sorts of mea - mm ™ ™ - sures : wherewith they measure cloth both linen and woollen : they call the one and Areshine , and the other a Locut : the Areshine I take to be as much as the Flanders ell , and their Locut half and English yard : with their Areshine they may meet all such sorts of clothes as come into the land , and with the Locut all such cloth both linen and woollen , as they make themselves . And whereas we use to give yard and inch , or yard and handful , they do give nothing but bore measure . 
 They have also a measure wherewith they do meet their corn , which they call a Setforth , and the half of that and Osmine : this Setforth I take to be three bushels of London measure . And as for their drink measure , they call it a Span , which is much like a bucket , and of that I never saw any true rate , but that some was greater then other some . And as for the measures of measure Wardhouse wherewith they meet their cloth , there is no difference between that and the measure of Dansk , measu , . e which is half and English ell . Dansk . 
 Concerning the toils & customs of Russia , it was reported to me in Moscovia , that the Turkes and The Turkes Armenians pay the tenth penny custom of all the wares rme they bring into the Emperor's land , and above that they ususme^ pay for all such goods as they weigh at the Emperors The Emperor's beam , two pence of the Rubble , which you buyer or beam . 
 « 75 
 The Dutch nation lost their privileges , y renewed them with a great sum . 
 The commodities of Russia . 
 seller must make report to of the Master of the beam : they also pay a certain horse toll , which is in diverse places of his Realm foure pence of a horse . 
 The Dutch nation are free of this : notwithstanding for certain offences , they had lost their privileges which they have recovered this Summer to their great charge . It was reported to me by a Justice of that country , that they paid for it thirtie thousand Rubbles , and also that Rye , Dorpte and Revel have yielded themselves under the government of the Emperor of Russia : whither this was a brag of the Russes or not , I know not , but thus he said , and in deed while we were there , there came a great Ambassador out of Liefland , for the assurance of their privileges . 
 To speak somewhat of the commodities of this country , it is to be understood , that there is a certain place foure score miles from the Sea called Colmogro : to which place there resort all the sorts of Wares that are in the North parts , as Oils , Salt , Stockfish , Salmon , Feathers and Furs : their Salt they make of saltwater by the sea side : their Oils they make of Seals , whereof they have great store which is brought out of the Bay where our ships came in : they make it in the Spring of the year , and bring it to Colmogro to fell , and the merchant's there carry it to Novogrode , and so fell it to the Dutch nation . Their Stockfish and Salmon comes from a place called Mallums , not far from Wardhouse : their Salmon and their Salt they carry to Mosco , and their dry fish they carry to Novogrode , and fell it there to the Lieflanders . 
 The Furs and Feathers which come to Colmogro , as Sables , Beavers , Minks , Armine , Lettis , Graies , Wool-verings , and white Foxes , with Dear skins , they are brought thither , by the men of Penning , Lampas , and Powstezer , which fetch them from the Samoedes that are counted savage people : and the merchant's that bring these Furs do use to truck with the merchant's 276 
 I55+-of Colmogro for Cloth , Tin , Batrie , & such other like , and the merchant's of Colmogro carry them to Novogrode , Vologda , or Mosco , & fell them there . The Feathers which come from Penning they do little esteem . 
 If our merchant's do desire to know the meetest place of Russia for the standing house , in mine opinion I take it to be Vologda , which is a great town standing in the heart of Russia , with many great and good towns about it . There is great plenty of corn , victuals , and of all such wares as are raised in Rusland , but specially , flax , hemp , tallow and bacon : there is also great store of wax , but it comes from the Mosko . 
 The town of Vologda is meetest for our merchants , Vologda and because it lies amongst all the best towns of Russia , sta^ and there is no town in Russia but trades with it : also the water is a great commodity to it . If they plant themselves in Mosco or Novogrode , their charge will be great and wonderful , but not so in Vologda : for all things will there be had better cheap by the one half . And for their vent , I know no place so meet . It is likely that some will think you Mosko to be the meetest by the reason of the court , but by that reason I take it to be worse : for the charge there would be so great by cravers and expenses , that the moiety of the profit would be wholly consumed , which in the other place will be saved . And yet notwithstanding our merchants may be there in the Winter to serve the Emperor and his court . The The Emperor Emperor is a great merchant himself of wax and ls 
 sables , which with good foresight may be procured to mseife n their hands : as for other commodities there are little or none in Moscovia , beside those above rehearsed : if there be other , it is brought thither by the Turkes , who will be dainty to buy our clothes considering the charges of carriage over land . 
 Our merchants may do well to provide for the Russes such wares as the Dutch nation doth serve them of , as Flanders and Holland clothes , which I believe , they shall 277 
 serve better and with less charge then they of Rye or Dorpt , or Revel : for it is no small adventure to bring their clothes out of Flanders to either of these places , and their charge not little to carry them over land to Novogrode , which is from Rye nine hundred Russian miles . 
 This Novogrode is a place well furnished with flax , Wax , Hides , tallow and many other things : the best flax in Russia is brought thither and there sold by the hundred bundles , which is done also at Vologda , and they that bring the flax to Novogrode , dwell as near Vologda , as Novogrode , and when they hear of the utterance which they may have with our nation , they will as willingly come to them as go to other . 
 Two sorts of They have in Russia two sorts of flax , the one is axe - called great flax , and the other small : that which they call great flax is better by foure rubbles in 100. bundles then the small : It is much longer then the other , and cleaner without wood : and whereas of the small flax there go 27. or 28 bundles to a shippound , there goes not of the greater sort above 22. or 24 at the most . There are many other trifles in Russia , as soap , mats , etc. but I think there will be no great account made of them . 
 