Certain notes unperfectly written by Richard Johnson servant to Master Richard Chancellor , which was in the discovery of Vaigatz and Nova Zembla , with Steven Burrowe in the Serchthrift 1556. and after - i$56 ward among the Samoedes , whose devilish rites he describeth . 
 Norway . 
 Roast Etf Lofoot . Finmarke . 
 Wardhouse . 
 Lappia . 
 The Serie - 
 Irst , after we departed out of England we fell with Norway , and on that cost lies Northbern or Northbergen , and this people are under the King of Denmarke : But they differ in their speech from the Danes , for they speak Norsh . And North of Northbern lie the Isles of Roast 
 and Lofoot , and these Islands pertain unto Finmarke , and they keep the laws and speak the language of the Islanders . And at the Eastermost part of that land is a castle which is called the Ward house , and the King of Denmarke doth fortify it with men of war : and the Russes may not go to the Westward of that castle . And East Southeast from that castle is a land called Lappia : in which ’ land be two manner of people , that is to say , the Lappians , and the Scrickfinnes , which Scrickfinnes are a 
 wild people which neither know God , nor yet good fames-order : and these people live in tents made of Dears skins : and they have no certain habitations , but continue in heards and companies by one hundred and two hundreds . And they are a people of small stature , and are clothed in Dears skins , and drink nothing but water , and eat no bred but flesh all raw . And the The Lappians . Lappians be a people adjoining to them & be much like to them in all conditions : but the Emperor of Russia hath of late overcome many of them , and they are in subjection to him . And this people will say that they believe in the Russes God . And they live in tents as the other doe . And Southeast and by South from Lappia 
 345 
 Corelia . lies a province called Corelia , and these people are called Kerilli . And South southeast from Corelia lies a Novogardia . country called Novogardia . And these three nations are The Russes , under the Emperor of Russia , and the Russes keep the Law of the Greeks in their Churches , and write somewhat like as the Greeks write , and they speak their own language , and they abhor the Latin tongue , neither have they to do with the Pope of Rome , and they hold it not good to worship any carved Image , yet they will worship painted Images on tables or boards . And in Russia their Churches , steeples , and houses are all of wood : and their ships that they have are sowed with withes and have no nails . The Kerilles , Russians and Moscovians bee much alike in all conditions . And South from the Moscovians lie the Tartaria . Tartarians , which bee Mahumetans , and live in tents and wagons , and keep in herds and companies : and they hold it not good to abide long in one place , for they will say , when they will curse any of their children , I would thou mightest tarry so long in a place that thou mightest smell thine own dung , as the Christians doe : and this is the greatest curse that they have . 
 Lampasamart And East Northeast of Russia lies Lampas , which is orfaire of the a place where the Russes , Tartars and Samoeds meet Tatars and tw^se a yeerej and make the fair to barter wares for Samoeds . wares . And Northeast from Lampas lies the country The Samoeds of the Samoeds , which be about the river of Pechere , country . and these Samoeds be in subjection to the Emperor of Russia , - and they lie in tents made of Dear skins , and they use much witchcraft , and shoot well in bows . 
 Or , Pechora . And Northeast from the river Pechere lies Vaygatz , Taigatz . and there are the wild Samoeds which will not suffer the Russes to land out of the Sea , but they will kill them and eat them , as we are told by the Russes : and they live in heards , and have all their carriages with deer , for they have no horses . Beyond Vaygatz NovaZembla . lies a land called Nova Zembla , which is a great land , but we saw no people , and there we had 346 
 Foul enough , and there we saw white Foxes and white Bears . And the said Samoeds which are about the banks of Pechere , which are in subjection to the Emperor of Russia , when they will remove from one place to another , then they will make sacrifices in manner following . Every kindred doth sacrifice in their own tent , and he that is most ancient is their Priest . And first the Priest doth begin to play upon a thing like to a great sieve , with a skin on the one end like a drum : and the stick that he plays with is about a spann e long , and one end is round like a ball , covered with the skin of and Heart . Also the Priest hath upon his head a thing of white like a garland , and his face is covered with a piece of a shirt of mail , with many small ribs , and teeth of fish , and wild beasts hanging on the same mail . Then he sings as we use here in Englande to hallow , whope , or shout at hounds , and the rest of the company answer him with this Owtis , Igha , Igha , Igha , and then the Priest replieth again with his voices . And they answer him with the selfsame words so many times , that in the end he becomes as it were mad , and falling down as he were dead , having nothing on him but a shirt , lying upon his back I might perceive him to breathe . I asked them why he lay so , and they answered me , Now doth our God tell him what we shall do , and whither we shall go . And when he had lyen still a little while , they cried thus three times together , Oghao , Oghao , Oghao , and as they use these three calls , he riseth with his head and lies down again , and then he rose up and sang with like voices as he did before : and his audience answered him , Igha , Igha , Igha . Then he commanded them to kill five Olens or great Dear , and continued singing still both he and they as before . Then he took a sword of a cubit and a span long , ( I did meet it my self ) and put it into his belly halfway and sometime less , but no wound was to be seen , 347 
 A.D. 
 1556. 
 Store offoule . White Foxes . White bears . 
 The manner of the Samoeds sacrifices , about the river of Pechere . 
 ( they continuing in their sweet song still ) Then he put the sword into the fire till it was warm , and so thrust it into the slit of his shirt and thrust it through his body , as I thought , in at his navel and out at his fundament : the point being out of his shirt behind , I laid my finger upon it , then he pulled out the sword and sat down . This being done , they set a kettle of water over the fire to heat , and when the water doth seethe , the Priest begins to sing again they answering him , for so long as the water was in heating , they sat and sang not . Then they made a thing being foure square , and in height and squareness of a chair , and covered with a gown very close the forepart thereof , for the hinder part stood to the tents side . Their tents are round and are called Chome in their language . The water still seething on the fire , and this square seat being ready , the Priest put off his shirt , and the thing like a garland which was on his head , with those things which covered his face , & he had on yet all this while a pair of hosen of deeres skins with you hair on , which came up to his buttocks . So he went into the square seat , and sat down like a tailor and sang with a strong voice or hallowing . Then they took a small line made of deeres skins of foure fathoms long , and with a small knot the Priest made it fast about his neck , and under his left arm , and gave it unto two men standing on both sides of him , which held the ends together . Then the kettle of hight water was set before him in the square seat , all this time the square seat was not covered , and then it was covered wl a gown of broad cloth without lining , such as the Russes do wear . Then the 2. men which did hold you ends of the line still standing there , began to draw , & drew till they had drawn the ends of the line stiff and together , and then I heard a thing fallen into the kettle of water which was before him in the tent . Thereupon I asked them that sat by me what it was that fell into the 
 348 
 water that stood before him . And they answered me , that it was his head , his shoulder and left arm , which the line had cut off , I mean the knot which I saw [ I . 285. J afterward drawn hard together . Then I rose up and would have looked whither it were so or not , but they laid hold on me , and said , that if they should see him with their bodily eyes , they should live no longer . And the most part of them can speak the Russe tongue to be understood : and they took me to be a Russian . Then they began to hallow with these words , Oghaoo , Oghaoo , Oghaoo , many times together . And as they were thus singing & out calling , I saw a thing like a finger of a man two times together thrust through the gown from the Priest . 
 I asked them that sat next to me what it was that I saw , and they said , not his finger ; for he was yet dead : and that which I saw appear through the gown was a beast , but what beast they knew not nor would not tell . And I looked upon the gown , and there was no hold to be seen : and then at the last the Priest lifted up his head with his shoulder and arm , and all his body , and came forth to the fire . Thus far of their service which I saw during the space of certain hours : but how they do worship their Idols that I saw not : for they put up their stuff for to remove from that place where they lay . And I went to him that served the Priest , and asked him what their God said to him when he lay as dead . He answered , that his own people doth not know : neither is it for them to know : for they must do as he commanded . This I saw the lift day of Januarie in the year of our Lord 1556. after the English account . 
 