The Navigation and discovery towards the river of Ob , made by Master Steven Burrough , Master of the Pinnace called the Serchthrift , with diverse things worth the noting , passed in the year 1556. 
 April 23 
 27 
 E departed from Ratcliffe to Blackewall the 23 of April . Satturday being S. Marks day , we departed from Blackewall to Grays . 
 The 27 being Munday , the right Worshipful Sebastian Cabota came aboard our Pinnace at Gravesende , 
 accompanied with diverse Gentlemen , and Gentlewomen , who after that they had viewed our Pinnace , and tasted of such cheer as we could make them aboard , they went on shore , giving to our mariners right liberali rewards : and the good old Gentleman Master Cabota gave to the poor most liberali alms , wishing them to pray for the good fortune , and prosperous success of the Serchthrift , our Pinnace . And then at the sign of the Christopher , he and his friends banqueted , and made me , and them that were in the company 
 322 
 1556. great cheer : and for very joy that he had to see the towardness of our intended discovery , he entered into the dance himself , among the rest of the young and lusty company : which being ended , he and his friends departed most gently , commending us to the governance of almighty God . 
 Tuesday we road still at Gravesend , making provision 28 for such things as we wanted . 
 Wednesday in the morning we departed from Graves - 29 end , the wind being at Southwest , that night we came to and anchor thwart our Lady of Hollands . 
 Thursday at three of the clock in the morning we 3° weighed , and by eight of the clock , we were at and anchor in Orwell wanness , and then incontinent I went aboard the Edward Bonaventure , where the worshipful company of merchants appointed me to be , until the said good ship arrived at Wardhouse . Then I returned again Note . into the pinnace . 
 Friday the 15 of May we were within 7 leagues May 15. of the shore , on the coast of Norway : the latitude at a South sun , 58 degrees and a half , where we saw three sails , beside our own company : and thus we followed the shore or land , which lies Northnorthwest , North and by West , and Northwest and by North , as it does appear by the plate . 
 Saturday at and East sun we came to S. Dunstans 16 Island , which Island I so nam . It was off us East two leagues and a half , the wind being at Southeast : the latitude this day at a South sun 59 degrees , 42 minutes . Also the high round mountain bore East of us , at a south sun : and when this hill is East of you , and being bound to the Northward , the land lies North and half a point Westerly , from this said South sun , unto a North sun twenty leagues Northwest alongst the shore . 
 Upon Sunday at sixe of the clock in the morning , the 17 farthest land that we could see that lay Northnorthwest , was East of us three leagues , and then it trended to the 
 323 
 Northwards , and to the Eastwards of the North , which headland I judged to be Scoutsnesse . At seven of the clock we changed our course and went North , the wind being at Southsoutheast , and it waxed very thick and misty , and when it cleared , we went Northnortheast . At a South sun we lost sighed of the Serchthrift , because of the missed , making our way North . And when we lost sighed of the shore and pinnace , we were within two leagues & a half of the shore : the last land that we saw when this missed came upon us , which is to the Northwards of Scowtsnesse , lay Northnortheast , and Southsouthwest , and we made our way North until a west sun five leagues . 
 18 From that until Munday three a clock in the morning ten leagues Northnortheast : and then we went North and by East , because the wind came at the Westsouthwest with thick mist : the latitude this day at a South sun sixtie three degrees and a half truly taken : at this season we had sighed of our Pinnace again . 
 19 From that until Tuesday a South sun Northnortheast fortie foure leagues , and then Northeast . From a South sun until eight of the clock , fifteene leagues Northeast . 
 20 From that until Wednesday a South sun Northnortheast , except the first watch Northeast : then had we the latitude in sixtie seven degrees , thirtie nine minutes . From that unto a Northwest sun eighteen leagues Northeast , & then we were within two leagues off the shore , and saw the high land to the Southwards of Low-foot break out through the missed , and then we went North and by east . 
 21 From the said Northwest sun until foure of the clock in the morning North and by East ten leagues and a half : and then Northnortheast until a South sun , the latitude being sixtie nine degrees , and a half . From that until half and hour passed seven of the clock , Northnortheast eleven leagues and a half , and then we 
 22 went Northeast ten leagues . From that 3 leagues and a 
 324 
 1556. half Eastnortheast , and then we saw the land through the clouds and hazy thwart on the broad side of us the wind being then at Southsouthwest . 
 From that until Saturday , at eight of the clock in 23 the morning Eastnortheast , and to the Northwards fortie eight leagues , and then the wind came up at North , we being aboard the shore , and thwart of the Chapel , which I suppose is called Kedilwike : then we cast the Kedelwike ships head to the seawards , because the wind was very chapped-scant : and then I caused the Pinnace to bear in with the shore , to see whither she might find and harbour for the ships or not , and that she found and saw two readers ride in the found : and also they saw houses . But notwithstanding , God be praised , the wind enlarged upon us , that we had not occasion to go into the harbour : and then the Pinnace bore her Myssen mast over board with flag and all , and lost the flag : with the mast there fell two men over board , but God be praised , they were saved : the flag was a token , whereby we might understand whither there were a good harbour there or not . 
 At a North sun the North cape ( which I so nam The North the first voyage ) was thwart of us , which is nine leagues c*Pe 50 nam to the Eastwards of the foresaid Chapel from the g^^g Eastermost point of it . 
 June . 
 THe sunday we weighed in Corpus Christi Bay , at a 7 Northeast and by East sun : the Bay is almost half a league deep : the headland which is Corpus Christi point , lies Southeast and by East , one league from the head of the Bay , where we had a great tIED , like a raze over the flood : the Bay is at the least two leagues over : so do I imagine from the fair foreland to Corpus Christi point ten leagues Southeast and by East : It flows in this Bay , at a South and by West moon full sea . From that we went until seven a clock at after noon twentie leagues Southeast and by South : 
 325 
 and then we took in all our sails , because it was then very misty , and also we met with much ice that ran out of the Bay , and then we went Southsoutheast with our foresail : at eight of the clock , we herd a piece of ordinance , which was out of the Edward , which bade us farewell , and then we shot off another piece , and bade her farewell : we could not one see the other , because of the thick mist : at a Northwest sun it began somewhat to clear , and then we saw a head land , and the shore trended to the Southwestward , which I judged to be about Cross Island : it was off us at a Northnorthwest sun , Westsouthwest . 
 8 From this Northnorthwest sun , until Munday , we went Southeast , and this morning we came at anchor among the shoals that lie off of point Look out , at a Northeast and by East sun , the wind being at Eastsoutheast . At this point Look out , a south Moon makes a full sea . Cape good fortune lies from the Isle of Crosses Southeast , and between them is tenne leagues : point Look out lies from Cape Good fortune Eastsoutheast , and between them are sixe leagues . S. Edmonds point lies from point Look out Eastsoutheast , and half a point to the Southwards , and between them are sixe leagues . There is between these two points , a Bay that is half a league deep , and is full of shoals and dangers . At a Southeast sun we weighed , and turned to the windwards , the wind being at Eastsoutheast : and at a Southeast sun , we came to and anchor , being then a full sea , in five fathoms and a half water . It hieth at this place where we road , and also 
 9 at point Look out , foure fathom water . At a Westnorthwest sun we weighed , and drived to the windwards , until Tuesday , a Northnortheast sun , and then being a high water , we came to and anchor open of the river Cola , in eight fathom water . Cape S. Bernard lies from S. Edmonds point , Southeast and by South , and betwixt them are sixe leagues , and also betwixt them is the River Cola , into which River we went this evening . 
 326 
 Wednesday we road still in the said river , the wind 10 being at the north : we sent our skiff aland to be dressed : the latitude of the mouth of the river Cola latitude is sixtie five degrees , fortie and eight minutes . of Cola. 
 Thursday at 6 of the clock in the morning , there n came aboard of us one of the Russe Lodiaes , rowing with A Russe twentie oars , and there were foure and twenty men in Lodta-her . The master of the boat presented me with a great loaf of bred , and sixe rings of bred , which they call Colaches , and foure dried pikes , and a peck of fine otemeale , and I gave unto the Master of the boat , a comb , and a small glass : and he declared unto me , that he was bound to Pechora , and after that , I made them to drink , the tide being somewhat broken , they gently departed . 
 The Master's name was Pheodor . 
 Whereas the tenth day I sent our Pinnace on shore to be mended , because she was leak , and weak , with the Carpenter and three men more to help him , the weather chanced so , that it was Sunday before they could get aboard our ship . All that time they were without provision of victuals , but only a little bred , which they spent by Thursday at night , thinking to have come aboard when they had listed , but wind and weather denied them : insomuch that they were feign to eat grass , and such weeds as they could find then above ground , but fresh water they had plenty , but the meat with some of them could scant frame by reason of their queasy stomachs . 
 From Thursday at afternoon , until Sunday in the 14. morning , our bark did ride such a road stead that it was to be marveiled , without the help of God , how she was able to abide it . 
 In the bite of the Southeast shore of the river Cola , there is a good road in five fathom , or foure fathom and a half , at a low water : but you shall have no land Northnortheast of you then . I proved with our pinnace , that the depth goes on the Southeast shore . 
 Thursday we weighed our anchors in the River Cola , and 18 
 327 
 From Cola to Pechora is but 7 or % days sailing . 
 21 
 22 
 The courtesy of one Gabriel . 
 23 a good y necessary note . 
 went into the Sea seven or eight leagues , where we met with the wind far Northerly , that of force it constrained us to go again back into the said river , where came aboard of us sundry of their Boats , which declared unto me that they were also bound to the northwards , a fishing for Morse , and Salmon , and gave me liberally of their white and wheaten bred . 
 As we road in this river , we saw daily coming down the river many of their Lodias , and they that had least , had foure and twenty men in them , and at the last they grew to thirtie sail of them : and among the rest , there was one of them whose name was Gabriel , who showed me very much friendship , and he declared unto me , that all they were bound to Pechora , a fishing for Salmons , and Morses : insomuch that he showed me by demonstrations , that with a fair wind we had seven or eight days sailing to the River Pechora , so that I was glad of their company . This Gabriel promised to give me warning of shoals , as he did indeed . 
 Sunday being the one and twentieth day , Gabriel gave me a barrel of Meade , and one of his speciali friends gave me a barrel of beer , which was carried upon men's backs at least 2 miles . 
 Munday we departed from the river Cola , with all the rest of the said Lodias , but sailing before the wind , they were all too good for us : but according to promise , this Gabriel and his friend did often strike their sails , and tarried for us forsaking their own company . 
 Tuesday at and Eastnortheast sun we were thwart of Cape S. John. It is to be understood , that from the Cape S. John unto the river or bay that goes to Mezen , it is all sunk land , and full of shoals and dangers , you shall have scant two fathom water , and see no land . And this present day we came to and anchor thwart of a creek , which is 4 or 5 leagues to the Northwards of the said Cape , into which creek Gabriel and his fellow rowed , but we could not get in : and before night there were above 20 328 
 .. I556 , sail that went into the said creek , the wind being at the Northeast . We had indifferent good landfang . 
 This afternoon Gabriel came aboard with his skiff , and then I rewarded him for the good company that he kept with us over the shoals with two small ivory combes , and a steel glass , with two or three trifles more , for which he was not ungrateful . But notwithstanding , his first company had got further to the Northwards . 
 Wednesday being Midsummer day , we sent our 24 skiff aland to found the creek , where they found it almost dry at a low water . And all the Lodais within were on ground . 
 Although the harbour were evil , yet the stormy similitude of Northerly winds tempted us to set our sails , & we let slip a cable and and anchor , and bore with the harbour , for it was then near a high water : and as always in such journeis varieties do chance , when we came upon the bar in the entrance of the creek , the wind did shrink so suddenly upon us , that we were not able to led it in , and before we could have flatted the ship before the wind , we should have be on ground on the lee shore , so that we were constrained to let fallen and anchor under our sails , and road in a very breach , thinking to have warped in . Gabriel came out with his skiff , and so did sundry others also , showing their good will to help us , but all to no purpose , for they were likely to have be drowned for their labour , in so much that I desired Gabriel to lend me his anchor , because our own anchors were two big for our skiff to lay out , who sent me his own , and borrowed another also and sent it us . Then we laid out one of those anchors , with a hawser which he had of 140 fathom long , thinking to have warped in , but it would not be : for as we shorted upon you said warp the anchor came home , so that we were feign to bear the end of the warp , that we rushed in upon the 
 329 
 other small anchor that Gabriel sent aboard , and laid that anchor to seawards : and then between these two anchors we traversed the ships head to seawards , and set our foresail and main sail , and when the bark had way , we cut the hawser , and so gate the sea to our friend , and tried out all that day with our main corpse . 
 25 The Thursday we went room with Cape S. John , where we found indifferent good road for a Northnortheast wind , and for a need , for a North and by West wind . 
 26 Friday at afternoon we weighed , and departed from thence , the weather being meetly fair , & the wind at Eastsoutheast , and plied for the place where we left our cable and anchor , and our hawser : & as soon as we were at and anchor , the foresaid Gabriel came aboard of us , with 3 or foure more of their small boats , and brought with them of their Aquavitae & Mead , professing unto me very much friendship , and rejoiced to see us again , declaring that they earnestly thought that we had be lost . This Gabriel declared unto me , that they had saved both the anchors and our hauser , and after we had thus communed , I caused 4 or 5 of them to go into my cabin , where I gave them figs , and made them such cheer as I could . While I was thus banqueting of them , there came another of their skifFes aboard with one who was a Keril , whose name afterwards I learned , & that he dwelled in Colmogro , & Gabriel dwelled in the town of Cola , which is not far from the rivers mouth . This foresaid Keril said unto me that one of the anchors which I borrowed was his , I gave him thanks for the lone of it , thinking it had be suffi - cient . And as I continued in one accustomed manner , that if the present which they brought were worth entertainment , they had it accordingly , he brought nothing with him , & therefore I regarded him but little . And thus we ended , & they took their leave 
 330 
 and went a shore . At their coming ashore , Gabriel 
 and Keril were at unconvenient words , and by the ears , as I understand : the cause was because the one had better entertainment then the other : but 
 you shall understand that Gabriel was not able to make his party good , because there were 17 lodias of the Kerils company who took his part , and but 2 of Gabriels company . 
 The next high water Gabriel and his company departed from thence , and rowed to their former 
 company and neighbours , which were in number 28 at the least , and all of them belonging to the river Cola. 
 Twentie eight Lodias belonging to Cola. 
 And as I understood Keril made reckoning that the 27 hawser which was fast in his anchor should have be 
 his own , and at first would not deliver it to our boat , insomuch that I sent him word that I would complain upon him , whereupon he delivered the hawser to my company . 
 The next day being Saturday , I sent our boat on shore to fetch fresh water and wood , and at their coming on shore this Keril welcomed our men most gently , and also banqueted them : and in the mean time caused some of his men to fill our baricoes with water , and to help our men to bear wood into their boat : and then he put on his best silk coat , and his collar of pearls , and came aboard again , & brought his present with him : and thus having more respect unto his present then to his person , because I perceived him to be vainglorious , I bade him welcome , and gave him a dish of figs : and then he declared unto me that his father was a gentleman , and that he was able to show me pleasure , and not Gabriel , who was but a priests son . 
 After their departure from us we weighed , and plied 28 all the ebb to the windwards , the wind being Northerly , & towards night it waxed very stormy , so that of force we were constrained to go room 
 331 
 The latitude of Cape S. John 66 degrees 50 minutes . 
 Earth swimming above water like wood . 
 with Cape S. John again , in which storm we lost our skiff at our stern , that we bought at Wardhouse , and there we road until the fourth of July . The latitude of Cape S. John is 66 degrees 50 minutes . And it is to be noted , that the land of Cape S. John is of height from the full sea mark , as I judge , 10 fathoms , being clean without any trees growing , & also without stones or rocks , and consists only of black earth , which is so rotten , that if any fallen into the sea , it will swim as though it were a piece of wood . In which place , about three leagues from the shore you shall not have above 9 fathom water , and clay ground . 
 Julie . 
 4 OAturday at a North northwest sun the wind came Oh at Eastnortheast , & then we weighed , and plied to the Northwards , and as we were two leagues shot passed the Cape , we saw a house standing in a valley , which is dainty to be seen in those parts , and by and by I saw three men on the top of the hill . Then I judged them , as it afterwards proved , that they were men which came from some other place to set traps to take vermin for their furs , which traps we did perceive very thick alongst the shore as we went . 
 5 Sunday at and East sun we were thwart off the creek where the Russes lay , and there came to and anchor , and perceiving the most part of the Lodias to be gone we thought it not good to tarry any longer there , but weighed and spent all the ebb , plying to the windwards . 
 6 Munday at a South sun it was high water . All alongst the coast it flows little , only a South moon makes a full sea : and as we were a weighin we espied the Russe Lodias , which we first lost . They came out of a creek among the sandy hills , which hills begin 15 leagues Northnortheast from Cape S. John. 
 332 
 The latitude 68 degrees and a half . 
 STEPHEN BURROUGH 
 Plying this ebb to and end , we came to and anchor 6 leagues Northnortheast from the place where we saw the Russes come out : and there the Russes harboured themselves within a sunk bank , but there was not water enough for us . 
 At a North sun we weighed and plied to the Northwards , the land lying Northnortheast , and Southsouthwest , until a South sun , and then we were in the 
 latitude of 68 degrees & a half : and in this latitude 
 end those sandy hills , and the land begins to lie 
 North and by West , South and by East , and North - 
 northwest , and to the Westwards , and there the water begins to wax deep . 
 At a Northwest sun we came to and anchor within half a league of the shore , where we had good plenty of fish , both Haddocks and Cods , riding in io fathom water . 
 Wednesday we weighed , and plied nearer the headland , 8 which is called Caninoz , the wind being at East and by North . 
 Thursday the wind being scant we turned to windwards 9 the ebb , to get about Caninoz : the latitude this day at noon was 68 degrees 40 minutes . 
 Friday we turned to the windward of the ebb , but to 10 no purpose : and as we road at and anchor , we saw the similitude of a storm rising at Northnorthwest , & could not tell where to get road nor succour for that wind , and harbour we knew none : & that land which we road under with that wind was a lee shore . And as I was musing what was best to be done , I saw a sail come out of a creek under the foresaid Caninoz , which was my friend Gabriel , who forsook his harbour and company , and came as near us as he might , and pointed us to the Eastwards , & then we weighed and followed him , and went East and by South , the wind being at Westnorthwest , and very misty . 
 Saturday we went Eastsoutheast & followed Gabriel , n and he brought us into and harbour called Morgiovets , Morgovets and which is 30 leagues from Caninoz , & we had upon the harbour . 
 333 
 bar going in two fathom and a fourth part : and after we were passed in over the bar , it waxed deeper , for we had 5 fathoms , 4 and a half , and 3 fathom etc. Our bark being mored , I sent some of our men to shore to pro-Drlft wood . vide wood , where they had plenty of drift wood , but none growing : and in this place we found plenty of young foul , as Guiles , Seapies , and others , whereof the Russes would eat none , whereof we were nothing sorry , for there came the more to our part . 
 12 Sunday our men cut wood on shore , and brought it aboard , and we ballasted our ship with stones . 
 This morning Gabriel saw a smoke on you way , who rowed unto it with his skiff , which smoke was two leagues from the place where we road : and at a Northwest sun he came aboard again , and brought with him Samoed . a Samoed , which was but a young man : his apparel was then strange unto us , and he presented me with three young wild geese , and one young barnacle . 
 13 Munday I sent a man to the main in Gabriels boat , and he brought us aboard 8 barricoes of fresh water : the latitude of the said Morgiovets is sixtie eight degrees and a terce . It flows there at a Southsouthwest moon full sea , and hyeth two fathom and a half water . 
 14 At a Westnorthwest sun we departed from this place , and went East 2 5 leagues , and then saw and Island North and by West of us eight leagues , which Dolgoieve and Island is called Dolgoieve : and from the Eastermost Island . par ( . o£ there lies a sand East and by 
 South 7 leagues long . 
 15 Wednesday at a North and by East sun Swetinoz was South of us 5 leagues . This day at afternoon Pechora . we went in over the dangerous bar of Pechora , and had upon the bar but one fathom water . 
 16 Thursday we road still . 
 \7 Friday I went on shore and observed the variation ^theCmpas Compass , which was three degrees and a half 
 a from the North to the West : the latitude this day was sixtie nine degrees ten minutes . 
 334 
 From two or three leagues to the Eastward of Swetinoz , until the entering of the river Pechora , it is all sandy hills , and towards Pechora the sandy hills are very low . 
 It higheth on the bar of Pechora foure foot water , & it flows there at a Southwest moon a full sea . 
 Munday at a North & by East sun , we weighed , and 20 came out over the said dangerous bar , where we had but five foot water , insomuch that we found a foot less water coming out then we did going in . I think the reason was , because when we went in the wind was off the sea , which caused the sands to break on either side of us , and we kept in the smoothest between the breaches , which we durst not have done , except we had seen the Russes to have gone in before us : and at our coming out the wind was off the shore , and fair weather , and then the sands did not appear with breaches as at our going in : we thank God that our ship did draw so little water . 
 When we were a seaboord the bar the wind scanted upon us , and was at Eastsoutheast , insomuch that we stopped the ebbs , and plied all the floods to the windwards , and made our way Eastnortheast . 
 Tuesday at a Northwest sun we thought that we had 21 seen land at East , or East & by North of us : which afterwards proved to be a monstrous heap of ice . 
 Within a little more then half and hour after , we first Ice . saw this ice , we were enclosed within it before we were aware of it , which was a fearful sighed to see : for , for the space of sixe hours , it was as much as we could do to keep our ship aloof from one heap of ice , and bear roomer from another , with as much wind as we might bear a coarse . And when we had passed from the danger of this ice , we lay to the Eastwards close by the wind . 
 The next day we were again troubled with the ice . 22 
 Thursday being calm , we plied to the windwards , 23 the wind being Northerly . We had the latitude this Thelat . ode-day at noon in 70 degrees 11 minutes . ees 11 min - 
 335 
 25 
 S. James Island . 
 26 
 27 The variation of the Gompas 7 degrees and a half . 
 28 The relation of Loshak . 
 We had not run passed two hours Northwest , the wind being at Northnortheast and Northeast and by North a good gale , but we met again with another heap of ice : we wethered the head of it , and lay a time to the seawards , and made way West 6 leagues . 
 Friday at a Southeast sun we cast about to the Eastwards , the wind being at Northnortheast : the latitude this day at noon was 70 degrees 15 minutes . 
 On S. James his day bolting to the windewardes , we had the latitude at noon in seventy degrees twentie minutes . The same day at a Southwest sun , there was a monstrous Whale aboard of us , so near to our side that we might have thrust a sword or any other weapon in him , which we durst not do for fear he should have overthrown our ship : and then I called my company together , and all of us shouted , & with the cry that we made he departed from us : there was as much above water of his back as the breadth of our pinnace , and at his falling down , he made such a terrible noise in the water , that a man would greatly have marveled , except he had known the cause of it : but God be thanked , we were quietly delivered of him . And a little after we spied certain Islands , with which we bore , and found good harbour in 15 or 18 fathom , and black oz : we came to and anchor at a Northeast sun , & nam the Island S. James his Island , where we found fresh water . 
 Sunday , much wind blowing we road still . 
 Munday I went on shore and took the latitude , which was 70 degrees 42 minutes : the variation of the compass was 7 degrees and a half from the North to the West . 
 Tuesday we plied to the Westwards alongst the shore , the wind being at Northwest , and as I was about to come to anchor , we saw a sail coming about the point , wherunder we thought to have anchored . Then I sent a skiff aboard of him , and at their coming aboard , they took acquaintance of them , and the chief man said he 336 
 had be in our company in the river Cola , and also declared unto them that we were passed the way which The way to should bring us to the Ob. This land , said he , is called thr^er Nova Zembla , that is to say , the New land : and then ' he came aboard himself with his skiff , and at his / mighty hill coming aboard he told me the like , and said further , that in this Nova Zembla is the highest mountain in the ’ world , as he thought , & that Camen Boldshay , which is on the main of Pechora , is not to be compared to this mountain , but I saw it not : he made me also certain demonstrations of the way to the Ob , and seemed to make haste on his own way , being very loath to tarry , because the year was far passed , and his neighbour had fetched Pechora , and not he : so I gave him a steel glass , two pewter spoons , and a pair of velvet sheathed knives : and then he seemed somewhat the more willing to tarry , and showed me as much as he knew for our purpose : he also gave me 17 wild geese , and showed me that foure of their lodias were driven perforce from Caninoze to this Nova Zembla . This men name was Loshak . Loshak . 
 Wednesday , as we plied to the Eastwards , we espied 29 another sail , which was one of this Loshaks company , and we bore room , and spoke with him , who in like sort told us of the Ob , as the other had done . 
 Thursday , we plied to the Eastwards , the wind being 30 at Eastnortheast . 
 Friday , the gale of wind began to increase , and came 31 Westerly withal , so that by a Northwest sun we were at and anchor among the Islands of Vaigats , where we saw The Islands two small lodias , the one of them came aboard of us , and °fTagaits . presented me with a great loaf of bred : and they told me that they were all of Colmogro , except one man that dwelled at Pechora , who seemed to be the chiefest among them in killing of the Morse . 
 There were some of their company on shore , which did chase a white bear over the high cliffs into the water , which bear the lodia that was aboard of us killed in our sighed . 
 n 337 Y 
 This day there was a great gale of wind at North , and we saw so much ice driving a seaboord , that it was then no going to sea . 
 August . 
 i OAturday I went ashore , and there I saw three morses Oh that they had killed : they held one tooth of a Morse , which was not great , at a roble , and one white bear skin at three robles & two robles : they further told me , that Samoeds . there were people called Samoeds on the great Island , and that they would not abide them nor us , who have no houses , but only coverings made of Deersskins , set over them with stakes : they are men expert in shooting , and have great plenty of Dear . 
 This night there fell a cruel storm , the wind being at West . 
 2 Sunday we had very much wind , with plenty of snow , and we road with two anchors a head . 
 3 Munday we weighed and went room with another Island , which was five leagues Eastnortheast from us : and there I met again with Loshak , and went on shore with him , and he brought me to a heap of the Samoeds idols , mamrs of which were in number above 300 , the worst and the most the Samoeds . ^artificiali WOrke that ever I saw : the eyes and mouths of sundry of them were bloody , they had the shape of men , women and children , very grossly wrought , & that which they had made for other parts , was also sprinkled with blood . Some of their idols were and old stick with two or three notches , made with a knife in it . I saw much of the footing of the said Samoeds , and of the sleds that they ride in . There was one of their sleds broken , and lay by the heap of idols , & there I saw a deers skin which the fowls had spoiled : and before certain of their idols blocks were made as high as their mouths , being all bloody , I thought that to be the table whereon they offered their sacrifice : I saw also the instruments , whereupon they had roasted flesh , and as far as I could perceive , they make their fire directly under the spit . 
 338 
 Loshak being there present told me that these The Samoeds Samoeds were not so hurtful as they of Ob are , and that they have no houses , as indeed I saw none , but only tents made of Deers skins , which they underprop with stakes and poles : their boats are made of Deers skins , and when they come on shore they carry their boats with them upon their backs : for their carriages they have no other beasts to serve them , but Dear only . As for bred and corn they have none , except the Russes bring it to them : their knowledge is very base , for they know no letter . 
 Tuesday we turned for the harbour where Lo - . 4 shaks bark lay , whereas before we road under and Island . And there he came aboard of us and said unto me : if God send wind and weather to serve , I will go to the Ob with you , because the Morses were scant at these Islands of Vaigats , but if he could not get to the river of Ob , then he said he would go to the river of Naramzay , where the people were not altogether so savage Naramzay . as the Samoyds of the Ob are : he showed me that they will shoot at all men to the uttermost of their power , that cannot speak their speech . 
 Wednesday we saw a terrible heap of ice approach 5 near unto us , and therefore we thought good with all speed possible to depart from thence , and so I returned to the Westwards again , to the Island where we were the 31. of July . 
 Thursday I went a shore , and took the latitude , 6 which was 70 degrees 2 5 minutes : and the variation of latitude . the compass was 8 degrees from the North to the West . 
 Loshak and the two small Lodias of Pechora departed from this Island , while I was on shore taking the latitude , and went to the Southwards : I marveled why he departed so suddenly , and went over the shoals among the Islands where it was impossible for us to follow them . But after I perceived them to be weatherwise . 
 339 
 7 Friday we road still , the wind being at Northnortheast , with a cruel storm . The ice came in so abundantly about us at both ends of the Island that we road under , that it was a fearful sighed to behold : the storm continued with snow , rain , and hail plenty . 
 8 Saturday we road still also , the storm being somewhat abated , but it was altogether misty , that we were not able to see a cables length about us , the wind being at Northeast and by East . 
 9 Sunday at foure of the clock in the morning we departed from this Island , the wind being at Southeast , and as we were clear a sea board the small Islands and shoals , it came so thick with mists , that we could not see a base shot from us . Then we took in all our sails to make little way . 
 At a Southeast sun it waxed clear , and then we set our sails , and lay close by the wind to the Southwards alongst the Islands of Vaigats . At a west sun we took in our sail again because of the great missed and rain . we sounded at this place , and had five and twenty fathoms water , and soft black oz , being three leagues from the shore , the wind being at South and by East , but still misty . 
 10 Munday at and East sun we sounded , and had 40 fathoms , and oz , still misty : at noon we sounded again , and had 36 fathom , still misty . 
 11 Tuesday at and Eastnortheast sun we let fallen our anchor in three and twenty fathom , the missed still continuing . 
 12 Wednesday at three of the clock in the morning the missed brake up , the wind being at Northeast & by East , and then we saw part of the Islands of Vaigats , which we bore withal , and went Eastsoutheast close by the wind : at a West sun we were at and anchor under the South-They land west part of the said Vaigats , and then I sent our skiff to upon Palgatz . shore with three men in her , to see if they might speak with any of the Samoeds , but could not : all that day was rainy , but not windy . 
 34° 
 Thursday the wind came Westerly , so that we were feign to seek us another place to ride in , because the wind came a seaboord land , and although it were misty , yet we followed the shore by our led : and as we brought land in the wind of us , we let fallen our anchor . At a West sun the missed brake up , so that we might see about us , and then we might perceive that we were entered into a found . 
 This afternoon we took in two or three skiffs lading of stones to ballast our ship withal . It hyeth here foure foot water , and flows by fits , uncertain to be judged . 
 Friday we road still in the found , the wind at Southwest , with very much rain , and at the end of the rain it waxed again misty . 
 Saturday there was much wind at West , and much rain , and then again misty . 
 Sunday was very misty , and much wind . 
 Munday very misty , the wind at Westnorthwest . 
 Tuesday was also misty , except at noon : then the sun brake out through the missed , so that we had the latitude in 70 degrees 1 oh minutes : the afternoon was misty again , the wind being at Westnorthwest . 
 Wednesday at three of the clock afternoon the missed brake up , & the wind came at Eastnortheast , and then we weighed , and went South & by East , until seven of the clock , eight leagues , thinking to have had sighed of the sandy hills that are to the Eastwards of the river 
 A.D. 
 I556-13 
 The uncertainty of ebbing W flowing . 
 > 4 
 i5 
 16 
 17 
 18 
 19 
 Pechora . At a Northwest sun we took in our main sail , because the wind increased , & went with a foresail Westnorthwest , the wind being at Eastnortheast : at night there grew so terrible a storm , that we saw not the like , although we had endured many storms since we came out of England . It was wonderful that our bark was able to brook such monstrous & terrible seas , without the great help of God , who never faileth them at need , that put their sure trust in him . 
 Thursday at a Southsouthwest sun , thanks be to 20 
 341 
 They were within 15 leagues of Pechora . 
 21 
 22 
 They return the 22 of August . 
 God , the storm was at the highest , & then the wind began to slake , and came Northerly withal , & then I reckoned the Westermost point of the river Pechora to be South of us 15 leagues . At a Westsouthwest sun we set our main sail , and lay close by the wind , the wind being at Northwest and by North , making but little way , because the billow went so high : at midnight we cast about , and the ship caped Northnortheast , making little way . 
 Friday at noon we had the latitude in 70 degrees 8 minutes , and we sounded , and had 29 fathoms sand , and in manner stremy ground . At a West sun we cast about to the Westwards , and a little after the wind came up at West . 
 Saturday was calm : the latitude this day at noon was 70 degrees and a terce , we sounded here , and had nine and forty fathoms and oz , which oz signified that we drew towards Nova Zembla . 
 And thus we being out of all hope to discover any more to the Eastward this year , we thought it best to return , and that for three causes . 
 The first , the continual Northeast and Northerly winds , which have more power after a man is passed to the Eastwards of Caninoze , then in any place that I do know in these Northerly regions . 
 Second , because of great and terrible abundance of ice which we saw with our eyes , and we doubt greater store abide that in those parts : I adventured already somewhat too far in it , but I thank God for my safe deliverance from it . 
 Third , because the nights waxed dark , and the winter began to draw on with his storms : and therefore I resolved to take the first best wind that God should send , and ply towards the bay of S. Nicholas , and to see if we might do any good there , if God would permit it . 
 This present Saturday we saw very much ice , and were within two or three leagues of it : it showed unto us as though it had been a firm land as far as we might see 
 342 
 from Northwest off us to the Eastwards : and this afternoon the Lord sent us a little gale of wind at South , so that we bore clear off the Westermost part of it , thanks be to God . And then against night it waxed calm again , and the wind was at Southwest : we made our way until Sunday noon Northwest and by West , and 24. then we had the latitude in 70 degrees and a half , the wind at Southwest : there was a billow , so that we could not discern to take the latitude exactly , but by a reasonable guess . 
 Munday there was a pretty gale of wind at South , so 25 that we went West and by South , the latitude this day at noon was 70 degrees 10 minutes : we had little wind all day : at a Westnorthwest sun we sounded , and had 29 fathoms black sandy oz , & then we were Northeast 5 leagues from the Northeast part of the Island Colgoieve . 
 Tuesday the wind all Westerly we plied to the wind 26 wards . 
 Wednesday the wind was all Westerly , and calm : we 27 had the latitude this day in 70 degrees 10 minutes , we within three leagues of the North part of the Island Colgoieve . 
 Thursday , we went room about the Westermost part 28 of the Island , seeking where we might find a place to ride in for a Northwest wind , but could find none , and then we cast about again to the seawards , and the wind came at Westsouthwest , and this morning we had plenty of snow . 
 Friday , the wind being at Southwest and by West , we 29 plied to the windwards . 
 Saturday , the wind being at South , we plied to the Westwards , and at afternoon the missed brake up , and then we might see the land seven or eight leagues to the Eastwards of Caninoz : we sounded a little before and had 35. fathoms and oz . And a while after we sounded again , and had 19. fathom and sand : then we were within three leagues and a half of the shore , and towards night there came down so much wind , that we were 343 
 feign to bring our ship a try , and laid her head to the Westwards . 
 3° Sunday , the wind became more calm , and then it waxed very mystie : At noon we cast about to the Eastwards , the wind being at South , and ran eight hours on that board , and then we cast about and caped West southwest : we sounded and had 32. fathoms , and tough oaze like clay . 
 31 Munday , we doubled about Caninoze , and came at and anchor there , to the intent that we might kill some fish if God would permit it , and there we gate a great Nuse , which Nuses were there so plenty , that they would scarcely suffer any other fish to come near the hooks : the said Nuses carried away sundry of our hooks and leads . 
 A little after at a West Sun , the wind began to blow stormy at West southwest , so that we were feign to weigh and forsake our fishing ground , and went close by the wind Southwest , and Southwest and by West , making our way South southwest . 
 September . 
 i r I ' Uesday at a West Sun we sounded and had 20. A fathoms , and broken Wilkeshels : I reckoned Canonise to be 24. leagues Northnortheast from us . 
 11 The eleventh day we arrived at Colmogro , and there we wintered , expecting the approach of the next Summer to proceed farther in our intended discovery for the Ob : which ( by reason of our employments to Wardhouse the next spring for the search of some English ships ) was not accordingly performed . 
 