A Letter of the Moscovie company to their Agents in Russia , Master Henrie Lane , Christopher Hudson , and Thomas Glover sent in their seventh voyage to Saint Nicholas with three ships , the Swallow , the Philip and marry , and the Jesus the fifth of May , 1560. 
 AFter our hearty commendations to you . The twelfth day of the last month here arrived in safety , thanks be to God , our two ships , & by them we received your letters & invoices very well perceiving what you have laden in them . The tallow came evil Trifax conditioned and broken , by reason it came in Corrobias , we loose and spoil more then the Cask will cost , and much of this tallow is very evil , black , soft and putrified . Touching the Wax , as yet we know not Wax . how the weight will rise , by reason that some of it was lost in the barks . The weight of the last years wax did not rise so well as the other years before it did . There had need good heed to be taken in the 
 n 401 2 c 
 weighing . Also much of this Wax had a great foot and is not so fair wax as in times past we have had . You must cause the foot to be taken off before you do weigh it , or else you must seek to have a good allowance Train oils . for it . The train Oils which you jaded this year came well conditioned , and the cask was good and of a good size . But if they were made a little bigger it were the better , for they be not hogsheads . You have written to us to send you cask which is not here to be had , neither do we think it so best if it were here , considering it must go either shaken and bound up , or else empty , which will be pesterable , and likewise will shrink and dry , and not be fit to lade oils in . Therefore our mind is , you shall cause so much cask to be made there of the size of hogsheads as will serve both for your oils and tallow , and let them be well trimmed with pitch on the heads and seams , and stand full of water three or foure days before you put Oils in them . Your Cowper may be overseer to them that make them , that they be well hooped and clear timber without knots , the worst cask you may put the tallow in . He that sees the filling of the oils had need to look well to it , for there was much water in this that came now . we perceive you have bought and have in a readiness one hundred and fourtie tons of oils , and that if need be you may have more store . Wherefore we do mind to send you shipping for three hundred tons and upward , because we would have this next Summer as great a return as you can of the commodities of that Country , as also such of our wares as you have that are not vendible , or will not be sold or bartered , because we would have a full knowledge Sables . and state of our accounts . The Sables which you sent this year be very base , among them all we could not make one principali timber : we have always written unto you to send them that be good or else none . Wolverines . The Wolverings were indifferent , and some of the Lusems . wolves , the rest very base , the Lusernes but mean , 
 402 
 1560. the Lettes not so large skins as we have had : the Lets . best is , they were of a new death . As for the Ermines , Ermines . they cost more there with you , then we can fell them for here . Therefore buy no more of them , nor of Squirrels , for we lost the one half in the other . The Squirrels . wares that we would have you provide against the coming of the ships are , Wax , Tallow , tray ne Oils , Flax , Cables and Ropes , and Furs , such as Flax . we have written to you for in our last letters by the Cables and . ships : and from henceforth not to make any great provision of any rich Furs except principali Sables & 
 Lettes : for now there is a Proclamation made that no A proclama-fiirres shall be worn here , but such as the like is cion against growing here within this our Realm . Also we perceive foreign that there might be a great deal of tallow more provided in a year then you send . Therefore our mind is , you should enlarge somewhat more in the price , and to send us if you can three thousand podes a year : for we 3000. podes doe most good in it . And likewise the Russes , if °f Tallow a you would give them a reasonable price for their wares , TO ” 6 ' would be the willinger to buy and fell with you , and not to carry so much to Novogrode as they do , but would rather bring it to Vologda to you , both Wax , Tallow , Flax , Hemp , and all kind of other wares fit for our Country . Our mind is you should provide for the next ships five hundred Losh hides , of 5°°-them that be large and fair , and thickest in hand , and to be circumspect in the choosing , that you buy them that be killed in season and well dried and whole . If they be good we may fell them here for sixteene shillings and better the piece , we would have the whole skins , that is , the neck and legs withal , for these that you sent now lack their necks and legs . Nevertheless Note , for this time you must send them as you may get them : if you could find the means that the hair might be clipped off them , they would not take so much room in the ships as they do . We perceive by your letters that the princes of Wax do rise there with you , by reason 
 403 
 [ I - 3°7-J Hope of trade to be found by master Antonie Jenkinson . 
 Seal skins tawed . 
 Small cables best vendible . 
 that the Poles and Lifelanders do trade into Russia by licence : which , if there should be peace between them , would be and occasion that all other commodities in Russia would rise to a bigger price , and not be sufficient to serve them and us too , and likewise would bring down there the princes of our commodities . Therefore we think it good you should make a supplication to the Emperor in the name of The Company to return the trade from Rye and Revel to us , especially for such wares as we do buy : promising that we will be bound to take them at a reasonable price , as we have bought them in times past : and likewise that we will bring to them such wares of ours , as are thought fit for the Country , and to fell them at such reasonable princes as we have done . If this should not come to pass , we might be out of hope of doing any good by the trade there : but that we have a further hope of some good trade to be found out by Master Antonie Jenkinson : by reason we do perceive by your letters , that raw silk is as plentiful in Persia , as flax is in Russia : beside other commodities that may come from thence . we understand by your letters that you be at a point with the Russe for the Wax , Tallow , and Train oils that he shipped the last year for 311 robles 20 altines , which is well : although much be not got by it , but because they should not understand our reckonings We much marvel what you mean to buy Seal skins and tanne them . All that you have sent in times past lie here unsold , and will yield no money . If you send 100 of them tawed with the hair on , they will be sold , or else not . In our ship we will send you such things as you write to have for the ropers : and we would they should make more store of small cables and ropes , as cables of 7 , 8 , 9 , 10 , 11 , 12. inches . For these great cables be not for every man ; and the greatest cables be not best jaded : and likewise small ropes for shrouds , shoal , and other small tackling : and that you look better to the spinning of their yarn 
 4°4 
 that it be even and well tarred . The sables that you do mind to send us let them be principali and fair , and not passed foure or five timbars . For they will not be so commonly worn here as they have been with noble men : and likewise of Luserns send few and principal good . We mind to send you in our ships 100 tons of salt . And because we perceive that ballast is hardly to be had at our lading place there with you , we would you should have in a readiness 100 tons of the white stones whereof you sent us home and example two years past . And likewise to have in a readiness Masts of all masts of all sorts for our ships : for we know not sorts i0 J* what need we shall have of them . The bringer hereof p p ' is Thomas Alcock , he could not be suffered the last year to pass through Poland . And as we wrote unto you in our ships , he is our servant for years : And for that we know him to be honest , true and painefiill , our mind is he shall placed where he may do best service . He does know the commodities and discommodities of all kind of wares which you do send us . 
 Therefore we would you should credit his sayings both in quantity of wares and goodness , as also wherein is most our profit . We see by your letters that your opinion is that the ropemakers should remain there two years more ; and that you have provided great plenty of hemp , which we are content withal . But as yet we have sold none of our cables nor halsers , neither is the proof of them known ; because the first you sent us were made of flax , which are worth not money : for after they be once wet they will rotten and moulder away like moss . And those which you sent us now last , by misfortune there with you at the lading were wet and fretted in many places , and have lost their colour : by means whereof they be not so vendible as if they had come well conditioned . Of and hard beginning we trust God will send us a good ending . We hope in your next letters to hear good news of the proceedings of Master Antonie Jenkinson . We 
 405 
 Christopher Hodson and Thomas Glover appointed Agents 1560. 
 perceive by his letters that Astracan is not so good a Mars town as the fame hath gone of it : and marvel much that round pewter should be so good , and good cheap there , and from whence it should come . And whereas you write that you will come for England in our next ships , we would gladly have you to remain there until the next year following , for the better instruction of our servants there ; who have not had so long time of continuance for the language , and knowledge of the people , country , and wares as you have had . Nevertheless if you will needs come away , we have no doubt , but that you will leave good order with our servants there , namely with Christopher Hodson and Thomas Glover , whom we appoint to remain there as Agents in your room , till further order be taken : not doubting but that they will use themselves so discreetly and wisely in all their doings , as shall be to the worship and benefit of this company . And as we have a good hope in them that they will be careful , diligent and true in all their doings : so have we no less hope in all the rest of our servants there , that they will be not only obedient to them ( considering what room they be in ) but also will be careful , painful , diligent , and true every one in his room and place for the benefit and profit of the company : That hereafter in the absence of others they may be called and placed in the like room there or elsewhere . And if you find any to be disobedient and stubborn , and will not be ruled ; we will you shall send him home in our ships : who shall find such small favour and friendship during the time that he hath to serve , as by his disobedience and evil service he hath deserved . And whereas Christopher Hodson hath written to come home , as partly he hath good cause , considering the death of his father and mother : yet in regard that Sir George Bairn and the Lady his wife were his special friends in his absence , we doubt not but that he will remain in the room , which we 
 406 
 have appointed him , if you do not tarry and remain there , till farther order be taken : and for his service and pains he shall be considered , as reason is , as friendly as if his friends were living . Thus we trust you will take such order the one to remain at the Mosco , and the other at Colmogro , or elsewhere , as most need is . Thomas Alcocke is desirous to be in the Mosco : nevertheless you shall find him reasonable to serve where he may do most good . The 62 robles which you received of John Boucher we have paid him here , and also the 8 robles , which you received the year before of Christopher Rose , and the money which you received more of George Burton , for the which we have you our debtors . Thus we rest , referring that which is here omitted to the report of the bringer : and so God have you in his keeping . Also we would that you should send us in our ships 200 horse-clothes more . The things before written we would that you should let our servants see and read , to the intent they may perceive our minds . 
 