The voyage of Master Anthony Jenkinson , made from the city of Mosco in Russia , to the city of Boghar in Bactria , in the year 1558 : written by himself to the Merchant's of London of the Moscovie company . 
 [ I - 3^-1 
 He 23. day of April , in the year 1558. ( having obtained the Emperor of Russia his letters , directed unto sundry kings and princes , by whose dominions I should pass ) I departed from Mosco by water , having with me two of your servants , namely , Richard Johnson , & 
 Robert Johnson , and a Tartar Tolmach , with diverse 
 parcels of wares , as by the inventory appears : and the 28. day we came to a town called Collom , distant from the Mosco 20. leagues , & passing one league beyond the said Collom , we came unto a river called Occa , into the which the river Mosco falls , and loses his name : and passing down the said river Occa 8. leagues , we came unto a castle called Terrevettisko , which we left upon our right hand , and proceeding forward , the second day of May , we came unto another castle called Peroslave , distant 8. leagues , leaving it also on our right hand . The third day we came unto the place where old Rezan was situate , being now most of it ruined and overgrown , and distant from the said Peroslave , 6. leagues : the 4. day we passed by a castle called Terrecovia , from Rezan 12. leagues , & the 6. 
 11 
 449 
 2 F 
 day we came to another castle called Cassim , under the government of a Tartar prince nam Utzar Zegoline , sometime Emperor of the worthy city of Cazan , and now subject unto the Emperor of Russia . But leaving Cassim on our left hand , the 8. day we came unto a fair town called Morom , from Cassim 20. leagues , where we took the son , and found the latitude 56. degrees : and proceeding forward the 11. day , we came unto another fair town & castle called Nyse Novogrod , situated at the falling of the foresaid river Occa into the worthy river of Volga , distant from the said Moron 25. leagues , in the latitude of 56. degrees 18. minutes . From Rezan to this Nyse Novogrod , on both sides the said river of Occa , is raised the greatest store of wax and honey in all the land of Russia . We tarried at the foresaid Nyse Novogrod until the 19. day , for the coming of a captain which was sent by the Emperor to rule at Astracan , who being arrived , and having the number of 500. great boats under his conduct , some laden with victuals , soldiers , and munition : and other some with merchandise , departed altogether the said 19. day from the said Nyse Novogrod , and the 22. we came unto a castle called Vasiliagorod , distant 25. leagues , which we left upon our right hand . This town or castle had his name of this Emperors father , who was called Vasilius , and gorod in the Russe tongue is as much to say as a castle , so that Vasiliagorod is to say , Vasilius castle : and it was the furthest place that the said Emperor conquered from the Tartars . But this present Emperor his son , called Ivan Vasiliwich , hath had great good success in his wars , both against the Christians and also the Mahometists and Gentiles , but especially against the Tartars , enlarging his Empire even to the Caspian sea , having conquered the famous river of Volga , with all the countries thereabouts adjacent . Thus proceeding on our journey the 25. day of May aforesaid , we came to another castle called Sabowshare , which we 
 45° 
 left on our right hand , distant from Vasiliagorod 16. leagues . The country hereabout is called Mordovits , and the habitants did profess the law of the Gentiles : but now being conquered by this Emperor of Russia , most of them are christened , but lie in the woods and wilderness , without town or habitation . 
 The 27. day we passed by another castle called Swyasko , distant from Shabowshare aforesaid 25. leagues : we left it on our right hand , and the 29. came unto and Island one league from the city of Cazan , from Cazan . which falls down a river called Cazanka reca , & entereth into the foresaid Volga . Cazan is a fair town after the Russe or Tartar fashion , with a strong castle , situated upon a high hill , and was walled round about with timber & earth , but now the Emperor of Russia hath given order to pluck down the old walls , and to build them again of free stone . It hath be a city of great wealth and riches , and being in the hands of the Tartars it was a kingdom of it self , and did more vex the Russes in their wars , then any other nation : but 9. years past , this Emperor of Russia conquered it , and took the king captive , who being but young is now baptised , and brought up in his court with two other princes , which were also kings of the said Cazan , and being each of them in time of their reigns in danger of their subject's through civil discord , came and rendered themselves at several times unto the said Emperor , so that at this present there are three princes in the court of Russia , which had be Emperors of the said Cazan , whom the Emperor uses with great honour . 
 We remained at Cazan till the 13. day of June , and then departed from thence : and the same day passed by and Island called the Island of merchant's , because it was The Island of wont to be a place where all merchant's , as well Russes merchants . and Cazanites , as Nagayans and Crimmes , and diverse other nations did resort to keep mars for buying and selling , but now it is forsaken , and stands without 
 451 
 Hordes . 
 any such resort thither , or at Cazan , or at any place about it , from Mosco unto Mare Caspium . 
 Thus proceeding forward the 14. day , we passed by a goodly river called Cama , which we left on our left hand . This river falls out of the country of Permia into the river of Volga , and is from Cazan 15. leagues : and the country lying betwixt the said Cazan and the said river Cama on the left hand of Volga is called Vachen , and the inhabitants be Gentiles , and live in the wilderness without house or habitation : and the country on the other side of Volga over against the said river Cama is called the land of Cheremizes , half Gentiles , half Tartars , and all the land on the left hand of the said Volga from the said river unto Astracan , and so following the North and Northeast side of the Caspian sea , to a land of the Tartars called Turkemen , is called the country of Mangat or Nagay , whose inhabitants are of the law of Mahomet , and were all destroyed in the year 1558 , at my being at Astracan , through civil wars among them , accompanied with famine , pestilence , and such plagues , in such sort that in the said year there were consumed of the people , in one sort and another , above one hundred thousand : the like plague was never seen in those parts , so that the said country of Nagay being a country of great pasture , remains now unreplenished to the great contentation of the Russes , who have had cruel wars a long time together . 
 The Nagayans when they flourished , lived in this manner : they were divided into diverse companies called Hordes , and every Hord had a ruler , whom they obeyed as their king , and was called a Murse . Town or house they had none , but lived in the open fields , every Murse or King having his Hordes or people about him , with their wives , children and cattle , who having consumed the pasture in one place , removed unto another : and when they remove they have houses like tents set upon wagons or carts , which are drawn 
 45 2 
 from place to place with camels , & therein their wives , children , and all their riches , which is very little , is carried about , and every man hath at the least foure or five wives beside concubines . Use of money they have none , but doe barter their cattle for apparel and other necessaries . They delight in no art nor science , except the wars , wherein they are expert , but for the most part they be pasturing people , and have great store of cattle , which is all their riches . They eat much flesh , and especially the horse , and they drink mares milk , wherewith they be oftentimes drunk : they are seditious & inclined to theft and murder . Corn they sow not , neither do eat any bred , mocking the Christians for the same , and disabling our strengths , saying we live by eating the top of a weed , and drink a drink made of the same , allowing their great devouring of flesh , and drinking of milk to be the increase of their strength . But now to proceed forward to my journey . 
 All the country upon our right hand the river Volga , from over against the river Cama unto the town of Astracan , is the land of Crimme , whose inhabitants be The Crimme also of the law of Mahomet , and live for the most part Tartars . according to the fashions of the Nagayes , having continual wars with the Emperor of Russia , and are valiant in the field , having countenance , and support from the great Turke . 
 The 16. day of June we passed by certain fishermen's houses called Petowse twenty leagues from the river Cama , where is great fishing for sturgeon , so continuing our way until the 22. day , and passing by another great river called Samar , which falls out of the afore - The river of said country , and runneth through Nagay , and entereth Samar-into the said river of Volga . The 28. day we came unto a great hill , where was in times passed a castle made by the Crimmes , but now it is ruined , being the just midway between the said Cazan and Astrachan , which is 200. leagues or thereabouts , in the latitude of 51. 
 453 
 Astracan . 
 degrees 47. minutes . Upon all this shore grows abundance of Licoris , whose root runneth within the ground like a vine . 
 Thus going forward the sixt day of July we came to a place called Perovolog , so nam because in times passed the Tartars carried their boats from Volga unto the river Tanais , otherwise called DONE , by land , when they would rob such as passed down the said Volga to Astracan , and also such as passed down by the river Tanais , to Asou , Caffa , or any other town situated upon Mare Euxinum , into which sea Tanais falls , who hath his springs in the country of Rezan , out of a plain ground . It is at this straight of Perovolog from the one river to the other two leagues by land , and is a dangerous place for thieves and robbers , but now it is not so evil ! as it hath be , by reason of the Emperor of Russia his conquests . 
 Departing from Perovolog , having the wilderness on both sides , we saw a great herd of Nagayans , pasturing , as is abovesaid , by estimation above a thousand Camels drawing of carts with houses upon them like tents , of a strange fashion , seeming to be a far off a town : that Hord was belonging to a great Murse called Smille , the greatest prince in all Nagay , who hath slain and driven away all the rest , not sparing his own brothers and children , and having peace with this Emperor of Russia he hath what he needs , and ruleth alone : so that now the Russes live in peace with the Nagayans , who were wont to have mortali wars together . 
 The 14. day of July passing by and old castle , which was Old Astracan , and leaving it upon our right hand , we arrived at New Astracan , which this Emperor of Russia conquered sixe years past , in the year 1552. It is from the Mosco unto Astracan sixe hundreth leagues , or thereabouts . The town of Astracan is situated in and Island upon a hill side , having a castle within the same , walled about with earth and timber , 
 454 
 neither fair nor strong : The town is also walled about with earth : the buildings and houses ( except it be the captains lodging , and certain other gentlemens ) most base and simple . The Island is most destitute and barren of wood and pasture , and the ' ground will bear no corn : the air is there most infected , by reason ( as I suppose ) of much fish , and specially Sturgeon , by Store of Stur-which only the inhabitants live , having great scarcity & ms ' of flesh and bred . They hang up their fish in their streets and houses to dry for their provision , which causeth such abundance of flies to increase there , as the like was never seen in any land , to their great plague . 
 And at my being at the said Astracan , there was a great famine and plague among the people , and specially among the Tartars called Nagayans , who the same time came thither in great numbers to render themselves to the Russes their enemies , & to seek succour at their hands , their country being destroyed , as I said before : but they were but ill entertained or relieved , for there died a great number of them for hunger , which lay all the Island through in heaps dead , and like to beasts unburied , very pitiful to behold : many of them were also sold by the Russes , and the rest were banished from the Island . At that time it had be and easy thing to have converted that wicked Nation to the Christian faith , if the Russes themselves had be good Christians : but how should they show compassion unto other Nations , when they are not merciful ! unto their own ? At my being there I could have bought many goodly Tartars children , if I would have had a thousand , of their own father's and mother's , to say , a boy or a wench for a loaf of bred worth sixe pence in England , but we had more need of victuals at that time then of any such merchandise . This Astracan is the furthest hold that this Emperor of Russia hath conquered of the Tartars towards the Caspian sea , which he keepeth very strong , sending thither every year provision of men , and victuals , and timber to built the castle . 
 455 
 The length of the Island of Astracan . 
 They enter into the Caspian sea . 
 There is a certain trade of merchandise there used , but as yet so small and beggarly , that it is not worth the making mention , and yet there come merchant's thither from diverse places . The chiefest commodities that the Russes bring thither are red hides , red sheeps skins , wooden vessels , bridles , and saddles , knives , and other trifles , with corn , bacon , and other victuals . The Tartars bring thither diverse kinds of wares made of cotton wool , with diverse kinds of wrought silks : and they that come out of Persia , namely from Shamacki do bring sowing silk , which is the coursest that they use in Russeland , Crasko , diverse kinds of pide silks for girdles , shirts of male , bows , swords , and such like things : and some years corn , and walnuts , but all such things in such small quantity , the merchant's being so beggarly and poor that bring the same , that it is not worth the writing , neither is there any hope of trade in all those parts worth the following . 
 This foresaid Island of Astracan is in length twelve leagues , and in breadth three , & lies East and West in the latitude of fortie seven degrees , nine minutes : we tarried there until the sixt day of August , and having bought and provided a boat in company with certain Tartars and Persians , we jaded our goods and embarked our selves , and the same day departed I , with the said two Johnsons having the whole charge of the Navigation down the said river Volga , being very crooked , and full of flats towards the mouth thereof . We entered into the Caspian sea the tenth day of August at the Easterly side of the said river , being twentie leagues from Astracan aforesaid , in the latitude of fortie six degrees , twentie seven minutes . 
 Volga hath seventie mouths or falls into the sea : and we having a large wind , kept the Northeast shore , and the eleventh day we sailed seven leagues Eastnortheast , and came unto and Island having and high hill therein , called Accurgar , a good mark in the sea . 
 456 
 From thence East tenne leagues , we fell with another Island called Bawhiata , much higher then the other . Within these two Islands to the Northwards , is a great Bay called the Blue sea . From thence we sailed East The blue sea . and by North ten leagues , and having a contrary wind , we came to and anchor in a fathom water , and so rid until the fifteenth day , having a great storm at Southeast , being a most contrary wind , which we rid out . Then the wind came to the North , and we weighed , and set our course Southeast , and that day sailed eight leagues . 
 Thus proceeding forward , the 17. day we lost sighed of land , and the same day sailed thirtie leagues , and the 18. day twentie leagues winding East , and fell with a land called Baughleata , being 74. leagues from the Taughkata mouth of the said Volga , in the latitude of 46. degrees 7+54 . minutes , the coast lying nearest East and by South , J and West and by North . At the point of this land lies buried a holy Prophet , as the Tartars call him , of their law , where great devotion is used of all such Maho-metists as doe pass that way . 
 The nineteenth day the wind being West , and we winding Eastsoutheast , we sailed tenne leagues , and passed by a great river called laic , which hath his spring laic river . in the land of Siberia , nigh unto the foresaid river Cama , and runneth through the land of Nagay , falling into this Mare Caspium . And up this river one days journey is a Town called Serachick , subject to the Serachick . aforesaid Tartar prince called Murse Smille , which is now in friendship with the Emperor of Russia . Here is no trade of merchandise used , for that the people have no use of money , and are all men of war , and pasturers of cattle , and given much to theft and murder . Thus being at and anchor against this river laic , and all our men being on land , saving I , who lay soar sick , and five Tartars , whereof one was reputed a holy man , because he came from Mecka , there came unto us a boat with thirtie men well armed and appointed , who boarded us , and began to enter into our bark , and our holy 
 457 
 Tartar called Azy , perceiving that , asked them what they would have , and withal made a prayer : with that these rovers stayed , declaring that they were Gentlemen , banished from their country , and out of living , & came to see if there were any Russes or other Christians ( which they call Caphars ) in our bark ? To whom this Azi most stoutly answered , that there were none , avowing the same by great oaths of their law , ( which lightly they will not break ) whom the rovers believed , and upon his words departed . And so through the fidelity of that Tartar , I with all my company and goods were saved , and our men being come on board , and the wind fair , we departed from that place , and winding East and Southeast , that day being the 20. of August sailed 16. leagues . 
 The 21. day we passed over a Bay of 6. leagues broad , and fell with a Cape of land , having two Islands at the Southeast part thereof , being a good mark in the sea : & doubling that Cape the land trended Northeast , and makes another Bay , into which falls the great river The Country Yem , springing out of the land of Colmack . of Colmack . The 22. 23. and 24. days , we were at and anchor . 
 The 25. the wind came fair , and we sailed that day 20. leagues , and passed by and Island of low land , and there about are many flats and sands : and to the Northward of this Island there goes in a great Bay , but we set off from this Island , and winded South to come into deep water , being much troubled with shoalds & flats , and ran that course 10. leagues , then East Southeast 20. leagues , and fell with the main land , being full of copped hills , and passing along the coast 20. leagues , the further we sailed , the higher was the land . 
 The 27. day we crossed over a Bay , the South shore being the higher land , and fell with a high point of land : & being overthwart the Cape , there rose such a storm at the East , that we thought verily we should have perished : this storm continued 3. days . From 458 
 1558. this Cape we passed to a port called Manguslave . The The port of place where we should have arrived at the Southermost Manguslave . part of the Caspian sea , is 12. leagues within a Bay : but we being soar tormented and tossed with this foresaid storm , were driven unto another land on you other side the Bay , overthwart the said Manguslave being very low land , and a place as well for the ill commodity of the haven , as of those brutus field people , where never bark nor boat had before arrived , not liked of us . 
 But yet here we sent certain of our men to land to talk with the governor and people , as well for our good usage at their hands , as also for provision of camels to carry our goods from the said sea side to a place called Sellyzure , being from the place of our landing five and twentie days journey . Our messengers returned with comfortable words and fair promises of all things . 
 Wherefore the 3. day of September 1558. we dis - They go on charged our bark , and I with my company were gently entertained of the Prince & of his people . But before our departure from thence , we found them to be very bad and brutish people , for they ceased not daily to molest us , either by fighting , stealing or begging , raising the prize of horse and camels , & victuals , double that it was wont there to be , and forced us to buy the water that we did drink : which caused us to hasten away , and to conclude with them as well for the hire of camels , as for the prize of such as we bought , with other provision , according to their own demand : So that for every camels lading , being but 400. weight of ours , we agreed to give three hides of Russia , and foure wooden dishes , and to the Prince or governor of the said people , one ninth , and two sevenths : Namely , nine several ! things , and twice seven several things : for money they use none . 
 And thus being ready , the foureteenth of September we departed from that place , being a Caravan of a 
 459 
 thousand camels . And having travailed five days journey , we came to another Princes Dominion , and upon the way there came unto us certain Tartars on horseback , being well armed , and servants unto the said Prince called Timor Sultan , governor of the said country of Manguslave , where we meant to have arrived and discharged our bark , if the great storm aforesaid had not disappointed . These aforesaid Tartars stayed our Caravan in the name of their Prince , and opened our wares , and took such things as they thought best for their said prince without money , but for such things as they took from me , which was a ninth ( after much dissension ) I rid unto the same Prince , and presented my self before him , requesting his favour , and passport to travail through his country , and not to be robbed nor spoiled of his people : which request he granted me , and entertained me very gently , commanding me to be well feasted with flesh and mares milk : for bred they use none , nor other drink except water : but money he had none to give me for such things as he took of me , which might be of valve in Russe money , fifteene rubbles , but he gave me his letter , and a horse worth seven rubbles . And so I departed from him being glad that I was gone : for he was reported to be a very tyrant , and if I had not gone unto him , I understood his commandment was , that I should have been robbed and destroyed . 
 This Sultan lived in the fields without Castle or town , and sat , at my being with him , in a little round house made of redes covered without with felt , and within with Carpets . There was with him the great Metropolitan of that wild Country , esteemed of the people , as the Bishop of Rome is in most parts of Europe , with diverse other of his chief men . The Sultan with this Metropolitan demanded of me many questions , as well touching our kingdoms , laws , and Religion , as also the cause of my coming into those parts , with my further pretence . To whom I answered 460 
 concerning all things , as unto me seemed best , which they took in good part . So having leave I departed and overtook our Caravan , and proceeded on our journey , and travailed 20. days in the wilderness from the sea side without seeing town or habitation , carrying provision of victuals with us for the same time , and were driven by necessity to eat one of my camels and a horse for our part , as othei* did the like : and during the said 20. days we found no water , but such as we drew out of old deep wells , being very brackish and salt , and yet sometime passed two or three days without the same . And the 5. day of October ensuing , we came unto a gulf of the Caspian sea again , where we found the water very fresh and sweet : at this gulf the customers of the king of Turkeman met us , who took custom of every 25. one , and 7. ninths for the said king and his brothers , which being received they departed , and we remained there a day after to refresh our selves . 
 20 days travail in the wilderness , with scarcity of water . 
 Another gulf of the Caspian sea . 
 Note that in times passed there did fall into this gulf the great river Oxus , which hath his springs in the mountains of Paraponisus in India , & now comes not so far , but falls into another river called Ardock , ill-de which runneth towards the North , & consumeth himself , cribeththis in the ground passing under ground above 500. miles , river of and then issueth out again and falls into the lake Ardok , cap . 4. of Kithay . 
 We having refreshed our selves at the foresaid gulf , departed thence the 4. day of October , and the seventh day arrived at a castle called Sellizure , where you king SelRzure , or called Azim Can , remained with 3. other of his brothers , ha^ure-and the 9. day I was commanded to come before his presence , to whom I delivered the Emperor's letters of Russia : and I also gave him a present of a ninth , who entertained me very well , and caused me to eat in his presence as his brothers did , feasting me with flesh of a wild horse , and mares milk without bred . And the next day he sent for me again , and asked of me diverse 
 461 
 Urgence . 
 questions , as well touching the affairs of the Emperor of Russia , as of our country and laws , to which I answered as I thought good : so that at my departure he gave me his letters of safe conduct . 
 This Castle of Sellizure is situated upon and high hill , where the King called the Can lies , whose palace is built of earth very basely , and not strong : the people are but poor , and have little trade of merchandise among them . The South part of this Castle is low land , but very fruitful , where grow many good fruits , among which there is one called a Dynie , of a great bigness and full of moisture , which the people do eat after meat in stead of drink . Also there grows another fruit called a Carbuse of the bigness of a great cucumber , yellow and sweet as sugar : also a certain corn called legur , whose stalk is much like a sugar cane , and as high , and the grain like rice , which grows at the top of the cane like a cluster of grapes ; the water that serves all that country is drawn by ditches out of the river Oxus , unto the great destruction of the said river , for which cause it falls not into the Caspian sea as it hath done in times past , and in short time all that land is like to be destroyed , and to become a wilderness for want of water , when the river of Oxus shall fail . 
 The 14. day of the month we departed from this Castle of Sellizure , and the 16. of the same we arrived at a city called Urgence , where we paid custom as well for our own heads , as for our camels and horses . And having there sojourned one month , attending the time of our further travail , the king of that country called Aly Sultan , brother to the forenamed Azym Can , returned from a town called Corasan , within the borders of Persia , which he lately had conquered from the Persians , with whom he and the rest of the kings of Tartaria have continual wars . Before this king also I was commanded to come , to whom I likewise presented the Emperor's letters of Russia , and he entertained 
 462 
 me well , and demanded of me diverse questions , and at my departure gave me his letters of safeconduct . 
 This city or town of Urgence stands in a plain ground , with walls of the earth , by estimation 4. miles about it . The buildings within it are also of earth , but ruined and out of good order : it hath one long street that is covered above , which is the place of their market . It hath be won and lost 4. times within 7. years by civil wars , by means whereof there are but few merchant's in it , and they very poor , and in all that town I could not fell above 4. kerseis . The chiefest commodities there sold are such wares as come from Boghar , and out of Persia , but in most small quantity not worth the writing . All the land from the Caspian sea to this City of Urgence is called the land of Turkeman , & is subject to the said Azim Can , and his brothers which be five in number , and one of them hath the name of the chief king called Can , but he is little obeyed saving in his own Dominion , and where he dwells : for every one will be King of his own portion , and one brother seeks always to destroy another , having no natural love among them , by reason that they are begotten of diverse women , and commonly they are the children of slaves , either Christians or Gentiles , which the father doth keep as concubines , and every Can or Sultan hath at the least 4. or 5. wives , beside young maidens and boys , living most viciously : and when there are wars betwixt these brothers , ( as they are seidome without ) he that is overcome if he be not slain , flies to the field with such company of men as will follow him , and there lives in the wilderness resorting to watering places , and so robbeth and spoileth as many Caravans of Merchants and others as they be able to overcome , continuing in this sort his wicked life , until such time as he may get power and aid to invade some of his brothers again . From the Caspian sea unto the Castle of Sellizure aforesaid , and all the Countries about the said Sea , the people live without 
 463 
 The country of Turkoman . 
 town or habitation in the wild fields , removing from one place to another in great companies with their cattle , whereof they have great store , as camels , horses , and sheep both tame and wild . Their sheep are of great stature with great buttocks , weighing 60. or 80. pound in weight . There are many wild horses which the Tartars do many times kill with their hawks , and that in this order . 
 The hawks are lured to seize upon the beasts necks or heads , which with chafing of themselves and soar beating of the hawks are tired : then the hunter following his game doth slay the horse with his arrow or sword . In all this land there grows no grass , but a certain brush or heath , whereon the cattle feeding become very fat . 
 The Tartars never ride without their bow , arrows , and sword , although it be on hawking , or at any other pleasure , and they are good archers both on horseback , and on foot also . These people have not the use of gold , silver , or any other coin , but when they lack apparel or other necessaries , they barter their cattle for the same . Bred they have none , for they neither till nor sow : they be great devourers of flesh , which they cut in small pieces , & eat it by handfuls most greedily , & especially the horseflesh . Their chiefest drink is mares milk soured , as I have said before of the Nagayans , & they will drunk with the same . They have no rivers nor places of water in this country , until you come to the foresaid gulf , distant from the place of our landing 20. days journey , except it be in wells , the water whereof is saltish , & yet distant the one from the other two days journey and more . They eat their meat upon the ground , sitting with their legs double under them , and so also when they pray . Art or science they have none , but live most idly , sitting round in great companies in the fields , devising , and talking most vainly . 
 The 26. day of November , we departed from the 464 
 town of Urgence , and having travailed by the river Oxus , too . mile , we passed over another great river called Ardock , where we paid a certain petty custom . 
 This river Ardock is great , and very swift , falling out of nuum of the foresaid Oxus , and passing about 1000. mile to the rtirjckfalleth Northward , it then consumeth it self in the ground , a ‘ and passing under the same about 500. mile , issueth out again , and falls into the lake of Kitay , as I have before declared . 
 The 7. of December following , we arrived at a Castle The castle of called Kait , subject to a Sultan called Saramet Sultan , Ka , tl who meant to have robbed all the Christians in the Caravan , had it not be for fear of his brother the king of Urgence , as we were informed by one of his chiefest counsellors , who willed us to make him a present , which he took , and delivered : beside , we paid at the said castle for custom , of every camel one read hide of Russia , beside petty gifts to his officers . 
 Thus proceeding in our journey , the tenth day at night being at rest , and our watch set , there came unto us foure horsemen , which we took as spies , from whom we took their weapons and bound them , and having well examined them , they confessed that they had seen the tract of many horsemen , and no footing of camels , & gave us to understand , that there were rovers and thieves abroad : for there travail few people that are true and peaceable in that Country , but in company of Caravan , where there be many camels : and horse-feeting new without camels were to be doubted . Whereupon we consulted & determined among our selves , and sent a post to the said Sultan of Kayte , who immediately came himself with 300. men , and met these foure suspected men which we sent unto him , and examined them so streightly , and threatened them in such sort , that they confessed , there was a banished Prince with 40. men 3. days journey forward , who lay in wait to destroy us , if he could , and that they themselves were of his company . 
 n 465 2 G 
 The Sultan therefore understanding , that the thieves were not many , appointed us 80. men well armed with a Captain to go with us , and conduct us in our way . And the Sultan himself returned back again , taking the foure thieves with him . These soldiers travailed with us two days , consuming much of our victuals . And the 3. day in the morning very early they set out before our Caravan , and having ranged the wilderness for the space of foure hours , they met us , coming towards us as fast as their horse could run , and declared that they had found the tract of horses not far from us , perceiving well that we should meet with enemies , and therefore willed us to appoint our selves for them , and asked us what we would give them to conduct us further , or else they would return . To whom we offered as we thought good , but they refused our offer , and would have more , and so we not agreeing they departed from us , and went back to their Sultan , who ( as we conjectured ) was privy to the conspiracy . Divination by But they being gone , certain Tartars of our company sorcene . called holy men , ( because they had be at Mecha ) caused the whole Caravan to stay , and would make their prayers , and divine how we should prosper in our journey and whither we should meet with any ill company or no ? To which , our whole Caravan did agree . And they took certain sheep and killed them , and took the blade bones of the same , and first sod them , and then burned them , and took of the blood of the said sheep , and mingled it with the powder of the said bones , and wrote certain Characters with the said blood , using many other ceremonies and words , and by the same divined and found , that we should meet with enemies and thieves ( to our great trouble ) but should overcome them , to which sorcery , I and my company gave no credit , but we found it true : for within 3. hours after that the soldiers departed from us , which was the 15. day of December , in the morning , we escried far off diverse horsemen which made towards us , and we ( per-466 
 ceiving them to be rovers ) gathered our selves together , being 40. of us well appointed , and able to fight , and we made our prayers together every one after his law , professing to live and die one with another , and so prepared our selves . When the thieves were nigh unto us , we perceived them to be in number 37. men well armed , and appointed with bows , arrows and swords , and the captain a prince banished from his Country . They willed us to yield our selves , or else to be slain , but we defied them , wherewith they shot at us all at once , and we at them very hotly , and so continued our fight from morning until two hours within night , diverse men , horses and camels being wounded and slain on both parts : and had it not be for 4. handgunnes which I and my company had and used , we had be overcome and destroyed : for the thieves were better armed , and were also better archers then we ; But after we had slain diverse of their men and horses with our guns , they durst not approach so nigh , which caused them to come to a truce with us until the next morning , which we accepted , and encamped our selves upon a hill , and made the fashion of a Castle , walling it about with packs of wares , and laid our horses and camels within the same to save them from the shot of arrows : and the thieves also encamped within and arrow shot of us , but they were betwixt us and the water , which was to our great discomfort , because neither we nor our camels had drunk in 2. days before . 
 Thus keeping good watch , when half the night was spent , the Prince of the thieves sent a messenger half way unto us , requiring to talk with our Captain , in their tongue , the Caravan Basham , who answered the messenger , I will not depart from my company to go into the half way to talk with thee : but if that thy Prince with all his company will swear by our Law to keep the truce , then will I send a man to talk with thee , or else not . Which the Prince understanding as well himself as his company , swore so loud that 467 
 Handguns very profitable . 
 we might all hear . And then we sent one of our company ( reputed a holy man ) to talk with the same messenger . The message was pronounced aloud in this order , Our Prince demandeth of the Caravan Basham , Bussarmans . and of all you that be Bussarmans , ( that is to say cir - cumcised ) not desiring your bloods , that you deliver Caphar . into his hands as many Caphars , that is , unbelievers 
 ( meaning us the Christians ) as are among you with their goods , and in so doing , he will suffer you to depart with your goods in quietness , and on the contrary , you shall be handled with no less cruelty then the Caphars , if he overcome you , as he doubteth not . To the which our Caravan Basham answered , that he had not Christians in his company , nor other strangers , but two Turks which were of their Law , and although he had , he would rather die then deliver them , and that we were not afraid of his threatenings , and that should he know when day appeared . And so passing in talk , the thieves ( contrary to their other ) carried our holy man away to their Prince , crying with a loud voice in token of victory , Olio , olio . Wherewith we were much discomforted , fearing that that holy man would betray us : but he being cruelly handled and much examined , would not to death confess any thing which was to us prejudicial ! , neither touching us , nor yet what men they had slain and wounded of ours the day before . When the night was spent , in the morning we prepared our selves to battle again : which the thieves perceiving , required to fallen to agreement 8c asked much of us : And to be brief , the most part of our company being loath to go to battle again , and having little to lose , 8c safeconduct to pass , we were compelled to agree , and to give the thieves 20 ninths ( that is to say ) 20 times 9 several things , and a camel to carry away the same , which being received , the thieves departed into the wilderness to their old habitation , and we went on our way forward . And The river of that night came to the river Oxus , where we refreshed Qxus . our seiveSj having be 3. days without water and 
 468 
 drink , and tarried there all the next day , making merry with our slain horses and camels , and then departed from that place , & for fear of meeting with the said thieves again or such like , we left the high way which went along the said river , and passed through a wilderness wilderness of sand , and traveled 4 days in the same before we °fsande-came to water : and then came to a well , the water being very brackish , and we then as before were in need of water , and of other victuals , being forced to kill our horses and camels to eat . 
 In this wilderness also we had almost fallen into the hands of thieves : for one night being at rest , there came certain scouts , and carried away certain of our men which lay a little separated from the Caravan , wherewith there was a great shout and cry , and we immediately jaded our camels , and departed being about midnight and very dark , and drove soar till we came to the river Oxus again , and then we feared nothing being walled with the said river : & whither it was for that we had got the water , or for that the same thieves were far from us when the scouts discovered us , we know not , but we escaped that danger . 
 So upon the 23 day of December we arrived at Bokhara Me the city of Boghar in the land of Bactria . This Boghar is situated in the lowest part of all the land , walled about with a high wall of earth , with diverse gates into the same : it is divided into 3 partitions , whereof two parts are the kings , and the 3 part is for Merchants and markets , and every science hath their dwelling and market by themselves . The City is very great , and the houses for the most part of earth , but there are also many houses , temples and monuments of stone sumptuously built , and gilded , and specially bathstoves so artificially built , that the like thereof is not in the world : the manner whereof is too long to rehearse . There is a little river running through the midst of the said City , but the water there of is most unwholesome , for it breeds sometime in men that drink thereof , and 
 469 
 A strange especially in them that be not there born , a worm of and wormemmens ep long5 which lies commonly in the leg betwixt the GOD'S flesh and the skin , and is plucked out about the ankle with great art and cunning , the Surgeons being much practised therein , and if she break in plucking out , the party dieth , and every day she comes out about and inch , which is rolled up , and so works till she be all out . And yet it is there forbidden to drink any other thing then water , & mares milk , and whosoever is found to break that law is whipped and beaten most cruelly through the open markets , and there are officers appointed for the same , who have authority to go into any men house , to search if he have either Aquavitae , wine , or brage , and finding the same , do break the vessels , spoil the drink , and punish the master's of the house most cruelly , yea , and many times if they perceive but by the breath of a man that he hath drunk , without further examination he shall not escape their hands . 
 There is a Metropolitan in this Boghar , who causeth this law to be so streightly kept : and he is more obeyed then the king , and will depose the king , and place another at his will and pleasure , as he did by this king that reigned at our being there , and his predecessor , by the means of the said Metropolitan : for he betrayed him , and in the night slew him in his chamber , who was a Prince that loved all Christians well . 
 This Country of Boghar was sometime subject to the Persians , & do now speak the Persian tongue , but yet now it is a kingdom of it self , and hath most cruel wars continually with the said Persians about their religion , although they be all Mahometists . One occasion of their wars is , for that the Persians will not cut the hair of their upper lips , as the Bogharians and all other Tartars do , which they account great sin , and call them Caphars , that is , unbelievers , as they do the Christians . 
 The king of Boghar hath no great power or riches , his revenues are but small , and he is most maintained 47° 
 by the City : for he takes the tenth penny of all things that are there sold , as well by the craftsmen as by the merchants , to the great impoverishment of the people , whom he keepeth in great subjection , and when he lacketh money , he sends his officers to the shops of the said Merchants to take their wares to pay his debts , and will have credit of force , as the like he did to pay me certain money that he owed me for 19 pieces of Kersey . Their T& °f money is silver and copper , for gold there is none BoSl , ar-currant : they have but one piece of silver , & that is worth 12 pence English , and the copper money are called Pools , and 120 of them goes the valve of the said 12. pence , and is more common payment then the silver , which the king causeth to rise and fallen to his most advantage every other month , and sometime twice a month , not caring to oppress his people , for that he looketh not to reign above 2 or 3 years before he be either slain or driven away , to the great destruction of the country and merchant's . 
 The 26 day of the month I was commanded to come before the said king , to whom I presented the Emperor of Russia his letters , who entertained us most gently , and caused us to eat in his presence , and diverse times he sent for me , and devised with me familiarly in his secret chamber , as well of the power of the Emperor , and the great Turke , as also of our countries , laws , and religion , and caused us to shoot in handguns before him , and did himself practise the use thereof . But after all this great entertainment before my departure he showed himself a very Tartar : for he went to the wars owing me money , and saw me not paid before his departure . And although indeed he gave order for the same , yet was I very ill satisfied , and forced to rebate part , and to take wares as payment for the rest contrary to my expectation : but of a beggar better payment I could not have , and glad I was so to be paid and dispatched . 
 But yet I must needs praise & commend this barbarous king , who immediately after my arrival at Boghar , 
 471 
 having understood our trouble with the thieves , sent 100 men well armed , and gave them great charge not to return before they had either slain or taken the said thieves . Who according to their commission ranged the wilderness in such sort , that they met with the said company of thieves , and slew part , and part fled , and foure they took and brought unto the king , and two of them were soar wounded in our skirmish with our guns : And after the king had sent for me to come to see them , he caused them all 4 to be hanged at his palace gate , because they were Gentlemen , to the example of others . And of such goods as were got again , I had part restored me , and this good justice I found at his hands . 
 There is yearly great resort of Merchants to this City of Boghar , which travail in great Caravans from the countries thereabouts adjoining , as India , Persia , Balgh , Russia , with diverse others , and in times passed from Cathay , when there was passage : but these Merchants are so beggarly and poor , and bring so little quantity of wares , lying two or 3 years to fell the same , that there is no hope of any good trade there to be had worthy the following . 
 The chief commodities that are brought thither out of these foresaid Countries' , are these following . 
 The Indians do bring fine whites , which the Tartars do all roll about their heads , & all other kinds of whites , which serve for apparel made of coton wool and crasko , but gold , silver , precious stones , and spices they bring none . I inquired and perceived that all such trade passes to the Ocean sea , and the veins where all such things are got are in the subjection of the Portingals . The Indians carry from Boghar again wrought silks , read hides , slaves , and horses , with such like , but of Kerseis and other cloth , they make little account . I offered to barter with Merchants of those Countries , which came from the furthest parts of India , even from the country of Bengala , & the river Ganges , to give 
 472 
 1558. them Kersies for their commodities , but they would not barter for such commodity as cloth . 
 The Persians do bring thither Craska , woollen cloth , Merchandise linen cloth , diverse kinds of wrought pide silks , Argo-macks , with such like , and do carry from thence red hides with other Russe wares , and slaves , which are of diverse countries , but cloth they will by none , for that they bring thither themselves , and is brought unto them as I have inquired from Aleppo in Syria , and the parts of Turkey . The Russes do carry unto Boghar , red Marchaudiu hides , sheepeskinnes , woollen cloth of diverse sorts , °fRussia ' wooden vessels , bridles , saddles , with such like , and do carry away from thence diverse kinds of wares made of cotton wool , diverse kinds of silks , Crasca , with other things , but there is but small utterance . From the Countries of Cathay are brought thither in Merchandise time of peace , and when the way is open , musk , rubarbe , of Cathay . satin , damask , with diverse other things . At my being at Boghar , there came Caravans out of all these foresaid Countries , except from Cathay : and the cause why there came none from thence was the great wars that had dured 3 years before my coming thither , and yet dured betwixt 2 great Countries & cities of Tartars , that are directly in the way betwixt the said Boghar and the said Cathay , and certain barbarous field people , as well Gentiles as Mahometists bordering to the said Cities . The cities are called Taskent and Caskar , and the people that war against Taskent & Taskent are called Cassaks of the law of Mahomet : Cascar-and they which war with the said country of Caskar are called Kings , Gentiles & idolaters . These 2 barbarous nations are of great force living in the fields without house or town , & have almost subdued the foresaid cities , & so stopped up the way , that it is impossible for any Caravan to pass unspoiled : so that 3 years before our being there , no Caravan had gone , or used trade betwixt the countries of Cathay and Boghar , and when the way is clear , it is 9 months journey . 
 473 
 He returns the eight of March 1559. 
 To speak of the said country of Cathay , and of such news as I have herd thereof , I have thought it best to reserve it to our meeting . I having made my solace at Boghar in the Winter time , and having learned by much inquisition , the trade thereof , as also of all the other countries thereto adjoining , and the time of the year being come , for all Caravans to depart , and also the king being gone to the wars , and news come that he was fled , and I advertised by the Metropolitan himself , that I should depart , because the town was like to be besieged : I thought it good and meet , to take my journey some way , and determined to have gone from thence into Persia , and to have seen the trade of that country , although I had informed my self sufficiently thereof , as well at Astracan , as at Boghar : and perceived well the trades not to be much unlike the trades of Tartaria : but when I should have taken my journey that way , it was let by diverse occasions : the one was , the great wars that did newly begin betwixt the Sophy , and the kings of Tartaria , whereby the ways were destroyed : and there was a Caravan destroyed with rovers & thieves , which came out of India and Persia , by safe conduct : and about ten days journey from Boghar , they were robbed , and a great part slain . Also the Metropolitan of Boghar , who is greater then the king , took the Emperor's letters of Russia from me , without which I should have be taken slave in every place : also all such wares as I had received in barter for cloth , and as I took perforce of the king , & other his Nobles , in payment of money due unto me , were not vendible in Persia : for which causes , and diverse others , I was constrained to come back again to Mare Caspium , the same way I went : so that the eight of March 1559 , we departed out of the said City of Boghar , being a Caravan of 600 Camels : and if we had not departed when we did , I and my company had be in danger to have lost life and goods . For ten days after our departure , the king of Samarcand came 
 474 
 with and army , & besieged the said City of Boghar , the king being absent , and gone to the wars against another prince , his kinsman , as the like chanceth in those Countries once in two or three years . For it is marvel , if a King reign there above three or foure years , to the great destruction of the Country , and merchants . 
 The 25 of March , we came to the foresaid town of Urgence , and escaped the danger of 400 rovers , which Urgence . lay in wait for us back again , being the most of them of kindred to that company of thieves , which we met with going forth , as we perceived by foure spies , which were taken . There were in my company , and committed to my charge , two ambassadors , the one from the king of Boghar , the other from the king of Balk , king of 
 and were sent unto the Emperor of Russia . And after °r having tarried at Urgence , and the Castle of Sellysure , ag ' eight days for the assembling , and making ready of our Caravan , the second of Aprill we departed from thence , having foure more Ambassadors in our company , sent from the king of Urgence , and other Sol tan , his brothers , unto the Emperor of Russia , with answer of such letters as I brought them : and the same Ambassadors were also committed unto my charge by the said Kings and princes : to whom I promised most faithfully , and swore by our law , that they should be well used in Rusland , and suffered to depart from thence again in safety , according as the Emperor had written also in his letters : for they somewhat doubted , because there had none gone out of Tartaria into Russia , of long time before . 
 The 23 of Aprill , we arrived at the Mare Caspium again , where we found our bark which we came in , but neither anchor , cable , cock , nor sail : nevertheless we brought hemp with us , and spun a cable our selves , with the rest of our tackling , and made us a sail of cloth of cotton wool , and rigged our bark as well as we could , but boat or anchor we had none . In the mean time being devising to make and anchor of wood 475 
 of a cart wheel , there arrived a bark , which came from Astracan , with Tartars and Russes , which had 2 anchors , with whom I agreed for the one : and thus being in a readiness , we set sail and departed , I , and the two Johnsons being Master and Mariners our selves , having in our bark the said sixe ambassadors , and 25 Russes , [ I . 334. J which had be slaves a long time in Tartaria , nor ever had before my coming , liberty , or means to get home , and these slaves served to row when need was . Thus sailing sometime along the coast , and sometime out of sighed of land , the 13. day of May , having a contrary wind , we came to and anchor , being three leagues from the shore , & there rose a soar storm , which continued 44. hours , and our cable being of our own spinning , brake , and lost our anchor , and being off a lee shore , and having no boat to help us , we hoised our sail , and bore roomer with the said shore , looking for present death : but as God provided for us , we ran into a creek full of oz , and so saved our selves with our bark , & lived in great discomfort for a time . For although we should have escaped with our lives the danger of the sea , yet if our bark had perished , we knew we should have be , either destroyed , or taken slaves by the people of that Country , who live wildly in the field , like beasts , without house or habitation . Thus when the storm was seized , we went out of the creek again : and having set the land with our Compass , and taken certain marks of the same , during the time of the tempest , whilst we rid at our anchor , we went directly to the place where we rid , with our bark again , and found our anchor which we lost : whereat the Tartars much marveiled , how we did it . While we were in the creek , we made and anchor of wood of cart wheels , which we had in our bark , which we threw away , when we had found our iron anchor again . Within two days after , there arose another great storm , at the Northeast , and we lay a try , being driven far into the sea , and had much ado to keep 
 476 
 1559-our bark from sinking , the billow was so great : but at the last , having fair weather , we took the Sun , and knowing how the land lay from us , we fell with the River Yaik , according to our desire , whereof the Tartars were very glad , fearing that we should have be driven to the coast of Persia , whose people were unto them great enemies . 
 Note , that during the time of our Navigation , we The English set up the red cross of S. George in our flags , for ' 5 honour of the Christians , which I suppose was never p ' seen in the Caspian sea before . We passed in this voyage diverse fortune's : notwithstanding the 28. of May we arrived in safety at Astracan , and there remained till the tenth of June following , as well to prepare us small boats , to go up against the stream of Volga , with our goods , as also for the company of the Ambassadors of Tartarie , committed unto me , to be brought to the presence of the Emperor of Russia . 
 This Caspian sea ( to say some thing of it ) is in length about two hundred leagues , and in breadth 150. without any issue to other seas : to the East part whereof , joineth the great desert country of the Tartars , called Turkemen : to the West , the countries of the Chyr-casses , the mountains of Caucasus , and the Mare Euxinum , which is from the said Caspian Sea a hundred leagues . To the North is the river Volga , and the land of Nagay , and to the South part join the countries' of Media and Persia . This sea is fresh water in many notable deplaces , and in other places as salt as our great Ocean , tcription of thee It hath many goodly Rivers falling into it , and it avoideth Casfian sea-not it self except it be under ground . The notable Rivers that fallen into it , are first the great River of Volga , called in the Tartar tongue Edell , which springs out of a lake in a marrish or plain ground , not far from the City of Novogrode in Russia , and it is from the spring to the Sea , above two thousande English miles . 
 It hath diverse other goodly Rivers falling into it , as out of Siberia , Yaic , and Yem : Also out of the moun-477 
 taines of Caucasus , the Rivers of Cyrus and Arash , and diverse others . 
 As touching the trade of Shamaky in Media and Tebris , with other towns in Persia , I have inquired , and do well understand , that it is even like to the trades of Tartaria , that is little utterance , and small profit : and I have be advertised that the chief trade of Persia is into Syria , and so transported into the Levant sea . The few ships upon the Caspian Seas , the want of Mars and port Towns , the poverty of the people , and the ice , makes that trade nought . 
 At Astracan there were merchant's of Shamaky , with whom I offered to barter , and to give them kersies for their wares , but they would not , saying , they had them as good cheap in their country , as I offered them , which was sixe rubbles for a kersie , that I asked : and while I was at Boghar , there were brought thither out of Persia , Cloth , and diverse commodities of our countries , which were sold as good cheap , as I might fell ours . 
 The tenth day of June , we departed from Astracan towards the Mosco , having and hundred gunners in our company at the Emperor's charges , for the safe conduct of the Tartar Ambassadors and me . And the eight and twentieth day of July following , we arrived at the city of Cazan , having be upon the way from Astracan thither , sixe weeks and more , without any refreshing of victuals : for in all that way there is no habitation . 
 The seventh of August following , we departed from Cazan , and transported our goods by water , as far as the city of Morum , and then by land : so that the second of September , we arrived at the ci tie of Mosco , His arrival at and the fourth day I came before the Emperors September Majesty , kissed his hand , and presented him a white Cows tail of Cathay , and a drum of Tartaria , which he well accepted . Also I brought before him all the Ambassadors that were committed to my charge , with all the Russe slaves : and that day I dined in his 478 
 Majesties presence , and at dinner , his Grace sent me meat by a Duke , & asked me diverse questions touching the lands and countries where I had be . And thus I remained at the Mosco about your affairs , until the 17. day of February that your wares were sent down : and then having licence of the Emperor's Majesty to depart , the 21. day I came to your house at Vologhda , and there remained until the breaking up of the year : and then having seen all your goods laden into your boats , I departed with the same , and arrived withal in safety at Colmogro the 9. of May 1560. And here I cease for this time , entreating you to bear with this my large discourse , which by reason of the variety of matter , I could make no shorter , and I beseech God to prosper all your attempts . 
 The latitudes of certain principali places in Russia , and other Regions . 
 Deg. Min. 
 ' Mosco in 55 ' IO 
 Novogrod the great 58 26 
 Novogrod the less 33 
 Colmogro 64 10 
 Vologhda 59 11 
 Cazan 55 33 
 Oweke 51 40 
 Astracan 47 9 
 At the entrance into the Caspian sea . > 46 ► 72 
 Manguslave beyond the Caspian sea . ► 45 00 
 Urgence in Tartary 20. 
 days journey from the Caspian sea . > 42 18 
 Boghar a city in Tartary 
 20. days journey ^39 IO 
 from Urgence . J I J 
 