A letter of Sigismond king of Polonia , written 1559. in the 39. year of his reign to Elizabeth the Queens most excellent Majestic of England , etc. 
 QIgismudus Augustus by the grace of God king of 0 Polonia , great Duke of Lituania , Russia , Prussia , Massovia , and Samogetia , etc. Lord and heir etc. to the most Noble Princess Lady Elizabeth by the same grace of God Queen of England , France and Ireland , etc. our deer sister and kinswoman , greeting and increase of all felicity . Whereas your Majesty writeth to us that you have received two of our letters , we have looked that you should have answered to them both . First to the one , in which we entreated more at large in forbidding the voyage to Narve , which if it had be done , we had be unburdened of so often writing of one matter : and might have answered your Majesty much better to the purpose . Now we thus answer to your Majesty to those matters of the which you written to us the 3 of October from Windsore . First , forasmuch as your Majesty at the request of our letters hath discharged the arrest of Merchants goods , and of the names of the men of Dansk our subject's , which was set upon them by the commandment of your Majesty : and also have restored the old and ancient liberty of traffic , we acknowledge great pleasure done unto us in the same : and also think it to be done according to common agreement made in times past . Neither were we ever at any time of any other opinion touching your Majesty , but that we should obtain right and reason at your hands . Forasmuch as we likewise shall at all times be ready to grant to your Majesty , making any request for your subject's , so far as shall stand with justice , yet neither will ye yield any thing to your Majesty in contention of love , benevolence , and mutual office , but that we judge every good turn of yours to be recompensed by us to the utter-485 
 The trade to Narve forbidden by the K. of Poland . 
 The ancient covenants oj traffic be-ttoeene England W Prussia . 
 most : and that shall we prove as occasion shall serve . Therefore we shall command the arrests , if any be made by our subject's ( as it is unknown to us ) of merchant's The old liber - goods and English names to be discharged : and shall tie oftrafficke . conserve the old liberty of traffic , and all other things which shall seem to appertain to neighbourhood between us and your Majesty : so that none of the subject's of your Majesty hereafter presume to use the navigation to the Narve forbidden by us , and full of danger not only to our parts , but also to the open destruction of all The means of Christians and liberali nations . The which as we have increase of the wr^fen afore so now we write again to your Majesty ot the f Oh • J J 
 Moscovite . know and feel of a surety , the Moscovite , enemy 
 to all liberty under the heavens , daily to grow mightier by the increase of such things as be brought to the Narve , while not only wares but also weapons heretofore unknown to him , and artificers & arts be brought unto him : by mean whereof he makes himself strong to vanquish all others . Which things , as long as this voyage to Narve is used , can not be stopped . And we perfectly know your Majesty can not be ignorant how great the cruelty is of the said enemy , of what force he is , what tyranny he uses on his subject's , and in what servile sort they be under him . We seemed hitherto to vanquish him only in this , that he was rude of arts , and ignorant of policies . If so be that this navigation to the Narve continue , what shall be unknown to him ? Therefore we that know best , and border upon him , do admonish other Christian princes in time , that they do not betray their dignity , liberty and life of them and their subject's to a most barbarous and cruel enemy , as we can no less doe by the duty of a Christian prince . For now we do foresee , except other princes take this admonition , the Moscovite puffed up in pride with those things that be brought to the Narve , and made more perfect in warlike affairs with engines of war and ships , will make assault this way on Christendome , to slay or make bound all that shall withstand him : which God defend . With 
 486 
 which our admonition diverse princes already content themselves , and abstain from the Narve . The others that will not abstain from the said voyage shall impeached by our navy , and incur the danger of loss of life , liberty , wife and children . Now therefore if the subject's of your Majesty will forbear this voyage to Narve , there shall nothing denied to them of us . Let your Majesty well weigh and consider the reasons & occasions of our stopping of ships going to the Narve . In which stopping , our subject's of Dansk be in no fault , as we have already written to your Majesty , neither use we their counsel in the same . In any other matter , if there be any fault in them against your Majesty or your subject's , we will gladly do justice upon them , that your Majesty may well understand that we be careful of you and your subject's . Neither think we it meet to take Hamburgh , or any other place to judge the matter : for we have our council & judgement seat at Rye , where your Majesty & your subject's , or any other , shall have justice administered unto them , with whom we have had ancient league and amity . And thus much we have thought good to let your Majesty understand . Fare you well . Dated the sixt of December the 39 of our reign . 
 Sigismundus Augustus Rex . 
 