His arrival at Casbin the 25. of May . 
 Conference & demands of thee Shaugh . 
 A letter of M. Arthur Edwards , written the 8. of August 1566. from the town of Shamaki in Media , to the right worshipful the Governors , Consuls , Assistants , and generality of the company of Russia , etc. Showing his access unto the Emperor of Persia , his conference with him , his obtaining of a privilege , with diverse other good observations . 
 Right worshipful Sirs , my bounden duty remembered , with most humble commendations and like request to God for the preservation of your good healths , with the rest of the company , etc. It may please you to understand , that the last letter which I sent you from hence was of the 26. of April of this present year by Richard Johnson at my departure towards Casbin : to which ci tie I came the 25. of May following , not slacking any day , hour , nor moment , to procure and make friends for the speedy bringing me before the presence of thee Shaugh , being the 29. day of the same month brought before him , with whose majesty I was in talk ( as I think ) two hours . He willed me twice to come nearer him , demanding what were my requests : and having herd them , he promised me his gracious letters . Afterwards he called me twice again to come nearer him , and talked with me of our Queens majesty and Country , and what commodities we had , and what other commodities we desired : and then of other countries adjoining to us and their commodities , as also of king Philip , what overthrow he gave the Turks at the siege of Malta . And how long we had traded into Russeland and Moscovia , and in what space we might sail out of England into Russeland , & how many weeks travel it is from Colmogro to Astracan : and then came to discourse of Russeland , and what towns the Emperor had won , declaring unto me himself most of our commodities . In the end he willed that your worships 54 
 1566. should send him of all sorts of clothes , but of one All sorts of especially which maidens do make ( as he said : ) He does to be sent , nam it Karengi , I think it is Western dozens died sPecta^ Was into scarlets . lime will not permit me to write at died into large the conference which I had with his majesty . It scarlet . was strange to his people ( knowing our religion ) to see me so long in talk with him , willing his Secretary before me to write what he was desirous of : to wit , of London clothes , three or foure of all sorts for example , being well shorn and dressed . Violets in grain and fine reds be most worn , but other good colours will away , when they shall see them . I wore a garment of London russet , being much esteemed . You shall do well to send such sorts as be lively to the sighed , and some blacks for women's garments , with some Orange colours and tawneis . Here 
 is much broad cloth worn . They talk much of London London c^s clothes , and they that know the wearing , are desirous of them before the cloth of the women's making , for they Much Venice find it nothing durable . For when it comes to wear cloth worn in on the thread , it renteth like paper . Here is much Persia . Venice cloth worn , being cromplisted a yard and a half broad , and sold here from 24. to 30. shaughes their arshine , being longer by two inches then the Russe arshine is . I wish also that you send some good chamlets & velvets died in grain , with purple colours & fine reds : because these are most worn . Also some blacks with other colours : some cloth of gold , tissue & bocky , some velvets wrought with gold , with satins and damasks , most purple , and reds of all sorts . You may not forget to send some Western karseis , to wit , dozens , which be thicked well , and close shut in the weaving , being died into fine reds , and some scarlets : for I think there is no such cloth for their caps . 
 Your worships shall understand , that after my first departure from the presence of the Prince , I neglected no time in daily attendance on them , who had my privilege in writing , that I might have it in readiness at such time as I should again be called before the 
 The second admission to the Shaughs presence , the 29. of June 1566. at which Arne he received the privilege . The Shaughs promise to increase the privilege . 
 presence of thee Shaugh , which was the 29. of June last . I was in apparel that he gave unto me , with other garments to mine interpreter , and one of your servants , and then I received your letters or privilege , according to my desire , sealed and firmed with the Shaughs own hand . Praised be God who hath wrought with me , and for me , in all my doings . 
 The 29. of June is one of their chief festi vail days , so that all his nobility was there present , with two Ambassadors in company with his majesty , who said unto me that if my letters were not to my mind , in time to come they should be mended . Whereupon I made my reverence , and gave his highness most humble and hearty thanks , saying , that with as much speed as might be , our Queens Majesty should understand of his goodness towards her Merchant's , which I thought would write their letters of request unto his Highness , in such form & order as by them should be thought meet and requisite for their good assurance in the trade of merchandizes : who replied with these words : when we shall see their reasonable requests , we will show them our farther good will , and so I departed . 
 Since the receiving of the Shaughs letters , I have eaten in company of good Dukes and others , who before would not come near me . And every day some would come to my Shop , and eat and drink with me out of mine own dish . Likewise in riding from Casbin hither , on the way when I sat down to dinner , they would come and eat with me unbidden , when I wished them further off : for I spared them that , which gladly I would have eaten my self . I doubt not but we shall live here from henceforth in quietness : for now in all places where I come , I am friendly used with the best . 
 I was asked by the Shaugh if you were able to bring him yearly one hundred thousand pieces of kersies , and clothes . And I answered him , saying , your worships were able to furnish his country with two hundred thousand . Whereat his Highness rejoiced : for the 56 
 Armenians barterwiththe Venetians . 
 The distance 
 ARTHUR EDWARDS a.d. 
 1566. 
 Turkes Ambassador the last year , as diverse have told me , did put the Shaugh in despair , saying , that the Turke would not permit any cloth to be brought into his country . 
 There is a city in Syria nam Aleppo , wherein con - Aleppo a city tinually are many Venetians dwelling , beside other that greattwde-come yearly and there buy wools , gals , tallow , saffron , skins , cotton wool , and other wares , and great store of spices . Also the Armenians yearly receive at the Venetians hands , karsies in barter for raw silks , giving sometime 60. pieces of karsies for 70. batmans of silk of this country , and 40. pieces for Grosin silk . And karsies sold commonly for ready money in Aleppo , at 11. and 12. ducats the piece , ( the ducat being here worth 12. shillings ) may cost the first penny 132. and 144. Shaughs a karsie . By report it is one months travel from this town of Shamaky to Aleppo , and from 
 thence to Tripolis , six days journey : and from Tripolis r ' to Venice by water , a month or five weeks sailing . As I learn , from hence to Venice may easily be traveled in less then three months . Therefore I wish your worships to procure some trusty and assured friend there , to whom from hence letters may be sent . For I can have them here to put in sureties to deliver my letters , and to bring answer . If I had any other here with me , I would nothing have doubted to have brought you the Shaughs letters that way . 
 The Armenians and other are desirous to barter with Armenians us , giving silk for karsies , and also will serve us of all ot^er ’ kind of spices , we giving them sufficient warning to an / spices fetch it in the Indies , and will deliver it us in Shamaky for karsies . at these prizes . 
 Pepper this towns batman for 18. Shaughs , every Shaugh is sixpence . 
 Maces large for 40. Shaughs , and 45. the batman . 
 Cloves for 40. Shaughs the batman . 
 Nutmegs for 16. and 18. Shaughs the batman . 
 Sinamom for 40. Shaughs the batman . I doubt not 
 The Shaugh desirous tobar-gaine fir our commodities . 
 2000. pieces of karsies to be sent into Persia . 
 but there will be profit and good done in spices , with drugs and other like in time . 
 From Casbin to Ormus is six weeks travel , and from hence to Casbin is 16. days with camels laden : but if one travel with a good Mule unladen , it may be gone in seven or eight days . And I think to Ormus and other places , may be traveled in like order and proportion , with cattle unladen . But here in all places as men travel , they must carry their own provision on horses , which they are to buy , and thus they travel but a footepase . 
 The Shaugh himself is desirous to bargain with you who will give money , silk , and other wares as we will , and take our wares as we may afford them , willing me himself to bring such wares as we might gain by him . The Armenians by report , and as I perceive , bring from Aleppo yearly , foure , five , and six thousand pieces of karsies , and clothes , beside those which other men bring . If your Worships might procure and find vent or sales for raw silk , and silk died in grain , beside other silks wrought and made here , by which , profit may be made : then you might send a great substance of wares hither . But I fear you shall be hindered by the Venetians if they may : for I know it will grieve them that you do trade into these parts : for in short time it shall clean altar their trade , and hinder the sales of their clothes in Aleppo and other places adjoining . You shall understand that 60. batmans of silk is a Mules lading : and as it is reported , one village of the Armenians yearly carrieth 400. and 500. Mules lading of silk to Aleppo , and brings thence 800. or a thousand Mules laden with karsies 8c Venice clothes . And 18. pieces of karsies are a Mules lading . But I wish you not to send above 2000. pieces of karsies , although I have be willed to write for more . If I might have had any understanding what your Worships had written for in your letters sent this year , I should 58 
 in this my letter have be better able to have answered you . They which be now in Astracan , might have written some thing unto me hither , if it had pleased them , or else have sent me such letters of mine , as I hope some of my friends have written to me : for here are arrived eight weeks past , two boats with wares and Russes , by whom they might have written , had it be but 3. or 4. lines . They promised the Russes to write , but promise was not kept . I would be sorry that any boat should depart out of these parts , and not write unto them , weighing how all things stand . I hear they have bought a boat , which cost 40. rubbles , and shipped certain wares to come hither . God send them in safety . I do tarry their coming , or else I had thought to have come to Astracan in those boats 
 which departed hence lately . 
 The fifteenth of July last , I departed from Casbin , He departed and came to this town the 29. of you same . And fr°m as^n the fourth of August I found means to arrest the 
 falsest knave in this country , to for 22. tumens , and too . shaughs , tumen . ) I have caused him to put forthcoming at all times , what with him , God knoweth , the debt 
 wit , the Customer ( 200. shaughs is a in sureties for his end I shall have will be recovered , 
 but not yet , for he must pay the Shaugh 1000. rubbles . These parts as yet are in no stay for lack of a Governor or head to rule , which I think shall be the Mursey . Within 5. or 6. days we shall know , for it is time , because men are in fear to travel for being robbed . If there were a prince placed , I should soon get in your debts , for they dare not disobey the Shaughs letters or privilege : wherein he hath not only written that our debts shall be paid , but also that we shall be taken heed to , so as we need not to doubt ( God willing ) in time to come , to be here as well used as we are in Russeland . The bills of debts that Rich. Rich. Johnsons Johnson left with me , had neither the parties name & eat ne^1 ' nor sum of money in two of them , and in other bills sence‘ 
 Cozomomet was Arthur Edwards friend to the 
 Shaugh . 
 but his own name . If I had not used discretion in causing to be written in our privilege , that such debts as are owing , should be paid any or us in the absence of the other , some men would not have paid one penny , but only to Richard Johnson , who hath written but his own name only in the bills . I received in Casbin of Forackan in part of 29. tumens , 300. shaughs in money : the rest he will deliver me here in silk , and this is all that I have received to this day . And as for Hawrambecks twelve tumens , I make account , that if I could ride to speak with him , I should be paid in money and wares . Touching Ackons money , by means of Duke Ameddinbeck , who first owed the debt , because they meant not to pay a penny , he did rather seek to hinder my suit then to further me , but I found out a present remedy : for God sent me friends that were always about the Shaugh , and daily put on his apparel , who opened all my suit , and brought me to the presence of thee Shaugh before that Cozomomet saw the Shaughs eyes . But Cozomomet in the end was my friend : for he was sent for , and declared unto the Shaugh what good merchant's we were , using truth in all our doings , and how we were in great favour with the Emperor of Russia , and what good commodities we might bring into his Country , with other talk . And daily he was sent for to the Shaugh about the affairs in those parts , for no man was able to advice the Shaugh of the state and affairs of those Countries' so much as he was . He owed your Worships seven tumens and 48. shaughs , which was not all this time to be got at his hands : for he was at great charges in riding to Casbin , and giving great gifts since his coming , which he twice declared unto me . I feeling his grief became Physician to ease his pain , and forgave him his debt abovesaid , in recompense of ten pieces of karsies , that were promised him by Richard Johnson and me , to give him at the camming of our goods , in consideration that he should with speed 
 do what lay in him , to dispatch me away : for I perceive he procured other that did help me in my suit to delay me of , till time he had his purpose . I never was in quiet , till I had the Princes privilege , and had god me out of Casbin : for victuals , and all other things Victuals and are very deer there , because they are brought thither dl things dear from far off . As for all other small debts ( which may at as m' be about 7. tumens ) when our Merchant's are come hither , we shall seek to get them in as we may . I wish your Worships to send some bullion to be coined here , it will please the prince there , and be profitable to you . Silk is better cheap by two or three shaughs the batman , then it was the last year . You shall understand that I have written two letters of all my proceedings , which I sent from Casbin long since : to wit , the 24. 
 and 29. of June last , by one of your servants to Gilan , there to take ship and to go to Astracan , and to deliver the same unto your Factors , which might have be to their quietness and mine , long ago . But I am right sorry to hear since my coming hither , that he hath played the loitering merchant in Gilan , not going in those boats that went first , but tarried for the last boats . But 1 will teach him , to the example of other , how he shall make haste hereafter in such affairs . The karsies which you sent last , being bought of M. Quarles , were good and full lengths and well sorted . The Princes TheAmbatsa-Ambassador of Gilan was in Casbin , at my being there . 
 I hope in God , if I remain here , and may go to Gilan , Quan _ to obtain for your worships the like privilege at the kings hand there also . For I have something moved the matter , being put in such comfort , that I doubt not the getting thereof with small charges , which I had done at this time if I had had other here with me to put in trust : for from Casbin to Gilan is but 5. Gilan but five days riding , which Country may be profitable to your Worships . There is in that Province good store of silk , ' 
 better cheap , & better in goodness then this country silk is . Also great store of Alom , being there sold this 
 towns batman , for one bist and a half . I have made reckoning , all charges born from hence to Colmogro , & from thence fraught into England at three pounds the tun , all charges accounted , will not stand you in above 18. and 20. shillings the hundreth . You have yearly by report two or three hundred tons lading . Other commodities there for England I hear not of . As for Gals . gals here to be bought , there is no profit to be done 
 by them . They be brought from Aleppo , and sold here not under 3. or 4. shaughs their batman , being Grain , six pounds English weight . Grain that you die scarlet withal is worth the batman ready money , 200. shaughs , reckoning the shaugh for 6. pence Russe , it may be 6. rubbles their batman . Your worships may send some portion of money , if you may buy , as I think you may , for 12. and 13. S. a pound the berries , so you shall gain both in the price and weight . If one Englishman more had be here with me , to whom I might have delivered our bills of debts and other things , whatsoever should have chanced of me , I would then have become servant Ormus . to mine Interpreter , and so have gone to Ormus and Aleppo . Aleppo , which both join on the borders of this country , being the chief Mars towns , whereunto from all places merchant's resort . And thus would I have spent 4. or 5. months in traveling for further knowledge of things for to have certified your worships of . I hope in God to use things in such order , that yearly you shall have return of your goods from hence , as you have forth of Russeland , and in those ships . For if we may , as I doubt not with diligence , provide to make sales in time , and with speed receive silk at the Shaughs hand , and other men's , that it may be sent from hence to be in Astracan at the beginning of Aprill , from whence it may be sent to Colmogro in three months and less , and there to be ready with the rest of your goods by the end of June for your ships to receive , that will be time enough . This I doubt not to bring to pass within a year or two , when we are thoroughly settled in these 62 
 parts , and better known . Moreover you shall stand , that at my last being in the presence of thee it was said to me that M. Anthonie Jenkin . , ^ proffer to take all the raw silk in those parties , de - pefSian ‘ livering cloth and other commodities for the same . I assure you there is in those parts to be had three or foure thousand horses lading , every horse load being 50. or 60. batmans , beside silk of Grosin . Great abundance of silk at times is sent out of these parts , to wit , 4. or 5. hundred horse loads at a time by the Turkes , who bring great store of silver to be coined , to wit , Dollars at ten shaughs the piece . The Hungarie Ducket is at 12. shaughs . And having money in readiness at the time of the year , they buy silk the better cheap , when the country men bring it first to be sold . If your worships may bargain with the Venetians to take silk at your hands , or otherwise deal with them , I do not mistrust but to have at the Shaughs hand sixe batmans of silk for two pieces and a half of karsies . Your good advice herein , and in other matters , I trust you 
 will write with convenient speed . Master Anthonie M. Anthonie Jenkinson hath deserved great commendation at all your Jenkinson worships hands : for the good report of his well and come e • wise doings in those parts , was oftentimes a comfort to me to hear thereof , and some good help to me in my proceedings . To this day I never herd from any of our merchant's . God grant me in health to see your worships , for I have had a careful travel , with many a sorrowful day and unquiet sleeps . Neither had I the company of one English person , to whom sometime I might have eased my pensive heart , as God well knoweth , who hath delivered me from mine enemies . Thus almighty God grant you in health and wealth long to live . 
 Your humble servant at commandment during life , 
 Arthur Edwards . 
 63 
 under - 
 Shaugh , M. Anthonie / 4 « / 4 Jenkinsons 
 The Shaughs letters to the Moscovy company . 
 Another letter of Arthur Edwards written in Astracan the 16. of June , 1567. at his return in his first voyage out of Persia , to the right worshipful Company trading into Russia , Persia , and other the North and Northeast parts . 
 IT may please your Worships that herein I have written not only certain articles of your privilege , but also the Governors names , with the Consuls , Assistants and generality . Also such commodities as the Prince or Emperor of the Country hath written in one of his letters directed to your Worships to be sent him , with other notes which I thought good to be remembered , as may appear hereafter following . Your privilege is written , granted , and given in the names of these sixe persons following : to wit , sir William Garrard , sir William Chester , governors , sir Thomas Lodge , master Anthony Jenkinson , master Thomas Nicols and Arthur Edwards . 
 1 First , it is granted that you shall pay no manner of customs or tols , any kind of ways , now , nor in time coming , unto his heirs after him . And that all English merchant's , such as you shall appoint now and hereafter , shall and may pass and repass into all places of his dominions and other countries adjoining in the trade of merchandise , to buy and fell all manner of commodities , with all manner of persons . 
 2 Item , that in all places where any of our merchant's shall have their resort , or abiding , his chief Governors , Rulers and Justices shall take heed unto us , being our aid & defence against all evil persons , punishing those that shall do us any wrong . 
 3 Item , that for all such debts as shall be owing by any manner of person , justice shall be done on the party , and we paid at the day . 
 4 Item , that no manner of persons of whatsoever estate 64 
 or degree they be of , shall be so hardy as to take any kind of wares , or any gifts , without any leave and good will . 
 5 Item , if by chance medley any of our merchant's or servants , as God forbid , should kill any of his subject's , that no part of your goods shall be touched or meddled withal , neither any party but the offendor , and true justice to be ministered , and being any of us , not to suffer without the Princes knowledge and advice . 
 6 Item , that all such debts as are now owing , or hereafter shall be , are to be paid unto any of us , in the absence of the other , be the party dead or alive . 
 7 Item , that no person return any kind of wares back again , being once bought or sold . 
 8 Item , that when God shall send your goods to shore , presently his people shall help us on land with them . 
 These articles before written , I trust in God will content your minds , until your farther letters be hitherto written unto the Prince , who I am assured will grant your farther reasonable requests , which his majesty hath promised . For I moved the question , declaring unto him that I thought your Worships would write your letters of requests , to crave his farther good will , as should be thought meet for your better assurance in the trade of merchandise : you will hardly believe what long and gracious talk he had with me , which I assure you continued two hours , which was strange unto the people & other merchant strangers . For betwixt every question that his majesty moved , when I had answered him , he would talk with his Nobles and other his servants , having some knowledge of our Western parts & commodities , and then again would demand other questions . He caused his Secretary to write the articles before nam , in all of his foure letters given me ( whereof two as I required , are in the Turkish tongue to be sent you . ) On the back side of the one , him 65 E 
 * By the word Karanff . es , I think they meaneKarsies . 
 he hath written what wares his Majesty would have you to send him . He held me one hour within night before I departed from him . 
 These be the names of the wares or commodities , which on the back side of one of his letters the Shaugh hath written to you to be sent him . 
 First , some cloth of Gold , with cloth of Tissue , and cloth of Botky , as Velvets wrought with gold . 
 Item , good velvets , to wit , crimosins , purples , reds , greens and blacks . These colours his majesty requires , for they are most worn . And though there be some of these wares made in his city of Cassan , yet nothing like in goodness , to those that you may procure for him . Small profit I think will be in these wares : yet for diverse considerations , as also to satisfy the Princes mind , I wish you to send some , and those that be especial good . 
 Item , good damasks and satins of all sorts , with and hundred pieces of good chamlets , which are worth here 80. shaughs the piece , at sixe pence the shaugh , and those silks to be of those colours above written , to wit , crimosins , purples , reds , greens , blacks , with some light watchet colours . 
 Item , three or foure complete harnesses that will abide the shot of a handgun with 10. or 12. targets of steel , being good . 
 Item , ten or twelve good shirts of male being very good or else none , that may abide the shot of and arrow , and two buff jerkins . 
 Item , ten or twelve pieces of Western karsies , being thicked well and close shut in the weaving , and died into scarlets and fine reds . I think there will be no such cloth for noblemen's caps . The prince nam them * karangies , saying , that maidens did make them , & is desirous of them . 
 Item , six pieces of fine Holland cloth for the Prince , with some other for noblemen , of a lower price . 
 Item , twentie handguns being good , some of them with fire locks , and also six good dags , with locks to travel withal . 
 Item ioo . brushes for garments ( none made of swines hair , ) for gifts , and otherwise to be sold . 
 Item , six stone bows that shoot led pellets . 
 Item , a mill to grind corn in the field as they go , finely devised : for Cozomomet willed me to write for one to be sent , to give the Prince . 
 Item , the Prince requires of all sorts and colours of London clothes . I wish you to send no less then 40. or 50. for I know they will be sold to profit , especially such cloth as may be affborded for 20. shaughs the arshine , which is longer by two of mine inches then Russia arshine is . Let there be fine scarlets , violets in grain , fine reds , blacks , brown blews , foure or five of every sort , for the prince and other lords : the rest of other colours lively to the sighed , as London russets , tawnies , lion colours , good lively greens , with other , as you shall think good : for the prince desires to see of all sorts , which will be and occasion that the Venetians and Turkes shall be in less estimation then they are : for they themselves do fear , and secretly say the same . And truly the Princes subject's intend to enter into trade with us for spices and other commodities that they were wont to fell unto the Venetians and Turkes . 
 Thus I commit you all to God , who send you health with increase of worship . Written in Astracan the 16. of June , 1567. 
 By your servant during life to command , Arthur Edwards . 
 67 
 