A letter of M. Henrie Lane to M. Richard Hakluit , concerning the first ambassage to our most gracious Queen Elizabeth from the Russian Emperor anno 1567 , and other notable matters incident to those places and times . 
 Orshipfull sir , because I find you have the success and proceedings of Osep Napea the first ambassador of the Russian Emperor to the Majesties of King Philip and Queen marry , at what time and at his return I was remaining in Russia , & do not find that the 
 perfect knowledge of the first ambassage from thence to this our Sovereign Lady Queen Elizabeth is come to your hands , between whose Highness and the ambassadors I was interpretor , I think good to express it . In August Anno 1567 arrived at London with their retinue two especial authorised messengers , nam Stephen Twerdico , and Theodore Pogorella , with letters and presents to her Majesty , at that time being at Otelands , where diverse of the chief merchant's of the Russian company did associate them , and I there doing my duty and office of interpretor , her Majesty gave them audience . First they rehearsed the long style and Majesty of their Master , with his most friendly and hearty commendations to her Highness , and then they testified the singular great joy and pleasure that he conceived to hear of her most princely estate , dignity and health : and lastly , they delivered their letters and presents . The presents sent unto her Majesty were Sables , both in pairs for tippets , and two timbars , to wit , two times fortie , with Luserns and other rich furs . For at that time that princely ancient ornament of furs was yet in use . And great pity but that it might be renewed , especial in Court , and among Magistrates , not 98 
 only for the restoring of and old worshipful Art and 
 Company , but also because they be for our climate 7% use of wholesome , delicate , grave and comely : expressing dig - f^e* Micate nitie , comforting age , and of longer continuance , and ’ ’ 
 better with small cost to be preserved , then these new silks , shagges , and rags , wherein a great part of the wealth of the land is hastily consumed . 
 grave and comely . 
 These ambassadors were appointed lodging and enterteinement by the Moscovie company at their house then in Seething Lane , and were sundry times after permitted to be in presence . And in May 1568 took their leave [ I . 375. J at Greenwich , where they understood and had the Queens Majesties mind , letters and reward . At the latter part of her talk , her Highness considering that our trade to Saint Nicholas since the beginning had be ? he trade t0 offensive to diverse princes , states , and merchant's Eastward , used these speeches or the like : Who is or shall ^vers pr-inces be more touched by detractors , with flying tales and states East - 
 untrue reports , then Princes and Rulers , to the breach of ward . love and unity ? your Master and I in things that pass by word and writing , I doubt not will keep and perform promises . If he hear the contrary of me , let him suspend his judgement , and not be light of credit , and so will I . These words they termed her Majesties golden speech : and kneeling down , kissed her hand , and departed . 
 The letters that these two messengers brought , were delivered to me by my Lord Treasurer , being then Secretary , to be translated , the copies whereof I had , but now cannot find . The copy of the Queens Majesties letter I send enclosed herewith unto your worship . I also have sent you a copy of a letter written from the king of Polonia to the Queens Majesty , with other letters from some of our nation and factors , declaring the displeasure for our traffic to the Russes from anno 1558 to the year 1566 , especially by the way of the Narve : in which year of 1566 , having general procuration and commission from the Company , I was in the Low 
 country at Antwerpe and Amsterdam , and sometime in company with Polacks , Danskers , and Easterlings : and by reason I had be a lidger in Russia , I could the better reply and prove , that their own nations and the Italians were most guilty of the accusations written by the king of Poland . 
 This king Sigismundus ( whose ambassadors very sumptuous I have seen at Mosco ) was reported to be too mild in suffering the Moscovites . Before our traffic they overran his great dukedom of Lituania , Smolensk wone and took Smolensco , carrying the people captives to by the Russe . Mosco . And in the year 1563 , as appears by Thomas Alcocks letter , they suffered the Russe likewise in that Polotzko Duchy to take a principali city called Polotzko , with 
 taken . the iorj and ( j peOple thereof . Likewise the said Sigis - 
 mundus and the king of Sweden did not look to the protection of Livonia , but lost all , except Rye and Revel , and the Russe made the Narve his port to traffic , not only to us , but to Lubec and others , general . And still from those parts the Moscovites were furnished out of Dutchland by enterlopers with all arts and artificers , and had few or none by us . The Italians also furnished them with engines of war , and taught them warlike stratagems , and the art of fortification . In the days of Sigismund , the Russe would tant the Polacks , that they loved their ease at home with their wives , and to drink , and were not at commandment of their king . This Sigismund had to wife the daughter of Ferdinando , Charles the fifths brother , and he died without issue . Polotzko re - Since which time their late elected king Stephanus Batore tiered by tO Russe jn better order , and recovered Polotzko Batore . again in the year 1579. Thus with my hearty farewell 
 I take my leave of your worship . 
 Your assured friend Henrie Lane . 
 