Certain letters in verse , written by Master George Turbervile out of Moscovia , which went as Secretary thither with Master Tho. Randolph , her Majesties Ambassador to the Emperor 1568 , to certain friends of his in London , describing the manners of the Country and people . 
 To his especial friend Master Edward Dancie . 
 MY Dancie deer , when I recount within my breast , My London friends , and wonted mates , and thee above the rest : 
 I feel a thousand fits of deep and deadly woe , To think that I from land to sea , from bliss to bale did go . 
 I left my native soil , full like a retchless man , And unacquainted of the coast , among the Russes ran : 
 A people passing rude , to vices vile inclined , 
 Folk fit to be of Bacchus train , so quaffing is their kind . 
 Drink is their whole desire , the pot is all their pride , The sobrest head does once a day stand needful of a guide . 
 If he to banquet bid his friends , he will not shrink On them at dinner to bestow a douzen kinds of drink : 
 124 
 Such liquour as they have , and as the country gives , But chiefly two , one called Kvas , whereby the Mousike lives . 
 Small beware and waterlike , but somewhat tart in taste , The rest is Mead of honey made , wherewith their lips they baste . 
 And if he go unto his neighbour as a guest , He cares for title meat , if so his drink be of the best . No wonder though they use such vile and beastly trade , Sith with the hatchet and the hand , their chiefest gods be made . 
 Their Idols have their hearts , on God they never call , Unless it be ( Nichola Bough ) that hangs against the wall . 
 The house that hath no god , or painted Saint within , Is not to be resorted to , that roof is full of sin . Beside their private gods , in open places stand Their crosses unto which they crooche , and bless themselves with hand . 
 Devoutly down they duck , with forehead to the ground , 
 Was never more deceit in rags , and greasy garments found . 
 Almost the meanest man in all the country rides , 
 The woman eke , against our use , her trotting horse bestrides . ' 
 In sundry colours they both men and women go , In buskin's all , that money have on buskin's to bestoe . Each woman hanging hath a ring within her ear , Which all of ancient use , and some of very pride do 
 [ I - 385J 
 wear . 
 Their gate is very brave , their countenance wise and 
 sad , 
 And yet they follow fleshly lusts , their trade of living bad . 
 It is no shame at all accounted to defile 
 Another's bed , they make no care their follies to concile , 
 i25 
 Is not the meanest man in all the land but he , 
 To buy her painted colours doth allow his wife a fee , Wherewith she decks her self , and die her tawny skin , 
 She pranks and paints her smoky face , both brow , lip , cheek , & chin . 
 Yea those that honest are , if any such there be 
 Within the land , do use the like : a man may plainly see 
 Upon some women's cheeks the painting how it lies , 
 In plaster sort , for that too thick her face the harlot die . 
 But such as skilful are , and cunning Dams indeed , 
 By daily practise do it well , yea sure they do exceed . 
 They lay their colours so , as he that is full wise , May easily be deceiv’d therein , if he do trust his eyes . 
 I not a little muse , what madness makes them paint 
 Their faces , weighing how they keep the stoove by mere constraint . 
 For seidome when , unless on Church or marriage day A man shall see the Dams abroad , that are of best array . 
 The Russie means to reap the profit of her pride , 
 And so he mews her to be sure , she lie by no men side . 
 Thus much , friend Dancie , I did mean to write to thee , 
 To let thee weet in Russia land , what men and women be . 
 Hereafter I perhaps of other things will write 
 To thee , and other of my friends , which I shall see with sighed : 
 And other stuff beside , which true report shall tell , Mean while I end my loving lines , and bid thee now farewell . 
 126 
 IF I should now forget , or not remember thee , Thou Spencer might’st a foul rebuke , and shame impute to me . 
 For I to open show did love thee passing well , 
 And thou wertenberg he at parture , whom I loathde to bid farewell . 
 And as I went thy friend , so I continue still , 
 No better proof thou canst then this desire of true good will . 
 I do remember well when needs I should away , 
 And that the Post would licence us , no longer time to stay : 
 Thou wrongest me by the fist , and holding fast my hand , 
 Didst crave of me to send thee news , and how I liked the land . 
 It is a sandy soil , no very fruitful vain , 
 More waste and woody grounds there are , then closes fit for grain . 
 Yet grain there growing is , which they untimely take , 
 And cut or ear the corn be ripe , they mow it on a stack . 
 And laying sheaf by sheaf , their harvest so they dry , 
 They make the greater haste , for fear the frost the corn destroy . 
 For in the winter time , so glary is the ground , 
 As neither grass , nor other grain , in pastures may be found . 
 In coms the cattle then , the sheep , the colt , the cow , 
 Fast by his bed the Mowsike then a lodging does allow , 
 Whom he with fodder feeds , and holds as deer as life : 
 And thus they wear the winter with the Mowsike and his wife . 
 127 
 Seven months the Winter dures , the glare it is so great , As it is May before ' he turn , his ground to sow his wheat . 
 The bodies eke that die unburied lie they then , 
 Laid up in coffins made of fir , as well the poorest men , 
 As those of greater state : the cause is lightly found , For that in Winter time , they cannot come to break the ground . 
 And wood so plenteous is , quite throughout all the land , 
 As rich , and poor , at time of death assured of coffins stand . 
 Perhaps thou musest much , how this may stand with reason , 
 That bodies dead can uncorrupt abide so long a season . Take this for certain troth , as soon as heat is gone , The force of cold the body binds as hard as any stone , 
 Without offence at all to any living thing : 
 And so they lie in perfect state , till next return of Spring . 
 Their beasts be like to ours , as far as I can see 
 For shape , and show , but somewhat less of bulk , and bone they be . 
 Of waterish taste , the flesh not firm , like English beef , 
 And yet it serv’s them very well , and is a good relief : 
 Their sheep are very small , sharp singled , handful long , 
 Great store of fowl on sea and land , the moorish redes among . 
 The greatness of the store doth make the princes less , Beside in all the land they know not how good meat to dress . 
 They use neither broach nor spit , but when the stove they heat , 
 128 
 GEORGE TURBERVILE’S LETTERS a.d. .. J 5^8 . 
 They put their victuals in a pan , and so they bake their meat . 
 No pewter to be had , no dishes but of wood , 
 No use of trenchers , cups cut out of birche are very good . 
 They use but wooden spoons , which hanging in a case 
 Each Mowsike at his girdle ties , and thinks it no disgrace . 
 With whitles two or three , the better man the more , 
 The chiefest Russies in the land , with spoon and knives do go . 
 Their houses are not huge of building , but they say , 
 They plant them in the loftiest ground , to shift the snow away , 
 Which in the Winter time , each where full thick does lie : 
 Which makes them have the more desire , to set their houses high . 
 No stone work is in use , their roofs of rafters be , One linked in another fast , their walls are all of tree . 
 Of masts both long , and large , with moss put in between , 
 To keep the force of weather out , I never erst have seen 
 A gross devise so good , and on the roof they lay 
 The burden bark , to rid the rain , and sudden showers away . 
 In every room a stove , to serve the Winter turn , 
 Of wood they have sufficient store , as much as they can burn . 
 They have no English glass , of slices of a rock 
 Hight Sluda they their windows make , that English glass does mock . 
 They cut it very thin , and sow it with a thread In pretty order like to panes , to serve their present need . 
 No other glass , good faith does give a better light : 
 And sure the rock is nothing rich , the cost is very [ I . 3 8 7. J slight , in 129 i 
 The chiefest place is that , where hangs the god by it , The owner of the house himself does never fit , Unless his better come , to whom he yealds the seat : The stranger bending to the god , the ground with brow must beatrice . 
 And in that very place which they most sacred deem , The stranger lies : a token that his guest he does esteem . 
 Where he is wont to have a bears skin for his bed , And must , in stead of pillow , clap his saddle to his head . 
 In Russia other shift there is not to be had , 
 For where the bedding is not good , the boalsters are but bad . 
 I mused very much , what made them so to lie , 
 Sith in their country Down is rife , and feathers out of cry : 
 Unless it be because the country is so hard , 
 They fear by niceness of a bed their bodies would be marred , 
 I wished thee oft with us , save that I stood in fear 
 Thou wouldst have loathed to have laid thy limbs upon a bear , 
 As I and Stafford did , that was my mate in bed : 
 And yet ( we thank the God of heaven ) we both right well have sped . 
 Lo thus I make and end : none other news to thee , But that the country is too cold , the people beastly be . 
 I write not all I know , I touch but here and there , 
 For if I should , my pen would pinch , and eke offend I fear . 
 Who so shall read this verse , conjecture of the rest , And think by reason of our trade , that I do think the best . 
 But if no traffic were , then could I boldly pen 
 The hardness of the soil , and eke the manners of the men . 
 130 
 They say the Lions paw gives judgement of the beast : 
 And so may you deem of the great , by reading of the least . 
 To Parker . 
 MY Parker , paper , pen , and ink were made to write , 
 And idle heads , that little do , have leisure to indite : Wherefore , respecting these , and thine assured love , If I would write no news to thee , thou might’st my pen reprove . 
 And since fortune thus hath shov’d my ship on shore : 
 And made me seek another Realm unseen of me before : 
 The manners of the men I purpose to declare , 
 And other private points beside , which strange and geazon are . 
 The Russie men are round of bodies , fully fac’d , 
 The greatest part with bellies big that overhang the waste , 
 Flat headed for the most , with faces nothing fair , 
 But brown , by reason of the stove , and closeness of the air : 
 It is their common use to shave or else to shear 
 Their heads , for none in all the land long lolling locks does wear , 
 Unless perhaps he have his sovereign prince displeas’d , 
 For then he never cuts his hair , until he be appeas’d . 
 A certain sign to know who in displeasure be , 
 For every man that views his head , will say , Lo this is he . 
 And during all the time he lets his locks to grow , Dares no man for his life to him a face of friendship show . 
 Their garments be not gay , nor handsome to the eye , 131 
 A cap aloft their heads they have , that stands very high , Which Colpack they do term . They wear no ruffs at all : 
 The best have collers set with pearl , which they Rubasca call . 
 Their shirts in Russie long , they work them down before , 
 And on the sleeves with coloured Silks , two inches good and more . 
 Aloft their shirts they wear a garment jacket wise Hight Onoriadka , and about his burly waste he ties [ I . 388. J His portkies , which in stead of better breeches be : 
 Of linen cloth that garment is , no codpiece is to see . A pair of yarnen stocks to keep the cold away , Within his boots the Russie wears , the heals they underlay 
 With clouting clamps of steel , sharp pointed at the toes , And over all a Shuba furd , and thus the Russie goes . Well butned is the Shube , according to his state , Some Silk , of Silver other some : but those of poorest rate 
 Do wear not Shubs at all , but grosser gowns to sighed , That reaches down beneath the calf , and that Armacha hight : 
 These are the Russies robes . The richest use to ride From place to place , his servant runs , and follows by his side . 
 The Cassacke bears his felt , to force away the rain : Their bridles are not very brave , their saddles are but plain . 
 No bits but snaffles all , of birch their saddles be , Much fashioned like the Scottish seats , broad flakes to keep the knee 
 From sweating of the horse , the panneis larger far 
 And broader be then ours , they use short stirrups for the war : 
 For when the Russie is pursued by cruel foe , 
 He rides away , and suddenly betakes him to his boe , 
 132 
 And bends me but about in saddle as he sits , And therewithal ! amids his raze his following foe he hits . Their bows are very short , like Turkey bows outright , 
 Of sinews made with birchen bark , in cunning manner dight . 
 Small arrows , cruel heads , that fell and forked be , 
 Which being shot from out those bows , a cruel way will flee . 
 They seidome use to shoo their horse , unless they ride 
 In post upon the frozen floods , then cause they shall not slide , 
 He sets a slender calk , and so he rides his way . 
 The horses of the country go good fourescore versts a day , 
 And all without the spur , once prick them and they skip , 
 But go not forward on their way , the Russie hath his whip 
 To rap him on the ribs , for though all booted bee , Yet shall you not a pair of spurs in all the country see . 
 The common game is chess , almost the simplest will 
 Both give a check and eke a mate , by practice comes their skill . 
 Again they dice as fast , the poorest rogues of all 
 Will fit them down in open field , and there to gaming fallen . 
 Their dice are very small , in fashion like to those 
 Which we do use , he takes them up , and over thumb he throws 
 Not shaking them a whit , they cast suspiciously , 
 And yet I deem them void of art that dicing most apply . 
 At play when Silver lacks , goes saddle , horse and all , 
 And eke thing else worth Silver walks , although the price be small . 
 Because thou lovest to play friend Parker other while , 
 133 
 I wish thee there the weary day with dicing to beguile . But thou weart better far at home , I wist it well , And wouldst be loath among such lowts so long a time to dwell . 
 Then judge of us thy friends , what kind of life we had , That near the frozen pole to waste our weary days were glad . 
 In such a savage soil , where laws do bear no sway , But all is at the king his will , to save or else to slay . And that sans cause , God wot , if so his mind be such . But what mean I with Kings to deal ? we ought no Saints to touch . 
 Conceive the rest your self , and deem what lives they led , 
 Where lust is Law , and Subject's live continually in dread . 
 And where the best estates have none assurance good 
 Of lands , of lives , nor nothing falls unto the next of blood . 
 But all of custom doth unto the prince redound , And all the whole revenue comes unto the King his crown . 
 Good faith I see thee muse at what I tell thee now , But true it is , no choice , but all at princes pleasure bow . So Tarquine ruled Rome as thou remembrest well , And what his fortune was at last , I know thy self canst tell . 
 Where will in Common weal does bear the only sway , 
 And lust is Law , the prince and Realm must needs in time decay . 
 The strangeness of the place is such for sundry things 
 1 see , 
 As if I would I cannot write each private point to thee . 
 The cold is rare , the people rude , the prince so full of pride , 
 The Realm so stored with Monks and nuns , and priests on every side : 
 T34 
 The manners are so Turkey like , the men so full of guile , The women wanton , Temples stuffed with idols that defile The Seats that sacred ought to be , the customs are so quaint , 
 As if I would describe the whole , I fear my pen would feint . 
 In sum , I say I never saw a prince that so did reign , 
 Nor people so beset with Saints , yet all but vile and vain . 
 Wild Irish are as civil as the Russies in their kind , Hard choice which is the best of both , each bloody , rude and blind . 
 If thou be wise , as wise thou art , and wilt be ruled by me , Live still at home , and covet not those barbarous coasts to see . 
 No good befalls a man that seeks , and finds no better place , 
 No civil customs to be learned , where God bestows no grace . 
 And truly ill they do deserve to be belov’d of God , That neither love nor stand in awe of his assured rod : Which though be long , yet plagues at last the vile and beastly sort 
 Of sinful wights , that all in vice do place their chiefest sport . 
 A dieu friend Parker , if thou list , to know the Russes well , 
 To Sigismundus book repair , who all the truth can tell : 
 For he long erst in message went unto that savage King , 
 Sent by the Pole , and true report in each respect did bring , 
 To him I recommend my self , to ease my pen of pain , 
 And now at last do wish thee well , and bid farewell again . 
 