A dedicatory Epistle unto the Queens most excellent Majestic , written by Master William Burrough late Comptroller of her Highness navy , and annexed unto his exact and notable map of Russia , briefly containing ( among other matters ) his great travails , observations , and experiments both by sea and land , especially in those Northeastern parts . 
 To the most high and renowned Princess Elizabeth by the grace of God Queen of England , France and Ireland , etc. 
 Y mind earnestly bent to the knowledge of navigation and Hydrography from my youth ( most excellent my dread Sovereign ) hath eftsoons been moved by diligent study to search out the chiefest points to them belonging : and not therewith sufficed hath also sought 
 by experience in diverse discoveries and other voyages and travails to practise the same . I was in the first in 209 oh 
 voyage for discovery of the parts of Russia , which begun in anno 1553. ( being then sixteene years of age ) also in the year 1556. in the voyage when the coasts of Samoed and Nova Zembla , with the straights of Vaigatz were found out : and in the year 1557 , when the coast of Lappia , and the bay of S. Nicholas were more perfectly discovered . Since which time , by my continual practice in the voyages made yearly to S. Nicholas in Russia , or to the Narve , and to some other countries' also by Sea : as likewise in passing from S. Nicholas to Mosco , and from Mosco to Narve , and from thence back again to S. Nicholas by land , in the years 1574. and 1575. ( being then Agent in those countries for the company of English merchant's for discoveries of new trades ) setting down always with great care and diligence , true observations & notes of all those countries' , Islands , coasts of the sea , and other things requisite to the arts of Navigation and Hydrography : and with like diligence gathering exact notes and descriptions of the ways , rivers , cities , towns , etc. as I passed by land : I find my self sufficiently furnished to give report unto your Majesty , and to make description of those North parts of the world in form and manner of every leagues distance that I have passed & seen in all those my travels . The places herein described , which I have not seen and tried my self , I have set down by the best authorities that I could find , and therein may err with the learned Gerardus Mercator , Abraham Ortelius , and the rest : but for the main part which is from Rochel in France hither to London , and from hence Eastward to Narve by sea , and from thence to Mosco and to S. Nicholas by land : also from hence Northwards and Northeastwards by Sea to Saint Nicholas , and to the straight of Vaigatz ( first craving humbly your highness pardon ) I dare boldly affirm ( and that I trust without suspect of arrogancy , since truly I may say it ) I have here set it open to the view , with such exactness and truth , and so placed every thing aright in 
 210 
 BURROUGH’S EPISTLE DEDICATORY a.d. 
 .... c - I598 ' 
 true latitude and longitude , ( accounting the longitudes from the meridian of London , which I place in 21. degrees ) as till this time no man hath done the like : neither is any man able by learning only , except he travaileth , as I have done . For as it may be truly said of navigation and Hydrography , that no man can be cunning in the one which wants convenient knowledge in the other : and as neither of them can be had without the helps of Astronomic and Cosmography , much less without these two grounds of all arts , Arithmetic and Geometric : so none of the best learned in those sciences Mathematical ! , without convenient practice at the sea can make just proof of the profit in them : so necessarily dependeth art and reason upon practice and experience . Albeit there are diverse both learned and unlearned , little or nothing experienced , which in talk of navigation will enter deeply and speak much of and against errors used therein , when they cannot reform them . Such also have written thereof , pretending singular great knowledge therein , and would so be accounted of , though in very deed not worthy the name of good and sufficient pilots . To whom I think it shall not be amiss in defence of rules budded upon reason , and in practice allowed , thus much to say for answer . It is so , that there are rules used in navigation which are not perfectly true : among which the straight lines in sea-cardes , representing the 32. points of the compass or winds , are not held to be the least , but noted of such talkers for principali , to condemn the occupiers thereof for ignorant : yet hath the famous and learned Gerardus Mercator used them in his universal map . 
 But such as condemn them for false , and speak most against their use cannot give other that should serve for navigation to better purpose and effect . Experience ( one of the keys of knowledge ) hath taught me to say it . Wherein with my ability , together with some part of my study , I am the rather moved ( in this my plot ) to make some trial unto your majesty : for that 
 211 
 I perceive that such attempts of new discoveries ( whereunto this noble Island is most aptly situated ) are by your royal maintenance so willingly furthered : beseeching your highness so to accept of these my travails , as a pledge of my well willing to my country , and of my loyal service to your majesty , whose healthful happy life and reign God continue which is Almighty . Amen . 
 Your Majesties most humble subject William Burrough . 
 