The Queens Majesties letters to Shaugh Thamas the great Sophi of Persia , sent by Arthur Edwards , William Turnbull , Matthew Tailbois , and - Peter Gerard appointed Agents for the Moscovie company , in their sixt voyage to Persia , begun in the year 1579. 
 To the most noble and invincible Emperor of Persia , King of Shirvan , Gilan , Grosin , Corassan , and great Governor of the Indies . 
 Lizabeth by the grace of God Queen of England , France and Ireland , defender of the faith , etc. To the most noble and invincible Emperor of Persia , King of Shirvan , Gilan , Grosin , Corassan , and great governor even unto the Indies , sends greeting . Most noble and in - 
 Il 1568 vincible Prince , it is now II tenne years since , or 
 394 - thereabouts , wherein ( after the honourable ambassade of 
 the noble man Anthony Jenkinson our well-beloved subject , to your most noble and invincible father performed ) we laboured to bring to pass by Thomas Bannister and Gefferey Ducket merchant's , our subject's , that throughout all the kingdoms subject to his empire , free power might be given to Will . Garrard , Thomas Ofley , William Chester knights , Rowland Haiward , Lionel Ducket , 
 212 
 William Allen , Thomas Bannister , Gefferey Ducket , Lawrence Chapman Merchant's , and unto their society , to enter into his lands and countries' at all times when they would and could , there to exercise & use their trade of merchandise , and from thence likewise after exchange or sale made of those wares , which they should bring with them with his like good leave and favour , to carry from thence those things wherewith his dominions do abound & with us be scant . Which our petition the most noble prince your father took so thankfully and in such good part , that he not only granted frank and commodious leave , as was desired : but the same he would to be unto them most free and beneficial , and to have continuance for many years and times . The benefit of the which his wonderful liberality , our subject's did enjoy with such humanity & freedom as there could be no greater , till the time that by reason of wars more and more increasing in those parts , by the which our subject's were to make their journey into Persia , they were debarred and shut from that voyage & traffic . The which traffic the said society being eftsoons desirous to renew to the weal and commodity of both our dominions they have now sent into Persia their factors & Agents Arthur Edwards , William Turnbull , Matthew Tailbois , Peter Gerrard merchant's , with their associates , whom we beseech your invincible majesty to entertain with that favour wherewith your father did embrace Tho. Bannister 8c Geffrey Ducket , and to enfranchise their whole society with that freedom , that neither they through any their misdemeanours towards your subject's , may thereof seem unworthy ( as we hope they will not ) neither we our selves otherwise enjoy them , then with the perpetuali remembrance of your good affection towards us , and with the like favourable inclination of our part towards you . The matter it self 8c tract of time shall sufficiently prove the foresaid manner of traffic unprofitable to neither of us . For so hath one God the chief 
 213 
 A.D. 
 1579 - 
 governor of all things disposed of our affairs on earth , that each one should need other . And as for our people & subject's of the English nation , in very deed your majesty shall find them made and fashioned so pliant to the performance of all duties of humanity , that it can never repent you to have granted them this frank traffic , nor shame us to have obtained it for them at your hands . That therefore it may please your majesty to yield unto them this at our request , most earnestly we beseech you . And we ( as it well beseems a prince ) if ever hereafter we may , will show our self not to be unmindful of so great a benefit . We wish your majesty well & prosperously to fare . Given at our palace of Westminster the io . day of June , in the year of our Lord 1579. and of our reign the 21. 
 