The deposition of M. William Burrough to certain Interrogatories ministered unto him concerning the Narve , Kegor , etc. to what king or prince they do appertain and are subject , made the 23 of June , 1576. 
 These articles seem to have be ministered upon the quarrel between Aiderman Bound the elder , and the Moscovie company , for his trade to the Narve without their consent . 
 First , whither the villages or towns vulgarly called The first ln-the Narve , Kegor , Pechingo and Cola , and the ports Erogatorie . 
 of the same towns , as well at the time of the grant of 
 the letters of privilege by the Emperor to our mere - [ I . 415. J chants , as also in the years of our Lord , 1566 , 1567 , 1568 , 1569 , 1570 , 1571 , 1572 , 1573 , 1574 , and 1575. 
 respectively were ( as presently they be ) of the jurisdiction , and subject to the mighty prince the Emperor of 203 
 Russia : and whither the said Emperor of Russia , by all the time aforesaid , was chief lord and governor respectively of the said places , and so vulgarly known , had , and reputed : and whither the said towns and places , and either of them be situated towards the North and Northeast or Northwest , and between the North and the East point : and be the same places whereunto by force of the said privilege , it is forbidden to any other subject to have traffic , saving to the society aforesaid . 
 To this Interrogatory the deponent says , that it is true that the villages , towns and places vulgarly called the Narve , Kegor , Pechingo and Cola , and the ports thereof , at the time of the grant of the said privilege ( as he judgeth ) were reputed respectively to be under the jurisdiction , & subject to the Emperor of Russia , and so from the time of the said grant , unto the year , 1566 , and that in the years of our Lord , 1566 , 67 , 68 , 69 , 70 , 71 , 725 73 , 74 , and 1575. respectively they were ( as presently they be ) of the jurisdiction , and subject unto the mighty prince the Emperor of Russia , and the same Emperor of Russia , by all the time aforesaid , was chief governor respectively of the said places , and so vulgarly known , had and reputed . And that all the said places are situated from London Northwards , between the East and the North , and within the grant of the letters patents , and privileges of the said company of merchant's for the discovery of new trades , and the same places whereunto by force of the said letters patents , it is forbidden to any other subject to have traffic saving to the society aforesaid . 
 Notwithstanding the Deponent says , that he hath herd it credibly reported by diverse , that the king of Denmarke of late years , or every year once , hath had one of his subject's or more by him self , or with his guide a Lappian , that hath at the places Cola , Kegor , and diverse other places in Lappia , taken of the Lappies certain tribute or head pence , which the said Lappies 
 204 
 have willingly given to win favour of the said prince , and to live quietly by his subject's , the people of Finmark which border upon their country , whereof Wardhouse is the strongest hold , & bordereth near unto them . He hath also heard that in the time of peace between the said Emperor of Russia , and the kings of Sweden , there was yearly for the king of Sweden one or more that came into Lappia unto diverse places , in manner as the king of Denmarkes servant uses to do , and did demand of them some tribute or duty which they willingly paid : but since the late wars between the said Emperor and king of Sweden , he hath not herd of any thing that hath be paid by them to the king of Sweden : such is the simplicity of this people the Lappies , that they would rather give tribute to all those that border upon their country , then by denying it have their ill wills . 
 But the truth is , as this Deponent says , that the said mighty prince the Emperor of Russia is the chief lord and governor of the said country of Lappia , his laws and order are observed by them , he takes toll and custom etc. of them . They are infidels , but if any of them become Christians it is after the Russe law . If there happen any controversy between those people , such as cannot be ended among themselves , or by the Emperors deputies in that country , they repair to the Mosko as their highest Court , and there have it ended . Between the place specified Kegor , and the confines of Finmarke aforesaid in Lappia , is the monastery Pechingo , which are monks , and use the Peeking ) Russe law , the chief or head of that abbey is always appointed by the clergy in Mosko . 
 Also in the year of our Lord 1557. the said Deponent was at the place Kegor , in the month of June , the 29. day being S. Peters day , at which time was a great assembly of people at a mars there , the Russes , Kerils and Lappians on the one side subject's to the said mighty prince the Emperor of Russia , and the Norwegians 
 205 
 or Norses and people of Finmarke subject's to the king of Denmarke on the other part , they did barter and exchange fish for other commodities . The deputy for the Russe had the chief government of the said Mars , and took toll of those people the were subject to his master , and the captain of Wardhouse had then the government of the people subject to his master the king of Denmark . He says also , that between the abbey Pechingo , and the abbey of S. Nicholas in Russia , upon the border of the said coast of Lappia , he hath be upon the shore at diverse places , where fresh rivers fallen into the Sea , where are commonly taken fresh salmons , all which places he does know for certain , that they were farmed out to the subject's of the said Emperor , and he the said Emperor received yearly the rend for them . And further he says that it hath be further credibly reported unto him , that there is not any such river or creek of fresh water which falls out of the said country of Lappia into the sea , between the said abbey Pechingo , and the bay of S. Nicholas , but they are all and every of them farmed out , and the Emperor receives the rend for them . 
 The second Item , whither as well before , as also within the Interroga - memory of men , till the time of the grant of the said letters patents any of the English merchant's ( saving the merchant's of the said society ) subject's of this realm of England , have commonly exercised or frequented business or trade in the said villages or towns called the Narve , Kegor , Pechingo , and Cola , or in any of them , or in any ports or territories of the said Emperor of Russia . 
 Thejeponents To tbis Interrogatory the Deponent answereth , that answer . the subject's of reajme before the grant of the said letters patents did not commonly exercise , neither frequent or trade to any of the said places called the Narve , Kegor , Pechingo or Cola , or to any of them . 
 