Notes in writing , beside more privy by mouth , that were given by M. Richard Hakluyt of Eiton in the County of Hereford , Esquire , Anno 1580 : to M. Arthur Pet , and to M. Charles Jackman , sent by the Merchant's of the Moscovie company for the discovery of the Northeast straight , not altogether unfit for some other enterprises of discovery , hereafter to be taken in hand . 
 What respect of Islands is to be had , and why . 
 WHereas the Portingals have in their course to their Indies in the Southeast , certain ports and fortifications to thrust into by the way , to diverse great purposes : so you are to see what Islands , and what ports you had need to have by the way in your course to the Northeast . For which cause I wish you to enter into consideration of the matter , and to note all the Islands , and to set them down in plate , to two ends : that is to say , That we may devise to take the benefit by them , And also foresee how by them the Savages or civil Princes may in any sort annoy us in our purposed trade that way . 
 And for that the people to the which we purpose in this voyage to go , be no Christians , it were good that the mass of our commodities were always in our own disposition , and not at the will of others . Therefore it were good that we did seek out some small Island in the Scythian sea , where we might plant , fortify , and staple safely , from whence ( as time should serve ) we might feed those heathen nations with our commodities without cloying them , or without venturing our whole mass in the bowels of their country . 
 And to which Island ( if need were , and if we should think so good ) we might allure the Northeast navy , 264 
 1580. the navy of Cambalu to resort with their commodities to us there planted , and stapling there . 
 And if such and Island might be found so standing as might shorten our course , and so standing , as that the navy of Cambalu , or other those parties might conveniently sail unto without their dislike in respect of distance , then would it fall out well . For so , beside less danger and more safety , our ships might there unladen and lade again , and return the self same summer to the ports of England or of Norway . 
 And if such and Island may be for the stapling of our commodities , to the which they of Cambalu would not sail , yet we might , having ships there , employ them in passing between Cambalu and that stapling place . 
 Respect of havens and harborowes . 
 A Nd if no such Islands may be found in the Scythian sea towards the firm of Asia , then are you to search out the ports that be about Nova Zembla , all along the tract of that land , to the end you may winter there the first year , if you be let by contrary winds , and to the end that if we may in short time come unto Cambalu , and unladen and set sail again for return without venturing there at Cambalu , that you may on your way come as far in return as a port about Nova Zembla : that the summer following , you may the sooner be in England for the more speedy vent of your East commodities , and for the speedier discharge of your Mariners : if you cannot go forward and back in one self same Summer . 
 And touching the tract of the land of Nova Zembla , towards the East out of the circle Arcticke in the more temperate Zone , you are to have regard : for if you find the soil planted with people , it is like that in time and ample vent of our warm woollen clothes may be found . And if there be no people at all there to be A good confound , then you shall specially note what plenty of sideration . whale's , and of other fish is to be found there , to the 
 265 
 end we may turn our new found land fishing or Island fishing , or our whalefishing that way , for the aid and comfort of our new trades to the Northeast to the coasts of Asia . 
 Respect of fish and certain other things . 
 A Nd if the air may be found upon that tract temperate , and the soil yielding wood , water , land and grass , and the seas fish , then we may plant on that main the offals of our people , as the Portingals do in Brasill , and so they may in our fishing in our passage , and diverse ways yield commodity to England by harbouring and victualling us . 
 And it may be , that the inland there may yield masts , pitch , tar , hemp , and all things for the Navy , as plentifully as Eastland does . 
 The Islands to be noted with their commodities and wants . 
 TO note the Islands , whither they be high land or low land , mountain or flat , gravelly , clay , chalky , or of what soil , woody or not woody , with springs and rivers or not , and what wild beasts they have in the same . 
 And whither there seem to be in the same apt matter to built withal , as stone free or rough , and stone to make lime withal , and wood or coal to burn the same withal . 
 To note the goodness or the badness of the havens and harborowes in the Islands . 
 If a straight be found , what is to be done , and what great importance it may be of . 
 A Nd if there be a straight in the passage into the Scythian seas , the same is specially and with great regard to be noted , especially if the same straight be narrow and to be kept . I say it is to be noted as a thing that doth much import : for what prince soever shall be Lord of the same , and shall possess the same , as 266 
 the king of Denmarke doth possess the straight of Denmarke , he only shall have the trade out of these regions into the Northeast parts of the world for himself , and for his private profit , or for his subject's only , or to enjoy wonderful benefit of the toll of the same , like as the king of Denmarke does enjoy of his straights , by suffering the merchant's of other Princes to pass that way . If any such straight be found , the elevation , the high or low land , the havens near , the length of the straights , and all other such circumstances are to be set down for many purposes : and all the Mariners in the voyage are to be sworn to keep close all such things , that other Princes prevent us not of the same , after our return upon the disclosing of the Mariners , if any such thing should hap . 
 Which way the Savage may be made able to [ I . 439-1 purchase our cloth and other their wants . 
 IF you find any Island or main land populous , and that the same people hath need of cloth , then are you to devise what commodities they have to purchase the same withal . 
 If they be poor , then are you to consider of the soil , and how by any possibility the same may be made to enrich them , that hereafter they may have something to purchase the cloth withal . 
 If you enter into any main by portable river , and shall find any great woods , you are to note what kind of timber they be of , that we may know whither they are for pitch , tar , masts , dealeboord , clapboord , or for building of ships or houses , for so , if the people have no use of them , they may be brought perhaps to use . 
 Not to venture the loss of any one man . 
 YOu must have great care to preserve your people , since your number is so small , and not to venture any one man in any wise . 
 267 
 To bring home beside merchandise certain trifles . 
 BRing home with you ( if you may ) from Cambalu or other civil place , one or other young man , although you leave one for him . 
 Also the fruits of the Countries' if they will not of themselves dure , dry them and so preserve them . 
 And bring with you the kernels of pears and apples , and the stones of such stonefruits as you shall find there . 
 Also the seeds of all strange herbs & flowers , for such seeds of fruits and herbs coming from another part of the world , and so far off , will delight the fancy of many for the strangeness , and for that the same may grow , and continue the delight long time . 
 If you arrive at Cambalu or Quinsay , to bring thence the map of that country , for so shall you have the perfect description , which is to great purpose . 
 To bring thence some old printed book , to see whither they have had print there before it was devised in Europe as some write . 
 To note their force by sea and by land . 
 IF you arrive in Cambalu or Quinsay , to take a speciali view of their Navy , and to note the force , greatness , manner of building of them , the sails , the tackles , the anchors , the furniture of them , with ordinance , armour , and munition . 
 Also , to note the force of the walls and bulwarks of their cities , their ordonnance , and whither they have any calivers , and what powder and shot . 
 To note what armour they have . 
 What swords . 
 What pikes , halberds and bills . 
 What horses of force , and what light horses they have . 
 And so throughout to note the force of the Country both by sea and by land . 
 268 
 Things to be marked to make conjectures by . 
 TO take speciali note of their buildings , and of the ornaments of their houses within . 
 Take a speciali note of their apparel and furniture , and of the substance that the same is made of , of which a Merchant may make a guess as well of their commodity , as also of their wants . 
 To note their Shops and Warehouses , and with what commodities they abound , the price also . 
 To see their Shambles , and to view all such things as are brought into the Markets , for so you shall soon see the commodities , and the manner of the people of the inland , and so give a guess of many things . 
 To note their fields of grain , and their trees of fruit , and how they abound or not abound in one and other , and what plenty or scarcity of fish they have . 
 Things to be carried with you , whereof more or less is to be carried for a show of our commodities to be made . 
 KArsies of all orient colours , specially of stamell , broadcloth of orient colours also . 
 Frizadoes , Motlies , Bristow friezes , Spanish blankets , Bays of all colours , specially with Stamel , Worsteds , Carels , Says , Woadmols , Flanels , Rash , etc. 
 Felts of diverse colours . 
 TafFeta hats . 
 Deep caps for Mariners coloured in Stamel , whereof if ample vent may be found , it would turn to and infinite commodity of the common poor people by knitting . 
 Quilted caps of Levant taffeta of diverse colours , for the night . 
 Knit stocks of silk of orient colours . 
 Knit stocks of Jerzie yarn of orient colours , whereof if ample vent might follow the poor multitude should be set in work . 
 260 
 Stocks of karsie of diverse colours for men and for women . 
 Garters of silk of several kinds , and of colours diverse . 
 Girdles of Buff and all other leather , with gilded and ungilt buckles , specially waste girdles , waste girdles of velvet . 
 Gloves of all sorts knit , and of leather . 
 Gloves perfumed . 
 Points of all sorts of silk , thread , and leather , of all manner of colours . 
 Shoes of Spanish leather of diverse colours , of diverse length , cut and uncut . 
 Shoes of other leather . 
 Velvet shoes and pantofle . 
 These shoes and pantofle to be sent this time , rather for a show then for any other cause . 
 Purses knit , and of leather . 
 Nightcaps knit , and other . 
 A garnish of pewter for a show of a vent of that English commodity , bottles , flagons , spoons , etc. of that mettle . 
 Glasses of English making . 
 Venice glasses . 
 Looking glasses for women , great and fair . 
 Small dials a few for proof , although there they will not hold the order they do here . 
 Spectacles of the common sort . 
 Others of Crystal trimmed with silver , and otherwise . 
 Hour glasses . ) J Combes of box . 
 Combes of Ivory . J [ Combes of horn . 
 Linen of diverse sorts . 
 Handkerchiefs with silk of several colours wrought . 
 Glazen eyes to ride with against dust . 
 Knives in sheaths both single and double , of good edge . 
 Needles great and small of every kind . 
 Buttons greater and smaller , with moulds of leather 
 270 
 1580. and not of wood , and such as be durable of double silk , and that of sundry colours . 
 Boxes with weights for gold , and of every kind of the coin of gold , good and bad , to show that the people here use weight and measure , which is a certain show of wisdom , and of certain government settled here . 
 All the several silver coins of our English moneys , to be carried with you to be showed to the governors at Cambalu , which is a thing that shall in silence speak to wise men more then you imagine . 
 Locks and keys , hinges , bolts , hasps , etc. great and small of excellent workmanship , whereof if vent may be , hereafter we shall set our subject's in work , which you must have in great regard . For in finding ample vent of any thing that is to be wrought in this realm , is more worth to our people beside the gain of the merchant , then Christchurch , Bridewell , the Savoy , and all the Hospitals of England . 
 For banqueting on shipboard persons of credit . 
 First , the sweetest perfumes to set under hatches to make you place sweet against their coming aboard , if you arrive at Cambalu , Quinsey , or in any such great city , & not among Savages . 
 Marmelade . I J Figs barrelled . [ I. 441. J 
 Sucket . J ( Raisins of the sun . 
 Comfets of diverse kinds made of purpose by him that is most excellent , that shall not dissolve . 
 Prunes damask . ) ( Walnuts . 
 Dried Pears . j ( Almonds . 
 Smalnuts . 
 Olives to make them taste their wine . 
 The apple John that dureth two years to make show of our fruits . 
 Hullock . } { Sack . 
 Vials of good sweet waters , and casting bottles of glasses to besprinkle the guests withal , after their coming aboard . 
 271 
 Sugar to use with their wine if they will . 
 The sweet oil of Zante , and excellent French vinegar , and a fine kind of Biscuit stieped in the same do make a banqueting dish , and a little Sugar cast in it cooleth and comforts , and refresheth the spirits of man . 
 Cynamon water is to be had with you to make a I show of by taste , and also to comfort 
 Imperiali water J your sick in the voyage . 
 With these and such like , you may banquet where you arrive the greater and best persons . 
 Or with the gift of these Marmelades in small boxes , or small vials of sweet waters you may gratify by way of gift , or you may make a merchandise of them . 
 The Map of England and of London . 
 Take with you the map of England set out in fair colours , one of the biggest sort I mean , to make show of your country from whence you come . 
 And also the large Map of London to make show of your City . And let the river be drawn full of Ships of all sorts , to make the more show of your great trade and traffic in trade of merchandise . 
 Ortelius book of Maps . 
 If you take Ortelius book of Maps with you to mark all these Regions , it were not amiss : and if need were , to present the same to the great Can , for it would be to a Prince of marvellous account . 
 The book of the attire of all Nations . 
 Such a book carried with you and bestowed in gift would be much esteemed , as I persuade my self . 
 Books . 
 If any man will lend you the new Herbal and such Books as make show of herbs , plants , trees , fish , fowls and beasts of these regions , it may much delight 272 
 timdum dedit Ortons inortald^rGan Orbi / ^vbtanfumCjaiC’iis Oitdium . e^ 
 ABRAHAM ORTELIUS 
 the great Can , and the nobility , and also their merchant's to have the view of them : for all things in these parts so much differing from the things of those regions , since they may not be here to see them , by mean of the distance , yet to see those things in a shadow , by this mean will delight them . 
 The book of Rates . 
 TAke with you the book of Rates , to the end you may prick all those commodities there specified , that you shall chance to find in Cambalu , in Quinsey , or in any part of the East , where you shall chance to be . 
 Parchment . 
 Rolls of Parchment , for that we may vent much without hurt to the Realm , and it lies in small room . 
 Glew . 
 To carry Glew , for that we have plenty and want vent . Red Ochre for Painters . 
 To seek vent because we have great mines of it , and have no vent . 
 Soap of both kinds . 
 To try what vent it may have , for that we make of both kinds , and may perhaps make more . 
 Saffron . 
 To try what vent you may have of Saffron , because this realm yields the best of the world , and for the e and other labours may set the poor greatly in work to their relief . 
 Aquavitae . 
 By new devises wondered quantities may be made here , and therefore to seek the vent . 
 Black Conies skins . 
 To try the vent at Cambalu , for that it lies towards the North , and for that we abound with the commodity , and may spare it . 
 Thread of all colours . 
 The vent thereof may set our people in work . in 273 s 
 To see the vent for it may set our people in work . A note and Caveat for the Merchant . 
 That before you offer your commodities to sale , you endeavour to learn what commodities the country there hath . For if you bring thither velvet , tafFeta , spice , or any such commodity that you your self desire to lade your self home with , you must not fell yours deer , lest hereafter you purchase theirs not so cheap as you would . 
 Seeds for sale . 
 Carry with you for that purpose all sorts of garden seeds , as well of sweet strawing herbs and of flowers , as also of pot herbs and all sorts for roots , etc. 
 Led of the first melting . 
 Led of the second melting of the slags . 
 To make trial of the vent of Led of all kinds . 
 English iron , and wier of iron and copper . 
 To try the sale of the same . 
 Brimstone . 
 To try the vent of the same , because we abound with it made in the Realm . 
 Antimony a Minerali . 
 To see whither they have any ample use there for it , for that we may lade whole navies of it and have no use of it unless it be for some small portion in founding of bells , or a little that the Alchemists use : of this you may have two sorts at the Apothecaries . 
 Tinder boxes with Steel , Flint & Matches and Tinder , the Matches to be made of Juniper to avoid the offence of Brimstone . 
 To try and make the better sale of Brimstone by showing the use . 
 Candles of Wax to light . 
 A painted Bellows . 
 For that perhaps they have not the use of them . 
 274 
 To try the sale , for that it is a natural commodity of this Realm . 
 All manner of edge tools . 
 To be sold there or to the less civil people by the way where you shall touch . 
 What I would have you there to remember . 
 To note specially what excellent dying they use in these regions , and therefore to note their garments and ornaments of houses : and to see their Die houses and the Materials & Simples that they use about the same , and to bring musters and shows of the colours and of the materials , for that it may serve this clothing realm to great purpose . 
 To take with you for your own use . 
 All manner of engines to take fish and foul . 
 To take with you those things that be in perfection of goodness . 
 For as the goodness now at the first may make your commodities in credit in time to come : so false and Sophisticate commodities shall draw you and all your commodities into contempt and ill opinion . 
 