A Letter sent from her Highness to the said great Duke of Russia , by sir Hierome Bows aforesaid , her Majesties Ambassador . 
 312 
 The same in English . 
 ELizabeth by the grace of God , Queen of England , France , and Ireland , defender of the faith , etc. to the most excellent Prince and Lord , John Basiliwich , by the same grace of God , King and great Duke of all Russia , Volodomer , Moscovie , and Novogrod , King of Cazan and Astracan , Lord of Plesco , and great Duke of Smolensco , of Tuer , Ugor , and Permie , Viatsca , Bolhar , and others , Lord and great Duke of Novogrod in the low country , of Cherniga , Rezan , Polotsko , Rostove , Jaroslave , Bealozera , Lifland , Oudor , Obdor , and Condensa , and Governor of all the land of Siberia , and of the North parts and others , her dearest brother and friend , Salutations . 
 Most excellent Prince , most deer brother and friend , by those things which the worthy ambassador of your excellency declared unto us , we have understood how kindly it would be taken , if we should send to your 313 
 excellency and ambassador from us , with commandment and instructions . In which matter your honourable request hath so much pleased us , that we could not any manner of way satisfy our selves , except we performed the same . And having purposed with our self so to do , we thought of , and remembered Jerome Bowes Knight , a gentleman of quality of our household , a man very much beloved of us , whom at this present we send unto your Majesty , and to whose wisdom and faithfulness we have committed all , whatsoever we take to appertain to the advancement of both our honours indifferently . In the discharge of which service , we doubt not but that all care and diligence shall be used on his part , so that we entreat your Majesty to give him credence in the prosecuting of those things which he hath from us in commandment , no less then to our self , if we were present . And whereas Doctor Jacob. Robert Jacob doctor of physic is a man very deer unto us , whom the last year we sent unto your excellency , we desire that he may have that favour and estimation with you , which good princes think a most honest and virtuous man worthy of : for had we not carried great respect to our mutual friendship , and endeavour to gratify your Majesty , we should in no case have parted with him . And seeing we continue still the same good will towards your excellency , we do even promise to our self your honourable kindnesses towards him : and we pray the almighty God to preserve your Majesty in good safety and health . Given at our palace of Greene-wich the 19 day of June , in the year of our Lord 1583 , and of our reign the five and twentieth . 
 