Instructions and notes very necessary and needful to be observed in the purposed voyage for discovery of Cathay Eastwards , by Arthur Pet , and Charles Jackman : given by M. William Burrough . 1580. 
 WHen you come to Orfordnesse , if the wind do serve you to go a seaboard the sands , do you set off from thence , and note the time diligently of your being against the said Ness , turning then your glass , whereby you intend to keep your continual watch , and appoint such course as you shall think good , according as the wind serves you : and from that time forward continually ( if your ship be loose , under sail , a hull or try ) do you at the end of every 4. glasses at the least ( except calm ) found with your dipsin led , and note diligently what depth you find , and also the ground . But if it happen by swiftness of the ships way , or otherwise , that you cannot get ground , yet note what depth you did prove , and could find no ground ( this note is to be observed all your voyage , as well outward as homeward . ) But when you come upon any coast , or do find any should bank in the sea , you are then to use your lead oftener , as you shall think it requisite , noting diligently the order of your depth , and the deeping and sholding . And so likewise do you note the depths into harboroughs , rivers , etc. 
 And in keeping your dead reckoning , it is very necessary that you do note at the end of every foure glasses , what way the ship hath made ( by your best proofs to be used ) and how her way hath be through the water , considering withal for the sag of the sea , to leewards , accordingly as you shall find it grown : and also to note the depth , and what things worth the noting happened in that time , with also the wind upon what point you find it then , and of what force or strength it is , and what sails you bear . 
 259 
 How to note down in his Jornall of the voyage , his dead reckoning , and other observations . 
 But if you should omit to note those things at the end of every foure glasses , I would not have you to let it slip any longer time , then to note it diligently at the end of every watch , or eight glasses at the farthest . 
 Do you diligently observe the latitude as often , and in as many places as you may possible , and also the variation of the Compass ( especially when you may be at shore upon any land ) noting the same observations truly , and the place and places where , and the time and times when you do the same . 
 When you come to have sighed of any coast or land whatsoever , do you presently set the same with your sailing Compass , how it bears off you , noting your judgement how far you think it from you , drawing also the form of it in your book , how it appears unto you , noting diligently how the highest or notablest part thereof bears off you , and the extremes also in For noting the sighed of the same land at both ends , distinguishing them the^and^t etters > & ■ . C. c - Afterwards when you have / rst discovery , sailed 1. 2. 3. or 4. glasses ( at the most ) noting diligently yr . what way your bark hath made , and upon what point of the Compass , do you again set that first land seen , or the parts thereof , that you first observed , if you can well perceive or discern them , and likewise such other notable points or signs , upon the land that you may then see , and could not perceive at the first time , distinguishing it also by letters from the other , and drawing in your book the shape of the same land , as it appears unto you , and so the third time , etc. 
 And also in passing alongst by any and every coast , do you draw the manner of biting in of every Bay , and entrance of every harbour or rivers mouth , with the lying out of every point , or headland , ( unto the which you may give apt names at your pleasure ) and make some mark in drawing the form and border of the same , where the high cliffs are , and where low land is , whither sand , hills , or woods , or whatsoever , not omitting to note any thing that may be sensible 260 
 and apparent to you , which may serve to any good purpose . If you carefully with great heed and diligence , note the observations in your book , as aforesaid , and afterwards make demonstration thereof in your plate , you shall thereby perceive how far the land you first saw , or the parts thereof observed , was then from you , and consequently of all the rest : and also how far the one part was from the other , and upon what course or point of the Compass the one lies from the other . 
 And when you come upon any coast where you find floods and ebbs , do you diligently note the time of the highest and lowest water in every place , and the slake or still water of full sea , and low water , and also which way the flood doth run , how the tides do set , how much water it hieth , and what force the tide hath to drive a ship in one hour , or in the whole tide , as near as you can judge it , and what difference in time you find between the running of the flood , and the ebb . And if you find upon any coast the currant to run always one way , do you also note the same duly , how it sets in every place , and observe what force it hath to drive a ship in one hour , etc. 
 Item , as often and when as you may conveniently come upon any land , to make observation for the latitude and variation , etc. do you also ( if you may ) with your instrument , for trying of distances , observe the platform of the place , and of as many things ( worth the noting ) as you may then conveniently see from time to time . These order if you diligently observe , you may thereby perfectly set down in the plots , that I have given you your whole travel , and description of your discovery , which is a thing that will be chiefly expected at your hands . But withal you may not forget to note as much as you can learn , understand or perceive of the manner of the soil , or fruitfulness of every place and country you shall come in , and of the manner , shape , attire and disposition of the people , and of the commodities they have , and what they most 
 261 
 A.D. 
 1580. 
 For observing of tides and currants . 
 To take the platforms of ■ places within compass of view upon land . 
 covet and desire of the commodities you carry with you . It behooveth you to give trifling things unto such people as you shall happen to see , and to offer them all courtesy and friendship you may or can , to win their love and favour towards you , not doing or offering them any wrong or hurt . And though you should be offered wrong at their hands , yet not to revenge the same lightly , but by all means possible seek to win them , yet always dealing wisely and with such circumspection that you keep your selves out of their dangers . 
 Thus I beseech God Almighty to bless you , and prosper your voyage with good and happy success , and send you safely to return home again , to the great joy and rejoicing of the adventurers with you , and all your friends , and our whole country , Amen . 
 