Instructions made by the company of English merchant's for discovery of new trades , unto Richard Gibs , William Biggat , John Backhouse , William Freeman , John Haly , and James Woodcock , etc. master's of the 9 ships , and one bark that we had freighted for a voyage with them to be made ( by the grace of God ) from hence to S. Nicholas in Russia , and back again : which ships being now in the river of Thames are presently ready to depart upon the said voyage , with the next apt winds that may serve thereunto : and with this Fleet afterwards was joined M. Christopher Carlisle with the Tiger . The 1 of June 1582. 
 Orasmuch as the number of ships which we purpose to send in this Fleet together for Saint Nicholas in Russia is greater then at any time heretofore we have sent thither , as also for that some speeches are given out that you shall be met withal by such as with force & 
 violence will assault you as enemies , to the end that good 3°3 
 order may be established among you for keeping together in company , and uniting your forces , as well for the better direction to be had in your navigation , as also for your more safety and strength against the enemy , we have thought good to appoint among you and Admiral and Viceadmiral , and that all of you and every one particularly shall be bound in the sum of one hundred pounds to keep company together . 
 2 Because the Salomon is the biggest ship , best appointed , and of greatest force to defend or offend the enemy , we do therefore appoint that ship Admiral , which shall wear the flag in the main top . 
 3 The Thomas Allen being a good ship and well appointed , and for that the master of her is the ancientest master of the Fleet that hath taken charge that way , we do appoint the same ship to be Viceadmiral , and to wear the flag in the foretop . 
 4 And for that the master of the Prudence is of great experience , and knowledge in that voyage , we do appoint that he with the master of the Admiral and Viceadmiral shall confer , consult and agree upon the courses and directions that shall be used in this voyage , and it shall be lawful unto the master of the Admiral , with the consent of M. Gibs , and M. Biggat , or one of them to make his courses and directions from time to time during the whole voyage , and all the fleet are to follow and observe the same without straying or breaking of company at any time upon the penalty before specified . 
 5 The appointing of the ships for Admiral and Viceadmiral , and those men to consult and agree upon the courses and directions of the voyage , as aforesaid , hath be done by the consents and with the liking of you all , and therefore we doubt not but that you will all carefully and willingly observe the premises . 
 6 Item , we have thought good to put you in mind , that at such times as you may conveniently from time to time , you do assemble and meet together , to consider , consult , and determine upon such articles as you shall 3°4 
 INSTRUCTIONS FOR RUSSIAN FLEET a.d. 
 1582. 
 think necessary to be propounded touching your best safety and defence against all forces that may be offered you in this voyage , as well outward bound , and while you shall remain in the road and bay of S. Nicholas , as also homewards bound , and that which you shall agree upon , or that which most of you shall consent unto , cause it to be set down in writing for record , which may serve for and act among your selves to bind you all to observe the same . 
 7 We have appointed James Woodcock in the small bark to attend upon you , & to receive his directions from you . You are therefore to remember well what conference and talk hath be had with you here before your going touching you said bark , to what purposes she may best serve , and the manner how to employ her , and thereupon to give your order and direction unto him , as the time and place shall require . 
 8 Item , if you shall understand as you are outward bound , that the enemy is gone before you to S. Nicholas , remember what advice hath be given you for your stay at Berozova Ustia , till you have by espials viewed and Berozova understood the forces , and the manner of their abided at Ustia . that place . 
 9 And if in the sea either outward or homeward , or in the time of your abided at anchor at Saint Nicholas , you shall be assaulted by force of any , as enemy whatsoever , you are to defend your selves with such forces as you may or can : trust not too far , neither give place to inconvenience . 
 10 You will not forget what conference we had touching your passing outward bound by Wardhouse , to view and understand what you can at that place , and to show your selves , to see if there be any there that have a mind to speak with you , for that we think it better then , & thereabouts , then afterwards or else where . 
 11 While you shall remain in the road at S. Nicholas , be circumspect and careful to have your ships in readiness , and in good order always , and upon all suddens . 
 in 3°5 u 
 The greatest danger unto you in that place will be while you shall shift your ships : therefore you are to consider of it , but the fittest time for you to do the same , will be when the wind is Southerly off the shore , or calm , and at such time you may the better do it without danger . You must take such order among you , that your companies may be always willing and ready to help one the other , and appoint among your selves such ships to shift first , and such after , in such sort and form as you shall think best and most convenient . And while they shall be in discharging , shifting , and lading , let the rest of your companies which have not then to do in lading or discharging , help those ships that shall have labour to do , as well for carrying the barks from ships to the shore , or from shore to the ship with your boats , as also for any other help that they shall have need of . 
 12 Remember what hath be said unto you touching 
 the moring of your ships , etc. for using advantage against the enemy , if you shall be assaulted in that place . 
 13 See that you serve God , abolish swearing and gaming , be careful of fire and candles , etc. 
 14 You are to consult and agree among your selves upon signs , tokens , and good order for the better keeping of company together , and also the manner how and by what means , rescue , aid , or help may be given by one to the other in fight , if you happen to come to it . 
 Thus we pray God to send you a prosperous voyage and safe return . 
 