The manner of the preferring of suits in Russia , by the example of our English merchant's bill , exhibited to the Emperor . 
 JOhn Basiliwich , Lord , King , and great Duke of all Russia , the English merchant's , William , son of Thomas , with his company sue unto . 
 Lord , in the 7082. year of the world's creation , thy Majesties treasurer , nam Gregorie Mekitowich Boroz-den , took of us for thy use 12. poods of loaf sugar , prised at 8. robles the pood , which sugar was sent to the II Sloboda . More , the said Gregorie treasurer , took of us II The Empe-for thy Majesty 200. reams of paper , prised at 20. rours altines the ream , for all which the money hath not be ' paid which amounteth to 216. robles . 
 And in the 84. year thy diake Stephan Lighachdo took of us for thy Majesty copper plataeae , for the sum of 1032. robles and one fourth part unpaid for . 
 Also in the said 84. year thy Majesties diakes called Ivan Blasghoy , and Ivan Sobakin took of us for thy use , sundry commodities , and have not paid 630. robles , the rest of the money due for the said goods . 
 In the 85. year thy Majesties treasurer Peter Gholoven took of us for thy Majesty , cloth of sundry sorts , and hath not paid of the money due therefore 538. robles . 
 In the 88. year , thy diakes Andrea Shalkan , and Istomay Yevskoy took of us led for thy Majesty , to the valve of 267. robles and a half not paid . 
 And in the same year thy Majesties diak Boris Gregoriwich had for thy use 15. broad clothes of diverse 329 
 sorts , prised at 210. robles , whereof 90. robles are unpaid . 
 Also in the said 88. year thy diak Andrea Shalkan took from us 1000. robles for thee ( Lord ) in ready money , yet we know not whither by thy Majesties appointment . 
 And also in the 89. year ( Lord ) thy diak Andrea Shalkan took from us for thy Majesty 500. robles , we know not whither by thy Majesties order or no , because that thy authorized people do yearly take away from us , neither do they give us right in any cause . 
 All the money ( Lord ) which is not paid us out of thy Majesties treasury for our commodities or wares , with the money taken from us by Andrea Shalkan , is 4273. robles 25. all tines . 
 Right noble king and Lord , show thy mercy , and cause the money to be paid us which is owing for our goods , as also that which hath been taken from us : extend thy favour , King and Lord . 
 