Master Horsey having received the letters and requests of the Emperor , provided for his journey over land , . and departed from Mosco the lift day of September , thence unto Otver , to Torshook , to great Novogrod , to Vobsky , and thence to Nyhouse in Livonia , to Wenden , and so to Riga : ( where he was beset , and brought forthwith before a Cardinali called Ragevil , but yet suffered to pass in the end : ) From thence to Mito , to Golden , and Libou in Curland , to Memel , to Konings-burgh in Prussia , to Elbing , to Dantzike , to Stetine in Pomerland , to Rostock , to Lubeck , to Hamborough , to Breme , to Emden , and by sea to London . Being arrived at her majesties royal court , and having delivered the Emperor's letters with good favour , and gracious acceptance , he was forthwith again commanded to repass into Russia , with other letters from her majesty to the Emperor , and prince Boris Pheodorowich , answering the Emperor's letters , and withal requesting the favour and friendship , which his father had yielded to the English merchant's : and hereunto was he earnestly also solicited by the merchant's of London themselves of that company , to deal in their behalf . Being thus dispatched from London by sea , he arrived in Mosco , the 20. of April 1586. and was very honorably welcomed . And 345 
 M. Horseis voyage from Mosco to England overland . 
 1586. 
 for you merchant's behoof , obtained all his requests , being therein specially favoured by you noble prince Boris Pheodorowich , who always affected M. Horsey with speciali liking . And having obtained privileges for the merchant's , he was recommended from the Emperor again , to the Queen of England his mistress , by whom the prince Boris , in token of his honourable and good opinion of the Queen's majesty , sent her highness a royal present of Sables , Luzarns , cloth of gold and other rich things . So that the Company of English merchant's , next to their thankfulness to her majesty , are to account M. Horseis pains their speciali benefit , who obtained for them those privileges , which in twentie years before would not be granted . 
 The manner of M. Horseis last dispatch from the Emperor , because it was very honourable , I thought good to record . He was freely allowed post horses for him and his servants , victuals and all other necessaries for his long journey ; at every town that he came unto from Mosco to Vologda , which is by land five hundred miles , he received the like free and bountiful allowances , at the Emperor's charge . New victuali and provision were given him upon the river Dwina at every town by the kings officers , being one thousand miles in length . When he came to the new castle called Archangel , he was received of the Duke Knez Vasili Andrewich Isveno-gorodsky by the Emperor's commission into the Castle , , gunners being set in ranks after their use , where he was sumptuously feasted : from thence he was dispatched with bountiful provision and allowance in the Dukes boat , with one hundred men to row him , and one hundred Gunners in other boats to conduct him , with a gentleman captain of the Gunners . Coming to the road where the English , Dutch , and French ships road , the gunners discharged , and the ships shot in like manner 46. pieces of their ordinance , & so he was brought ta his lodging at the English house upon Rose Island . 
 And that which was the full and complete conclusion 
 346 
 of the favour of the Emperor and Boris Pheodorowich towards M. Horsey , there were the next day sent him for his further provision upon the sea by a gentleman and a captain the things following . 
 16. live oxen . 
 70. sheep . 
 600. hens . 
 25. flitches of Bacon . 
 80. bushels of meal . 
 600. loaves of bred . 
 2000. eggs . 
 10. geese . 
 2. cranes . 
 2. swans . 
 65. gallons of mead . 
 40. gallons of Aquavitas . 
 60. gallons of beer . 
 3. young bears . 
 4. hawks . 
 Store of onions and garlic . 
 10. fresh salmons . 
 A wild boar . 
 All these things were brought him down by a Gentleman of the Emperor's , and another of prince Boris Pheodorowich , & were received in order by John Frese servant to M. Horsey , together with and honourable present and reward from the prince Boris , sent him by M. Francis Cherry and Englishman : which present was a whole very rich piece of cloth of gold , & a fair pair of Sables . This Gentleman hath observed many other rare things concerning those parts , which hereafter ( God willing ) at more convenient time and laisure shall come to light . 
 