The description of the regions , people , and rivers , lying North and East from Moscovia : as the way from Moscovia to the river Petzora , and the Province Jugaria or Juhra , and from thence to the river Obi. Likewise the description of other countries' and regions , even unto the Empire of the great Can of Cathay , taken out of Sigismundus ab Herberstein . 
 He dominion of the Prince of Moscovia , reaches far towards the East and North , unto the places which we will now describe . As concerning which thing , I translated a book y‘ was presented unto me in the Moscovites tongue , and have here made a brief rehearsal of the same . 
 I will first therefore describe the journey from Moscovia to Petzora , and so to Jugaria and Obi. From Moscovia to the ci tie of Vologda , are numbered five hundred versts , one versed containing almost the space of and Italian mile . From Vologda to Ustiug towards the right hand , descending with the course of the river of Vologda and Suchana with whom it joineth , are counted five hundred verstes , where within two versts of the town called Strelze , and hard by the city of Ustiug , Suchana joineth unto lug 405 
 The dominion of the Duke of Moscovia . 
 Vdogda . 
 Versed . 
 Ustiug . 
 lug . So called of his swift and pleasant stream . 
 Pienega . 
 Nicholai . 
 Kulvio . 
 The regions by the North sea . 
 Pieza . 
 Piescoia . 
 Rubicho . 
 Czircho . 
 Czilma . 
 Petzora . 
 which runneth from the South : from whose mouth unto the springs of the same , are numbered five hundred versts . 
 But Suchana and lug , after they join together , loose their first names , and make but one river nam Dwina , by the which the passage to the city of Colmogro containeth five hundred versts , from whence , in the space of sixe days journey , Dwina entereth into the North Ocean at sixe mouths . And the greatest part of this journey consisteth by Navigation . For by land from Vologda unto Colmogro , passing over the river Uvaga , are a thousand verstes . Not far from Colmogro , the river Pienega running from the East on the right hand for the space of seven hundred versts , falls into Dwina . From Dwina by the river Pienega , by the space of two hundred versts , they come to a place called Nicholai , from whence within half a versed ships have passage into the river Kulvio , which hath his originali from a lake of the same name toward the North , from whose springs is eight days voyage to the mouth of the same , where it entereth the Ocean . 
 Sailing by the coasts of the right hand of the sea , they pass by the regions of Stanuwische , Calunczscho , and Apnu : And sailing about the promontory or cape of Chorogoski Nosz , Stanuwische , Camenckh , and Tolstickh , they come at length into the river Mezen , and from thence in the space of sixe days , to a village of the same name , standing in the mouth of the river Pieza , by the which again ascending towards the left hand 8c summer East , they come to the river Piescoia : from whence sailing for the space of five versts , they come into two lake's , in the which are seen two ways : whereof one on the right side , goes to the river Rubicho , by the which they pass to the river Czircho . Other , by and other and shorter way , bring their ships from the lake directly into Czircho : from whence , except they be hindered by tempest , they come in the space of three weeks to the river and mouth of Czilma , flowing into the great river Petzora , which in that 406 
 OF THE NORTH AND EAST REGIONS a.d. 
 1588. 
 place is two versts in breadth . Sailing from thence , they come in the space of sixe days to the Town and castle of Pustosero , near unto the which , Petzora Pustosero . entereth into the North Ocean at sixe mouths . The inhabitants of this place , are men of simple wit : they received the faith of Christ , and were baptised in the year M.D.xviii . 
 From the mouth of Czilma unto the mouth of the river Ussa , going by Petzora , is one months voyage . Ussa . Ussa hath his springs in the mountain * Poyas Semnoi , * Cingulus being on the left hand towards the summer East , and mun^-springeth out of a great stone of the same mountain , called Camen Bolschoi . From the springs of Ussa to the mouths of the same , are numbered more then a thousand versts . Furthermore , Petzora runneth from this south winter part , from whence ascending from the mouths of Ussa , unto the mouths of the river Stzuchogora , is three weeks voyage . They that described this voyage said that they rested between the mouths of the rivers of Stzuchogora and Potzscheriema , and Stzuchogora . left their victuals there which they brought with them Potzscheriema from Russia . Beyond the rivers of Petzora and Stzuchogora towards the mountain Camenipoias , and Camenipoias . the sea with the Hands thereabouts , and the Castle of Pustosero , are diverse and innumerable nations , which by one common name are called Samoged ( that is ) Samoged . such as eat themselves . They have great increase of an fowls , birds , and diverse kinds of beasts : as Sables , & easts-Marternes , Bevers , Otters , Hermelines , Squirrels : and in the Ocean the beast called a Mors : Also Vesse , white Bears , Wolves , Hares , Equiwodvani , great Whale's , and a fish called Semfi , with diverse other . 
 The people of these nations come not to Moscovia : For they are wild , and flee the company and society Wild people . of other men . 
 From the mouths of Stzuchogora , sailing up the river unto Poiassa , Artawische , Cameni , and Poiassa Poiassa . the greater , is three weeks voyage . Furthermore , the 
 407 
 Sibut . 
 Lepin . 
 Sossa . 
 Obi. 
 Kitaisko . 
 Uvogolici . 
 Irtische . 
 Jerom. 
 Tumen . 
 Grustina . 
 Kitai . 
 Black men withoutspeech . 
 Serponow . Lucomoria . 
 Men that perelp die and revive . 
 A strange trade of merchandise . 
 ascending to the mount Camen , is three days journey : from the which descending they come to the river Artawischa , and from thence to the river Sibut , from whence they pass to the Castle of Lepin , and from Lepin to the river Sossa . The people that inhabit the region by this river , are called Uvogolici . Leaving Sossa on the right hand , they come to the great river Obi , that springs out of the lake Kitaisko , the which , with all the haste they could make , they could scarcely pass over in one day , the river being of such breadth that it reaches fourescore versts . The people also that dwell about the river , are called Uvogolici and Ugritzschi . From the Castle of Obea , ascending by the river of Oby , unto the river Irtische , into the which Sossa entereth , is three months journey . In these places are two Castles nam Jerom and Tumen , kept by certain Lords called Knesi Juhorski , being tributaries to the great Duke of Moscovia , as they say . Here are diverse kinds of beasts and furs . 
 From the mouth of the river Irtische to the Castle of Grustina , is two months journey : from whence to the lake Kitai , by the river Oby ( which I said to have his springs in this lake ) is more then three months journey . From this lake come many black men , lacking the use of common speech . They bring with them diverse wares , and especially pearls and precious stones , which they fell to the people called Grustintzi and Serponowtzi . These have their name of the Castle Serponow , situate in the mountains of Lucomoria , beyond the river Obi. They say that to the men of Lucomoria chanceth a marvelous thing and incredible : For they affirm , that they die yearly at the xxvii . day of November , being the feast of S. George among the Moscovites : and that at the next spring about the xxiii . day of Aprill , they revive again as doe Frogs . 
 With these also , the people of Grustintzi and Serponowtzi exercise a new and strange kind of trade : For when the accustomed time of their dying , or rather 408 
 OF THE NORTH AND EAST REGIONS a.d. 
 1588. 
 of sleeping , approaches , they leave their wares in certain places appointed , which the Grustintzi and Serponowtzi carry away , leaving other wares of equal valve in their places : which if the dead men at the time of their reviving perceive to be of unequal price , they require their own again : by reason whereof , much strife and fighting is between them . 
 From the river of Obi descending towards the left [ I . 494-J hand , are the people called Calami , which came thither . from Obiowa and Pogosa . Beneath Obi , about Aurea aamt ' Anus ( that is , the golden old wife ) are the rivers Sossa , Rivers . Berezvua , and Danadim , all which spring out of the mountains Camen , Bolschega , Poiassa , and the rocks joining to the same . All the nations that inhabit from these rivers to Aurea Anus , are subject to the prince of Moscovia . 
 Aurea Anus , called in the Moscovites tongue , Slata Aurea Anus . Baba , is and idol , at the mouth of Obi in the province of Obdora , standing on the furthest bank towards the Obdora . sea . Along by the banks of Obi , & the rivers near there about , are here and there many castles and fortresses : all the lords whereof are subject to the prince of Moscovia , as they say . They say also , or rather fable , that the idol called Aurea Anus , is and image like unto and old wife , having a child in her lap , and that there is now seen another infant , which they say to be her nephew : Also , that there are certain instruments that make a continual found like the noise of Trumpets , the which , if it so be , I think it to be by reason of the wind , blowing continually into the hollow places of those instruments . 
 The river Cossin falls out of the mountains of Cossin . Lucomoria : In the mouth of this is a castle , whither from the springs of the great river Cossin , is two months voyage . Furthermore , from the springs of the same river , the river Cassima hath his originali , which Cassima . running through Lucomoria , falls into the great river Tachnin , beyond the which ( as is said ) dwell men of great river . 
 409 
 A fish like a man . 
 Plinie writeth of the like fish . 
 The end of the journal . 
 Mountains . 
 The great Can of Cathay . 
 Moria is the sea . 
 Lucomoria . Tumen . 
 prodigious shape , of whom , some are overgrown with hair like wild beasts , other have heads like dogs , and their faces in their breasts , without necks , and with long hands also , and without feet . There is likewise in the river Tachnin a certain fish , with head , eyes , nose , mouth , hands , feet , and other members utterly of humane shape , and yet without any voice , and pleasant to be eaten , as are other fish . 
 All that I have hitherto rehearsed , I have translated out of the said journey which was delivered1 me in the Moscovites tongue : In the which , perhaps some things may seem fabulous , and in manner incredible , as of the dumb men , and the dead reviving , the Aurea Anus also , and the monstrous shapes of men , with the fish of humane form : whereof , although I have made diligent inquisition , yet could I know nothing certain of any that had seen the same with their eyes : nevertheless , to give further occasion to other to search the truth of these things , I have thought good to make mention hereof . 
 Noss in the Moscovites tongue signifies a nose , and therefore they call all capes or points , that reach into the sea , by the same . name . 
 The mountains about the river of Petzora are called 
 Semnoi Poyas , or Cingulus mundi , that is , the girdle of the world , or of the earth . 
 Kithai is a lake , of which the great Can of Cathay , whom the Moscovians call Czar Kithaiski , hath his 
 name : For Can in the Tartars A King . 
 language signifies , 
 The places of Lucomoria , near unto the sea , are salvage , full of woods , and inhabited without any houses . And albeit , that the author of this journey , said , that many nations of Lucomoria are subject to the prince of Moscovia , yet for as much as the kingdom of Tumen is near thereunto , whose prince is a Tartar , and nam in their tongue , Tumenski Czar , that is , a king in Tumen , and hath of late done great damage to the 
 410 
 OF THE NORTH AND EAST REGIONS aa 1588. prince of Moscovia : it is most like that these nations should rather be subject unto him . 
 Near unto the river Petzora ( whereof mention is Petzora . made in this journey ) is the city and castle of Papin , Papin . or Papinowgorod , whose inhabitants are nam Papini , and have a private language , differing from the Moscovites . Beyond this river are exceeding high mottn-mountaines , reaching even unto the banks , whose ridges or tops , by reason of continual winds , are in Hyperborei , manner utterly barren without grass or fruits . And andRhiphei . although in diverse places they have diverse names , yet are they commonly called Cingulus mundi , that is , the girdle of the world . In these mountains do Jerfalcons breed , whereof I have spoken before . There grow also Cedar trees , among the which are found the best and blackest kind of Sables : and only these mountains are seen in all the dominions of the prince of Moscovia , which perhaps are the same that the old writers call Rhipheos , or Hyperboreos , so nam of the Greek word , Hyper , that is , Above , and Boreas , that is , the North : for by reason they are covered with continual snow and frost , they can not without great difficulty be travailed , and reach so far into the North , that they make the unknown land of Engron-land . The Duke of Moscovia , Basilius the son of John , sent on a time two of his Captains , nam Simeon Pheodorowich Kurbski , 8c Knes Peter Uschatoi , to search the places beyond these mountains , and to subdue the nations thereabouts . Kurbski was yet alive at my being in Moscovia , 8c declared unto me that he spent xvii . days in ascending the mountain , 8c yet could not come to the top thereof , which in their tongue is called Stolp , that is , a pillar . This mountain is extended into the Ocean unto the mouths of the rivers of Dwina and Petzora . 
 But now having spoken thus much of the said journey , I will return to the dominions of Moscovia , with other regions lying Eastward 8c South from the same , 
 411 
 Jaroslave . 
 Hony. 
 La region delle Cine . Confini deUi ultimi Tartari . 
 towards the mighty Empire of Cathay . But I will first speak somewhat briefly of the province of Rezan , and the famous river of Tanais . 
 The province of Rezan , situate between the rivers of Occa and Tanais , hath a ci tie built of wood , not far from the bank of Occa : there was in it a Castle nam Jaroslave , whereof there now remains nothing but tokens of the old ruin . Not far from that city the river Occa makes and Hand nam Strub , which was sometime a great Dukedom , whose prince was subject to none other . This province of Rezan is more fruitful then any other of the provinces of Moscovia : Insomuch that in this ( as they say ) every grain of wheat brings forth two , and sometime more ears : whose stalks or straws grow so thick that horses can scarcely go through them , or Quails fly out of them . There is great plenty of honey , fish , fowls , birds , and wild beasts . The fruits also do far exceed the fruits of Moscovia . The people are bold and warlike men . 
 