To the Queens most excellent Majestic from the Lord Boris Pheodorovich Godonova . 
 Y the grace of God great Lord and great Duke Theodore Ivanovich governor of Russia , Volodimer , Mosco , and Novgorod , King of Cazan and Astracan , Lord of Vobsko , and great Duke of Smolensco , Otver , Ughori , Perm , Viatsky , Bulgary , and other regions , Lord and great Duke 
 of Novgorod in the low country , of Chernigo , of Rezan , Polotsko , Rostove , Jeroslave , Bealozera , and of Lifland , of Udorsky , Obdorsky , Condinsky , and all the country of Sibery , and commander of all the North parts , and Lord over the country of Iversky , and King of Grusinsky , and of the country of Kabardinsky , Cherchasky , and duke of Igorsky , Lord and ruler of many countries' more , etc. 
 Most resplendent Queen Elizabeth of England , France , and Ireland , etc. his princely Majesties servant , Lord and Master of his horses , and high Steward of his house , and President of the territories of Cazan and Astracan , Boris Pheodorovich Godonova , unto your most excellent Majesty , great Lady Queen Elizabeth , send my humble commendations . It hath pleased your Majesty to write unto me your gracious and princely letter by your servant Thomas Lind : which letter I received with all humbleness . During the time of the abided of your messenger Thomas Lind here in the Mosco , it pleased God of his mercifulness , and our Lady the mother of God , and holy Saints , by the prayers of our lord and king his Majesty Theodore Ivanovich 434 
 LETTER FROM BORIS PHEODOROWICH a.d. 
 1592-over all Russia governor , the right believer and lover of Christ , to send our Queen and gracious Lady Irene Tfie Empresu a young Princess , to the great joy and comfort of our a kingdom , nam Pheodocine . Wherefore we give all honour and glory to the almighty God unspeakable , whose gifts had been manifold with mercy unto us : for which all we Christians laud and praise God . 
 After all this your servant was occasioned to stay until the coming of your merchant's from the sea port . 
 Touching the letters which you have received from your loving brother our Lord and Master by your ambassador , therein you perceive sufficiently my good meaning , in travailing for the continuance of amity and friendship betwixt you mighty great princes , in the which I will continue mine endeavour . Also your merchant's I have taken into my protection for to defend them for the love I bear to your Majesty . As heretofore I have done it willingly , and with great care of their good , so I mean to continue so far as God will give me leave : to the end that brotherly love be held between you Princes without disturbance . 
 As 1 have been to your merchant's in times past , so now by the permission and commandment of our Lord and Master , I will be their defendor in all causes : and will cause all our authorised people to favour them and to defend them , and to give them free liberty to buy and fell at their pleasure . The merchant's do not certify your princely Majesty of all our friendship and favour showed unto them from time to time . And whereas your Majesty hath now written to our Lord and Master for the debts which your merchant's ought to have of William Turnebull lately diseased , I having perused your Majesties letter , whereby I am requested to be a mean for the recovery and obtaining of their said debts , I have moved it to our Lord and King his Majesty , that order may be given therein : and that his kinsman Rainold Kitchen with three persons more may be sent over together with the said Turnebulles 
 435 
 stuff and other things , as bills , books and writings . All which shall be delivered to your merchant's Agent and his fellows , and in money 600 rubbles of the said Turnebulles . 
 And touching your merchant's , I will have a great care over them , and protect them , whereby they shall suffer no damages in their trade : and all kind of traffic in merchandise shall be at their liberty . 
 Written in our Lord and Kings Majesties royal city of Mosco , in the year from the beginning of the world 7101 , in the month of Januarie . 
 