The miraculous victory achieved by the English Fleet , under the discreet and happy conduct of the right honourable , right prudent , and valiant lord , the L. Charles Howard , L. high Admiral of England , etc. Upon the Spanish huge Armada sent in the year 1588. for the invasion of England , together with the woeful and miserable success of the said Armada afterwards , upon the coasts of Norway , of the Scottish Western Isles , of Ireland , of Spaine , of France , and of England , etc. Recorded in Latin by Emanuel van Meteran in the 15. book of his history of the low Countries' . 
 Aving in part declared the strange and wonderful events of the year eightie eight , which hath be so long time foretold by ancient prophecies ; we will now make relation of the most notable and great enterprise of all others which were in the foresaid year achieved , in order 
 as it was done . Which exploit ( although in very deed it was not performed in any part of the low Countries' ) was intended for their ruin and destruction . And it 
 was the expedition which the Spanish king , having a long time determined the same in his mind , and having consulted thereabouts with the Pope , set forth and undertook against England and the low Countries' . To the end that he might subdue the Realm of England , and reduce it unto his catholic Religion , and by that 
 197 
 The preparation of the Spanish King to subdue England and the low Countries' . 
 means might be sufficiently revenged for the disgrace , contempt and dishonour , which he ( having 34. years before inforced them to the Popes obedience ) had endured of the English nation , and for diverse other injuries which had taken deep impression in his thoughts . And also for that he deemed this to be the most ready and direct course , whereby he might recover his heredetarie possession of the low Countries' , having restrained the inhabitants from sailing upon the coast of England . Which verily , upon most weighty arguments and evident reasons , was thought would undoubtly have come to pass , considering the great abundance and store of all things necessary wherewith those men were furnished , which had the managing of that actium committed unto them . But now let us describe the matter more particularly . 
 The Spanish King having with small fruit and commodity , for above twentie years together , waged war against the Netherlanders , after deliberation with his counsellors thereabouts , thought it most convenient to assault them once again by Sea , which had be attempted sundry times heretofore , but not with forces sufficient . Unto the which expedition it stood him now in hand to join great puissance , as having the English people his professed enemies ; whose Island is so situate , that it may either greatly help or hinder all such as sail into those parts . For which cause he thought good first of all to invade England , being persuaded by his Secretary Escovedo , and by diverse other well experienced Spaniards and Dutchmen , and by many English fugitives , that the conquest of that Hand was less difficult then the conquest of Holland and Zeland . Moreover the Spaniards were of opinion , that it would be far more behooveful for their King to conquer England and the low Countries' all at once , then to be constrained continually to maintain a warlike Navy to defend his East and West Indie Fleets , from the English Drake , and from such like valiant enemies . 
 198 
 And for the same purpose the king Catholic had given commandment long before in Italy and Spaine , that a great quantity of timber should be felled for the building of ships ; and had beside made great preparation of things and furniture requisite for such and expedition ; as namely in founding of brazen Ordinance , in storing up of corn and victuals , in training of men to use warlike weapons , in leavying and mustering of soldiers : insomuch that about the beginning of the year 1588. he had finished such a mighty Navy , and brought it into Lisbon haven , as never the like had before that time sailed upon the Ocean sea . 
 A very large and particular description of this Navy was put in print and published by the Spaniards ; wherein were set down the number , names , and burdens of the ships , the number of Mariners and soldiers throughout the whole Fleet ; likewise the quantity of their Ordinance , of their armour , of bullets , of match , of gun-poulder , of victuals , and of all their Naval furniture was in the said description particularized . Unto all these were added the names of the Governors , Captains , Noblemen and gentlemen voluntaries , of whom there was so great a multitude , that scarce was there any family of account , or any one principali man throughout all Spaine , that had not a brother , son or kinsman in that Fleet : who all of them were in good hope to purchase unto themselves in that Navy ( as they termed it ) invincible , endless glory and renown , and to possess themselves of great Signory and riches in England , and in the low Countries' . But because the said description was translated and published out of Spanish into diverse other languages , we will here only make and abridgement or brief rehearsal thereof . 
 Portugal furnished and set forth under the conduct of the duke of Medina Sidonia general of the Fleet , ten Galleons , two Zabraes , 1300. Mariners , 3300. soldiers , 300. great pieces , with all requisite furniture . 
 199 
 The number and quality of the ships in the Spanish Tleete , with the soldiers , Mariners , and pieces of Ordinance . 
 Biscay , under the conduct of John Martines de Ricalde Admiral of the whole Fleet , set forth tenne Galleons , 4. Pataches , 700. mariners , 2000. soldiers , 250. great pieces , etc. 
 Guipusco , under the conduct of Michael de Oquendo , tenne Galleons , 4. Pataches , 700. mariners , 2000. soldiers , 310. great pieces . 
 Italy with the Levant Islands , under Martine the Verten-dona , 10. Galleons , 800. mariners , 2000. soldiers , 310. great pieces , etc. 
 Castile , under Diego Flores de Valdez , 14. Galleons , two Pataches , 1700. mariners , 2400. soldiers , and 380. great pieces , etc. 
 Andaluzia , under the conduct of Petro de Valdez , 10. Galleons , one Patache , 800. mariners , 2400. soldiers , 280. great pieces , etc. 
 Item , under the conduct of John Lopez de Medina , 23. great Flemish hulks , with 700. mariners , 3200. soldiers , and 400. great pieces . 
 Item , under Hugo de Moncada , foure Galliasses containing 1200. galleyslaves , 460. mariners , 870. soldiers , 200. great pieces , etc. 
 Item , under Diego de Mandrana , foure Galleys of Portugal ! , with 888. galleyslaves , 360. mariners , 20. great pieces , and other requisite furniture . 
 Item , under Anthonie de Mendoza , 22. Pataches and Zabraes , with 574. mariners , 488. soldiers , and 193. great pieces . 
 Beside the ships aforementioned there were 20. caravels rowed with oars , being appointed to perform necessary services unto the greater ships : insomuch that all the ships aPPERTAINING to this Navy amounted unto the sum of 150. eke one being sufficiently provided of furniture and victuals . 
 The number of Mariners in the said Fleet were above 8000. of slaves 2088. of soldiers 20000. ( beside noblemen and gentlemen voluntaries ) of great cast pieces 2650. The foresaid ships were of and huge and incredible 200 
 1588. capacity and receipt . For the whole Fleet was large enough to contain the burden of 60. thousand tons . 
 The Galleons were 64. in number , being of and huge description bigness , and very stately built , being of marvelous °f^Galeons . force also , and so high , that they resembled great castles , most fit to defend themselves and to withstand any assault , but in giving any other ships the encounter far inferior unto the English and Dutch ships , which can with great dexterity wield and turn themselves at all assays . The upperworke of the said Galleons was of thickness and strength sufficient to bear off musketshot . The lower work and the timbers thereof were out of measure strong , being framed of planks and ribs foure or five foot in thickness , insomuch that no bullets could pierce them , but such as were discharged hard at hand : which afterwards proved true , for a great number of bullets were found to stick fast within the massy substance of those thick planks . Great and well pitched Cables were twined about the masts of their ships , to strengthen them against the battery of shot . 
 The Galliasses were of such bigness , that they con - description tained within them chambers , chapels , turrets , pulpits , °^the Gallt~ and other commodities of great houses . The Galliasses ’ were rowed with great oars , there being in eke one of them 300. slaves for the same purpose , and were able to do great service with the force of their Ordinance . All these together with the residue aforenamed were furnished and beautified with trumpets , streamers , banners , warlike ensigns , and other such like ornaments . 
 Their pieces of brazen ordinance were 1600. and of The great iron a 1000. 
 The bullets thereto belonging were 120. thousand . 
 Item of gun-poulder 5600. quintals . Of match 1200. quintals . 
 Of muskets and kaleivers 7000. Of haleberts and partisans 10000. 201 
 bullets , gun-poulder , and other furniture . 
 Their provision of victuals and other things necessary . 
 A Spanish terza consist-eth of 3200. soldiers . 
 Moreover they had great store of canons , doublecanons , culverings and field-pieces for land services . 
 Likewise they were provided of all instruments necessary on land to convey and transport their furniture from place to place ; as namely of carts , wheels , wagons , etc. Also they had spades , mattocks and baskets to set pioneers on work . They had in like sort great store of mules and horses , and whatsoever else was requisite for a land-army . They were so well stored of biscuit , that for the space of half a year , they might allow eke person in the whole Fleet half a quintali every month ; whereof the whole sum amounteth unto and hundreth thousand quintals . 
 Likewise of wine they had 147. thousand pipes , sufficient also for half a years expedition . Of bacon 6500. quintals . Of cheese three thousand quintals . Beside fish , rise , beans , peas , oil , vinegar , etc. 
 Moreover they had 12000. pipes of freshwater , and all other necessary provision , as namely candles , lanterns , lamps , sails , hemp , ox-hides and led to stop holes that should be made with the battery of gunshot . To be short , they brought all things expedient either for a Fleet by sea , or for and army by land . 
 This Navy ( as Diego Pimentelli afterwards confessed ) was esteemed by the King himself to contain 32000. persons , and to cost him every day 30. thousand ducats . 
 There were in the said Navy five terzaes of Spaniards , ( which terzaes the Frenchmen call Regiments ) under the command of five governors termed by the Spaniards , Master's of the field , and among the rest there were many old and expert soldiers chosen out of the garrisons of Sicilie , Naples , and Ter^era . Their Captains or Colonels were Diego Pimentelli , DONE Francisco de Toledo , DONE Alonso de Lu^on , DONE Nicolas de Isla , DONE Augustin de Mexia ; who had eke of them 32. companies under their conduct . Beside the which companies there were many bans 
 202 
 1588. also of Castilians and Portugals , every one of which had their peculiar governors , captains , officers , colours and weapons . 
 It was not lawful for any man , under grievous penalty , to carry any women or harlots in the Fleet : for which cause the women hired certain ships , wherein they sailed after the Navy : some of the which being driven by tempest arrived upon the coast of France . 
 The generail of this mighty Navy , was DONE Alonso Perez de Guzman duke of Medina Sidonia , Lord of S. Lucar , and knight of the golden Fleece : by reason that the Marks of santa Cruz appointed for the same dignity , deceased before the time . 
 John Martines de Ricalde was Admiral of the Fleet . 
 Francis Bovadilla was chief Marshal : who all of [ I . 594. j them had their officers fit and requisite for the guiding and managing of such a multitude . Likewise Martin Alorcon was appointed Vicar general of the Inquisition , being accompanied with more then a hundreth Monks , to wit , Jesuites , Capuchines , and friars mendicant . Beside whom also there were Physicians , Chirurgeons , Apothecaries , and whatsoever else pertained unto the hospitali . 
 Over and beside the forenamed governors and officers being men of chief note , there were 124. very noble and worthy Gentlemen , which went voluntarily of their own costs and charges , to the end they might see fashions , learn experience , and attain unto glory . among whom was the prince of Ascoli , Alonzo de Leiva , the marks de Pennafiel , the marks de Ganes , the marks de Barlango , count de Paredes , count de Yelvas , and diverse other marquesses and earls of the honourable families of Mendoza , of Toledo , of Pachieco , of Cordova , of Guzman , of Manricques , and a great Theprepara-number of others . .................... 
 While the Spaniards were furnishing this their Navy , aid tJe the duke of Parma , at the direction of king Philip , made Spaniards . 
 203 
 great preparation in the low Countries' , to give aid & assistance unto the Spaniards ; building ships for the same purpose , and sending for Pilots and shipwrights out of Italy . 
 In Flanders he caused certain deep channels to be made , and among the rest the channel of Yper commonly called Yper-lee , employing some thousands of workmen about that service : to the end that by the said channel he might transport ships from Antwerp and Ghendt to Bruges , where he had assembled above a hundreth small ships called hoys being well stored with victuals , which hoys he was determined to have brought into the sea by the way of Sluys , or else to have conveyed them by the said Yper-lee being now of greater depth , into any port of Flanders whatsoever . 
 In the river of Waten he caused 70. ships with flat bottoms to be built , every one of which should serve to carry 30. horses , having eke of them bridges likewise for the horses to come on board , or to go forth on land . Of the same fashion he had provided 200. other vessels at Neiuport , but not so great . And at Dunkerk he procured 28. ships of war , such as were there to be had , and caused a sufficient number of Mariners to be levied at Hamburgh , Breme , Emden , and at other places . He put in the ballast of the said ships , great store of beams of thick planks , being hollow and beset with iron pikes beneath , but on eke side full of clasps and hooks , to join them together . 
 He had likewise at Greveling provided 20. thousand of cask , which in a short space might be compact and joined together with nails and cords , and reduced into the form of a bridge . To be short , whatsoever things were requisite for the making of bridges , and for the barring and stopping up of havens mouths with stakes , posts , and other means , he commanded to be made ready . Moreover not far from Neiuport haven , he had caused a great pile of wooden faggots to be laid , and other furniture to be brought for the rearing up 
 204 
 of a mount . The most part of his ships contained two ovens a piece to bake bred in , with a great number of saddles , bridles , and such other like apparel for horses . They had horses likewise , which after their landing should serve to convey , and draw engines , field-pieces , and other warlike provisions . 
 Near unto Neiuport he had assembled and army , over the which he had ordained Camillo de Monte to be Campmaster . This army consisted of 30. bans or ensigns of Italians , of tenne bans of Wallons , eight of Scots , and eight of Burgundians , all which together amount unto 56. bans , every band containing a hundreth persons . Near unto Dixmud there were mustered 80. bans of Dutch men , sixtie of Spaniards , sixe of high Germanes , and seven bans of English fugitives , under the conduct of sir William Stanlie and English knight . 
 In the suburbs of Cortreight there were 4000. horsemen together with their horses in a readiness : and at Waten 900. horses , with the troop of the Marks deal Gwasto Captain generail of the horsemen . 
 Unto this famous expedition and presupposed victory , many potentates , princes , and honourable personages hied themselves : out of Spaine the prince of Melito called the duke of Pastrana and taken to be the son of one Ruygomes de Silva , but in very deed accounted among the number of king Philips base sons . Also the Marks of Burgrave , one of the sons of Archiduke Ferdinand and Philippa Welsera . Vespasian Gonsaga of the family of Mantua , being for chivalry a man of great renown , and heretofore Viceroy in Spaine . Item John Medices base son unto the duke of Florence . And Amadas of Savoy , the duke of Savoy his base son , with many others of inferior degrees . The Popes fur - 
 Likewise Pope Sixtus quintus for the setting forth of thermce to the the foresaid expedition , as they use to do against Turkes & infidels , published a Cruzado , with most ample indulgences which were printed in great numbers . These Countries . 
 205 
 A treaty of peace , to the end that England and the united provinces might be secure of invasion . 
 vain bulls the English and Dutchmen deriding , said that the devil at all passages lay in ambush like a thief , no whit regarding such letters of safe conduct . Some there be which affirm that the Pope had bestowed the realm of England with the title of Defensor fidei , upon the king of Spaine , giving him charge to invade it upon this condition , that he should enjoy the conquered realm , as a vassal and tributary , in that regard , unto the sea of Rome . To this purpose the said Pope proffered a million of gold , the one half thereof to be paid in ready money , and the other half when the realm of England or any famous port thereof were subdued . And for the greater furtherance of the whole business , he dispatched one D. Allen and English man ( whom he had made Cardinali for the same end and purpose ) into the Low countries , unto whom he committed the administration of all matters ecclesiastical throughout England . This Allen being enraged against his own native country , caused the Popes bull to be translated into English , meaning upon the arrival of the Spanish fleet , to have it so published in England . By which Bull the excommunications of the two former Popes were confirmed , and the Queens most sacred Majesty was by them most unjusdy deprived of all princely titles and dignities , her subject's being enjoined to perform obedience unto the duke of Parma , and unto the Popes Legate . 
 But that all matters might be performed with greater secrecy , and that the whole expedition might seem rather to be intended against the Low countries , then against England , and that the English people might be persuaded that all was but bore words & threatenings , and that nought would come to effect , there was a solemn meeting appointed at Borborch in Flanders for a treaty of peace between her majesty and the Spanish king . ...... 
 Against which treaty the united provinces making open protestation , used all means possible to hinder it , 206 
 alleging that it was more requisite to consult how the enemy now pressing upon them might be repelled from off their frontiers . Howbeit some there were in England that greatly urged and prosecuted this league , saying , that it would be very commodious unto the state of the realm , as well in regard of traffic and navigation , as for the avoiding of great expenses to maintain the wars , affirming also , that at the same time peace might easily and upon reasonable conditions be obtained of the Spaniard . Others thought by this means to divert some other way , or to keep back the navy now coming upon them , and so to escape the danger of that tempest . Howsoever it was , the duke of Parma by these wiles enchanted and dazzled the eyes of many English & Dutch men that were desirous of peace : whereupon it came to pass , that England and the united provinces prepared in deed some defence to withstand that dreadful expedition and huge Armada , but nothing in comparison of the great danger which was to be feared , albeit the constant report of the whole expedition had continued rife among them for a long time before . Howbeit they gave ear unto the relation of certain that said , that this navy was provided to conduct and waft over the Indian Fleets : which seemed the more probable because the Spaniards were deemed not to be men of so small discretion as to adventure those huge and monstrous ships upon the shallow and dangerous channel of England . 
 At length when as the French king about the end Her majesties of May signified unto her Majesty in plain terms that warlike prepare should stand upon her guard , because he was now , atlon sea‘ most certainly informed , that there was so dangerous and invasion imminent upon her realm , that he feared much lest all her land and sea-forces would be sufficient to withstand it , etc. then began the Queen's Majesty more carefully to gather her forces together , & to furnish her own ships of war , & the principali ships of her subject's with soldiers , weapons , and other necessary provision . The greatest and strongest ships of the 
 207 
 The preparation of the united provinces . 
 whole navy she sent unto Plimmouth under the conduct of the right honourable Lord Charles Howard , lord high Admiral of England , etc. Under whom the renowned Knight Sir Francis Drake was appointed Viceadmiral . The number of these ships was about and hundreth . The lesser ships being 30. or 40. in number , and under the conduct of the lord Henry Seimer were commanded to lie between Dover and Caleis . 
 On land likewise throughout the whole realm , soldiers were mustered and trained in all places , and were committed unto the most resolute and faithful captains . And whereas it was commonly given out that the Spaniard having once united himself unto the duke of Parma , meant to invade by the river of Thames , there was at Tilburie in Essex over-against Gravesend , a mighty army encamped , and on both sides of the river fortifications were erected , according to the prescription of Frederike Genebelli and Italian enginier . Likewise there were certain ships brought to make a bridge , though it were very late first . Unto the said army came in proper person the Queen's most royal Majesty , representing Tomyris that Scythian warlike princess , or rather divine Pallas her self . Also there were other such armies levied in England . 
 The principali catholic Recusants ( lest they should stir up any tumult in the time of the Spanish invasion ) were sent to remain at certain convenient places , as namely in the Isle of Ely and at Wisbich . And some of them were sent unto other places , to wit , unto sundry bishops and noblemen , where they were kept from endangering the state of the common wealth , and of her sacred Majesty , who of her most gracious clemency gave express commandment , that they should be entreated with all humanity and friendship . 
 The provinces of Holland and Zeland , etc. giving credit unto their intelligence out of Spain , made preparation to defend themselves : but because the Spanish ships were described unto them to be so huge , 208 
 The material originally positioned here is too large for reproduction in this DoWnWOdedfrom https : / / www . cambridge.org / corelgnivfrSityaf Nj£eW£t > e 5^30^ ^W^V , subject to the camhifeffdtfltrmfafuuse^ hnpsvww-varbdgeog / oe . ems . 
 1588. they relied partly upon the shallow and dangerous seas all along their coasts . Wherefore they stood most in doubt of the duke of Parma his small and flat-bottomed ships . Howbeit they had all their ships of war to the number of 90. and above , in a readiness for all assays : the greater part whereof were of a small burden , as being more meet to sail upon their rivers and shallow seas : and with these ships they besieged all the havens in Flanders , beginning at the mouth of Scheid , or from the town of Lillo , and holding on to Greveling and almost unto Caleis , & fortified all their seatowns with strong garrisons . 
 Against the Spanish fleets arrival , they had provided 25. or 30. good ships , committing the government of them unto Admiral Lonck , whom they commanded to join himself unto the lord Henry Seymer , lying between Dover and Cales . And when as the foresaid ships , ( whereof the greater part besieged the haven of Dunkerke ) were driven by tempest into Zeland , Justin of Nassau the Admiral of Zeland supplied that squadron with 35. ships being of no great burden , but excellently furnished with guns , mariners and soldiers in great abundance , and especially with 1200. brave Musketeers , having be accustomed unto sea-fights , and being chosen out of all their companies for the same purpose : and so the said Justin of Nassau kept such diligent ward in that Station that the duke of Parma could not issue forth with his navy into the sea out of any part of Flanders . 
 In the mean while the Spanish Armada set sail out The Spanish of the haven of Lisbon upon the 19. of May , An. Dom. fieete set sail 1588. under the conduct of the duke of Medina Sidonia , directing their course for the Bay of Corunna , J ali^s the Groin of Gallicia , where they took in soldiers and warlike provision , this port being in Spaine the nearest unto England . As they were sailing along , there arose such a mighty tempest , that the whole Fleet was dispersed , so that when the duke was re - 
 iv 209 oh 
 turned unto his company , he could not escry above 80. ships in all , whereunto the residue by Iide and little joined themselves , except eight which had their masts blown overboard . One of the foure galleys of Portin-gal escaped very hardly , retiring her self into the haven . The other three were upon the coast of Baion in France , by the assistance and courage of one David Gwin and English captive ( whom the French and Turkish slaves aided in the same enterprise ) utterly disabled and vanquished : one of the three being first overcome , which conquered the two other , with the slaughter of their governors and soldiers , and among the rest of DONE Diego de Mandrana with sundry others : and so those slaves arriving in France with the three Galleys , set themselves at liberty . 
 They set sail from you Groin upon the 11. of July . 
 The Spaniards come within kenning of England . 
 Captain Fleming . 
 The navy having refreshed themselves at the Groin , & receiving daily commandment from the king to hasten their journey , hoist up sails the 11. day of July , and so holding on their course till the 19. of the same month , they came then unto the mouth of the narrow seas or English channel . From whence ( striking their sails in the mean season ) they dispatched certain of their small ships unto the duke of Parma . At the same time the Spanish Fleet was escried by and English pinnace , captain whereof was M. Thomas Fleming , after they had be advertised of the Spaniards expedition by their scouts and espials , which having ranged along the coast of Spaine , were lately returned home into Plimmouth for a new supply of victuals and other necessaries , who considering the foresaid tempest , were of opinion that the navy being of late dispersed and tossed up and down the main Ocean , was by no means able to perform their intended voyage . 
 Moreover , the L. Charles Howard L. high admiral of England had received letters from the court , signifying unto him that her Majesty was advertised that the Spanish Fleet would not come forth , nor was to be any longer expected for , and therefore , that upon her 
 210 
 Majesties commandment he must send back foure of her tallest and strongest ships unto Chattam . 
 The lord high Admiral of England being thus on 2% L. Ad-the sudden , namely upon the 19. of July about foure mtrahsfmrt of the clock in the afternoon , informed by the pinnace of captain Fleming aforesaid , of the Spaniards July . approach , with all speed and diligence possible he warped his ships , and caused his mariners and soldiers ( the greater part of whom was absent for the cause aforesaid ) tocome on board , and that with great trouble and difficulty , insomuch that the lord Admiral himself was feign to lie without in the road with sixe ships only all that night , after the which many others came forth of the haven . The very next day being the 20. of July The 20. of about high noon , was the Spanish Fleet escried by the English , which with a Southwest wind came sailing along , and passed by Plimmouth : in which regard ( according to the judgement of many skilful navigators ) they greatly overshot themselves , whereas it had be more commodious for them to have stayed themselves there , considering that the Englishmen being as yet unprovided , greatly relied upon their own forces , and knew not the estate of the Spanish navy . Moreover , this was the most convenient port of all others , where they might with greater security have be advertised of the English forces , and how the commons of the land stood affected , and might have stirred up some mutiny , so that hither they should have bent all their puissance , and from hence the duke of Parma might more easily have conveyed his ships . 
 But this they were prohibited to do by the king and his counsel , and were expressly commanded to unite themselves unto the soldiers and ships of the said duke of Parma , and so to bring their purpose to effect . Which was thought to be the most easy and direct course , for that they imagined that the English and Dutch men would be utterly daunted and dismayed thereat , and would each man of them retire unto his 
 211 
 own Province and Porte for the defence thereof , and transporting the army of the duke under the protection of their huge navy , they might invade England . 
 It is reported that the chief commanders in the navy , and those which were more skilful in navigation , to wit , John Martines de Ricalde , Diego Flores de Valdez , and diverse others found fault that they were bound unto so strict directions and instructions , because that in such a case many particular accidents ought to concur and to be respected at one and the same instant , that is to say , the opportunity of the wind , weather , time , tide , and ebb , wherein they might sail from Flanders to England . Oftentimes also the darkness and light , the situation of places , the depths and shoulds were to be considered : all which especially depended upon the conveniency of the winds , and were by so much the more dangerous . 
 But it seems that they were enjoined by their commission to anchor near unto , or about Caleis , whither the duke of Parma with his ships and all his warlike provision was to resort , and while the English and Spanish great ships were in the midst of their conflict , to pass by , and to land his soldiers upon the Downs . 
 The Spanish captives reported that they were determined first to have entered the river of Thames , and thereupon to have passed with small ships up to London , supposing that they might easily win that rich and flourishing City being but meanly fortified and inhabited with Citizens not accustomed to the wars , who durst not withstand their first encounter , hoping moreover to find many rebels against her Majesty and popish catholics , or some favourers of the Scottish queen ( which was not long before most justly beheaded ) who might be instruments of sedition . 
 Thus often advertising the duke of Parma of their approach , the 20. of July they passed by Plimmouth , which the English ships pursuing and getting the wind 212 
 THE FIRST ACTION IN THE ENGLISH CHANNEL AGAINST THE ARMADA 2 1st July 1588 
 The material originally positioned here is too large for reproduction in this reissue . A PDF can be downloaded from the web address given on page iv of this book , by clicking on ' Resources Available ' . 
 1588. of them , gave them the chase and the encounter , and so both Fleets frankly exchanged their bullets . 
 The day following which was the 21. of July , the Then-of English ships approached within musquet shot of the Spanish : at what time the lord Charles Howard most hotly and valiantly discharged his Ordinance upon the Spanish Viceadmiral . The Spaniards then well perceiving the nimbleness of the English ships in discharging upon the enemy on all sides , gathered themselves close into the form of and half moon , and slackened their sails , lest they should outgo any of their company . And while they were proceeding on in this manner , one of their great Galliasses was so furiously battered with shot , that the whole navy was feign to come up rounder together for the safeguard thereof : whereby it came to pass that the principali Galleon of Sivill ( wherein DONE Pedro de Valdez , Vasques de Silva , Alonzo de Sayas , and other noble men were embarked ) falling foul of another ship , had her foremast broken , and by that means was not able to keep way with the Spanish Fleet , neither would the said Fleet stay to succour it , but left the distressed Galeon behind . The lord Admiral of England when he saw this ship of Valdez , & thought she had be void of Mariners and Soldiers , taking with him as many ships as he could , passed by it , that he might not lose sighed of the Spanish Fleet that night . For sir Francis Drake ( who was notwithstanding appointed to bear out his lantern that night ) was giving of chase unto five great Hulks which had separated themselves from the Spanish Fleet : but finding them to be Easterlings , he dismissed them . The lord Admiral all that night following the Spanish lantern in stead of the English , found himself in the morning to be in the midst of his enemies Fleet , but when he perceived it , he cleanly conveyed himself out of that great danger . 
 The day following , which was the two and twentie of Tk of July , Sir Francis Drake espied Valdez his ship , where - 
 213 
 unto he sent forth his pinnace , and being advertised that Valdez himself was there , and 45° - persons with him , he sent him word that he should yield himself . 
 Valdez for his honours sake caused certain conditions to be propounded unto Drake : who answered Valdez that he was not now at laisure to make any long parley , but if he would yield himself , he should find him friendly and tractable : howbeit if he had resolved to die in fight , he should prove Drake to be no dastard . 
 DONE Pedro de Upon which answer Valdez and his company under-^hls^Mpstanding that they were fallen into the hands of fortunate company taken . Drake , being moved with the renown and celebri tie of his name , with one consent yielded themselves , and found him very favourable unto them . Then Valdez with 40. or 50. noblemen and gentlemen pertaining unto him , came on board sir Francis Drakes ship . The residue of his company were carried unto Plimmouth , where they were detained a year & and half for their ransom . 
 Valdez coming unto Drake and humbly kissing his hand protested unto him , that he and his had resolved to die in battle , had they not by good fortune fallen into his power , whom they knew to be right courteous and gentle , and whom they had herd by general report to be most favourable unto his vanquished foe : insomuch that he said it was to be doubted whither his enemies had more cause to admire and love him for his great , valiant , and prosperous exploits , or to dread him for his singular felicity and wisdom , which ever attended upon him in the wars , and by the which he had attained unto so great honour . With that Drake embraced him and gave him very honourable entertainment , feeding him at his own table , and lodging him in his cabin . 
 Here Valdez began to recount unto Drake the forces of all the Spanish Fleet , and how foure mighty Galleys were separated by tempest from them : and also how they were determined first to have put into Plimmouth haven , not expecting to be repelled thence by the 214 
 English ships which they thought could by no means withstand their impregnable forces , persuading themselves that by means of their huge Fleet , they were become lords and commanders of the main Ocean . For which cause they marveled much how the English men in their small ships durst approach within musket shot of the Spaniards mighty wooden castles , gathering the wind of them with many other such like attempts . 
 Immediately after , Valdez and his company , being a man of principal authority in the Spanish Fleet , and being descended of one and the same family with that Valdez , which in the year 1574. besieged Leiden in Holland , were sent captives into England . There were in the said ship 55. thousand ducats in ready money of the Spanish kings gold , which the soldiers merrily shared among themselves . 
 The same day was set on fire one of their greatest ships , being Admiral of the squadron of Guipusco , and being the ship of Michael de Oquendo Viceadmiral of the whole Fleet , which contained great store of gunnepowder and other warlike provision . The upper part only of this ship was burned , and all the persons therein contained ( except a very few ) were consumed with fire . And thereupon it was taken by the English , and brought into England with a number of miserable burned and scorched Spaniards . Howbeit the gunpowder ( to the great admiration of all men ) remained whole and unconsumed . 
 In the mean season the lord Admiral of England in his ship called the Arke-royall , all that night pursued the Spaniards so near , that in the morning he was almost left alone in the enemies Fleet , and it was foure of the clock at afternoon before the residue of the English Fleet could overtake him . 
 At the same time Hugo de Moncada governor of the foure Galliasses , made humble suit unto the Duke of Medina that he might be licenced to encounter the Admiral of England : which liberty the duke thought 
 215 
 A.D. 
 1588. 
 A great Biscaine ship taken by the English . 
 not good to permit unto him , because he was loath to exceed the limits of his commission and charge . 
 The 23. of Upon Tuesday which was the three and twentie of July , the navy being come over against Portland , the wind began to turn Northerly , insomuch that the Spaniards had a fortunate and fit gale to invade the English . But the Englishmen having lesser and nimbler Ships , recovered again the vantage of the wind from the Spaniards , whereat the Spaniards seemed to be more incensed to fight then before . But when the English Fleet had continually and without intermission from morning to night , beaten and battered them with all their shot both great and small : the Spaniardes uniting themselves , gathered their whole Fleet close together into a roundel , so that it was apparent that they meant not as yet to invade others , but only to defend themselves and to make haste unto the place prescribed unto them , which was near unto Dunkerk , that they might join forces with the duke of Parma , who was determined to have proceeded secretly with his small ships under the shadow and protection of the great ones , and so had intended circumspectly to perform the whole expedition . 
 This was the most furious and bloody skirmish of all , in which the lord Admiral of England continued fighting amid his enemies Fleet , and seeing one of his Captains afar off , he spoke unto him in these words : O George what dost thou ? Wilt thou now frustrate my hope and opinion conceived of thee ? Wilt thou forsake me now ? With which words he being inflamed , approached forthwith , encountered the enemy , and did the part of a most valiant Captain . His name was George Fenner , a man that had be conversant in many Sea-fights . 
 great In this conflict there was a certain great Venetian We ™ * ™ 1 shiP ship with other small ships surprised and taken by the ships taken by English .... 
 the English . The English navy in the mean while increased , whereunto out of all Havens of the Realm resorted ships and 216 
 1588. men : for they all with one accord came flocking thither as unto a set field , where immortali fame and glory was to be attained , and faithful service to be performed unto their prince and country . 
 In which number there were many great and honourable personages , as namely , the Earls of Oxford , of Northumberland , of Cumberland , etc. with many Knights and Gentlemen : to wit , Sir Thomas Cecill , Sir Robert Cecill , Sir Walter Raleigh , Sir William Hatton , Sir Horatio Palavicini , Sir Henry Brook , Sir Robert Carew , Sir Charles Blunt , Master Ambrose Willoughbie , Master Henry Nowell , Master Thomas Gerard , Master Henry Dudley , Master Edward Darcie , Master Arthur Gorge , Master Thomas Woodhouse , Master William Harvie , etc. And so it came to pass that the number of the English ships amounted unto and hundreth : which when they were come before Dover , were increased to and hundred and thirtie , being notwithstanding of no proportionable bigness to encounter with the Spaniards , except two or three and twentie of the Queen es greater ships , which only , by reason of their presence , bred and opinion in the Spaniardes minds concerning the power of the English Fleet : the mariners and soldiers whereof were esteemed to be twelve thousand . 
 The foure and twentie of July when as the sea was The 24 , of calm , and no wind stirring , the fight was only between the foure great Galleasses and the English ships , which being rowed with Oars , had great vantage of the said English ships , which notwithstanding for all that would not be forced to yield , but discharged their chain-shot to cut asunder their Cables and Cordage of the Galleasses , with many other such Stratagems . They were now constrained to send their men on land for a new supplie of Gunpowder , whereof they were in great skarcitie , by reason they had so frankly spent the greater part in the former conflicts . 
 The same day , a Counsel being assembled , it was decreed that the English Fleet should be divided into 
 217 
 foure squadrons : the principali whereof was committed unto the lord Admiral : the second , to Sir Francis Drake : the third , to Captain Hawkins : the fourth , to Captain Frobisher . 
 The Spaniards in their sailing observed very diligent and good order , sailing three and foure , and sometime more ships in a rank , and following close up one after another , and the stronger and greater ships protecting the lesser . 
 The 25. of The five and twentie of July when the Spaniardes were come over-against the Isle of Wight , the lord Admiral of England being accompanied with his best ships , ( namely the Lion , Captain whereof was the lord Thomas Howard : The Elizabeth Jonas under the commandment of Sir Robert Southwel son in law unto the lord Admiral : the Bear under the lord Sheffield nephew unto the lord Admiral : the Victory under Captain Barker : and the Galeon Leicester under the forenamed Captain George Fenner ) with great valour and dreadful thundering of shot , encountered the Spanish Admiral being in the very midst of all his Fleet. Which when the Spaniard perceived , being assisted with his strongest ships , he came forth and entered a terrible combat with the English : for they bestowed each on other the broad sides , and mutually discharged all their Ordinance , being within one hundred , or and hundred and twentie yards one of another . 
 At length the Spaniardes hoist up their sails , and again gathered themselves up close into the form of a roundel . In the mean while Captain Frobisher had engaged himself into a most dangerous conflict . Whereupon the lord Admiral coming to succour him , found that he had valiantly and discreetly behaved himself , and that he had wisely and in good time given over the fight , because that after so great a 
 The 26. of battery he had sustained no damage . 
 July . For which cause the day following , being the sixe and 218 
 1588. twentie of July , the lord Admiral rewarded him with the order of knighthood , together with the lord Thomas Howard , the lord Sheffield , M. John Hawkins and others . 
 The same day the lord Admiral received intelligence from Newhaven in France , by certain of his Pinnaces , that all things were quiet in France , and that there was no preparation of sending aid unto the Spaniards , which was greatly feared from the Guisian faction , and from the Leaguers : but there was a false rumour spread all about , that the Spaniards had conquered England . 
 The seven and twentie of July , the Spaniards about The z^ . of the sunsetting were come over-against Dover , and . road at anchor within the sighed of Caleis , intending to ancr / before * hold on for Dunkerk , expecting there to join with Caleis . the duke of Parma his forces , without which they were able to do little or nothing . 
 Likewise the English Fleet following up hard upon them , anchored just by them within culverin-shot . And here the lord Henry Seymer united himself unto the lord Admiral with his fleet of 30. ships which road before the mouth of Thames . 
 As the Spanish navy therefore lay at anchor , the duke of Medina sent certain messengers unto the duke of Parma , with whom upon that occasion many Noblemen and Gentlemen went to refresh themselves on land : and among the rest the prince of Ascoli , being accounted the kings base son , and a very proper and towardly young gentleman , to his great good , went on shore , who was by so much the more fortunate , in that he had not opportunity to return on board the same ship , out of which he was departed , because that in returning home it was cast away upon the Irish coast , with all the persons contained therein . 
 The duke of Parma being advertised of the Spanish Fleets arrival upon the coast of England , made all the haste he could to be present himself in this expedition for the performance of his charge : vainly persuading 
 219 
 The 30. oj July . 
 himself that now by the means of Cardinali Allen , he should be crowned king of England , and for that cause he had resigned the government of the Low countries unto Count Mansfeld the elder . And having made his vows unto S. Marry of Hall in Henault ( whom he went to visit for his blind devotions sake ) he returned towards Bruges the 28. of July . 
 The next day traveling to Dunkerk he herd the thundering Ordinance of either Fleet : and the same evening being come to Dixmud , he was given to understand the hard success of the Spanish Fleet . 
 Upon Tuesday which was the thirtieth of July , about high noon , he came to Dunkerk , when as all the Spanish Fleet was now passed by : neither durst any of his ships in the mean space come forth to assist the said Spanish Fleet for fear of five and thirtie warlike ships of Holland and Zeland , which there kept watch and ward under the conduct of the Admiral Justin of Nassau . 
 The foresaid five and thirtie ships were furnished with most cunning mariners and old expert soldiers , among the which were twelve hundred Musketeers , whom the States had chosen out of all their garrisons , and whom they knew to have be heretofore experienced in sea-fights . 
 This navy was given especially in charge not to suffer any ship to come out of the Haven , nor to permit any Zabraes , Pataches or other small vessels of the Spanish Fleet ( which were more likely to aid the Dunkerkers ) to enter thereinto , for the greater ships were not to be feared by reason of the shallow sea in that place . Howbeit the prince of Parma his forces being as yet unready , were not come on board his ships , only the English Fugitives being seven hundred in number under the conduct of Sir William Stanley , came in fit time to have be embarked , because they hoped to give the first assault against England . The residue showed themselves unwilling and loath to 
 220 
 1588. depart , because they saw but a few mariners , who were by constraint drawn into this expedition , and also because they had very bore provision of bred , drink , and other necessary victuals . 
 Moreover , the ships of Holland and Zeland stood continually in their sighed , threatening shot and powder , and many inconveniences unto them : for fear of which ships , the Mariners and Seamen secretly withdrew themselves both day and night , lest that the duke of Parma his soldiers should compel them by main force to go on board , and to break through the Hollanders Fleet , which all of them judged to be impossible by reason of the straightness of the Haven . 
 But it seems that the Duke of Parma and the The Spaniards Spaniards grounded upon a vain and presumptuous vain °Ptnion expectation , that all the ships of England and of the C°heirozvnfleet Low countries' would at the first sighed of the Spanish and Dunkerk Navy have betaken themselves to flight , yielding them sea room , and endeavouring only to defend themselves , their havens , and sea coasts from invasion . Wherefore their intent and purpose was , that the Duke of Parma in his small and flat-bottomed ships , should as it were under the shadow and wings of the Spanish fleet , convey over all his troops , armour , and warlike provision , and with their forces so united , should invade England ; or while the English fleet were busied in fight against the Spanish , should enter upon any part of the coast , which he thought to be most convenient . Which invasion ( as the captives afterwards confessed ) the Duke of Parma thought first to have attempted by the river of Thames ; upon the banks whereof having at his first arrival landed twenty or thirty thousand of his principali soldiers , he supposed that he might easily have woonne the City of London ; both because his small ships should have followed and assisted his land-forces , and also for that the City itself was but meanly fortified and easy to overcome , by reason of the Citizens delicacy and discontinuance from 
 221 
 the wars , who with continual ! and constant labour might be vanquished , if they yielded not at the first assault . They were in good hope also to have met with some rebels against her Majesty , and such as were discontented with the present state , as Papists , and others . Likewise they looked for aid from the favourers of the Scottish Queen , who was not long before put to death ; all which they thought would have stirred up seditions and factions . 
 Whenas therefore the Spanish fleet road at anchor before Caleis , to the end they might consult with the Duke of Parma what was best to be done according to the Kings commandment , and the present estate of their affairs , and had now ( as we will afterwards declare ) purposed upon the second of August being Friday , with one power and consent to have put their intended business in practice ; the L. Admiral of England being admonished by her Majesties letters from the Court , thought it most expedient either to drive the Spanish fleet from that place , or at leastwise to give them the encounter : and for that cause ( according to her Majesties prescription ) he took forthwith eight of his worst & basest ships which came next to hand , & disburdening them of all things which seemed to be of any valve , filled them with gunpowder , pitch , brimstone , and with other combustible and firy matter ; and charging all their ordinance with powder , bullets , and stones , he sent the said ships upon the 28 of July being Sunday , about two of the clock after midnight , with the wind and tide against the Spanish fleet : which when they had proceeded a good space , being forsaken of the Pilots , and set on fire , were directly carried upon the King of Spaines Navy : which fire in the dead of the night put the Spaniards into such a perplexity and horror ( for they feared lest they were like unto those terrible ships , which Frederic Jenebelli three years before , at the siege of Antwerpe , had furnished with gunpowder , stones , and dreadful engines , for the dissolution of the Duke of 
 222 
 Parma his bridge , built upon the river of Scheid ) that cutting their cables whereon their anchors were fastened , and hoisting up their sails , they betook themselves very confusedly unto the main sea . 
 In this sudden confusion , the principali and greatest The galliass of the foure galliasses falling fowl of another ship , lost her rudder : for which cause when she could not be the guided any longer , she was by the force of the tide showlds before cast into a certain showld upon the shore of Caleis , C aleis . where she was immediately assaulted by diverse English pinasses , hoys , and drumbiers . 
 And as they lay battering of her with their ordinance , and durst not board her , the L. Admiral sent thither his long boat with and hundreth choice soldiers under the command of Captain Amias Preston . Upon whose M. Amias approach their fellows being more emboldened , did offer ? restm to board the galliass : against whom the governor iimrtigth fa thereof and Captain of all the foure galliasses , Hugo galliass . de Moncada , stoutly opposed himself , fighting by so much the more valiantly , in that he hoped presently to be succoured by the Duke of Parma . In the mean season , Moncada , after he had endured the conflict a good while , being hit on the head with a bullet , fell down stark dead , and a great number of Spaniards also were slain in his company . The greater part of the residue leaping overboard into the sea , to save themselves by swimming , were most of them drowned . Howbeit there escaped among others DONE Anthonio de Manriques , a principali officer in the Spanish fleet ( called by them their Veador general ) together with a few Spaniards beside : which Anthonio was the first man that carried certain news of the success of the fleet into Spaine . 
 This huge and monstrous galliass , wherein were contained three hundred slaves to lug at the oars , and foure hundred soldiers , was in the space of three hours rifled in the same place ; and there were found among diverse other commodities 50000 ducats of the Spanish kings treasure . At length when the slaves were released out of 
 223 
 The great fight before Greveling the 29. of July . 
 their fetters , the English men would have set the said ship on fire , which Monsieur Gourdon the governor of Caleis , for fear of the damage which might thereupon ensue to the Town and Haven , would not permit them to do , but drave them from thence with his great ordinance . 
 Upon the 29 of July in the morning , the Spanish Fleet after the foresaid tumult , having arranged themselves again into order , were , within sighed of Greveling , most bravely and furiously encountered by the English ; where they once again god the wind of the Spaniards : who suffered themselves to be deprived of the commodity of the place in Caleis road , and of the advantage of the wind near unto Dunkerk , rather then they would change their array or separate their forces now conjoined and united together , standing only upon their defence . 
 And albeit there were many excellent and warlike ships in the English fleet , yet scarce were there 22 or 23 among them all which matched 90 of the Spanish ships in bigness , or could conveniently assault them . Wherefore the English ships using their prerogative of nimble stirrage , whereby they could turn and wield themselves with the wind which way they listed , came often times very near upon the Spaniards , and charged them so soar , that now and then they were but a pikes length asunder : & so continually giving them one broad side after another , they discharged all their shot both great and small upon them , spending one whole day from morning till night in that violent kind of conflict , until such time as powder and bullets failed them . In regard of which want they thought it convenient not to pursue the Spaniards any longer , because they had many great vantages of the English , namely for the extraordinary bigness of their ships , and also for that they were so nearly conjoined , and kept together in so good array , that they could by no means be fought withal one to one . The English thought therefore , that they had right well acquitted themselves , in chasing the Spaniards 
 224 
 THE FINAL BATTLE OFF GRAVELINES 20th July 1588 
 1588. first from Caleis , and then from Dunkerk , and by that means to have hindered them from joining with the Duke of Parma his forces , and getting the wind of them , to have driven them from their own coasts . 
 The Spaniards that day sustained great loss and damage having many of their ships shot thorough and thorough , and they discharged likewise great store of ordinance against the English ; who indeed sustained some hindrance , but not comparable to the Spaniards loss : for they lost not any one ship or person of account . For very diligent inquisition being made , the English men all that time wherein the Spanish Navy sailed upon their seas , are not found to have wanted above one hundreth of their people : albeit Sir Francis Drakes ship was pierced with shot above forty times , and his very cabben was twice shot thorough , and about the conclusion of the fight , the bed of a certain gentleman lying weary thereupon , was taken quite from under him with the force of a bullet . Likewise , as the Earl of Northumberland and Sir Charles Blunt were at dinner upon a time , the bullet of a demi-culverin brake thorough the midst of their cabin , touched their feet , and struck down two of the standers by , with many such accidents befalling the English ships , which it were tedious to rehearse . Whereupon it is most apparent , that God miraculously preserved the English nation . For the L. Admiral wrote unto her Majesty that in all humane reason , and according to the judgement of all men ( every circumstance being duly considered ) the English men were not of any such force , whereby they might , without a miracle , dare once to approach within sighed of the Spanish Fleet : insomuch that they freely ascribed all the honour of their victory unto God , who had confounded the enemy , and had brought his counsels to none effect . 
 The same day the Spanish ships were so battered with Three Spanish English shot , that that very night and the day following , Hips sunk two or three of them sunk right down : and among 1n tO } ie fight . 
 iv 225 p 
 Two galleons taken and carted into Beland . 
 the rest a certain great ship of Biscay , which Captain Cross assaulted , which perished even in the time of the conflict , so that very few therein escaped drowning ; who reported that the governors of the same ship slew one another upon the occasion following : one of them which would have yielded the ship was suddenly slain ; the brother of the slain party in revenge of his death slew the murderer , and in the mean while the ship sunk . 
 The same night two Portugall galleons of the burden of seven or eight hundreth tons a piece , to wit the Saint Philip and the Saint Matthew , were forsaken of the Spanish Fleet , for they were so torn with shot , that the water entered into them on all sides . In the galeon of Saint Philip was Francis the Toledo , brother unto the Count de Orgas , being Colonel over two and thirty bans : beside other gentlemen ; who seeing their mast broken with shot , they shaped their course , as well as they could , for the coast of Flanders : whither when they could not attain , the principali men in the ship committing themselves to their skiff , arrived at the next town , which was Ostend ; and the ship it self being left behind with the residue of their company , was taken by the Ulishingers . 
 In the other galeon , called the S. Matthew , was embarked DONE Diego Pimentelli another campmaster and colonel of 32 bans , being brother unto the marks of Tamnares , with many other gentlemen and captains . Their ship was not very great , but exceeding strong , for of a great number of bullets which had battered her , there were scarce 20 wherewith she was pierced or hurt : her upper work was of force sufficient to bear off a musket shot : this ship was shot thorough and pierced in the fight before Greveling ; insomuch that the leakage of the water could not be stopped : whereupon the duke of Medina sent his great skiff unto the governor thereof , that he might save himself and the principal persons that were in his ship : which he , upon a halt 
 226 
 courage , refused to do : wherefore the Duke charged him to sail next unto himself : which the night following he could not perform , by reason of the great abundance of water which entered his ship on all sides ; for the avoiding whereof , and to save his ship from sinking , he caused 50 men continually to labour at the pump , though it were to small purpose . And seeing himself thus forsaken & separated from his admiral , he endeavoured what he could to attain unto the coast of Flanders : where , being espied by 4 or 5 men of war , which had their station assigned them upon the same coast , he was admonished to yield himself unto them . Which he refusing to do , was strongly assaulted by them altogether , and his ship being pierced with many bullets , was brought into far worse case then before , and 40 of his soldiers were slain . By which extremity he was inforced at length to yield himself unto Peter Banderduess & other captains , which brought him and his ship into Zeland ; and that other ship also last before mentioned : which both of them , immediately after the greater and better part of their goods were unladen , sunk right down . 
 For the memory of this exploit , the foresaid captain Banderduess caused the banner of one of these ships to be set up in the great Church of Leiden in Holland , which is of so great a length , that being fastened to the very roof , it reached down to the ground . 
 About the same time another small ship being by A small ship necessity driven upon the coast of Flanders , about away Blankenberg , was cast away upon the sands , the people and therein being saved . Thus almighty God would have the Spaniards huge ships to be presented , not only to the view of the English , but also of the Zelanders ; that at the sighed of them they might acknowledge of what small ability they had been to resist such impregnable forces , had not God endued them with courage , providence , and fortitude , yea , and fought for them in many places with his own arm . 
 227 
 The dishonour - The 29 of July the Spanish fleet being encountered 
 able flight of English ( as is aforesaid ) and lying close together 
 under their fighting sails , with a Southwest wind sailed prudent advice passed Dunkerk , the English ships still following the chase . of the L. Ad - Of whom the day following when the Spaniards had god mirall . sea roomej they cut their main sails ; whereby they sufficiently declared that they meant no longer to fight but to fly . For which cause the L. Admiral of England dispatched the L. Henrie Seymer with his squadron of small ships unto the coast of Flanders , where , with the help of the Dutch ships , he might stop the prince of Parma his passage , if perhaps he should attempt to issue forth with his army . And he himself in the mean space pursued the Spanish fleet until the second of August , because he thought they had set sail for Scotland . And albeit he followed them very near , yet did he not assault them any more , for want of powder and bullets . But upon the fourth of August , the wind arising , when as the Spaniards had spread all their sails , betaking themselves wholly to flight , and leaving Scotland on the left hand , trended towards Norway , ( whereby they sufficiently declared that their whole intent was to save themselves by flight , attempting for that purpose , with their battered and crazed ships , the most dangerous navigation of the Northern seas ) the English seeing that they were now proceeded unto the latitude of 57 degrees , and being unwilling to participate that danger whereinto the Spaniards plunged themselves , and because they wanted things necessary , and especially powder & shot , 
 The English returned back for England ; leaving behind them r^urne h01 ™ certain pinasses only , which they enjoined to follow suit of the Spaniards aloof , and to observe their course . And 
 Spaniards the so it came to pass that the fourth of August , with great 4 of August , danger and industry , the English arrived at Harwich : for they had be tossed up and down with a mighty tempest for the space of two or three days together , which it is likely did great hurt unto the Spanish fleet , being ( as I said before ) so maimed and battered . The 228 
 English now going on shore , provided themselves forthwith of victuals , gunpowder , and other things expedient , that they might be ready at all assays to entertain the Spanish fleet , if it chanced any more to return . But being afterwards more certainly informed of the Spaniards course , they thought it best to leave them unto those boisterous and uncouth Northern seas , and not there to hunt after them . 
 The Spaniards seeing now that they wanted foure or five thousand of their people and having diverse maimed and sick persons , and likewise having lost io or 12 of their principali ships , they consulted among themselves , what they were best to do , being now escaped out of the hands of the English , because their victuals failed them in like sort , and they began also to want cables , cordage , anchors , masts , sails , and other naval furniture , and utterly despaired of the Duke of Parma his assistance ( who verily hoping and undoubtedly expecting the return of the Spanish Fleet , was continually occupied about his great preparation , commanding abundance of anchors to be made , & other necessary furniture for a Navy to be provided ) they thought it good at length , so soon as the wind should serve them , to fetch a compass about Scotland and Ireland , and so to return for Spaine . 
 For they well understood , that commandment was given throughout all Scotland , that they should not have any succour or assistance there . Neither yet could they in Norway supply their wants . Wherefore , having taken certain Scotisfi and other fisherboats , they brought the men on board their own ships , to the end they might be their guides and Pilots . Fearing also lest their fresh water should fail them , they cast all their horses and mules overboard : and so touching no where upon the coast of Scotland , but being carried with a fresh gale between the Orcades and Faar-Isles , they proceeded far North , even unto 61 degrees of latitude , being distant from any land at the least 40 leagues . Here the 
 229 
 The Spaniards consult to sail round about Scotland and Ireland , and so to return home . 
 Duke of Medina generail of the Fleet commanded all his followers to shape their course for Biscay : and he himself with twenty or five and twenty of his ships which were best provided of fresh water and other necessaries , holding on his course over the main Ocean , returned safely home . The residue of his ships being about forty in number , and committed unto his Viceadmiral , fell nearer with the coast of Ireland , intending their course for Cape Clare , because they hoped there to get fresh water , and to refresh themselves on land . But after they were driven with many contrary winds , The ship - at length , upon the second of September , they were ■ m-acke of the cast y a tempest arising from the Southwest upon diverse upon^he^rish Parts °f Ireland , where many of their ships perished . coast . And among others , the ship of Michael de Oquendo , which was one of the great Galliasses : and two great ships of Venice also , namely , la Ratta and Belanzara , with other 36 or 38 ships more , which perished in sundry tempests , together with most of the persons contained in them . 
 Likewise some of the Spanish ships were the second time carried with a strong West wind into the channel of England , whereof some were taken by the English upon their coast , and others by the men of Rochel upon the coast of France . 
 Moreover , there arrived at Newhaven in Normandy , being by tempest enforced so to do , one of the foure great Galliasses , where they found the ships with the Spanish women which followed the Fleet at their setting forth . Two ships also were cast away upon the coast of Norway , one of them being of a great burden ; howbeit all the persons in the said great ship were Of ships saved : insomuch that of 134 ships , which set sail out ° { et'ther ” re P°rtugahj there returned home 53 only small and 
 turned how ' great : namely the foure galliasses but one , and but but 53. one of the foure galleys . Of the 91 great galleons and hulks there were missing 58 , and 33 returned : of the pataches and zabraes 17 were missing , and 18 returned 
 230 
 home . In brief , there were missing 81 ships , in which number were galliasses , galleys , galleons , and other vessels both great and small . And among the 53 ships remaining , those also are reckoned which returned home before they came into the English channel . Two galleons of those which were returned , were by misfortune burned as they road in the haven ; and such like mishaps did many others undergo . Of 30000 persons which went in this expedition , there perished ( according to the number and proportion of the ships ) the greater and better part ; and many of them which came home , by reason of the toils and ' inconveniences which they sustained in this voyage , died not long after their arrival . The Duke of Medina immediately upon his return was deposed from his authority , commanded to his private house , and forbidden to repair unto the Court ; where he could hardly satisfy or yield a reason unto his malicious enemies and backbiters . Many honourable personages and men of great renown deceased soon after their return ; as namely John Martines de Ricalde , with diverse others . A great part also of the Spanish Nobility and Gentry employed in this expedition perished either by fight , diseases , or drowning , before their arrival ; & among the rest Thomas Perenot of Granduell a Dutchman , being earl of Cantebroi , and son unto Cardinali Granduell his brother . 
 Upon the coast of Zeland DONE Diego de Pimen tell , brother unto the Marks de Tamnares , and kinsman unto the earl of Beneventum & Calva , and Colonel over 32 bans with many other in the same ship was taken and detained as prisoner in Zeland . 
 Into England ( as we said before ) DONE Pedro de Valdez , a man of singular experience , and greatly honoured in his country , was led captive , being accompanied with DONE Vasquez de Silva , DONE Alonzo de Sayas , and others . 
 Likewise upon the Scotish Western Isles of Lewis , and Ila , and about Cape Cantyre upon the main land , 231 
 there were cast away certain Spanish ships , out of which were saved diverse Captains and Gentlemen , and almost foure hundred soldiers , who for the most part , after their shipwreck , were brought unto Edenborough in Scotland , and being miserably needy and naked , were there clothed at the liberality of the King and the Merchants , and afterwards were secretly shipped for Spaine ; but the Scotish fleet wherein they passed touching at Yarmouth on the coast of Norfolke , were there stayed for a time until the Counsels pleasure was known ; who in regard of their manifold misery's , though they were enemies , winked at their passage . 
 Upon the Irish coast many of their Noblemen and Gentlemen were drowned ; and diverse slain by the barbarous and wild Irish . Howbeit there was brought prisoner out of Ireland , DONE Alonzo de Lu^on , Colonel of two and thirtie bands , commonly called a terza of Naples ; together with Rodorigo de Lasso , and two others of the family of Cordova , who were committed unto the custody of Sir Horatio Palavicini , that Monsieur de Teligny the son of Monsieur de la Notie ( who being taken in fight near Antwerpe , was detained prisoner in the Castle of Turney ) might be ransomed for them by way of exchange . To conclude , there was no famous nor worthy family in all Spaine , which in this expedition lost not a son , a brother , or a kinse - 
 man . 
 New coins stamped fir the memory of the Spaniards overthrow . 
 For the perpetuali memory of this matter , the Zelanders caused new coin of Silver and brass to be stamped : which on the one side contained the arms of Zeland , with this inscription : GLORY TO GOD ONLY : and on the other side , the pictures of certain great ships , with these words : THE SPANISH FLEET : and in the circumference about the ships : IT CAME , WENT , AND WAS . Anno 1588. That is to say , the Spanish fleet came , went , and was vanquished this year ; for which , glory be given to God only . 
 232 
 COMPASSES AND BREECH-LOADING GUN FROM THE SPANISH GALLEON ‘ FLORENCIA ’ FOUND IN TOBERMORY BAY JUNE I903 
 Likewise they coined another kind of money ; upon the one side whereof was represented a ship fleeing , and a ship sinking : on the other side foure men making prayers and giving thanks unto God upon their knees ; with this sentence : Man purposes ; God disposeth . 1588. Also , for the lasting memory of the same matter , they have stamped in Holland diverse such like coins , according to the custom of the ancient Roman . 
 While this wondered and puissant Navy was sailing The people of along the English coasts , and all men did now plainly Tnglandandof see and hear that which before they would not be per - v-tnceh swaded of , all people throughout England prostrated fast , and give themselves with humble prayers and supplications unto thanks unto God : but especially the outlandish Churches ( who had God-greatest cause to fear , and against whom by name , the Spaniards had threatened most grievous torments ) enjoined to their people continual fastings and supplications , that they might turn away Gods wrath and fury now imminent upon them for their sins : knowing right well , that prayer was the only refuge against all enemies , calamities , and necessities , and that it was the only solace and relief for mankind , being visited with affliction and misery . Likewise such solemn days of supplication were observed throughout the united Provinces . 
 Also a while after the Spanish Fleet was departed , there was in England , by the commandment of her Majesty , and in the united Provinces , by the direction of the States , a solemn festival day publicly appointed , wherein all persons were enjoined to resort unto the Church , and there to render thanks and praises unto God : and the Preachers were commanded to exhort the people thereunto . The foresaid solemnity was observed upon the 29 of November ; which day was wholly spent in fasting , prayer , and giving of thanks . 
 Likewise , the Queens Majesty herself , imitating the ancient Roman , road into London in triumph , in regard of her own and her subject's glorious deliverance . For being attended upon very solemnly by all the principali 
 233 
 estates and officers of her Realm , she was carried thorough her said City of London in a triumphant chariot , and in robes of triumph , from her Palace unto the Cathedral Church of Saint Paul , out of the which the ensigns and colours of the vanquished Spaniards hung displayed . And all the Citizens of London in their Liveries stood on either side the street , by their several Companies , with their ensigns and banners : and the streets were hanged on both sides with Blue cloth , which , together with the foresaid banners , yielded a very stately and gallant prospect . Her Majesty being entered into the Church , together with her Clergy and Nobles gave thanks unto God , and caused a public Sermon to be preached before her at Pauls cross ; wherein none other argument was handled , but that praise , honour , and glory might be rendered unto God , and that Gods name might be extolled by thanksgiving . And with her own princely voice she most Christianly exhorted the people to do the same : whereupon the people with a loud acclamation wished her a most long and happy life , to the confusion of her foes . 
 Thus the magnificent , huge , and mighty fleet of the Spaniards ( which themselves termed in all places invincible ) such as sailed not upon the Ocean sea many hundreth years before , in the year 1588 vanished into smoke ; to the great confusion and discouragement of the authors thereof . In regard of which her Majesties happy success all her neighbours and friends congratulated with her , and many verses were penned to the honour of her Majesty by learned men , whereof some which came to our hands we will here annex . 
 ’34 
 AD SERENISSIMAM ELIZABETHAM ANGLIC REGINAM . 
 THEODOR . BEZA . 
 Traverat innumeris Hispanus navibus aequor , Regnis juncturus sceptra Britanna suis . 
 Tanti hujus , rogitas , quae motus causa ? superbos 
 Impulit Ambitio , vexit Avaritia . 
 Quam bene te ambitio mersit vanissima ventus ? 
 Et tumidos tumidae vos superastis aquae ! 
 Quam bene totius raptores orbis avaros , Hausit inexhausti justa vorago maris 1 At tu , cui venti , cui totum militat aequor , Regina , d mundi totius una , decus , Sic regnare Deo perge , ambition remota , Prodiga sic opibus perge juvare pios , 
 Ut te Angli longum , longiim Anglis ipsa fruaris , Quam dilecta bonis , tam metuenda malis . 
 The same in English . 
 THe Spanish Fleet did float in narrow Seas , And bend her ships against the English shore , With so great rage as nothing could appease , And with such strength as never seen before : And all to join the kingdom of that land Unto the kingdoms that he had in hand . 
 Now if you ask what set this king on fire , To practise war when he of peace did treat , It was his Pride , and never quenched desire , To spoil that Islands wealth , by peace made great : His Pride which far above the heavens did swell , And his desire as unsuffic’d as hell . 
 But well have winds his proud blasts overblown , And swelling waves allayed his swelling heart , Well hath the Sea with greedy gulfs unknown , Devoured the devourer to his smart : 
 And made his ships a prey unto the sand , That meant to pray upon another's land . 
 235 
 And now , Oh Queen , above all others blessed , For whom both winds and waves are pressed to fight , So rule your own , so succour friends oppressed , ( As far from pride , as ready to do right ) 
 That England you , you England long enjoy , No less your friends delight , then foes annoy . 
 