[ II i . 4. . ] The life and travails of Pelagius born in Wales . 
 276 
 PElagius , born in that part of Britaine which is called Wales , was head or governor of the famous College of Bangor , not far from Chester , wherein lived a Society of 2100. Divines , or Students of Christian philosophic , applying themselves to the profit of the Christian people , and living by the labours of their own hands , according to Pauls doctrine . He was a man excellently learned , and skilful both in the Greek and Latin tongues , and as it were another Tertullian , after his long and great travails for the good of the Christian common wealth , seeing himself abused , and injuriously dealt withal by some of the Clergy of that time , he took the matter so grievously , that at the last he relapsed from the faith . 
 Whereupon he left Wales , and went into France , and having gone through France , he went therehence into Egypt , Syria , & other Countries of the East , and being made Priest by a certain Monk of those parts , he there hatched his heresy , which according to his name was called the heresy of the Pelagians : which was , that man was born without sin , and might be saved by the power of his own will without grace , that so the miserable man might take away faith and baptism . With this and the like dregs of false doctrine , he returned again into Wales , and there by the means of the two false Prelates Julian and Celestine , who favoured his heresy , he infected the whole Country with it . But before his fallen and Apostasy from the faith , he exercised himself in the best studies , as Gennadius , Beda , Honorius , and other authors do report of him , and wrote many books serving not a little to Christian utility : but being once fallen into his heresy , he wrote many more erroneous books , then he did before honest , and sincere : whereupon , at the last his own Countrymen banished him , as Walden testifieth in his Epistle to Pope Martine the fift . He flourished in 
 277 
 the year after the Incarnation , 390. Maximus being then King of Britaine . 
 