Hunc ego sic imitor , 
 Haffniae 1593. Mense Mart. 
 Gudbrandus Thorliacus Episcopus Holensis in Islandia . 
 Authoris ad Lectorem . 
 COMMENTARII DE ISLANDIA INITIUM . 
 [ Sectio 
 Munsterus Islandiam collocat sub Longit . Latitude . 68. 
 Hersee : 7. 40 60. 42 
 Thirtes : 5. 50 64. 44 
 Nadar : 6. 40 57 - 20 
 Madher promontorium 21. 20 65. 10 
 Civitates in ea mediterraneae sunt Holen Episcopalis 28. 67. 5° 
 SECTIO SECUNDA . 
 Et penitus toto divisos orbe Britannos . Quartus unam ex Farensibus . Quintus Telemarchiam Noruagiae . Sextus Schrichfinniam . 
 SECTIO QUINTA . 
 [ Sectio 
 SECTIO SEXTA . 
 iv 17 B 
 SECTIO SEPTIMA . 
 A.D. 
 1592. 
 i . cap . 7. 
 [ I - $25-1 
 SECTIO OCTAVA . 
 27 
 [ Sectio 
 SECTIO DECIMA . 
 SECTIO UNDECIMA . 
 iv 33 c 
 Baiano sed ne fumare in littore thermas [ I . 529. J 
 SECTIO DUODECIMA . 
 SECTIO DECIMATERTIA . 
 Pictoribus atque Poetis , 
 41 
 A.D. 
 1592. 
 Munst. 
 SECTIO PRIMA . 
 IV 49 WORSER 
 974 - 
 53 
 1000. 
 Anno Christi . Episcopi Schalholtenses . Episcopi Holenses . Anno Christi 
 II I 
 1083 Redit in Islandiam cum Ordinatur peregre : anno 1106 
 Episcopatu . aetat . 64. cognomentum 
 1133 Moritur . ” 45 
 IIII III 
 Magnus . Biorno . 
 1134 Ordinatur . Ordinatus venit in Is - II+7 
 V V 
 1151 Eligitur . Bonus . 
 1176 Moritur . Moritur . 1237 
 Anno Christi . Episcopi Schalholtenses . Episcopi Holtenses . Anno Christi . 
 VI VI 
 Thorlacus . Botolphus . 
 praedecessoris Moritur . 1246 
 1178 1193 Ordinatur . Moritur . VII 
 VTT Henricus . 
 121 I Moritur . VIII 
 1216 Magnus . Abbas peregre abit . 1262 
 Ordinatur . Cathedram adit . 1263 
 IX Moritur . 1264 
 1239 Cathedram adit . 
 X Moritur . 1313 
 1269 Cathedram adit . X 
 vt Cathedram adit . 1314 
 1304 Ordinatur . 
 1310 Redit ex itinere . 
 1320 Moritur . XIII 
 XII Ormus . 
 1323 Cathedram adit . [ XIIII 
 1338 Moritur . [ XIII 
 55 
 Anno Christi . Episcopi Schalholtenses . Episcopi Holenses . Anno Christi , . 
 XIII XIIII 
 1341 Cathedram adit . Skalle . 
 Moritur . Cathedram Holensem 1358 
 XIIII aditurus venit in Island - Gron - 
 iam . Hic Jonas , olim landiae ! 
 XVI 
 XVII est , ut ea res arbitrio 
 Oddgeirus . Regis componeretur . 
 1381 Moritur in Assumpt . beat virginis , in portu Norvagiae Bergensi , e mere - bus favente Cathedram Holensem obtinuit . 
 Moritur . I391 
 tus Bergis in aede Sal - Petrus . 
 Michael Danus . Cathedram adit Holen - 1392 
 1385 Cathedram adit . sem . 
 1388 Resignat profectus in Moritur . 
 Daniam . XVI 
 Moritur . Holensi . 1432 
 Anno Christi . Episcopi Schalholtenses . Episcopi Holenses . Anno Christi . 
 [ XXV 5 [ XX 7 
 Episcopi Holenses . 
 Anno Christi . 
 1494 
 1519 
 1522 
 1541 
 1544 
 XXV Stephanus . 
 Cathedram adit . 
 Cathedram adit . 
 XXVII 
 XX 
 1525 
 1548 
 1550 
 1551 
 Anno Christi . Episcopi Schalholtenses . Episcopi Holenses . Anno Christi . 
 1556 reverso , Martinussponte superstitionibus abro - 
 Anno Christi . Episcopi Schalholtenses . Episcopi Holenses . Anno Christi . 
 A . WORSER 
 1592. 
 iv 65 E 
 SECTIO QUARTA . 
 SECTIO QUINTA . 
 858. 
 1260. 
 Margareta . 
 HOc loco praemittit Krantzius talem Ironiam . 
 69 
 [ Sectio 
 Item : 
 SECTIO OCTAVA . 
 [ Sectio 
 SECTIO NONA . 
 SECTIO DECIMA . 
 SECTIO UNDECIMA . 
 omnibus bonis nauseam movere posse , ac sua spurcitie ab iis legendis absterrere . 
 SECTIO DUODECIMA 
 SECTIO DECIMATERTIA . 
 SECTIO DECIMAQUARTA . 
 SECTIO DECIMAQUINTA . 
 SECTIO DECIMASEXTA . 
 A BRIEF COMMENTARIE of Island : wherein the errors of such as have written concerning this Island , are detected , and the slanders , and reproaches of certain strangers , which they have used overboldly against the people of 
 Island are confuted . 
 By Arngrimus Jonas , of Island . 
 To the most mighty Prince and Lord , Lord Christian the 4. of Denmarke , Norway , and of the Vandals and Gothes , King elect : of Sleswic , Holste , Stormar , and Dithmarse Duke : Earl of Oldenburg , and Delmenhorst : His most gracious Lord . 
 Hat heroical attempt of Anchurus , son of King Midas ( most gracious prince ) and that piety towards his country in manner peerless , deserveth highly to be renowned in histories : in that freely and courageously he offered his own person , for the stopping up of and huge gulf of 
 earth , about Celoena , a town in Phrigia , which daily swallowed multitudes of men , and whatsoever else came near unto it . For when his father Midas was advertised by the Oracle , that the said gulf should not be shut up , before things most precious were cast into it : Anchurus deeming nothing to be more invaluable then life , plunged himself alive down headlong into that bottomeles hold ; and that with so great vehemency of mind , that neither by his father's request nor by the allurements and tears of his most amiable wife , he suffered himself to be drawn back from this his enterprise . 
 Sperthius also and Bulls , two Lacedæmonians , were not much inferior to the former , who to turn away the revenge of Xerxes that most puissant King of the 89 
 Persians , intended against the Lacedæmonians , for killing the ambassadors of his father Darius , hied them unto the said king , and that he might avenge the ambassadors death upon them , not upon their country , with hardy , and constant minds presented themselves before him . 
 The very same thing ( most gracious prince ) which moved them , and many others being inflamed with the love of their country , to refuse for the benefit thereof , no danger , no trouble , no nor death it self , the same thing ( I say ) hath also inforced me , not indeed to undergo voluntary death , or freely to offer my self unto the slaughter , but yet to assay that which I am able for the good of my country : namely , that I may gather together and refute the errors , and vain reports of writers , concerning the same : and so take upon me a thing very dangerous , and perhaps subject to the sinister judgement of many . 
 In this purpose the example of Cneius Pompeius hath likewise confirmed me : who being chosen procurator for corn among the Romans , and in and extreme scarcety and dearth of the city , having taken up some store of grain in Sicilia , Sardinia , and Africa , is reported to have had greater regard of his country , then of himself . For when he made haste towards Room , and a mighty and dangerous tempest arising , he perceived the Pilots to tremble , and to be unwilling to commit themselves to the rigor of the stormy sea , himself first going on board , and commanding the anchors to be weighed , brake forth into these words : That we should sail necessity urges : but that we should live , it urges not . In which words he seems wisely to infer , that greater care is to be had of our country lying in danger , then of our own private safety . 
 SIf small with great as equals may agree : 
 And Fly with Elephant compared be . 
 Namely that gathering together and laying up in store those things which might be applied to succour the fame and credit of our nation , having now this long time be oppressed with strangers , through the envy of certain malicious persons , I boldly adventure to present these few meditations of mine unto the view of the world , and so hoisting up sails to commit my self unto a troublesome sea , and to break forth into the like speeches with him : That I should write necessity urges : but that my writings in all places should satisfy every delicate taste , or escape all peevishness of carpers it urges not . I doubt not but many will allow this my enterprise : the success perhaps all men will not approve . Nevertheless , I thought that there was greater regard to be had of my country , sustaining so many men's mocks and reproaches , then of mine own praise or dispraise , redounding perhaps unto me upon this occasion . For what cause should move me to shun the envy and hate of some men , being joined with and endeavour to benefit and gratify my country ? 
 But if I shall seem somewhat too bold in censuring The errors of the errors of writers , or too severe in reprehending the writers oj slanders of some men : yet I hope all they will judge r 
 indifferently of me , who shall seriously consider , how intolerable the errors of writers are , concerning our nation : how many also and how grievous be the reproaches of some , against us , wherewith they have sundry ways provoked our nation , and as yet will not cease to provoke . They ought also to have me excused in regard of that inbred affection rooted in the hearts of all men , towards their native soil , and to pardon my just grief for these injuries offered unto my country . And I in very deed , so much as lay in me , have in all places moderated my self , and have be desirous to abstain from reproaches : but if any man think , we should have used more temperance in our style , I trust , the former reason will content him . 
 Since therefore , I am to undergo the same hazard , 
 which I see is commonly incident to all men , that publish any writings : I must now have especial regard of this one thing : namely , of seeking out some patron , and Meccenas for this my brief commentary , under whose name and protection it may more safely pass through the hands of all men . 
 But for this purpose I could not find out , nor wish for any man more fit then your royal Majesty , most gracious prince . For unto him , who hath received under his power & tuition our lives and goods , unto him ( I say ) do we make humble suit , that he would have respect also unto the credit of our nation , so injuriously disgraced . 
 Yea verily ( most gracious King ) we are constrained to crave your Majesties merciful aid , not only in this matter , but in many other things also which are wanting in our country , or which otherwise belong to the public commodity and welfare thereof : which not by me , but by the letters supplicatory of the chief men of our nation , are at this time declared , or will shordy be declared . For we doubt not but that your sacred Majesty , after the example of your Christian predecessors , will vouchsafe unto our country also , among other Islands of your Majesties dominion , your kingly care and protection . For as the necessity of fleeing for redress unto your sacred Majesty , is ours : so the glory of relieving , regarding , and protecting us , shall wholly redound unto your sacred Majesty : as also , there is laid up for you , in respect of your fostering and preserving of Gods church , upon the extreme northerly parts almost of the whole earth , and in the uttermost bounds of your Majesties dominion ( which by the singular goodness of God , enjoyeth at this present tranquillity and quiet safety ) a reward and crown of immortali life in the heavens . 
 But considering these things are not proper to this place , I will leave them , and return to my purpose which I have in hand : most humbly beseeching your 92 
 S. M. that you would of your clemency vouchsafe to become a favourer and patron unto these my labours and studies , for the behalf of my country . 
 It now remains ( most gracious and merciful sovereign ) for us to make our humble prayers unto almighty God , that king of kings , and disposer of all humane affairs , that it would please him of his infinite goodness , to advance your Majesty ( yearly growing up in wisdom & experience , and all other heroical virtues ) to the highest pitch of sovereignty : and being advanced , continually to bless you with most prosperous success in all your affairs : and being blessed , long to preserve you , as the chief ornament , defence and safeguard of these kingdoms , and as the shield and fortress of his church : and hereafter in the life to come , to make you shine glorious like a star , among the principali nursing father's of Gods Church , in the perfect joy of his heavenly kingdom . The same most merciful father likewise grant , that these prayers , the oftener they be daily repeated and multiplied in every corner of your Majesties most ample territories & Islands , so much the more sure and certain they may remain , Amen . At Haffhia , or Copen Hagen 1593. in the month of March . 
 Y. S. M. 
 most humble subject , Arngrimus Jonas , Islander . 
 To the courteous and Christian reader Gudbrandus Thorlacius , Bishop of Holen in Island , wishes health . 
 Here came to light about the year of Christ 1561 , a very deformed imp , begotten by a certain Pedlar of Germany : namely a book of Germane rhymes , of all that ever were read the most filthy and most slanderous against the nation of Island . Neither did it suffice the base printer once to send abroad that base brat , but he must publish it also thrice or foure 93 
 Great errors grow upon mariners fabulous reports . 
 times over : that he might thereby , what lay in him , more deeply disgrace our innocent nation among the Germanes , & Danes , and other neighbour countries , with shameful , and everlasting ignominy . So great was the malice of this printer , & his desire so greedy to get lucre , by a thing unlawful . And this he did without controlment , even in that city , which these many years hath trafficked with Island to the great gain , and commodity of the citizens . His name is Joachimus Leo , a man worthy to become lions food . 
 Moreover , there are many other writers found , who when they would seem to describe the miracles of nature , which are thought to be very many in this Island , & the manners , & customs of the Islanders , have altogether swerved from the matter and truth it self , following mariners fables more trifling then old wives tales , & the most vain opinions of the common sort . These writers , although they have not left behind them such filthy & reproachful stuff as that base rimer : yet there are many things in their writings that will not suffer them to be excused , & altogether acquitted from causing and innocent nation to be had in derision by others . Wherefore marking , reading , & weighing these things with my self , & considering that there daily spring up new writers , which offer injury to the fame & reputation of the Islanders , being such men also as doe shamelessly filtch out of other men's labours , deluding their readers which feigned descriptions , & a new rehearsal of monsters , I often wished that some one man would come forth , to make answer to the errors of historiographers & other unjust censurers : and by some writing , if not to free our innocent nation from so many reproaches , yet at leastwise , in some sort to defend it , among Christian & friendly readers . And for this cause I have now procured and honest and learned young man one Arngrimus Fitz-Jonas , to peruse the works of authors , that have written any thing concerning Island , and by found reasons to detect their errors , & falsehoods . 
 And albeit at the first he was very loath , yet at length my friendly admonition , & the common love of his country prevailed with him so far , that he compiled this brief commentary , taking his proofs , not out of the vain fables of the people , but from his own experience , and many other men's also of sufficient credit . 
 Now , he that undertook this matter at my procurement , did again as it were by his own authority challenge at my hands , that I should in two or three words at least , make a preface unto his book ; thinking it might gain some credit , and authority thereby . Wherefore to speak my mind in a word : for my part , I judge him to have taken both honest & necessary pains , who hath done his endeavour not only to weigh the diverse opinions of wrighters concerning things unknown , and to examine them by the censure of truth , and experience , but also to defend his country from the venomous bitings of certain sycophants . It is thy part therefore ( gentle reader ) to accept this small treatise of his , being as it were guarded with the sacred love of truth , and of his country , against the perverseness of carpers . Farewell . Anno 1592. Julii 29. 
 Here begins the Commentary of Island . 
 Ven as in war , daily experience teaches us , that some upon no just & lawful grounds ( being egged on by ambition , envy , and covetise ) are induced to follow the army , and on the contrary side , that others 
 arm themselves upon just and necessary causes : namely such as go to battle for the defence and propagation of the Gospel , or such as being any way provoked thereunto , do withstand present violence and wrong , or at least ( not being provoked ) by reason of the enemy approaching are constrained to be up in arms : right so , they that fight under Apolloes banner . among whom , a great part , not upon any honest , philosophical , or indeed Christian intention , address themselves to wright : especially such as for desire of glory , for envy 
 and spite , or upon malicious and affected ignorance , carp at others : and , that they may be accounted superiors , sometime whet their stile against the person , name and fame of this or that particular man , sometime inveighing against a whole country , and by shameless untruths disgracing innocent nations and people . Again , others of and ingenuous mind , do by great industry , search and bring to light things profitable : namely , they that write of Divinity , Philo - 
 sophy , History and such like : and they who ( taking use and experience for their guides ) in the said Sciences have brought things obscure to light , things maimed to perfection , and things confused to order : and they that have faithfully commended to everlasting posterity , the stories of the whole world : that by their infinite labours have advanced the knowledge of tongues : to be short , that endeavour themselves to repress the insolency , confute the slanders , and withstand the unjust violence of others , against themselves , their Nation or their Country : 
 And I for my part , having scarce attained the sighed of good letters , and being the meanest of all the followers of Minerva ( that I may freely acknowledge mine own wants ) can do no less then become one of their number , who have applied themselves to rid their country from dishonour , to avouch the truth , and to shake off the yoke of railers & revilers . My estate enabled me only to write ; howbeit the excellency of truth , and the inbred affection I bear to my country enforceth me to do the best I can : since it hath pleased some strangers by false rumours to deface , and by manifold reproaches to injury my said country , making it a byeword , and a laughingstock to all other nations . To meet with whose insolency and false accusations , as also to detect the errors of certain writers concerning this Hand , unto good and well affected men ( for the common people will be always like themselves , stubbornly maintaining that which is false and foolish , neither 96 
 can I hope to remove them from this accustomed and stale opinion ) I have penned the treatise following . 
 And albeit Island is not destitute of many excellent men , who , both in age , wit , and learning , are by many degrees my superiors , and therefore more fit to take the defence of the country into their hands : notwithstanding , being earnestly persuaded thereunto , by that godly & famous man Gudbrandus Thorlacius Bishop of Hola in Island , I thought good ( to the utmost of mine ability ) to be no whit wanting unto the common cause : both that I might obey his most reasonable request , and also that I might encourage other of my countrymen , who have be better trained up in good learning , and endued with a greater measure of knowledge then I my self , to the defence of this our nation : so far am I from hindering any man to undertake the like enterprise . 
 But to return to the matter , because they ( whatsoever they be ) that reproach and malign our nation , make their boast that they use the testimonies of writers : we are seriously to consider , what things , and how true , writers have reported of Island , to the end that if they have given ( perhaps ) any occasion to others of inveighing against us , their errors being laid open ( for I will not speak more sharply ) all the world may see how justly they do reproach us . And albeit I nothing doubt to examine some ancient writers of this Hand , by the rule of truth and experience : yet ( otherwise ) their memory is precious in our eyes , their dignity reverend , their learning to be had in honour , and their zeal and affection towards the whole common wealth of learned men , highly to be commended : but as for novices ( if there be any such writers or rather pasquilles ) when they shall hear and know truer matters concerning Island , then they themselves have written , they shall seem by their inconstancy and perverse wit to have gained nought else but a black mark of envy and reproach . 
 And that this commentary of mine may have some order , it shall be divided into two generail parts : the 
 iv 97 G 
 first of the Hand , the second of the inhabitants : and of these two but so farforth as those writers which are come to our hands have left recorded : because I am not determined to wander out of these lists , or to handle more then these things and some other which pertain unto them . For I profess not my self and Historiographer , or Geographer , but only a Disputer . Wherefore omitting a longer Preface , let us come to the first part concerning the situation , the name , miracles , and certain other adjuncts of this Hand . 
 The first section . 
 The Isle of Island being severed from other countries' an infinite distance , stands far into the Ocean , and is scarce known unto Sailors . 
 ALbeit a discourse of those things which concern the land , and the adjuncts or properties thereof be of little moment to defend the nation or inhabitants from the biting of slanderers , yet seems it in no case to be omitted , but to be entreated of in the first place , that the friendly reader perceiving how truly those writers of Island have reported in this respect , may thereby also easily judge what credit is to be given unto them in other matters which they have left written concerning the inhabitants , and which others have received from them as oracles , from whence ( as they say ) they have borrowed scoffs and taunts against our nation . 
 First therefore , that the distance of Island from other countries' is not infinite , nor indeed so great as men commonly imagine , it might easily be provided , if one did but in some sort know the true longitude & latitude of the said Hand . For I am of opinion that it cannot exactly be known any other way then this , whenas it is manifest how the Mariners course ( be it never so direct , as they suppose ) does at all times swerve . In you mean while therefore I will set down diverse opinions of authors , concerning the situation of Island , that from hence every man may gather that of the distance which 98 
 seems most probable ; until perhaps my self being one day taught by mine own experience , may , if not intrude , yet at least adjoin , what I shall think true as 
 touching this matter . Longit . Latitude . deg . min. 
 deg . min. 
 Munster places Island almost in 20 68 
 Gemma Frisius places the midst 
 of Island 7 O 65 30 
 Thirtes 5 50 64 44 
 Nadar 6 40 57 10 
 The West shore of Island 20 O 63 0 
 The promontory of Chos 22 46 63 0 
 The East shore is extended North - 
 ward , and hath bounds of 
 The North shore is extended West - 
 ward , and hath bounds of 
 extension in 28 O 69 0 
 The description of the West side . 
 The promontory of Heckelfell 25 O 67 0 
 The promontory of Madher 21 20 65 10 
 The inland cities of Island 
 Holen the seat of a bishop 28 O 67 50 
 Schalholten the seat of a bishop 22 63 30 
 By Mid-Island 69 
 Island stretcheth it self 3 degrees within the circle arctic from the equinoctial , insomuch that you said circle arctic doth almost divide it in the midst etc. 
 Seven days sailing from Island to Hamburg . Island but two days sailing distant from Faar-lslands , y from the desert shores of Norway . 
 There be others also , who either in their maps , or writings have noted the situation of Island : notwithstanding it is to no purpose to set down any more of their opinions , because the more you have , the more contrary shall you find them . For my part , albeit I have probable conjectures persuading me not to believe any of the former opinions , concerning the situation of Island , but to dissent from them all : yet had I rather leave the matter in suspense then affirm and uncertainty , until ( as I have said ) I may be able perhaps one day not to guess at the matter , but to bring forth mine own observation , and experience . 
 A certain writer hath put down the distance between the mouth of Elbe & Batzende in the South part of Island to be 400 leagues : from whence if you shall account the difference of longitude to the meridian of Hamburgh , Island must have none of the forenamed longitudes in that place . I am able to prove by three sundry voyages of certain Hamburgers , that it is but seven days sailing from Island to Hamburgh . Beside all those Islands , which by reason of the abundance of sheep , are called Fareyiar , or more rightly Faareyiar , as likewise the desert shores of Norway , are distant from us but two days sailing . We have foure days sailing into habitable Gronland : and almost in the same quantity of time we pass over to the province of Norway , called Stad , lying between the towns of Nidrosia or Trondon , and Bergen , as we find in the ancient records of these nations . 
 100 
 In this Hand , at the Summer solstitium , the Sun passing thorough the sign of Cancer , there is no night , and therefore at the Winter solstitium there is no day . Also : Vadianus . But in that Hand , which far within the arctic circle is seated in the main Ocean , at this day called Island , and next unto the lands of the frozen sea , which they call Engrontland , there be many months in the year without nights . 
 AT the solstitium of winter , that there is no day ( that is to say , no time , wherein the Sun is seen above the horizon ) we confess to be true only in that angle of Island ( if there be any such angle ) where the pole is elevated full 67 degrees . But at Holen ( which is the bishops seat for the North part of Island , and lies in a most deep valley ) the latitude is about 65 degrees and 44 minutes , as I am informed by the reverend father , Gudbrand , bishop of that place : and yet there , the shortest day in all the year is at least two hours long , and in South-Island longer , as it appears by the tables of Mathematicians . Heerehence it is manifest , first that Island is not situate beyond the arctic circle : secondly , that in Island there are not wanting in Summer solstitium many nights , nor in Winter solstitium many days . 
 The third section . 
 It is nam of the ice which continually cleaveth unto the North part thereof . Another writeth : From the West part of Norway there lies and Hand which is nam of the ice , environed with and huge sea , and being a country of ancient habitation , etc. Zieglerus . This is Thyle , whereof most of the ancient writers have made mention . 
 IT is nam of ice , etc. Island hath been called by three names , one after another . For one Naddocus a Norvagian born , who is thought to be the first 101 
 Olaus Magnus and others . 
 Island is not within the circle arctic . 
 Saxo. 
 Islandfirst discovered by Naddocus in a tempest . 
 Discoverer of the same , as he was sailing towards the Faar-Ilands , through a violent tempest did by chance arrive at the East shore of Island ; where staying with his whole company certain weeks , he beheld abundance of snow covering the tops of the mountains , and there-Sneland . upon , in regard of the snow , called this Hand Sneland . 
 After him one Gardarus , being moved thereunto by the report which Naddocus gave out concerning Island , went to seek the said Hand ; who , when he had found Gardasholme . it , called it after his own name Gardars-holme , that is to say , Gardars lie . There were more also desirous to visit this new land . For after the two former , a certain Island . third Noruagian , called Flok , went into Island , and nam it of the ice , wherewith he saw it environed . 
 Of ancient habitation , etc. I gather not this opinion out of these words of Saxo ( as some men do ) that Island hath be inhabited from the beginning , or ( to speak in one word ) that the people of Island were autochthones , that is , earthbred , or bred out of their own soil like unto trees and herbs ; since it is evident , that this Island scarce began to be inhabited no longer ago then about 718 years since . 
 This is Thyle , etc. Grammarians wrangle about this name , and as yet the controversy is not decided . Which notwithstanding , 1 think might easily grow to composition , if men would understand that this Hand was first inhabited about the year of our Lord 874. Unless some man will say that Thule King of Aegypt ( who , as it is thought , gave this name thereunto ) passed so far unto and Hand , which was at that time untilled , and destitute of inhabitants . Again , if any man will deny this , he may for all me , that it may seem to be but a dream , while they are distracted into so many contrary opinions . One affirms that it is Island : another , that it is a certain Hand , where trees bear fruit twice in a year : the third , that it is one of the Orcades , or the last Hand of the Scotish dominion , as Johannes Myritius and others , calling it by the name of Thylensey , which 
 102 
 Virgil also seems to have meant by his ultima Thyle . If beyond the Britans ( by which name the English men and Scots only at this day are called ) he imagined none other nation to inhabit . Which is evident out of that verse of Virgil in his first Eclogue : 
 And Britans whole from all the world divided . 
 The fourth writeth , that it is one of the Faar-Ilands : the fift , that it is Telemark in Norway : the sixt , that it is Schrichfinnia . 
 Which continually cleaveth to the North part of the Hand . That clause that ice continually cleaveth etc. or as Munster affirmeth a little after , that it cleaveth for the space of eight whole months , are neither of them both true , when as for the most part the ice is thawed . in the month of April or May , and is driven towards the West : neither does it return before Januarie or aiways to the Februarie , nay often times it comes later . What West . if a man should reckon up many years , wherein ice ( the No ice at all sharp scourge of this our nation ) hath not at all Jeres in bene seen about Island ? which was found to be true lsland-this present year 1592. Hereupon it is manifest how truly Frisius hath written that navigation to this Hand lies open only for foure months in a year , and no longer , by reason of the ice and cold , whereby the passage is shut up , when as English ships every year , sometime in March , sometime in April , and some of them in May ; the Germanes and Danes , in May and June , do usually return unto us , and some of them depart not again from hence till August . But the last Navigation year , being 1591 , there lay a certain ship of Germanie laden with Copper within the haven or Vopnafiord in the till the midst coast of Island about fourteene days in the month of of November . November , which time being expired , she fortunately set sail . Wherefore , seeing that ice , neither continually , nor yet eight months cleaveth unto Island , Munster and Frisius are much deceived . 
 [ The fourth 
 103 
 Island 144 
 Germane miles in compass . 
 The fourth section . 
 The Hand is so great that it containeth many people . Item Zieglerus say : The situation of the Hand is extended between the South and the North almost 200 leagues in length . 
 SO great , etc. One Wilstenius schoolmaster of Oldenburg , in the year 1591 , sent unto mine Uncle in West-Island , a short treatise which he had gathered out of the fragments of sundry writers , concerning Island . Where we found thus written : Island is twice as great as Sicilie , etc. But Sicilie , according to Munster , hath 150 Germane miles in compass . As for the circuit of our Hand , although it be not exactly known unto us , yet the ancient , constant , and received opinion of the inhabitants accounteth it 144 leagues ; namely by the 12 promontories of Island , which are commonly known , being distant one from another 12 leagues or thereabouts , which two numbers being multiplied , produce the whole sum . 
 Many people . etc. One Gysserus about the year of our Lord 1090 , being bishop of Schalholten in Island , caused all the husbandmen , or countrymen of the Hand , who , in regard of their possessions were bound to pay tribute to the king , to be numbered ( omitting the poorer sort with women , and the meaner sort of the communality ) and he found in the East part of Island 700 , in the South part 1000 , in the West part 1100 , in the North part 1200 , to the number of 4000 inhabitants paying tribute . Now if any man will try , he shall find that more then half the Hand was at that time unpeopled . 
 104 
 The Hand , most part thereof , is mountainous and un - M^ster-tilled . But that part which is plain does greatly ziHerus abound with fodder , which is so rank , that they are * feign to drive their cattle from the pasture , lest they surfeit or be choked . 
 THat danger of surfeiting or choking was never herd tell of , in our father's , grandfathers , greatgrandfathers or any of our predecessors days , be they never so ancient . 
 The sixth section . 
 There be in this Hand mountains lift up to the skies , ^^ria ' whose tops being white with perpetuali snow , their ' roots boil with everlasting fire . The first is towards the West , called Hecla : the other the mountain of the cross : and the third Helga . Item : • Zieglerus . The rock or promontory of Hecla boileth with continual fire . Item : Saxo. There is in this Hand also a mountain , which resembling the starry firmament , with perpetuali flashings of fire , con-tinueth always burning , by uncessant belching out of flames . 
 MUnster and Frisius being about to report the wonders of Island do presently stumble , as it were , upon the threshold , to the great inconvenience of them both . For that which they here affirm of mount Hecla , although it hath some show of truth : notwithstanding concerning the other two mountains , that they should burn with perpetuali fire , it is a manifest error . For there are no such mountains to be found in Island , nor yet any thing else ( so far forth as we can imagine ) which might minister occasion of so great and error unto writers . Howbeit there was seen ( yet very lately ) in the year 1581 out of a certain mountain of South 
 105 
 Island lying near the Sea , and covered over with continual snow and frost , a marvelous eruption of smoke and fire , casting up abundance of stones and ashes . But this mountain is far from the other three , which the said authors do mention . Howbeit , suppose that these things be true which they report of firy mountains : is it possible therefore that they should seem strange , or monstrous , whenas they proceed from natural causes ? What ? Do they any whit prevail to establish that opinion concerning the hell of Island , which follows next after in Munster , Ziegler , and Frisius ? For my part , I think it no way tolerable , that men should abuse these , and the like miracles of nature , to avouch absurdities , or , that they should with a kind of impiety wonder at them , as at matters impossible . As though in these kinds of inflammations , there did not concur causes of sufficient force for the same purpose . There is in the roots of these mountains a matter most apt to be set on fire , coming so near as it doth to the nature of brimstone and pitch . There is air also , which insinuating it self by passages , and holes , into the very bowels of the earth , doth puff up the nourishment of so huge a fire , together with Saltpeter , by which puffing ( as it were with certain bellows ) a Threenaturall most ardent flame is kindled . For , all these thus con-causes of fine curring } fire hath those three things , which necessarily moun in s . mahe it burn , that is to say , matter , motion , and force of making passage : matter which is fatty and moist , and therefore nourishes lasting flames : motion which the air doth perform , being admitted into the caves of the earth : force of making passage , and that the invincible might of fire it self ( which can not be without inspiration of air , and can not but break forth with and incredible strength ) doth bring to pass : and so ( even as in undermining trenches , and engines or great warlike ordinance , huge iron bullets are cast forth with monstrous roaring , and cracking , by the force of kindled Brimstone , and Saltpeter , whereof Gun - 
 106 
 powder is compounded ) chingle and great stones being scorched in that fiery gulf , as it were in a furnace , together with abundance of sand and ashes , are vomited up and discharged , and that for the most part not without and earthquake : which , if it comes from the depth of the earth , ( being called by Possidonius , Succussio ) it must either be and opening or a quaking . Opening causeth the earth in some places to gape , and fallen a sunder . By quaking the earth is heaved up and swells , and sometime ( as Plinie says ) casts out huge Lib - 2O - caPheaps : such and earthquake was the same which I even 20-now mentioned , which in the year 1581 did so soar trouble the South shore of Island . And this kind of earthquake is most clearkely described by Pontanus in these verses : 
 The stirring breath runs on with stealing steps , urged now up , and now inforced down : 
 For freedom eke tries all , it skips , it leaps , to rid it self from uncouth dungeon . Then quakes the earth as it would burst anon , The earth yquakes , and walled cities quiver , Strong quarries crack , and stones from hills do shiver . 
 I thought good to add these things , not that I suppose any man to be ignorant thereof : but least other men should think that we are ignorant , and therefore that we will run after their fables , which they do from hence establish . But yet there is somewhat more in these three feigned mountains of Island , which causeth the said writers not a little to wonder , namely whereas they say that their foundations are always burning , and yet for all that , their tops be never destitute of snow . Howbeit , it beseems not the authority and learning of such great clerks to marveile at this , who can not but well know the flames of mount Aetna , which ( according to Plinie ) being full of snow all Winter , notwithstanding ( as the same man witnesseth ) it does always burn . 
 107 
 Wherefore , if we will give credit unto them , even this mountain also , since it is covered with snow , and yet burns , must be a prison of unclean souls : which thing they have not doubted to ascribe unto Hecla , in regard of the frozen top , and the firy bottom . And it is no marveile that fire lurking so deep in the roots of a mountain , and never breaking forth except it be very seidome , should not be able continually to melt the snow covering the top of the said mountain . Cardanus . For in Caira ( or Capira ) also , the highest tops of the mountain are said continually to be white with snow : and those in Veragua likewise , which are five miles high , and never without snow , being distant notwithstanding but only 10 degrees from the equinoctial . We have herd that either of the foresaid Provinces stands near unto Paria . What , if in Teneriffa ( which is one of the Canary or fortunate Hands ) the Pike so called , arising into the air , according to Munster , eight or nine Germane miles in height , and continually flaming like Aetna : yet ( as Benzo and Italian , and Historiographer of the West Indies witnesseth ) is it not able to melt the girdle of snow embracing the midst thereof . Which thing , what reason have we more to admire in the mountain of Hecla ? And thus much briefly concerning firy mountains . 
 Now that also is to be amended , whereas they write that these mountains are lifted up even unto the skies . For they have no extraordinary height beyond the other mountains of Island , but especially that third mountain , called by Munster Helga , and by us Helgafel , that is the holy mount , standing just by a monastery of the same name , being covered with snow , upon no part thereof in Summer time , neither deserveth it the name of and high mountain , but rather of and humble hillock , never yet ( as I said in the beginning of this section ) so much as once suspected of burning . Neither yet ought perpetuali snow to be ascribed to Hecla only , or to a few others ; for Island hath very many such snowy 108 
 mountains , all which the Cosmographer ( who hath so extolled and admired these three ) should not easily find out , and reckon up in a whole year . And that also is not to be omitted , that mount Hecla stands not towards the West , as Munster and Ziegler have noted , but between the South and the East : neither is it and headland , but rather a midland hill . 
 Continueth always burning etc. whosoever they be that have ascribed unto Hecla perpetuali belching out of flames , they are far beside the mark : insomuch that as often as it hath be inflamed , our countrymen have recorded it in their yearly Chronicles for a rare The chronicles accident : namely in the years of Christ 1104 , 1157 , °fls^and-1222 , 1300 , 1341 , 1362 , and 1389 : For from that year we never herd of the burning of this mountain until the year 1558 , which was the last breaking forth of fire in that mountain . In the mean time I say not that is impossible , but that the bottom of the hill may inwardly breed and nourish flames , which at certain seasons ( as hath be heretofore observed ) have burst out , and perhaps may do the like hereafter . 
 The seventh section . 
 The flame of mount Hecla will not burn tow ( which Frisius . 
 is most apt for the wieke of a candle ) neither is it Munsterus . quenched with water : and by the same force that bullets are discharged out of warlike engines with us , from thence are great stones cast forth into the air , by reason of the mixture of cold , and fire , and brimstone . This place is thought of some to be the prison of unclean souls . Item : Zieglerus . 
 This place is the prison of unclean souls . 
 Will not burn tow . Where these writers should find such matters , it is not easy to conjecture . 
 For our people are altogether ignorant of them , neither had they ever be herd of here among us , if they had not brought them to light . For there is no man 109 
 Speculum regale written in the Norvagian tongue . 
 Whence the fablesofIsland grew . 
 with us so rashly and fondly curious , that dareth for his life , the hill being on fire , try any such conclusions , or ( to our knowledge ) that ever durst : which notwithstanding Munster affirmeth , saying : They that are desirous to contemplate the nature of so huge a fire , & for the same purpose approach unto the mountain , are by some gulf swallowed up alive , etc. which thing ( as I said ) is altogether unknown unto our nation . Yet there is a book extant , written in the ancient language of the Noruagians , wherein you may find some miracles of earth , water , fire , and air , etc. confusedly written , few of them true , and the most part vain and false . Whereupon it easily appears that it was written long since by some that were imagined to be great wise men in the time of Popery . They called it a royal looking glass : howbeit , in regard of the found fables , wherewith ( but for the most part under the show of religion and piety , whereby it is more difficult to find out the cousinage ) it doth all over swarm , it deserveth not the name of a looking glass royal , but rather of a popular , and old wives looking glass . In this glass there are found certain figments of the burning of Hecla , not much unlike these which we now entreat of , nor any whit more grounded upon experience , and for that cause to be rejected . 
 But that I may not seem somewhat foolhardy , for accusing this royal looking glass of falsehood ( not to mention any of those things which it reporteth as less credible ) lo here a few things ( friendly reader ) which I suppose deserve no credit at all . 
 1 Of a certain Isle in Ireland , having a church and a parish in it , the inhabitants whereof deceasing are not buried in the earth , but like living men , do continually , against some bank or wall in the Churchyard , stand bolt-upright : neither are they subject to any corruption or downfall : insomuch that any of the posterity may there seek for , and behold their ancestors . 
 2 Of another Isle of Ireland , where men are not mortali . 
 IIO 
 3 Of all the earth and trees of Ireland , being of force to resist all poisons , and to kill serpents , and other venomous things , in any country whatsoever , by the only virtue and presence thereof , yea even without touching . 
 4 Of a third Isle of Ireland , that the one half thereof became and habitation of devils , but that the said devils have no jurisdiction over the other half , by reason of a Church there built , although , as the whole Isle is without inhabitants , so this part is continually destitute of a Pastor , and of divine service : and that it is so by nature . 
 5 Of a fourth Isle of Ireland floating up and down in and huge lake , the grass whereof is a most present remedy for all kind of diseases , and that the Hand , at certain seasons , especially on Sundayes , comes to the bank of the lake , so that any man may then easily enter into it , as it were into a ship : which notwithstanding ( say he ) destiny will not suffer any more then one to enter at a time . Furthermore , he reporteth that this Hand every seventh year grows fast to the bank , so that you cannot discern it from firm land : but that into the place thereof there succeedeth another , altogether like the former , in nature , quantity , and virtue : which , from what place it comes , no man can tell : and that all this happeneth with a kind of thundering . 
 6 Of the hunter's of Norway who are so expert to tame wood ( for so he speaks very improperly , whereas unto wood neither life nor taming can be ascribed ) that wooden pattens of eight elnes long being bound to the soles of their feet do carry them with so great celerity even upon high mountains , that they cannot be outrun , either by the swiftness of hounds and deer , or yet by the flying of birds . And that they will kill nine roes or more at one course & with one stroke of a dart . 
 These and such like , concerning Ireland , Norway , m 
 Island , Gronland , of the miracles of water , and air , this master of fragments hath gathered together into his looking glass : whereby , although he hath made his own followers wonder , and the common people to be astonished , yet hath he ministered unto us nothing but occasion of laughter . 
 But let us hear Frisius . The flame of Mount Hecla ( say he ) will not burn tow ( which is most apt matter for the wieke of a candle ) neither is it quenched with water . But I say that this strange opinion may be confirmed by many reasons borrowed out of your school of Philosophy . For the natural Philosophers do teach , That it is common to all forcible flames to be quenched with dry things , and nourished with moist : whereupon even blacksmithes , by sprinkling on of water , use to quicken and strengthen their fire . For ( say they ) when fire is more vehement , it is stirred up by cold , and nourished by moisture , both which qualities do concur in water . Item , water is wont to kindle skorching fires : because the moisture it self , which arises , does prove more fatty and gross , neither is it consumed by the smoke enclosing it , but the fire it self feeds upon the whole substance thereof , whereby being made purer , and gathering round together , it becomes then more vehement by reason of cold . And therefore also wildfires cannot be quenched with water . Item , There be places abounding with brimstone and pitch , which burn of their own accord , the flame whereof cannot be quenched with water . The grand Philosopher also hath affirmed , that fire is nourished by water . Arist. 3. de anim . And Plinie , in the second book of his natural historic cap . no . And Strabo in his 7. book . In Nympheum there proceedeth a flame out of a rock , which is kindled with water . The same author say : The ash continually flourishes , covering a burning fountain . And moreover that there are sudden fires at some times , even upon waters , as namely that the lake of Thrasumenus in the field of 
 IT2 
 Perugi , was all on fire , as the same Strabo witnesseth . And in the years 1226 , and 1236 , not far from the promontory of Island called Reykians , a flame of fire brake forth out of the sea . Yea even upon men's bodies sudden fires have glittered : as namely , there sprang a flame from the head of Servius Tullius lying a sleep : and also Lucius Martius in Spaine after the death of the Scipions , making and oration to his soldiers , and exhorting them to revenge , was all in a flame , as Valerius Antias does report . Plinie in like sort makes mention of a flame in a certain mountain , which , as it is kindled with water , so is it quenched with earth or hay : also of another field which burns not the leaves of shady trees that grow directly over it . These things being thus , it is strange that men should account that a wonder in Hecla only ( for I will grant it to be , for disputation sake , when indeed there is no such matter so far forth as ever I could learn of any man ) which is common to many other parts or places in the world , both hilly and plain , as well as to this . 
 And by the same force that bullets , etc. Munster Frisius . says the like also . This mountain when it rages , it soundeth like dreadful thunder , casts forth huge stones , disgorgeth brimstone , and with the cinders that are blown abroad , it covereth so much ground round about it , that no man can inhabit within 20. miles thereof , etc. Howbeit , they ought to have compared it with Aetna , or with other fiery mountains , whereof I will presently make mention , seeing there is to be found in them , not only a like accident , but in a manner the very same . Unless perhaps this be the difference , that flames brake seldomer out of Hecla , then out of other mountains of the same kind . For it hath now rested these 34. years full out , the last fiery breach being made in the year 1558. as we have before noted . And there can no such wonders be affirmed of our Hecla , but the same or greater are to be ascribed unto other burning mountains , as it shall by and by appear . 
 iv 113 h 
 But that brimstone should be sent forth it is a mere fable , and never known unto our nation , by any experiment . 
 This place is the prison of unclean souls . Here I am constrained to use a preface , and to crave pardon of the Reader , because , whereas in the beginning 1 propounded unto my self to treat of the land , and of the inhabitants distinctly by themselves , I must of necessity confusedly handle certain matters in this first part , which do properly belong unto the second . This is come to pass through the fault of these writers , who have confounded this part of the inhabitants religion concerning the opinion of hell , or of the infernali prison , with the situation & miracles of the island . Wherefore that we may come to this matter , who can but wonder , that wise men should be grown to this point , not only to listen after , but even to follow and embrace the do tings of the rude people ? For the common sort of strangers , and the offscouring of mariners ( here I do except them of better judgement aswell mariners as others ) hearing of this rare miracle of nature , by and inbred and natural blockishness are carried to this imagination of the prison of souls : and that because they see no wood nor any such fuel laid upon this fire as they have in their own chimneys at home . And by this persuasion of the gross multitude , the report grew strong , especially ( as they are too much accustomed to banning and cursing ) while one would wish to another the firy torments of this mountain . As though elementary , materiali , and visible fire could consume men's souls being spirituali , bodiless , and invisible substances . And to be short , who can but wonder , why they should not feign the same prison of damned souls , aswell in mount Aetna , being no less famous for fires and inflammations then this ? But you will say , that Pope Gregorie feigned it so to be . Therefore it is purgatory . I am content it should be so : then there is the same truth of this prison that there 
 114 
 is of purgatory . But before I proceed any further I think it not amiss to tell a merry tale , which was the originali and ground of this hellish opinion : namely that a ship of certain strangers departing from Island , under full sail , a most swift pace , going directly on her course , met with another ship sailing against wind & weather , and the force of the tempest as swiftly as themselves , who hailing them of whence they were , answer was given by their governor , De Bishop van Bremen : being the second time asked whither they were bound ? he answered , Thom Heckelfeld though , Thom Heckelfeld though . I am afeard lest the reader at the 
 sighed of these things should call for a basin : for it is such and abominable lie , that it would make a man cast his gorge to hear it . Away with it therefore to fenny frogs , for we esteem no more of it , then of their croaking coax coax . Nay , it is so palpable that it is not worthy to be smiled at , much less to be refuted . But I will not trifle any longer with the found Papists : 
 let us rather come unto our own writers . 
 And first of all I cannot here omit a saying of that most worthy man Doctor Caspar Peucer . There is in Island ( quoth he ) mount Hecla , being of as dreadful a depth as any vast gulf , or as hell it self , which resoundeth with lamentable , & miserable yellings , that the noise of the criers may be herd for the space of a great league round about . Great swarms of ugly black Ravens and Vultures lie hoovering about this place which are thought of the inhabitants to nestle there . The common people of that country are verily persuaded , that there is a descent down into hell by this gulf : and therefore when any battles are foughten else where , in whatsoever part of the whole world , or any bloody slaughters are committed , they have learned by long experience , what horrible tumults and outcries , what monstrous skritches are herd round about this mountain . Who durst be so bold ( most learned Sir ) to bring such and incredible report to your ears ? 
 Neither hath Island any Vultures , but that second kind of Eagles , which Plinie noted by their white tails , and called them Pygarsi : neither are there any with us , that can bear witness of the foresaid spectacle : nor yet is it likely that Ravens and Eagles would nestle in that place , when as they should rather be driven from thence by fire and smoke , being things most contrary to their nature . And yet notwithstanding for proof of this matter , as also of a strange tumult herd within the hollow of the mountain , they allege the experience of the inhabitants , which indeed testifieth all things to the contrary . But whereabout should that hold or window of the mountain be , by the which we may hear outcries , noise and tumults done among them , who inhabit the most contrary , distant , and remote places of the earth from us ? Concerning which thing I would ask the author of this fable many questions , if I might but come to the knowledge of him : in the mean time I could wish that from henceforth he would learn to tell troth , & not presume with so impudent a face to inform excellent Peucer , or others , of such unknown and incredible matters . 
 But to return to Munster , who endeavouring to search out the causes of the great and strange fire of that famous hill Aetna , is it not monstrous that the very same thing which he there makes natural , he should here imagine to be preternatural , yea infernal ? But why do I speak of Aetna ? Let us rather consider what Munster in another place thinketh of the burning of Hecla . 
 Munsterus It is without doubt ( says he ) that some mountains Cosmographit anc [ fieids burned in old time throughout the whole ' world ’• and in this our age do burn . As for example : 
 ’ ' mount Hecla in Island at certain seasons casts abroad 
 great stones , spitteth out brimstone , and disperses ashes , for such a distance round about , that the land cannot be inhabited within 20. miles thereof . But where mountains do continually burn we understand that 116 
 there is no stopping of the passages , whereby they pour forth abundance of fire sometime flaming , & sometime smoking as it were a streaming flood . But if between times the fire increases , all secret passages being shut up , the inner parts of the mountain are notwithstanding inflamed . The fire in the upper part , for want of matter , somewhat abateth for the time . But when a more vehement spirit ( the same , or other passages being set open again ) does with great violence break prison , it casts forth ashes , sand , brimstone , pumistones , lumps resembling iron , great stones , & much other matter , not without the damage of the whole region adjoining . Thus far Munster . Where consider ( good Reader ) how he cutteth his throat with his own sword , consider ( I say ) that in this place there is the very same opinion of the burning of Hecla , & the burning of Aetna , which notwithstanding in his 4. book is very diverse , for there he is feign to run to infernali causes . A certain fiery mountain of West India hath far more friendly cen-surers , & historiographers then our Hecla , who make not and infernali gulf thereof . The History of which mountain ( because it is short & sweet ) I will set down , being written by Hieronimus Benzo and Italian , in his history of the new world , lib . 2. These be the words . About 35. miles distant from Leon there is a mountain which at a great hold belches out such mighty balls of flames , that in the night they shine far and near , above 100. miles . Some were of opinion that within it was melted gold ministering continual matter & nourishment for the fire . Hereupon a certain Dominican Frier , determining to make trial of the matter , caused a brass kettle , & and iron chain to be made : afterwards ascending to the top of the hill with 4. other Spaniards , he lets down the chain & the kettle 140. elnes into the furnace : there , by extreme heat of the fire , the kettle , & part of the chain melted . The monk in a rage ran back to Leon , & chid the smith , because he had made the chain far more slender then himself had come - 
 117 
 manded . The smith hammers out another of more substance & strength then the former . The Monk returns to the mountains , and lets down the chain & the cauldron : but with the like success that he had before . Neither did the caldron only vanish 8c melt away : but also , upon the sudden there came out of the depth a flame of fire , which had almost consumed the Friar , 8c his companions . Then they all returned so astonished , that they had small list afterwards to prosecute that attempt , 8cc . What great difference is there between these two censures ? In a fiery hill of West India they search for gold : but in mount Hecla of Island they seek for hell . Howbeit they will perhaps reject this as a thing too new , 8c altogether unknown to ancient writers . Why therefore have not writers imagined the same prison of souls to be in Chimaera and hill in Lycia ( which , by report , flameth continually day and night ) that is in mount Hecla of Island ? Why have they not imagined the same to be in the mountains of Ephesus , which being touched with a burning torch , are reported to conceive so much fire , that the very stones 8c sand lying in the water are caused to burn , 8c from the which ( a staff being burned upon them , 8c trailed after a man on the ground ) there proceed whole rivers of fire , as Plinie testifieth ? Why not in Cophantrus a mountain of Bactria , always burning in the night ? Why not in the Isle of Hiera , flaming in the midst of the sea ? Why not in Aeolia in old time likewise burning for certain days in the midst of the sea ? Why not in the field of Babylon burning in the day season ? Why not in the fields of Aethiopia glittering always like stars in the night ? Why not in the hill of Lipara opening with a wide and bottomless gulf ( as Aristotle bears record ) whereunto it is dangerous to approach in the night : from whence the found of Cymbals and the noise of rattles , with unwonted and uncouth laughters are herd ? Why not in the field of Naples , near unto Puteoli ? Why not in the Pike of Teneriffa before mentioned , like 
 118 
 Aetna continually burning and casting up stones into the air , as Munster himself witnesseth ? Why not in that Aethiopian hill , which Plinie affirmeth to burn more then all the former ? And to conclude , why not in the mountain of Vesuvius , which ( to the great damage of all the country adjoining , & to the utter destruction of Caius Plinius prying into you causes of so strange a fire ) vomiting out flames as high as the clouds , filling the air with great abundance of pumistones , and ashes , & with palpable darkness intercepting the light of the sun from all the region thereabout ? I will speak , & yet speak no more then the truth : because in deed they foresaw , that men would yield no credit to those things as being too well known , though they should have feigned them to have been the flames of hell : but they thought the burning of Hecla ( the rumor whereof came more slowly to their ears ) to be fitter for the establishing of this found fable . But get you packing , your fraud is found out : leave ofF for shame hereafter to persuade any simple man , y‘ there is a hell in mount Hecla . For nature hath taught both us & other ( maugre your opinion ) to acknowledge her operations in these fireworks , not the fury of hell . But now let us examine a few more such fables of you common people , which have so unhappily misled our historiographers & cosmographers . 
 119 
 [ The eight 
 The eight section . 
 Near unto the mountains ( the 3. forenamed Hecla 8cc . ) there be three vast holes , the depth whereof , especially at mount Hecla , cannot be discerned by any man , be he never so sharp sighted : but there appear to the beholders thereof certain men at that instant plunged in , & as yet drawing their breath , who answer their friends ( exhorting them with deep sighs to return home ) that they must depart to mount Hecla : and with that , they suddenly vanish away . 
 TO confirm the former lie , of and earthly & visible hell ( albeit I will easily grant that Frisius in writing these things did not intend to reproach any , but only to blaze abroad new & incredible matters ) certain idle companions knowing neither hell nor heaven have invented this fable , no less reproachful then false , and more vain 8c detestable then Sicilian scoffs . Which fellows these writers ( being otherwise men of excellent parts , and to whom learning is much indebted ) have followed with and over hasty judgement . 
 But it were to be wished , that none would write Histories with so great a desire of setting forth novelties 8c strange things , that they fear not , in that regard to broach any fabulous 8c old-wives toys , 8c so to defile pure gold with filthy mire . But I pray you , how might those drowned men be swimming in the infernal lake , 8c yet for all that , parling with their acquaintance 8c friends ? What ? Will you conjure , 8c raise up unto us from death to life old Orpheus conferring with his wife Euridice ( drawn back again down to the Stigian flood ) 8c in these parts of the world , as it were by the banks of snowy Tanais , 8c Hebrus descanting upon his harp ? But in very deed although others will not acknowledge the falsehood , 8c vanity of these trifles , yet Cardane being a diligent considerer of all things in his 18. book de subtilitate , does acknowledge 8c find them 
 120 
 out . Whose words be these . There is Hecla a mountain in Island , which burns like unto / Etna at certain seasons , & hereupon the common people have conceived and opinion this long time , that souls are there purged : some , lest they should seem liars , heap up more vanities to this fable , that it may appear to be probable , & agreeable to reason . But what be those vanities ? namely , they feign certain ghosts answering them , that they are going to mount Hecla : as the same Cardane says . And further he adds . Neither in Island only , but every where ( albeit seidome ) such things come to pass . And then he tells this story following of a man-killing spright . There was ( says he ) solemnized this last year the funerali of a common citizen , in the gate near unto the great Church , by that marketplace , which in regard of the abundance of herbs , in our tongue hath the name of the herbmarket . There meets with me one of mine acquaintance : I ( according to the custom of Physicians ) presently ask of what disease the man died ? he gives me answer that this man used to come home from his labour 3. hours within night : one night among the rest he espied and hobgoblin pursuing him : which to avoid , he ran away with all speed : but being caught by the spright , he was thrown down upon the ground . He would feign have made a shout , & was not able . At length ( when the spright & he had struggled together upon the ground a good while ) he was found by certain passengers , & carried home half dead . And when he was come to himself again , being asked what was the matter , he up and told this strange relation . Hereupon ( being utterly daunted , & discouraged , when neither by his friends , nor by Physicians , nor by Priests , he could be persuaded , that these things were but his own conceits , & that there was no such matter ) 8. days after he died . I herd also afterwards of others which were his neighbours , that no man could more constantly affirm himself to be wounded of his enemy , then this man did , that he 
 121 
 was cast upon the ground by a ghost . And when some demanded what he did , after he was tumbled on the earth ? The dead man ( quoth he ) laying his hands to my throat , went about to strangle me : neither was there any remedy , but by defending my self with mine own hands . When others doubted lest he might suffer these things of a living man , they asked him how he could discern a dead man from a living ? To this , he rendered a very probable reason , saying that he seemed in handling to be like Cottum , & that he had no weight , but held him down by main force . And presently after he adds . In like manner as in Island , so in the desert sands of . / Egypt , Ethiopia , and India , where the sun is hot , the very same apparitions , the same sprights are wont to delude wayfaring men . Thus much Cardane . Yet from hence ( I trow ) no man will conclude as our writers of Island do , that in the places of . / Egypt , . / Ethiopia , and India , there is a prison of damned souls . 
 I thought good to write these things out of Cardane , that I may bring even the testimony of strangers on our sides , against such monstrous fables . This place of Cardane implieth these two things , namely y* apparitions of sprights are not proper to Island alone ( which thing all men know , if they do not maliciously feign themselves to be ignorant ) And secondly that that conference of the dead with the living in you gulf of Hecla is not grounded upon any certainty , but only upon fables coined by some idle persons , being more vain then any bubble , which the brutish common sort have used , to confirm their opinion of the tormenting of souls . And is there any man so fantastical , that will induced to believe these gulfs , mentioned by writers , to be any where extant , although they be never so full of dead men's miracles ? yea doubtless . For from hence also they say , y* reproaches are justly used against our nation : namely , y* there is nothing in all the world more base , & worthless then it , which containeth hell within the bounds thereof . This verily is the good that we have got 
 122 
 by those historiographers , who have been so greedy to publish novelties . But this opinion , bred by the sottishness of the common people hath hitherto ( as I hope ) be sufficiently overthrown as a thing foolish & vain , and as being devised for the upbraiding of our nation . Wherefore , proceed ( friendly Reader ) and be farther instructed in this philosophy of infernali secrets . 
 The ninth section . 
 But round about the Hand , for the space of 7. or 8. Frisius and months in a year there floateth i'm , making a Munster-miserable kind of moan , and not unlike to men voice , by reason of the clashing together . The inhabitants are of opinion that in mount Hecla and in the i'm , there are places wherein the souls of their countrymen are tormented . 
 NO doubt , a worthy augmentation of the history , concerning the hell of Island , shut up within the bottom of one mountain , & that no great one : yea , at some times ( by fits and seasons ) changing places : namely , when it is weary of lurking at home by the fires side within you mountain , it delights to be ranging abroad , & to venture to sea , but without a ship , & to gather it self round into morsels of ice . Come forth , & give ear all the y‘ wonder at this secret . Lo , I will afford these historiographers another addition of history very notable . Let them write therefore , that you Islanders have not only hell within their jurisdiction , but also y* they enter into it willingly & wittingly , & come forth again untouched you very same day . How can that be ? Why : it is and ancient custom of the Island Taking of that they which inhabit near the sea shore do usually S ™ 1 ” on the go betimes in a morning to catch Seals , even upon the ' very same i'm which the historiographers make to be hell , & in the evening return home safe and found . Set down also ( if you please ) that the prison of the damned is kept in store by the Islanders in coffers and vessels , as we shall anon hear out of Frisius . 
 123 
 Ice fioateth not 7. or 8. months about Island . 
 But you had need wisely to foresee , lest you Islanders beguile all your countries of the commendation of courage and constancy : namely , as they ( for so it pleases your writers to report ) who both can & will endure the torments of hell , & who are able to break through & escape them , without any farther hurt : which thing is necessarily to be collected out of that , that hath been before mentioned . And I am able to reckon up a great many of our countrymen , who in you very act of hunting , wandering somewhat far from the shore ( the ice being dispersed by western winds ) & for the space of many leagues resting upon the ice , being chased with the violence of the tempest , & some whole days & nights being tossed up & down in the waves of the raging sea , & so ( for it follows by good consequence out of this problem of the historiographers ) have had experi - ■ ence of the torments , & pains of this hell of ice . Who at the last , the weather being changed , & the winds blowing at the North , being transported again to the shore , in this their ship of ice , have returned home in safety : some of which number are alive at this day . Wherefore let such as be desirous of news snatch up this , & ( if they please ) let them frame a whole volume hereof , & add it to their history . Neither do these vain fantasies deserve otherwise to be handled and confuted , then with such like merriments & sportings . But to lay aside all jesting , let us return to the matter from whence we are digressed . First of all therefore it is evident enough out of the second section , ill ice floateth not about this Hand , neither 8. nor 7. months in a year : then , that this ice ( although at some times by shuffling together it makes monstrous soundings & cracklings , & again at some times with the beating of the water , it sends forth and hoarse kind of murmuring ) does any thing at all resound or lament , like unto men voice , we may in no case confess . But whereas they say that , both in the Isle , and in mount Hecla we appoint certain places , wherein the souls of our countrymen 
 124 
 are tormented , we utterly stand to the denial of that : and we thank God & our Lord Jesus Christ from the bottom of our hearts ( who hath delivered us from death & hell , & opened unto us the gate of the kingdom of heaven ) because he hath instructed us more truly , concerning the place , whither the souls of our deceased countrymen depart , then these historiographers do tell us . We know and maintain that the souls of the godly are transported immediately out of their bodily prisons , not into the Papists purgatory , nor into the Elysian fields , but into Abrahams bosom , into the hand of God , & into the heavenly paradise . We know and maintain concerning the souls of the wicked , that they wander not into the fires & ashes of mountains , or into visible ice , but immediately are carried away into utter darkness , where is weeping & gnashing of teeth , where there is cold also , & fire not common , but far beyond our knowledge & curious disputation . Where not only bodies , but souls also , y‘ is spirituali substances are tormented . And we do also hold , y* the Islanders are no whit nearer unto this extreme & dark prison , in regard of the situation of place , then the Germanes , Danes , Frenchmen , Italians , or any other nation whatsoever . Neither is it any thing to the purpose , at all to dispute of the place or situation of this dungeon . It is sufficient for us , that ( by the grace and assistance of our Lord Jesus Christ , with whose precious blood we are redeemed ) we shall never see that utter darkness , nor feel the rest of the torments that be there . Now let us here shut up the disputation concerning the hell of Island . 
 [ The tenth 
 125 
 The tenth section . 
 If any man shall take a great quantity of this ice , & shall keep it never so warily enclosed in a coffer or vessel , it will at that time when the ice thaweth about the Hand , utterly vanish away , so that not the least part thereof , no nor a drop of water is to be found . 
 OUrely , this was of necessity to be added : namely , Oy‘ this ice , which according to historiographers re-presenteth men voice , & is the place of the damned , does not as all other things in this wide world , consist of you matter of some element . For whereas it seems to be a body , when indeed it is no body : ( which may directly be gathered out of Frisius absurd opinion ) whereas also it pierceth through hard & solid bodies , no otherwise then spirits & ghosts : therefore it remains , seeing it is not of and elementary nature , y‘ it must have either a spirituali , or a celestial , or and infernal matter . But y‘ it should be infernali , we can not be persuaded , because we have herd that infernali cold is far more unsufferable then this i'm , which uses to be put into a box with men's hands , & is not of force any whit to hurt even naked flesh , by touching thereof . Nor yet will we grant it to be spirituali : for we have learned in natural Philosophy , that spiritual substances can neither be seen nor felt , & cannot have any thing taken from them : all which things do notwithstanding most manifestly agree to this i'm of the Historiographers , howsoever according to them it be supernatural . Beside also , it is most true , that the very same ice being melted with the heat of the sun , & resolved into water , upon the upper part thereof , stands fishermen in as good stead to quench their thirst , as any land-river would do , which thing can no way be ascribed to a spirituali substance . It is not therefore spirituali , nor yet infernali . Now none will so bold to affirm , that it hath celestial matter , lest some man perhaps might hereupon imagine , y‘ this i'm hath brought hell ( which the historiographers 126 
 annex unto it ) down from heaven together with it self : or that the same thing should be common unto heaven , being of one & the same matter with i'm , & so that the prison of the damned may be thought to have changed places with the heavenly paradise , & all by the oversight of these Historiographers . Wherefore seeing the matter of this historical i'm is neither elementary ( as we have so often proved by this place of Frisius ) neither spirituali , nor infernali , both which we have concluded evidently , in short , yet found and substantiali reasons : nor yet celestial matter , which , religion for-biddeth a man once to imagine : it is altogether manifest , you according to the said historiographers , there is no such thing at all , which notwithstanding they blaze abroad with such astonishing admiration , & which we think to be and ordinary matter commonly seen and felt . Therefore it is , and it is not : which proposition when it shall fallen out true , in the same respect , in the same part , and at the same time , then will we give credit to these frozen miracles . Now therefore the Reader may easily judge , that we need none other help to refute these things , but only to show how they disagree one with another . But it is no marvel that he , which hath once inclined himself to the fabulous reports of the common people , should oftentimes fallen into error . There was a like strange thing invented by another concerning the sympathy or conjoining of this i'm : namely , that it follows the departure of that huge lump , whereof it is a part , so narrowly , & so swiftly , that a man by no diligence can observe it , by reason of the unchangeable necessity of following . But we have oftentimes seen such a solitary lump of i'm remaining ( after the other parts thereof were driven away ) and lying upon the shore for many weeks together , without any posts or engines at all to stay it . Therefore it is plain that these miracles of i'm are grounded upon a more slippery foundation then i'm it self . 
 127 
 Frisius . Not far from these mountains ( the three forenamed ) declining to the sea shore , there be foure fountains of a most contrary nature between themselves . The first , by reason of his continual ! heat converteth into a stone any body cast into it , the former shape only still remaining . The second is extremely cold . The third is sweeter then honey , and most pleasant to quench thirst . The fourth is altogether deadly , pestilent , and full of rank poison . 
 EVen this description of fountains does sufficiently declare how impure that fountain was , out of which the geographer drew all these miraculous stories . For he seems to affirm , that the three foresaid mountains do almost touch one another : for he ascribeth foure fountains indifferently unto them all . Otherwise , if he had not made them stand near together , he would have placed next unto some one of these , two of the foresaid fountains . But neither doe these mountains touch ( being distant so many leagues a sunder ) neither are there any such foure fountains near unto them , which , he that will not believe , let him go try . But to confute these things , the very contrariety of writers is sufficient . For another concerning two fountains gainsayth Frisius in these words . There do burst out of the same hill Hecla two fountains , the one whereof , by reason of the cold streams , the other with intolerable heat exceeds all the force of elements . These be Frisius his two first fountains , saving that here is omitted the miracle of hardening bodies , being by him attributed to one of the said fountains . But they cannot at one time break forth , both out of the mountain it self , and near unto the mountain . 
 But here I would willingly demand , by what reason any of the Peripatetics can affirm , that there is some thing in nature colder then the element of water , or hotter then the element of fire . From whence ( I pray 128 
 you , learned writers ) proceedeth this coldness ? From whence comes this heat ? Have we not learned out of your school that water is and element most cold and somewhat moist : and in such sort most cold , that for the making of secondary qualities , it must of necessity be remitted , & being simple , that it cannot be applied to the uses of mankind ? I do here deliver these Oracles of the natural Philosophers , not knowing whither they be true or false . M. John Fernelius , lib . 
 2. Phys. cap . 4. may stand for one witness among all the rest , & in stead of them all . So excessive ( says he ) be these foure first qualities in the foure elements , that as nothing is hotter then pure fire , & nothing lighter : so nothing is drier then earth , & nothing heavier : and as for pure water , there is no quality of any medicine whatsoever exceeds the coldness thereof , nor the moisture of air . Moreover , the said qualities be so extreme & surpassing in them , that they cannot be any whit increased , but remitted they may be . I will not hear heap up the reasons or arguments of the natural Philosophers . These writers had need be wary of one thing , lest while they too much magnify the miracles of the fountains , they exempt them out of the number of things created , aswell as they did the ice of the Islanders . We will prosecute in order the properties of these fountains set down by the foresaid writers . 
 The first by reason of his continual heat . There be Many very many Baths or hight fountains in Island , but fewer ™ 
 \ 11 i*i 1*1 1 1 Island . 
 vehemently hight , which we think ought not to make any man wonder , when as I have learned out of authors , that Germanie every where aboundeth with such hight Baths , especially near the foot of the Alpes . The hight Baths of Baden , Gebarsvil , Calben in the duchy of Wittenberg and many other be very famous : all which Fuchsius doth mention in his book de Arte medendi . 
 And not only Germanie , but also France , & beyond all the rest Italy that mother of all commodities , says Cardan . And Aristotle reporteth , that about Epyrus 
 iv 129 1 
 these hight waters do much abound , whereupon the place is called Pyriplegethon . And I say , these things should therefore be you less admired , because the searchers of nature have as well found out causes of the heat in waters , as of the fire in mountains : namely , that water runneth within the earth through certain veins of Brimstone & Allom , and from thence takes not only heat , but taste also , & other strange qualities . Aristotle in his book de Mundo hath taught this . The earth ( says he ) containeth within it fountains not only of water , but also of spirit & fire : some of them flowing like rivers , do cast forth read hight iron : from whence also doth flow , sometimes lukewarm water , sometimes scalding hight , and sometimes temperate . And Seneca . Empedocles thought that Baths were made hight by fire , which the earth secretly containeth in many places , especially if the said fire be under that ground where the water passes . And Pontanus writeth very learnedly concerning the Baian Baths . 
 No marvel though from bank of Baian shore 
 hight Baths , or veins of scalding liquour flow : For Vulcans forge incensed evermore 
 doth teach us plain , that heart of earth below And bowels burn , and fire enraged glow . 
 From hence the flitting flood sends smoky streams , And Baths do boil with secret burning gleams . 
 I thought good in this place to touch that which Saxo Grammaticus the most famous historiographer of the Danes reporteth . That certain fountains of Island do sometime increase & flow up to the brink : sometime again they fallen so low that you can scarce discern them to be fountains . Which kind of fountains , albeit they be very seidome found with us , yet I will make mention of some like unto them , produced by nature in other countries , lest any man should think it somewhat strange . Plinie makes a great recital of these . There is one ( sayeth he ) in the Isle of Tenedos , which at the Solstitium of summer does always flow from the 
 130 
 third hour of the night , till the sixt . In the field of Pitinas beyond the Apennine mountain , there is a river which in the midst of summer always increases , and in winter is dried up . He makes mention also of a very large fountain , which every hour doth increase and fallen . Neither is it to be omitted , that some rivers run under the ground , and after that fallen again into and open channel : as Lycus in Asia , Erasinus in Argolica , Tigris in Mesopotamia , unto which Cardan adds Tanais in Moscovia : and those things which were thrown into Aesculapius fountain at Athens , were cast up again in Phaletico . And Seneca writeth that there are certain rivers which being let down into some cave under ground , are withdrawn out of sighed , seeming for the time to be utterly perished and taken away , and that after some distance the very same rivers return , enjoying their former name and their course . And again Plinie reporteth that there is a river received under ground in the field of Atinas that issueth out twentie miles from that place . All which examples and the like , should teach us that the fountains of Island are not to be made greater wonders then the rest . 
 Does forthwith convert into a stone any body cast into it . By these two properties , namely warmth or most vehement heat , & a virtue of hardening bodies does Frisius describe his first fountain . And I have herd reported ( though I never had experience thereof my self ) that there is such a fountain in Island not far from the bishops seat of Schalholt , in a village called Haukadal . Seneca reporteth of the like , saying : That there is a certain fountain which converteth wood into stone , hardening the bowels of those men which drink thereof . And adds further , that such fountains are to be found in certain places of Italy : which thing Ovid in the 15. book of his Metamor . ascribeth unto the river of the Cicones . 
 Water drunk out of Ciconian flood 
 131 
 Rivers of Island in summer season lukewarm . 
 Ought else therewith besprinckt , as earth or wood becomes marble straight : a thing most strange . 
 And Cardane . Georgius Agricola affirmeth , that in the territory of Elbogan , about the town which is nam of Falcons , that the whole bodies of Pine trees are converted into stone , and which is more wonderful , that they contain , within certain rifts , the stone called Pyrites , or the Flint . And Domitius Brusonius re-porteth , that in the river of Silar ( running by the foot of that mountain which stands in the field of the ci tie in old time called Ursence , but now Contursia ) leaves and boughs of trees change into stones , & that , not upon other men's credit , but upon his own experience , being born & brought up in that country : which thing Plinie also avoucheth , saying , that the said stones do show the number of their years , by the number of their Barks , or stony husks . So ( if we may give credit to authors ) drops of the Gothes fountain being dispersed abroad , become stones . And in Hungary , the water of Cepusius being poured into pitchers , is converted to stone . And Plinie reporteth , that wood being cast into the river of the Cicones , and into the Veline lake in the field of Pice , is enclosed in a bark of stone growing over it . 
 The second is extremely cold . As for the second fountain , here is none to any men's knowledge so extremely cold : In deed there be very many that be indifferently code , insomuch that ( our common rivers in the Summer time being lukewarm ) we take delight to fetch water from those cool springs . It may be that there are some far colder in other countries : for Cardane makes mention of a river ( streaming from the top of and hill in the field of Corinth ) colder then snow : and within a mile of Culma , the river called Insana seeming to be very hight is most extremely could , etc. 
 The third is sweeter than honey . Neither is this altogether true . For there is not any fountain with us , which may in the least respect be compared with the sweetness of honey . And therefore Saxon wrote more 132 
 1592. truly , saying , that certain fountains ( for there be very many ) yielding taste as good as beer : and also in the same place there are fountains & rivers not only of diverse tastes , but of diverse colours . 
 And albeit natural Philosophers teach , that water naturally of it self hath neither taste nor smel , yet it is likely ( as we have touched before , which other call per accidens ) that oftentimes it representeth the qualities of that earth wherein it is engendered , and through the veins whereof it hath passage and issue : and from hence proceed the diverse & sundry smells , colours and savours of all waters . Of such waters doth Seneca make mention , whereof some provoke hunger , others make men drunken , some hurt the memory , & some help it , & some resemble the very quality and taste of wine , as that fountain which Plinie speaks of in the He of I ” Andros , within the temple of Bachus , which in the mtrab-auscult-Nones of January used to flow over with wine . And Aristotle reporteth , that in the field of Carthage there is a fountain which yields oil , & certain drops smelling like Cedar . Also Orcus a river of Thessalie flowing into Peneus , swimmeth aloft like oil . Cardane reporteth , that there is in Saxonie , near unto the town of Bruns-wic , a fountain mixed with oil : and another in Suevia near unto the Abbey called Tergensch . Also in the valley of the mountain Jurassus . He supposeth the cause of this thing to be very fatty pitch , which cannot but contain oil in it . The same author sayeth : It is reported that in Cardia near to the place of Daschylus , in the white field , there is water sweeter then milk . 
 Another also near unto the bridge which we pass over going to the town of Valdeburg . Propertius likewise in the third book of his Elegies mentioneth certain waters representing the savour of wine in these words . 
 Amid the Isle of Naxus lo , with fragrant smells and fine 
 A freshet runs ; the Naxians go fill cups , carouse , there’s wine . 
 133 
 This Naxus is one of the Hands called Cyclades lying in the TEgaean sea . Cardane gives a reason hereof , namely , because Hydromel or water-honey , in long continuance will become wine . Aristotle names a fountain in Sicilia , which the inhabitants use in stead of vinegar . The same author makes the cause of savours in water to be heat , because the earth being hight changes and gives savour unto the water . 
 Now concerning the colours of water so sayeth Cardane . There is the same reason ( says he ) of the colours of water , that there is of the savours thereof , for both have their originali from the earth . For there is white water within two miles of Glauca a town in Misena : read water in Radera a river of Misena not far from Radeburg . : & in old time near unto Joppa in Judea : green water in the mountain of Carpathus by Neusola : sky-coloured or blue water between the mountains of Feltrius & Tarvisius : & it is reported that there was water of that colour in Thermopylis : coalblack water in Alera a river of Saxonie , at that place where it dischargeth it self into the Weser . The causes of these colours are the colours of the soil . Also Aristotle sayeth , that about the promontory of Japigia , there is a fountain which streameth blood : adding moreover , that Mariners are driven far from that place of the sea , by reason of the extreme stench thereof . Furthermore , they say that in Idumaea there is a fountain which changes colour foure times in a year : for sometimes it is green , sometime white , sometime bloody , & sometimes muddy coloured . 
 Concerning the smells of waters , thus writeth Cardane . There is the like reason of difference in smells . But for the most part the steams of waters be unpleasant , because the earth doth seidome times smel well . The water of the river Anigris in Aelis stank , to the destruction , not only of fish , but also of men . About Meton in Messania , out of a certain pond there hath be drawn most sweet smelling , and odoriferous water . 
 J34 
 I do recite all these examples to the end that no man should make a greater wonder at the colours , smells , and savours of waters that be in Island , then at those which are in other countries . 
 The fourth is altogether deadly . Isidore affirmeth , that there is a certain fountain whose water being drunk , extinguisheth life . And Plinie sayeth , That about Nonaris in Arcadia , the river of Styx ( near the mountain of Cillene , sayeth Cardane : it would be contained in nothing but and horsehoof : and it is reported that Alexander the great was poisoned therewithal ) not differing from other water , neither in smell nor colour , being drunk , is present death . In Berosus and hill of The same the people called Tauri , there are three fountains , every Author sayeth . one of them deadly without remedy , & yet without grief . And ( which is the strangest thing of all the rest ) Seneca makes mention of a pool , into which whosoever look , do presently die . But , as for this fourth fountain of Frisius , which Saxo doth likewise mention , we Islanders , as always heretofore , so even at this day do testify , that it is utterly unknown unto us : and therefore in this regard , we render unto God im - Island free mortali thanks , because he hath vouchsafed to preserve our nation from such fountains , from serpents and venomous worms , & from all other pestiferous & con - beasts . tagious creatures . 
 Furthermore about the foresaid mountains there is such abundance of brimstone . The three mountains called by Munster and Frisius , Fiery mountains , do all of them stand and huge distance from our Mines . Wherefore , when as near unto these hills they have found out a place for foure fountains , which they do so mightily extol for wonders , they must needs have some Brimstone Mines also , standing a like distance from the said fountains . And assuredly , neither about mount Hecla , as Munster would have it , nor by Frisius his fountains ( the report whereof how true it is , hath be hitherto declared ) is Brimstone dug up at this 
 135 
 Mines only in the North part of Island . 
 Abundance offish about Island diminished . 
 day : nor I think ever was within the remembrance of our father's . Neither is it true that Munster re-porteth concerning the abundance of Brimstone : namely , that it is almost the only merchandise and tribute of the Hand . For whereas the Hand is divided into foure parts , the fourth part only towards the North ( nay , but even the half thereof ) doth use it for merchandise , and there is not one crumb of Brimstone paid for tribute of the Hand . 
 The twelfth Section . 
 There are so great store of fish in this Hand , that they are laid forth on piles to be sold in the open air , as high as the tops of houses . 
 IN the open air . In deed we have seen other country merchant's do so , until they had unladen their ships of outlandish wares , & filled them again with fish & with other of our country merchandise . But whither our men have done the like at any time , it is not manifest . Certainly , that plentiful and ancient abundance of fish is now decayed , and the Islanders now begin to be pinched with the want of these and other good things , the Lord laying the just scourge of our impiety upon us , which I pray God we may duly acknowledge . 
 The thirteenth Section . 
 They have most swift horses , which will run without ceasing a continual course for the space of 30. leagues . 
 A Certain Cosmographer in his Map of Island re-porteth concerning the horses of one parish , that they will run 20. leagues at once in a continued raze . But we account both to be impossible . For Munster writeth that those beasts which excel all other in swiftness & strength of body , called II Rangiferi , cannot run above 30. leagues in 24. hours . 
 136 
 There be seen sometime near unto Island huge Whale's Munster . like unto mountains , which overturn ships , unless they be terrified away with the found of trumpets , or beguiled with round and empty vessels , which they delight to toss up and down . It sometime falls out that Mariners thinking these Whale's to be Hands , and casting out anchors upon their backs , are often in danger of drowning . They are called in their tongue Trollwal Tuffelwalen , that is to say , the devilish Whale . 
 Like unto mountains . Loe here once again ( gentle Reader ) Munsters falsifying echo , and ( as the proverb sayeth ) his blind dream . Such a false and senseless overreaching doth exceedingly disgrace and historic , and that by so much the more , by how much the less necessary it is . For to what purpose should and Historiographer make leasings , if history be a report of plain truth ? Why should he use such strange surmountings ? What is it that he would persuade , or whither would he ravish the Reader , if he propoundeth unto himself nothing but the simple declaration of things ? 
 Poets and Painters had leave of old , To feign , to blaze , in all things to be bold . But not Historiographers . 
 The backs of Whale's which they think to be Hands . This fable , like all the rest , was bred of and old , ridiculous and vain tale , the credit and truth whereof is not worth a straw . And it is this that followeth , namely , that the bishop of Breme ( called by the ancient Norwaies Brandan , and by Kranzius , if I be not deceived , Alebran-dus ) in old time sent certain Legates with a Coven of Friars to preach and publish in the North the popish faith , which was then thought to be Christian : and when they had spent a long journey in sailing towards the North , they came unto and Hand , and there casting 
 Certain letters sent by Bran-dan bishop of Breme , to preach Christian faith in the North . 
 137 
 their anchor they went a shore , and kindled fierce ( for it is very likely that the Mariners were not a little vexed with the nipping cold which they felt at sea ) and so provided victuals for the rest of their journey . But when their fires grew very hight , this Hand sank , and suddenly vanished away , and the Mariners escaped drowning very narrowly with the boat that was present . This is the foundation of the matter , but how incredible it is , I appeal to the Reader . But what ailed these Mariners , or what meant they to do , who in a tempestuous sea , seeing a rock before their eyes , or ( as Munster sayeth ) a little Hand , would not rather with all diligence have avoided it for fear of running a shore and shipwreck , then to rest in such a dangerous harbour ? But in what ground should the anchor be fastened ? for Mariners for the most part are destitute of such long cables , whereby they may let down and anchor to the bottom of the main sea , therefore upon the backs of Whale's , says Munster . But then they had need first to boar a hold for the flouke to take hold in . O silly Mariners , that in digging cannot discern Whale's flesh from lumps of earth , nor know the slippery skin of a Whale from the upper part of the ground : without doubt they are worthy to have Munster for a Pilot. Verily in this place ( as likewise before treating of the land-miracles of Island ) he gathereth fruits as they say , out of Tantalus his garden , and followeth hard after those things which will never and no where be found , while he endeavoureth to proule here and there for miracles , perusing sea and land to stuff up his history : where notwithstanding he cannot hunt out ought but feigned things . 
 But they are called in their language Trollwal . Go not farther then your skill , Munster , for I take it you cannot skill of our tongue : and therefore it may be a shame for a learned man to teach others that which he knoweth not himself : for such and attempt is subject to manifold errors , as we will show by this your example . 
 138 
 For while you take in hand to school others , & to teach them by what name a Whale-fish is to be called in our tongue , leaving out through ignorance the letter H , which almost alone makes up the signification of the word , you deliver that which is not true : for val in our language signifies not a Whale , but choosing or choice of the verb Eg vel , that is to say , I choose , or I make choice , from whence val is derived , etc. But a Whale is called Hualur with us , & therefore you ought to have written Trollhualur . Neither doth Troll signify the devil , as you interpret it , but certain Giants that live in mountains . You see therefore ( and no marvel ) how you err in the whole word . It is no great injury to our language being in one word only : because ( doubtless ) you knew not more then one . 
 Others also do offend in the same fault , for it is not to be allowed that a certain man being about to publish a Map of Island received from Islanders themselves , had rather mar the fashion of all , or in very deed of the most names of Capes , Bays , mountains , springs , rivers , hammocks , valleis , hills & towns ( because that being ignorant of our language , he was not able to read those things aright , which he received from our countrymen ) he had rather ( I say ) deprave & corrupt them all , then learn of the Islanders themselves , which at that time , namely in the year 1585. lived in the university of Hafnia , or Copen Hagen , how every thing ought to be read and written . And we esteem him for this his wilful marring of our native names and words , ( whereupon it came to pass that we reading the same , could acknowledge very few to be our own ) that he is no slight offender against our tongue , otherwise retaining the pure and the ancient property . 
 But now we have after some sort examined most of the miracles of Island , which our writers have mentioned . Notwithstanding before we enter into any 139 
 farther matter , we think it good in this section to touch that which the last forenamed man ( in this Map of Island , that he caused to be put forth in you foresaid year under his own name ) hath given out concerning two other fountains beside the former : whereof the one should die white wool black , & the other black wool white . Which thing where he received it , or Who be the whence he had it , we can by no means imagine : for Islanduh | tO js not to founj ; n our own writers , nor in you 
 wnie's - writers of other countries . But whence soever it be , it is but a tale , & hath not one jot of truth in it . And although it be incredible That black wool may be died of a white colour , seeing it is affirmed by Plinie , that black wool ( of all other ) will receive no colour : notwithstanding there is some such thing reported by Theophrastus : namely , that there is a river in Macedonia which makes black sheep white . Speculum Also , that Norway pamphlet called the Royal lookingregale . glass } which I mentioned before , does attribute these fountains to Ireland , which is also called Hybernia , and not to Island . Which peradventure deceived the Reader , reading in a strange language S instead of R. 
 That likewise deserveth no better credit which another Author writeth : That there is a certain great stone in Island which runneth up and down the crags and cliffs of mountains by no outward force , but by the own proper and natural motion . He that will believe this , what will he not believe ? For it is such a rare devise that the Epicures themselves ( who yet seemed to Lucian to have feigned many incredible things ) I am sure never invented the like : unless perhaps the said Author doth imagine , that a man ( who is called of the Islanders by the proper name of Stein ) should compass about , and climb up certain rocks : which although it be ridiculous to put into a story of wonders , namely , that a man should move or walk , yet is it so to be supposed to save the credit of the Author , that we may not more severely 140 
 1592-condemne that fable , which is so senseless of it self and not worthy to be read . 
 They are guilty of the same crime also who have found out ravens , pies , hares and vultures , all white in Island : for it is well known that vultures come Vultures , very seidome , together with the I'm of the sea , unto beam and us , as bears also ( but they seldomer then vultures ) ‘ j^drift and a certain kind of crows called by the Islanders ice into Island . Isakrakur . But as for white pies , hares , and ravens , Island never had any . 
 And these in a manner be the things which , in regard of our daily business , we were able at this present to afford , as touching the former part of our treatise , which were penned by me for this purpose ( as in the beginning I did protest ) that the errors of Authors concerning and unknown land , and the affected vanity also of some men might be disclosed , for I am not desirous to diminish any men good name : but because I consecrated these my labours to truth and to my country , I could not choose but show , that those things which hitherto have be reported by many concerning our Hand deserve very little credit : and so to address my self unto the matters following concerning the Inhabitants . 
 Here endeth the first part of the Commentary . 
 Of Island the second part , concerning the Inhabitants . 
 HAving hitherto finished the miracles of Island with certain other particulars belonging to the first part , the which while writers do wonder at , and diversely extol as it were the fountains of Agamemnon , yea , as things beside and against all nature , they have be very careless both of truth it self , & of their own credit . Now the course of the present speech doth admonish me to make haste unto the other part of the treatise concerning the Inhabitants : wherein what 
 141 
 I should first say , or where I should begin , I am altogether ignorant . For there be such monstrous , and so many mocks , reproaches , skoffes , and taunts of certain men against us poor Islanders dwelling in the utmost parts of the world ( and among these also , some things of theirs who take upon them to profess most simple truth , namely Historiographers ) insomuch , that to reckon up the particulars were nothing else but to tell the drops of the Icarian sea . But as I said in the beginning , we will not deal alike severely with all . For although Krantzius , Munsterus , Frisius & others have written many things too boldly of our nation : yet having otherwise deserved well of learning by their monuments , they shall still in you same reputation w‘ us that they are worthy of . Howbeit in the mean time , although a man would free them from the mark of slanderers , yet is it not small matter that they should broach certain senseless , impossible & ridiculous things , such as those are which we have hitherto laid down : as also that they should record in histories profane and horrible untruths , some of which kind shall now immediately be discussed . As for others , whatsoever they be , who upbraid the nation of Islanders with daily reproaches , they are to have that answer in a readiness which such men deserve . In the number of whom , that scoffer is to be accounted , who by a company of rhymes published in the Germane tongue , to the disgrace of our country , hath brought his name into everlasting ignominy . 
 Wherefore as our present business requires , while we are in hand with the writings of Authors concerning this matter , although we meet with some things containing little reproach , notwithstanding we will examine most of them , noting the errors as hitherto we have done : in the mean time also when they shall allege any truth , we will in no case dissemble it . And after this manner , first we will hear Munster , Krantzius and Frisius , and others also , if there be any more , what they 142 
 have to say , rejecting that Parot and his Dutch rhymes infected with fell slander , as he is worthy , unto the last place . First therefore the said Authors write concerning the faith or religion of the Islanders : and secondly , of their Manners , Customs , and course of life in manner following . 
 The first Section . 
 Adalbert Metropolitan of Hamburg in the year of Krantzius in Christ 1070. saw the Islanders converted unto Christianitie : albeit , before the receiving of Christian faith , they lived according to the law of nature , and did not much differ from our law : therefore at their humble request , he appointed a certain holy man nam Islief to be their first Bishop . 
 KRantzius in these words , and Munster other where , do seem to attribute unto the Islanders the prerogative of Christian faith : and they should deal both beseeming themselves and the truth , if they did not in other places deprive us of the same . For ( to speak of Krantzius anon ) that which Munster before reported concerning our faith or opinion about the place and situation of hell , is very far from Christian piety : namely to be desirous to pry into those secrets which God hath kept close unto himself alone , and which his pleasure is , should exceed our capacity : for there is not any thing found in the holy Scriptures of this matter , where the place and situation of hell , or of eternal fire prepared for the devil and his angels , and so for all damned souls , is bounded or compassed about . The holy Bible ( I say ) assigneth no local ! or bodily situation beneath the earth , or upon the earth , or in any other place of this world , to that prison of the damned : but it affirmeth that this earth shall perish , and that a new earth , and new heavens shall be created for the habitation of just and holy men , Revel . 2. 2. Pet. 3. and Esay 65. wherefore a Christian man willingly gives over to search into such hidden secrets : and he accounteth it unlawful 
 143 
 to receive or deliver unto others , opinions ( grounded upon no plain and manifest places of Scripture ) for certainties and truths . Deut. 4. and 12. Esay 8. Matth. 27. 2. Tim. 3. 
 Further also that commendation wherewith Munster and Krantzius do grace the Islanders , is merely contrary to Christian religion : namely , that they make all one reckoning of their whelps and of their children . But more of this matter anon in the 7. section . So therefore Munster disagreeth with himself , whereas those whom he affirmeth to be Christians , afterwards he makes to be master-builders of hell . Also Krantzius and Munster both together , when as those whom they affirm to be engrafted by faith into Christ , they exempt from all sense of piety and honesty , in that they write that their sons are not dearer unto them then their whelps . 
 But to return to the matter : In very deed we have no great thing to say concerning our religion , what , or of what sort it was when Gentilism was first put to flight . No more ( I think ) have other Northern nations near unto us to say concerning the beginning of their faith . For ( alas ) we must needs confess & bewail with deep sighs , that until that day which shined unto us like the beginning of immortality , & brought unto us the pure doctrine of the gospel , our countrymen , as likewise other churches of the North , were overspread with more then Cimmerian darkness . But we may justly and religiously think thus much , that among us and our neighbours of Norway ( for I will not range out of my bounds , nor affirm any thing of unknown people ) after heathenish idolatry was rooted out , Christian faith & religion did flourish far more sincere and simple , as being less infected with the poison of popery at that time , then afterwards , when as the pestiferous leaven of the see of Rome being augmented , & the contagious mischief growing ripe , the poison thereof was dispersed through you whole world : for , as it shall afterwards appear , Island embraced Christ many years before the 
 144 
 new idolatry of the papists began to prevail , and did found forth nothing but faith in God the Father , the Son & the holy Ghost , like unto those two most renowned kings of Norway , who as they had one common name , so had they one common care and pro - fession to advance the gospel of Christ . I mean Olaus The first the son of Thryggo , who was born in the year of c1 , ian ktnS Christ 968. attaining to the kingdom of Norway in the orwa > 27. year of his age , and was the first , as we have herd , that offered Christ unto the Norwegians , over whom he reigned five years : and another of that name called Olaus Sanctus the son of Harald , who in the year of Christ 1013. or there about , governed with more severity , & for the space of 17. years did boldly deliver the doctrine of Christ . In the year of Christ 1030. being unjustly slain by wicked murderers , he shed his blood for you name of Christ in a town of Norway called Sticfla Stodum . 
 Our country also had , among many other , one man Nialus the of excellent piety whose name was Nialus , who about the first known year of Christ 1000. lived in the village of Berthorshvol frofeuourof situate in the parish of Island called Landehum : who in also for his experience in humane affairs , for his great wisdom and sage counsel was accounted famous . For whereas in his time Island was turmoiled with many fierce mutinies , the inhabitants being in subjection to no superior magistrate , he intermedled not in any quarrels , saving that by his discreet virtue & diligence , he set through and brought to composition a great number : he never did nor suffered violence , but only upon the last day of his life . So carefully avoided he all seditions and strifes : and gave good assistance to others , who were desirous also to avoid and escape them : neither did any man ever put in practise his counsel , but it turned to his especial good : nor ever any did swerve therefrom , but with the danger of his life and possessions . The words or rather the oracles that came from him were so certain , 
 that it was wondered from whence any man should have iv 145 K 
 A sum oj the Islanders Religion . 
 so great and so sure forecast and counsel of things to come , as was found to be in him . Whereupon his discreet and provident wisdom joined with counsel ! became a proverb among us Nials byta raden : That is to say , the counsel of Nialus : or , the thing is done , or succeedeth by Nialus his counsel : when any business was achieved prudently , and with admirable discretion . This man , when , for a slaughter committed by his son without his knowledge , he was in his own house beset with a ioo . men , who had conspired his death , and when his enemies began on all sides to set his house on fire , seeing his end approach , at length he brake into these words . Doubtless these things happen by fate , that is , by the will of God . Howbeit , I put my hope and confidence in Christ , that we ( meaning his wife , and himself ) although this our frail body shall undergo the corruption of death , in the fire of our enemies , yet , that it shall delivered from eternal flames . And so in the midst of these voices , and in the fury of the flames , he with his wife and the manslayer his son , in the year of Christ 1010. ended his life . A voice undoubtedly full well beseeming the sons of God , arguing the notable comfort of his soul amid the very pangs of death . 
 I therefore added those things to show by what reason I was moved to think , that in the very beginning of Christianitie received among us , men's minds were not so beguiled and overwhelmed in the darkness of errors , as of late , a little before these our times , they have be . 
 But after the Lord God by Luther , and Luthers fellow-labourers in the vineyard of the Lord , and by his godly successors , did make the doctrine of salvation more manifest , and shaking off the heavy sloth , and thick mist of our minds by the finger of his right hand , that is by his holy Spirit ( Matth. 12. v. 28. ) did pluck the ears of our hearts , and opened our eyes , that we might behold his saving health : We all , and every of us do believe and confess that God is a spirit ( John 4. v. 
 146 
 24. ) eternal ( Esay 40. v. 28. ) infinite ( Jere. 23. v. 24. Psal. 139. v. 7. 8. 9. ) most good ( Matth. 19. v. 17. ) almighty ( Gen. 17. 1. Revel . 1. 8. ) one in being , and nature : one in providence : one in the making and governing of all things ( Deut. 6. 5. Ephe. 4. 5. ) But distinguished by the persons of the Godhead and their properties , the Father , the Son , and the holy Ghost ( Matth. 28. 19. & 3. 17. ) God the Father the first person of the Godhead creator of heaven and earth , and all other things ( Gen. 1. v. 1. and in those that follow ) the upholder & governor of all ( Psa. 115. 3. Heb. 1. 3. ) Father of our Lord Jesus Christ ( Psal. 2 , 7. and verses following ) and our Father through him ( Rom. 8. 15. ) keeper of our souls and bodies ( Lycia 12. 12. ) And that Jesus Christ the second person of the Godhead is the son of God the Father ( John 1. 18. etc. ) only begotten ( John 1. 29. Heb. 1. 2. ) equal to his Father ( 1 Chro. 17. 13. Joh. 1. i . ) true God ( John 1. 2. etc. ) foreappointed before the creation of all things ( 1. Pet. 1. 
 20 , Revel . 13. 8. etc. ) and presently after men fallen promised to be the Messias ( Gene. 3. 15. etc. ) published eftsoons unto the holy Patriarchs , as unto Abraham ( Gen. 12. 3. etc. ) unto Isaac ( Gen. 26. 4. ) unto Jacob ( Gene. 28. 14. ) and confirmed by promises ( Gen. 49. 
 9. Esa. 11. 1 , 10. ) prefigured by you sacrifices of Moses ( Lev. 1. 2. etc. ) and by other types , as namely by the offering of Isaac ( Gen. 22. ) by the lifting up of the brazen serpent ( Num. 21 ) by Jonas ( Jonas 2. etc. ) proclaimed by the testimony of the Prophets ( Esa. 7. 14. ) and at length in the fullness of time truly exhibited : true man ( John 1. 14. etc. Gal. 4. ) that he died for our sins , and was raised again for our justification ( Rom. 
 4. 25. etc. ) Ascending into heaven ( Acts 1. 9. etc. ) and making intercession for us at the right hand of his Father without ceasing ( 1. John 2. 1. etc. ) by his holy Spirit ( which is the thirde person of the Godhead , coequal , and consubstantial to the Father and the Son , Acts. 
 5. 4. ) gathering the Church to himself by the Word , 147 
 and Sacraments ( Matth. 16. 18. Rom. 10. 14. etc. ) and sanctifying it to eternal life , Acts. 9. 31. etc. And that one day at the end of the world he will come from heaven ( Acts 1. 11. ) to judge the quick and the dead ( 1. Thessal . 4. 15. ) that he will render unto the wicked according to their works , and that he will judge them to eternal pains ( Matth. 13. 42. & 25. 4. ) but that he will reward them with eternal life , who believe in his Name ( Matth. 25. 34. ) This Jesus Christ ( I say ) we acknowledge to be our redeemer ( Matth. 1. 21. ) our head ( 1. Corinth . 12. 27. ) and our Lord ( Ephe. 4. 5. ) And that we in our holy baptism do give , and have given our names unto him ( Acts. 2. 38. ) and that we are engrafted into him by baptism ( 1. Corin. 12. 13. ) And this we do plainly , ingenuously , freely , and willingly confess , and witness : And as for all others who invent any other name in heaven given unto men by which they may be saved , we do earnestly detest , curse , and condemn them ( Acts. 4. 12. ) We hold his most holy Word to be the only rule of our salvation : And that alone ( all men devises being cast away and contemned ) we propound unto our selves as and infallible rule , and level of our faith ( Galat. 1. 8. Esai 29. 13. Ezech. 20. ) which we contain under the name of the old and new Testament ( Hebr. 8. ) delivered by the Prophets and Apostles ( Ephe. 2. 20. ) by the singular and infinite goodness of God , preserved ever unto this day and to be preserved hereafter always in the Church ( Matth. 28. last verse . 
 Psal. 71. 18. 1. Cor. 11. 26. ) 
 Therefore we render thanks unto our most gracious and Almighty God from our soul , and from our whole heart , because that even unto us being separated and huge distance from the rest of the body of his Church , and inhabiting the farthest parts of the world , he would that this light granted for the revelation of the Gentiles , and prepared before the face of all people , and in old time favourably showed to holy Simeon ( for in Christ are all the treasures of wisdom hidden ) which now doth 148 
 enlighten and cherish with the saving beams thereof our whole nation , that he would ( I say ) this light should come unto us . This in brief ( running over the very sum ) is our faith , and our Religion , which by the direction of the holy Spirit , and of his Ministers in the vineyard of Christ , we have drawn and that out of the fountains of Israel . 
 In the year of our Lord 1070. saw the Islanders converted unto Christ , etc. 
 IT is doubtful unto us whither in these words Kranzius would have said , that you Islanders were first converted unto Christ in the year of our Lord 1070 : or whither he does not deny that they were indeed before converted , but says that it was known first unto Adalbert that year . But whithersoever of these he affirmeth : notwithstanding the yearly records , and most ancient Chronicles of our nation testifying the contrary do make his credit to be suspected in this place , unto which records and Chronicles , whither you had rather give assent concerning our own proper and domestical affairs , done within the bounds of our Island , or to Krantzius or any other being ignorant in the story of our country , I appeal , ' ( friendly reader ) unto your own discretion . For my part I am inforced by many reasons to agree rather unto our own writers . For our countrymen affirm those things only that be known , and in a manner domestical : he writeth matters foreign and unknown : they have compiled their histories without the difiaming , disgracing or reprehending of any other nations , only that they might assign unto their own acts and exploits the true time or age thereof : he hath intermedled in his historic certain things contrary to the truth , and that to the upbraiding of our nation being most unknown unto him , as it shall immediately appear : they describe the names , years , order , succession of all the Bishops of Island : he mentioneth only one , & that far otherwise then the truth . Furthermore , 
 149 
 The most ancient Chronicles of Island . 
 that I may make good the credit of our Coun treymen , I will impart with strangers a few things which I found in our most ancient records of the conversion of Island unto Christ , and of the succession of Bishops in our Churches . Which although they be of little moment , and not altogether worthy to be written , yet must they of necessity be set down for the defence of the truth of our affairs against Krantzius and others : Thus therefore stands the certainty thereof . 
 Island first Jn the year of Christ 874. Island ( being indeed 
 inhabited . discovered before that time , as is above mentioned ) was then first of all inhabited by certain Noruagians . Their chieftain was one Ingulphus from whose name the East cape of Island is called Ingulffs hoffdi . These planters are reckoned up by name in our records more then to the number of 400. together with those of their blood and kindred , and great families beside : neither only is their number described , but it is also plainly set down , what coasts , what shores , and what inland places eke of them did occupy and inhabit , and what names the first inhabitants did give unto Straights , bays , harboroughs , necklands , creeks , capes , rocks , crags , mountains , hills , valleys , hammocks , springs , floods , rivers . And to be short , what names they gave unto their granges or houses , whereof many at this day are retained and used . Therefore the Norwayes with their company peopled all the habitable parts of Island now occupied by them for the space of 60. years or thereabouts : but they remained Ethnics almost a 100. years , except a very few which were baptised in Norwaie . But scarce a 100. years from their first entrance being passed , presently Christian Religion began to be considered 
 Fridericus upon , namely about the year of our Lord 974. Which Saxo the first thing above 20. years together , was diversely attempted preacher of the of many not without notable rebellion : among the rest are mentioned two outlandish Bishops , who 
 Anno Domini with others diligently laboured in converting the Hand 981. to Christian faith : the former was one Fridericus a 
 150 
 Saxon born , who in the year 981. came into Island , and behaved himself courageously in the office of preaching , and prevailed so much , that in the year 984. Churches were used in Island . 
 But the other outlandish Bishop or preacher whom they called Thangbrandt came first into Island in the year 997. 
 And then after 26. years consulting about Religion , - Anno Domini at length in the year 1000. it was decreed in a general I000‘ assembly of all the inhabitants by their whole consent , that the worship of heathenish Idols being abandoned , they should embrace Christian Religion . 
 Again , in the year 1050. it was decreed in a solemn assembly of the inhabitants , that temporali or politic laws ( the constitutions whereof being brought out of Norwaie were communicated unto the Islanders by one Ulfliot in the year 926. ) should every where give place to the Canon or divine Law . 
 In the year 1056. one Isleif went beyond the seas out of Island to be consecrated bishop of Island . 
 He came home consecrated into Island , and entered into the bishopric of Schalholt in the year 1057. He died 1080. in the year of his age 74. The 4. of the Kalends of July . 
 These things perhaps will seem trifling , short and base , nor sufficiently worthy to be mentioned , together with many other matters which follow : but neither do we compile the Roman history , neither yet shall these things be so trifling , but that they may be of sufficient force to convince the errors of Krantzius and others , according to our purpose . And undoubtedly as touching the truth of our histories , it is evident that Saxon Grammaticus attributeth very much unto them : whose words in his preface of Denmarke be these : Neither is the notable tes-diligence of the Thylenses ( for so he calls Islanders ) fimmuofSaxo to be smothered in silence : who when as by reason * e 
 of the native barrenness of their soil , wanting nourishments of riot , they do exercise the duties of continual 
 151 
 sobriety , and use to bestow all the time of their life in the knowledge of other men's exploits , they supply their want by their wit . For they esteem it a pleasure to know , and commit unto memory the famous acts of other nations , reckoning it no less praiseworthy to discourse of other men's virtues , then to practise their own . Whose treasuries replenished with the monuments of historical matters , I more curiously searching into , have compiled no small part of this present work by following of their relation : neither despised I to have those men for my judges , whom I knew to be skilful in so great knowledge of antiquity . Thus far Saxo. 
 Wherefore I think it not amiss to proceed in the recital of the Bishops of Island , that the order and descent of them all , being so far forth as is possible , diligently put together out of our yearly records , may make good that which we have alleged against Krantzius concerning Isleif the first Bishop of Island . 
 In the year of Christ . The Bishops of Schalholt . The Bishops of Holen . In the year of Christ . 
 1056. I. Isleif . Consecrated beyond the I Jonas son of Augmundus . 
 1057. seas . Returns and entereth Isleif his disciple . Consecrated beyond the 1106. 
 1080. the Bishops sea of Schalholt . Dieth in the year of his seas in the year of his age 64. his surname was Sanctus , unto whose 
 age 74. the 4. of the Kalends of July . II Gysserus . memory the 3. of March was by the inhabitants in old time dedicated . Dieth the 11. of the II2I . 
 1082. Consecrated beyond the Kalends of May . 
 1083. sea . Returns into Island with II 
 1118. his Bishopric . Dieth Ketillus or Catullus . 
 the 5. of the Kal. of Consecrated . 1122. 
 IS2 
 In the year of Christ . The Bishops of Schalholt . The Bishops of Helen . In the year of Christ . 
 III . III . 
 In the Thorlacus son of Run - Biorno . 
 year of ulphus . Being consecrated came 
 his age Consecrated the same into Island . 1147 - 
 3Z - year , wherein his predecessor Gysserus de - Dieth . 1162. 
 1133 - ceased , but yet 30. days beforehisdeath . Dieth . IIII . Brandus . [ I - 574-1 
 IIII . Magnus . Consecrated . Consecrated . 1163. 
 On the morrow after the 
 feast of all Saints , in his V. 
 parish town of Hiitar - Gudmundus surnamed 
 dal , the house being Bonus . 
 stricken with lightning , Elected and consecrated . I203 . 
 he , and 70. men with him were consumed Dieth . 1237. 
 with fire . VI . 
 1152. 1176. Entereth the see . Dieth . VII . 
 VI . Henricus . 
 Thorlacus . Entereth the see . 1247. 
 Chosen two years before Dieth . 1260. 
 the death of his predecessor . 
 1178. Consecrated . VIII . 
 1193 - Dieth . Brandus and Abbot . 1262. 
 Goes beyond the seas . 1263. 
 VII . Entereth the Bishopric . 1264. 
 1195. Consecrated . 
 Magnus . Entereth his see . 1267. 
 1216. Consecrated . [ IX . Dieth . [ X. 1313 - 
 153 
 A.D. 1592. 
 In the year of Christ . The Bishops of Schalholt . The Bishops of Holen . In the year of Christ . 
 1239. 1268. 1269. 1298. 1304. 1305. 1309. 1310. 1320. 1321. 1322. I323-1338 . 1339 - I34-I - 134313+8 . IX . Siguardus . Entereth his see . Dieth . X. Arnerus . Entereth his see . Dieth . XI . Arnerus son of Helgo . Consecrated . Entereth the see . Saileth into Norwaie , to crave timber of the king of Norway , wherewith the Church of Schalholt might be reedified , which the same year being touched with lightning , was burned down . Returns home . Dieth . XII . Jonas Haldorus . Elected . Consecrated the first of August . Entereth his see . Dieth . XIII . Jonas son of Indrid a Norvagian born . Entereth his see . Dieth . XIIIL Jonas son of Siguardus . Entereth his see . Dieth on S. Magnus even . 15 X. Audunnus . Entereth his see . Dieth . XI . Laurentius . Elected and consecrated . Dieth in the Ides of April . XII . Egillus . Entereth his see . Dieth . XIII . Ormus . Entereth his see . Dieth upon the feast of all Saints . XIIIL Jonas son of Ericus , surnamed Skalle . Being to enter his sea of Holen came into Island . This Jonas being before time consecrated bishop of Gronland , obtained licence of the bishop of Room to enter the See of Holen , which was at that time vacant . Whereupon coming and not bringing with him the confirmation of this dignity and function , received from the Pope , he began to be suspected among the 4 13141322. I324-1331 - 1332. 1341. 13431355 - ■ 358 - A Bishop of Gronland . 1356. 
 In the year of Christ . The Bishops of Schalholt . The Bishops of Holen . In the year of Christ . 
 1349 - 1356. XV . Gyrthus . Consecrated at Aslo in Norway by Salomon bishop of Aslo . Going beyond the seas he was drowned . XVI . Thorarinnus . priests of the diocese of Holen . Wherefore he was sent back by them into Norway , that the matter might be set through by the judgement of the king . The king therefore favouring his part , he obtained the bishopric of Holen . 
 1362. 1364. 1366. 1381. 1385 - 1388. Entereth his see . Dieth . XVII . Oddgeirus . Entereth his see . Dieth upon the Assumption of the blessed Virgin , in the port of Bergen in Norway , falling down from a pack of wares into the bottom of the ship . He was buried at Bergen in the Church of our Saviour . XVIII . Michael a Dane . Entereth his see . Resigneth , and saileth into Denmarke . XIX . William a Dane . He dieth . XV . Peter . Consecrated thee same year wherein his predecessor departed out of this present life . Entereth the see of Holen . Dieth , XVI . Jonas Wilhelmus English , Either born or surnamed . Entered the see . XVII . Godschalcus . Died. XVIII . Olaus son of Rogwaldus nephew to the forenamed Godschalcus by the sisters side , both of them being Norwayes . * 39E 1392. And English man Bishop of Island . 1+32 - < 457 - 1458. 
 1394 - Entereth the Bishopric . Dieth . [ XX . He was established . He died . [ XIX . 1497. 
 155 
 year of The Bishops of Schalholt . 
 The Bishops of Holen . 
 In the year of Christ . 
 1420. 
 1432. 
 1445. 
 1472. 
 1489. 
 1494. 
 XX . 
 Arnerus surnamed Milldur , that is to say , Liberali . He was at one time Lord President of all Island , bishop of Schalholt , and vicebishop of Holen . He died . 
 XXL 
 Jonas Gerickson Sueden either surnamed or born , is made Bishop over the Church of Schalholt : and afterwards for certain bold attempts being taken by one Thorvaldus de Modruvollum ( as it is reported ) and a great stone being bound to his neck , he was cast alive into the river of Schalholt , ( which takes name of the bridge ) and was there strangled . 
 XXII . 
 Goswinus bishop of Schalholt . 
 XXIII . 
 Sueno called you wise , bishop of Schalholt . 
 XXIIII . 
 Magnus son of Eiol-phus , Bishop , etc. 
 XXV . 
 Entereth thee see . Then ( living at one time with Godschalchus bishop of r < 
 XIX . 
 The nephew of Olaus deceased , by the brother's side : also he being a Norvagian was elected the same year wherein his uncle deceased . 
 He entereth the see . And for the space of 20. whole years is reported , cruelly to have entreated many of the subject's . In the year 1520. when he was in the midst of his cups , and banqueting dishes , & herd that Jonas Sigismundus was departed out of this life ( whom with his wife and children , he had for many years most cruelly oppressed ) he presently fell into a sudden disease , and so not long after changed that violence for miserable death , which in his whole life he had used against his distressed subject's . 
 XX . 
 Jonas Araesonius . Entereth the see . 
 This , man was the last & most earnest maintainer of Popish superstitions . Who stoutly 
 1500. 
 1525. 
 In the year of Christ . The Bishops of Schalholt . The Bishops of Holen . In the year of Christ . 
 1519. 1522. 1540. 1541. 1544. Holen , who seemed worthy to be surnamed cruel ) he had the same commendations for mercy and justice , that Godschalchus had . He died : or thereabouts . XXVI . Augmundus . Chosen in the year wherein Stephen deceased . Entereth the see . While he was Bishop , the Icings Lieutenant with some of his followers being invited to Schalholt , in the time of the banquet , was slain by certain conspirators : because he had in all places wickedly wasted the inhabitants and their goods . But Augmundus as the author of that murder ( although he purged himself with and other ) being transported into Denmarke , there ended his life . XXVII . Gysserus . Elected , Augmundus yet living . Entered the see . He was the abolisher of Popish traditions about Priests marriages : his own marriage being solemnized at Schalholt . [ XXVIII . withstanding Gysserus and Martinus bishops of Schalholt , was commanded by the most religious king Christan the 3. under pain of banishment to come with all speed into Denmarke . But neglecting the kings commandment , heetooke Martine bishop of Schalholt , and committed him to ward . At length he himself also being taken by a man of great name ( whom before that time , it is said , he had provoked ) and being brought to Schalholt , was , together with his two sons , by the authority of the kings Lieutenant beheaded . In revenge whereof not long after , the . said Lieutenant with some of his company , was villanously slain by certain roisters , which were once servants to the parties beheaded . XXL Olaus Hialterus . Departed his country . Entereth the see . [ This 1551. 1552. 1553 - 
 J57 
 In the year of Christ . The Bishops of Schalholt . The Bishops of Holen . In the year of Christ . 
 > 5+7 - XXVIII . Martinus . Bishop , etc. And the This man ( being as yet in the life time of his predecessor fellow - 
 years following . XXIX . Gislaus Jonas . This man presently , in the time of bishop Augmund began in his youth to be inflamed with you love of true piety , & of the pure labourer with him ) was the first that kindled the love of sincere doctrine at Holen in the hearts of many : and then being bishop did openly teach and defend the said doctrine . He died . 1568. 
 1556. doctrine of the Gospel , & being pastor of the Church of Selardal , diligently to advance the same , by which means he did so procure unto himself the hatred of Papists , as being constrained to give place unto their craft & cruelty , he departed over to Hamburg , from whence coming to Copen Hagen in Denmarke , & painefiilly proceeding in his former study of divinity , he lived in the familiarity , and favour of many , but specially of D. D. Peter Palladius : who was at that time bishop there . Afterwards re - XXII . Gudbrandus Thorlacius . The ornament , not only of his age , but of posterity also : who beside that , by the direction of the holy spirit , he hath most notably brought the work begun , and left unto him by his predecessor Olaus to that perfection which it hath pleased God to vouchsafe : ( namely his labours and diligence in maintaining the truth of the Gospel , and in abolishing of Popish superstitions ) even in this his country he 
 1587 - turning into his country , Martine gave place unto him of his own accord . This man died also , having is the first that hath established a Printing house . For which cause his country ( beside , for many 
 > 5 8 
 In the year of Christ . The Bishops of Schalholt . The Bishops of Holen . In the year of Christ . 
 1588. 1589. for the space of 31. years or there about , professed the Gospel of Jesus Christ : neither did he help & further the Church of God by the found of his voice only , but by all other means to the utmost of his ability , by teaching , preaching , writing , by his wealth & his counsel . XXX . Otto Enerus , a grave , godly , and learned man . Being chosen he departeth his country . He is consecrated , returns , and entereth the sea , endeavouring himself in the labours of his function . other books translated into our mother tongue ) shall eternally bounden unto him , that the sacred Bible also , by his means , is fairly printed in the language of Island . He ( I say ) being at this present , Bishop , when he was about to take his charge : Departed his country . Returned and entered the see of Holen . 1570. 1571. 
 IN these times therefore light is restored unto our souls from heaven , and the gate of the kingdom of heaven is opened unto us by the sincere preaching of Christian doctrine . For in either of the Bishops seats there is a free school founded by the liberality and piety of that most renowned King of Denmarke Christian the third : and afterwards the son following the godly steps of his most Christian father , the said Free schools by Lord Friderick the second , our most religious King , being called up to his heavenly country in the year 1588 , have been increased and furthered : which at this day also do prosper and flourish by the 
 159 
 favour and authority of the most gracious King and our Prince , Christian the fourth , wherein the youth of our Island being instructed in the rudiments of liberali arts , and sacred divinity , are trained up to knowledge and true godliness , that from hence ministers of Churches may proceed . 
 We are come at length in the register of the Bishops of Island down to this present day , wherein the forenamed excellent men Gudbrandus Thorlacius , and Otto Enerus , the one at Holen , and the other at Schalholt are Bishops of our Cathedral Churches : both of which men , that it would please God long to preserve unto his Church in health and life , for the glory of his most holy name , we all do earnestly and with fervent prayers beseech him . 
 The second section . 
 They inhabit for the most part in caves , or hollow places within the sides of mountains . And again , They have many houses and Churches built with the bones of fish , and Whale's . Again . Many of them also to avoid the extremity of cold , do keep themselves close in their caves , even as the people of Africa do to avoid the heat of the sun . Also Munster say : Many in Island at this day built their houses with the ribs and bones of Whale's . 
 HEre the second member takes his beginning concerning the course of life , and the manners of the inhabitants . And first of all what buildings or houses they do use : namely according to Munster , Krantzius , Frisius etc. Holes and caves of mountains . But although in gorgeous buildings , and such other worldly braveries there is very little help to the attaining of a life truly happy : notwithstanding , we can not in this place conceal the truth : and we plainly affirm that Cosmographers and Historiographers also do err in this point . For such habitations as they write to be common 160 
 unto the whole nation , are but in very few places , and are either sheep-cots for shepherds , or cottages and receptacles for fishermen at that time of the year only when they go a fishing , and the others stand in need to watch their flock . But for their houses themselves , and the very dwelling places of men , the Islanders have had them built from ancient time stately and sumptuously enough , according to the condition of the Country , with timber , stones , and turfs , until such time as traffic and exchange of wares began to cease Traffic with between them and the Noruagians , who were wont to 
 , , .... i r , Norway 
 supply them with timber , and for that cause now our ceaset^ houses begin to decay : whenas neither we have woods convenient for building , not yet there are now a days , Drift « and not as there were in old time , trees cast upon our shores by so Plentift11 the benefit of the sea , which may in any sort relieve us : timespast . neither do outlandish Merchant's succour our necessities : whereupon many of our meanest country villages are much decayed from their ancient integrity , some whereof be fallen to the ground , and others bee very ruinous . Notwithstanding there be many farms and villages which I cannot easily reckon up , the buildings whereof do resemble that ancient excellency , the houses being very large , both in breadth and length , and for the most part in height also . As for example : farms or granges which contain chambers in them , more then fiftie cubits in length , tenne in breadth , and twentie in height . And so other rooms , as a parlour , a stove , a buttery , etc. answering in proportion unto the former . I could here name many of our country buildings both large and wide , neither ilfavoured in show , nor base in regard of their workmanship and costly firmness or strength , with certain Churches also , or religious houses built of timber only , according to ancient and artificiali seemeli-nesse and beauty : as the Cathedral Church of Holen having a body the five pillars whereof on both sides be foure elnes high , and about five elnes thick , as also beams and weather-bourdes , and the rest of the roof 
 iv 161 L 
 proportionally answering to this lower building . Our most gracious King Lord Frederick , whose memory is most sacred unto us , in the year 1588. did most liberally bestow timber for the re-edifying of this body being cast down in the year 1584. by and horrible tempest . But the Church it self does manifestly exceed the body thereof in all quantity : also the inner part of the Church , which is commonly called the quire is somewhat less , both then the middle part of the Church , and also then the body . 
 The Church of Schalholt was far greater as I have herd in old time , then this our Cathedral , which having now been twice burned , is brought to a lesser scantling . Likewise there be some other Churches of our Hand , although not matching , yet resembling the ancient magnificence of these . For here the matter seems not to require that I should run into a long description of these things . For as we do not greatly extol our houses and buildings , so are we nothing ashamed of them : because being content with our poverty , we render unto Christ immortali praise who despises not to be received of us under a base roof , and contemneth not our temples and houses , ( which Munster , Krantzius and Frisius do not truly affirm to be built of fish and Whale's bones ) more then the marble vaults , the painted walls , the square pavements , and such like ornaments of Churches and houses in other countries . 
 The third section . 
 Krantzius . They and their cattle use all one house , all one food or Munsterus . victuals , all one state ( here Krantzius hath it lodging . ) 
 Also . They live only by feeding of cattle , and sometime by taking of fish . 
 THese be the things together with those that follow , which Krantzius hath champed , and put into Munsters mouth , so that Munster shall not need so much as once to chew them , which may appear by comparing them both together . For Munster , as he 162 
 swallowed these reproaches , taking them out of Krantzius his preface upon Norway , so he casts up the very same morsels undigested and raw against our nation , in his fourth book of Cosmography cap . 8. Those things which have been hitherto , although they have sufficiently grieved us , yet will we let them seem more tolerable : but this most malicious devise , and those which follow we cannot easily brook . It is our part therefore in this place also to avouch the truth , and to turn the leasing upon the authors own head . 
 House , etc. First , that which they say concerning the same common house ( as also living , and state ) with our cattle , we plainly affirm to be false and erroneous , not only the truth it self being our witness , if any man would make trial , but also the experience of many strangers , that have lived some years among us , and have more mind to speak the truth then to revile our nation : who have seen our houses and habitations with their own eyes , and knew that in every particular farm or grange there were many several rooms : namely , in those that were most simple and base , seven or eight : In others which were greater , sometime tenne , and sometime twentie . In the greatest sometime fortie , and sometime fiftie . Which for the most part being severed , both by roofs and walls , do serve for the daily and household affairs of one owner or master , seidome of two or three , but almost never of more : whereupon the Reader may easily judge , how true it is that the Islanders and their cattle have all one house to lie in , when every husbandman in this variety of rooms hath several oxe-stalles , sheep-cotes , stables , lambs-cots separated indifferent spaces one from another , which the servants go unto so oft as need requires , and from thence return back to the dwelling houses . 
 But whereas one noted in his Map of Island , concerning the province of Skagefiord , that under the same roof , men , dogs , swine and sheep live all together , it is partly false , and partly no marvel : for sheep , as 163 
 it hath been said , and specially for swine ( when as that province hath no swine at all ) it is utterly false : for dogs it is no marvel , when as not kings courts were ever , or at this day are destitute of them , as it is well known to all men . But as touching dogs afterwards in the seventh section . 
 Victuals , etc. Whither beasts meat may fitly be termed by the name of Victus , a man may justly doubt : when Doletus interpreting a piece of Tullie , says : As for Victus ( say he ) we will so expound it with the Civilians , namely that we comprehend under the word of Victus all things necessary for the life of man , as meat , drink , attire of the body , etc. And Ulpianus de verborum signification defineth Victus in the very same words . But in this place the said authors call beasts meat by the name of Victus . 
 But let us see what truth and plain dealing is to be found in these men . We have no labouring cattle beside horses and oxen : these have grass and hay ( except where hay is wanting ) for their fodder , and water to drink . Now , the very same writers confess , that the Islanders live by fish , butter , flesh both beef , and mutton , and corn also , though it be scarce , and brought out of other countries . Therefore they have not the same food with brutus beasts , which notwithstanding the said writers affirm in these words : They and their cattle use all one victuals or food . What Munsters meaning is in this clause , he himself a little before hath plainly taught . 
 Island ( says he ) containeth many people living only with the food of cattle , and sometime by taking of fish . But what else is the food of cattle , but the meat of cattle , says Doletus ? Unless perhaps Munster calls the food of cattle , cattle themselves slain for the food of men : whom , as I think , the use of the latin tongue does gainsay , which hath taught us that as men do eat , so beasts do feed , and hath termed the victuals of men , and the food or fodder of cattle . 
 164 
 But may I think that Munster and Krantzius were so mad as to imagine that the Islanders live upon grass and hay ? To this pass of misery was Nabuchodonozor brought undergoing the yoke of Gods vengeance : Daniel 4. vers . 30. We will easily grant that beasts , and cattle will not perhaps refuse many things , which men not only of our country but of yours also eat , if the said beasts be destitute of their usual food : as horses are fed with corn and barley loaves : they will drink milk also ( like unto calves and lambs ) and ale , if it be proffered them , and that greedily . And dogs in like manner will devour any dainty dishes whatsoever . May any man therefore say that men use the same common victuals with dogs and horses ? 
 Now , whatsoever things have happened in the time of grievous famine ought not to be recorded in historic for the general custom of any country . As it is not lawful for us to write concerning other nations , that the people of this or that country , do usually live by eating of dogs , mice , cats , although perhaps in the time of famine or siege or dearth of corn , they have often be constrained so to do . 
 But that the same drink is some times common to many men with beasts , we will not greatly gainsay : namely most pure water , that natural drink created by God for all living creatures : which also in some respect Physicians do commend , yea , neither the Patriarchs themselves , nor our saviour Christ despised it . 
 As touching apparel ( for we comprehend apparel also under the name of Victus ) it is no wise common to us with beasts . For nature hath clad them with hairs & bristles ( as I dare say Munster and Krantzius cannot be ignorant ) men , being otherwise naked , stand in need of clothes to cover their bodies . But I had not thought it might therefore have properly been said , that sheep and we have all one apparel . Men of other countries also wear cloth of sheeps wool , although it i65 
 be more finely wrought . But no more concerning the attire of the body . For it is a mere folly to seek for praise , and ambitious reputation by that , which argue the infirmity of our nature . 
 State , etc. Now , it remains that we should speak of that state , which we are said to have common with beasts : but of what kind or manner it should be , or our writers would have it to be , I cannot easily discern . State ( say Doletus ) is either of the body , or of causes , or of order and condition . Doubtless , that there is another state of our bodies then of beasts ( for beside our two feet , we have hands also , and go with our bodies , and countenances lift upright ) and that we be of another order and condition from them , we are verily persuaded . As for these good fellows , if they know any such matter by themselves or others , let them disclose it . We do altogether scorn these , being so vain things , and breeding so great contempt against the Majesty of God our creator , neither do we vouchsafe them any larger discourse . 
 But because it is our duty not so highly to regard either the love of our country , or of any other thing whatsoever , but that we may be ready at all times , and in all places , to give truth the pre-eminence : I will say in a word what that was which perhaps might minister occasion to this infamous reproach of writers . 
 There be never unto Schalholt , upon the South shore of Island , three small parishes standing between two most swift rivers Thiorsaa and Olfwis Aa , being in a manner destitute both of wood and turf , which is the accustomed fuel of the country . And although most of the inhabitants of these parishes , and some of their neighbours , as they do in time of year provide all things necessary for household , so especially those things which belong to fires and baths : notwithstanding there be certain among them of the basest sort of people , who , because they want those things at home , and are not able to provide them from other places , are con-166 
 1592-strained to use straw for the dressing of their meat . 
 But when the sharp rigor of snowy Winter comes on , these poor people betake them to their ox stalls , & there setting up sheds , & doing their necessary business in the day time , when they are not able to make fires , they borrow heat from their oxen , as it hath been reported to me by others : And so they only , being very few in number , do not willingly enjoy , but are constrained to use the same common house with their oxen . But for their livelihood and state it is far otherwise with them then with their oxen , of which thing I have entreated before . This is the lot , & poverty of certain men in those petty parishes , the condition whereof is therefore made a common byeword of the people among us , though somewhat injuriously . Where I would willingly demand with what honesty men can impute that unto the whole nation , which is hard and skantly true of these few poor men ? I am weary to stay any longer in this matter : only , because I have to do with Divines , let that of Salomon suffice , Proverbs 17. verse 5. He that mocks the poor , reproacheth him that made him . 
 And in very deed , because this our nation is now , and heretofore hath been poor and needy , and as it were a beggar amongst many rich men , it hath sustained so many taunts and scoffs of strangers . But let them take heed whom they upbraid . Verily if there were nothing else common unto us with them , yet we both consist of the same elements , and have all one father and God . 
 167 
 [ The fourth 
 The fourth section . 
 They lead their lives in holy simplicity , not seeking any more then nature doth afford . A happy Nation , whose poverty no man does envy . But the English and Danish merchant's suffer not the nation to be at rest , who frequenting that country to transport fishing , have conveyed thither our vices , together with their manifold wares . For now , they have learned to brew their water with corn , and begin to despise , and loath the drinking of fair water . Now they covet gold and silver like unto our men . 
 Simplicity , etc. I am exceedingly glad , that the commendation of holy simplicity is given unto us . But it grieveth us that there is found so great a decay of justice , and good laws , and so great want of government among us , which is the cause of many thousande heinous offences : which all honest and godly men do continually bewail . This inconvenience does not happen through the negligence of the highest Magistrate , that is , of our most gracious King , but rather by our own fault : who do not present these things unto his Majesty , which are disorderly committed without his knowledge , and which are wanting in the inferior Magistrate . 
 Merchant's . Moreover , Merchant's , not only of England and Denmarke , but especially of Germanie , as at this time , so heretofore frequenting our country , not to transport fishing , but fish , taught not Islanders the art of brewing corn with water . For the Noruagians themselves , the first , to our knowledge , that inhabited this Hand , from whom you Islanders are lineally descended , brought with them out of Norway that art , as also gold and silver coin , so that in old time there was no less use of silver and gold with us , then there is at this day . 
 168 
 And it is certain that before the often navigations Come of old of Danes , Germanes , and English men unto us , our land £r0^inS was much more fertile then now it is ( feeling the in - tn 5 ' 
 conveniences of the aged and decayed world , both from heaven and earth ) and brought forth , in certain choice places , corn in abundance . 
 The fift section . 
 The King of Denmarke and Norway sends every year a Lieutenant into the Country . 
 IN the year of our Lord eight hundred fortie and sixe Harald Harfagre ( which is to say , golden hairs or fair clocks ) was born . Who afterwards in the year eight hundred fiftie and eight , being chosen king of Norway , when he was grown to age , and full strength , changed the form of the Norvagian government . For whereas before it was divided into petty Provinces ( which they called Fylki , and the petty kings that The occasion governed them , Fylkis konga ) he reduced it by force of arms unto a Monarchic . But when some inhabitants of the country , being mighty , and descended of people of Norgood parentages , could not well brook this hard dealing , way . they chosen rather to be banished their country , then not to shake off the yoke of tyranny . Whereupon , they in the year above nam eight hundred seventie and foure , transported colonies into Island being before discovered by some men and found out , but unpeopled as yet : And so being the first founders of our nation , they called themselves Islanders , which name their posterity retaineth unto this day . And therefore the Islanders lived a long time , namely , three hundred eightie and sixe years , more or less , acknowledging no submission to any other Nation . And although Hayuinus Haquinus that crowned King of Norway , who reigned conatus . longest of any Norvagian king , namely , above sixtie sixe years , did oftentimes attempt by Ambassadors to make the Islanders become tributaries unto him , notwithstanding at all times they constantly withstood him , till at 
 169 
 length about the year of our Lord 1260. they performed homage unto him . And afterwards continued always in their promised loyalty , being subject's to the king of Norway . But now at this day , since the Empire of the Noruagians was translated by Margaret Queen of Denmarke , Suedeland , and Norway unto the Danes , they do honour as their sovereign Lord and King the most gracious king of Denmarke . 
 The sixt section . 
 All things are common among them except their wives . 
 HEre Krantzius in the first place begins with such a gibe . There be many notable things in their manners , etc. Moreover , your wit being too hasty in affirming things unknown , does here also diminish your credit . The experience as well of all things as of persons and times proves your over greedy desire of novelty , of fame and vainglory , and argue your great negligence in maintaining the truth . O worthy writers . 
 But whither the aforesaid things be true or no , we call the laws of our Country to witness , which the Islanders from the beginning have used all one with the Norwayes : of the King and his subject's : of the seat of justice , and of lawcases which come to be decided there : of inheritances : of adoptions , marriages , theft , extortions , lending , bargains , and the rest : all which , to what purpose should they be enjoined unto them with whom all things are common ? We call to witness so many broils and contentions in our courts , and places of judgement in Island concerning goods moveable , and immoveable : we call to witness our kings now of Denmarke , aforetime of Norway , who by so many bills of supplication out of Island in old time , and of late have been often interrupted , for the setting through of controversies concerning possessions . we call Krantzius himself to witness against himself , 170 
 whose words in the first section were these . Before the receiving of Christian faith the Islanders living according to the law of nature did not much differ from our law , etc. If by the law of nature , then doubtless by that law of justice , which gives to every man his own : If by the law of justice , then certainly distinctions of properties and possessions must needs have taken place in our Nation : and although this very law is often transgressed , and that haynously even in the Church : notwithstanding both the Church , and also heathen men do acknowledge it to be most just and 
 The seventh section . 
 They make all one reckoning of their whelps , and of their children : except that of the poorer sort you shall easier obtain their son then their shalke . 
 ALthough in the beginning of this Treatise I thought that Munster and other men of great name in those things which they have left written concerning Island , were not to be charged with slander , yet whither that favour may here be showed by any man whatsoever ( be he never so favourable , and never so sincere ) I do not sufficiently conceive . For what should move such great men , following the despiteful lies , and fables of mariners , to defame and stain our nation with so horrible and so shameful a reproach ? Surely nothing else but a careless licentiousness to deride and contemn a poor and unknown Nation , and such other like vices . 
 But , be it known to all men that this untruth does not so much hurt to the Islanders , as to the authors themselves . For in heaping up this , and a great number of others into their Histories , they cause their credit in other places also to be suspected : And hereby they gain thus much ( as Aristotle say ) that when they speak truth no man will believe them without suspicion . 
 171 
 But attend a while ( Reader ) and consider with me the gravity and wisdom of these great Clerks : that we may not let pass such a notable commendation of Island . Krantzius and Munster have hitherto taught , that the Islanders are Christians . Also : that before the receiving of Christian faith they lived according to the law of nature . Also : that the Islanders lived after a law not much differing from the law of the Germane . Also , that they lived in holy simplicity . 
 Attend I say ( good Reader ) and consider , what marks of Christianitie , of the law of nature , of the Germane law , of holy simplicity , these authors require , and what marks they show and describe in the Islanders . There was one of the said marks before : namely , that the Islanders do place hell or the prison of the damned , within the gulf and bottom of mount Hecla : concerning which , read the first section of this part , and the seventh section of the former . The seconde mark is , that with the Anabaptists they take away distinctions of properties and possessions : in the section next going before . The third and most excellent is this : those singular & natural affections , that love and tender care , and that fatherly and godly mind of the Islanders towards their children , namely that they make the same account of them , or less then they do of their dogs . What ? Will Munster and Krantzius after this fashion picture out unto us the law of Christ , the law of nature , the law of the Germane , and holy simplicity ? O rare and excellent picture , though not altogether matching the skill of Apelles : Oh sharp and wonderful invention , if authentical : Oh knowledge more then humane , though not at all divine . 
 But we Islanders ( albeit the farthest of all nations and inhabiting a frozen climb ) require far other notes of Christianitie . For we have the commandment of God , that every man should love his neighbour as himself . Now there is none ( I suppose ) that doth not love or esteem more of himself then of his dog . And if 172 
 there ought to be so great favour , so great estimation , so great love unto our neighbour , then how great affection do we owe unto our children ? The most near and inseparable love of whom , beside that nature hath most friendly settled in our minds , the love of God also commands us to have speciali regard in training them up ( Exod. 12. 24. Ephes. 6. 4. ) namely , that there may be in holy marriage certain seminaries of Gods Church , and exercises of all piety and honesty : according to the excellent saying of the Poet . 
 God will have each family , a little Church to be . 
 Also 
 Of humane life or men society , a School or College is holy matrimony . 
 That it may be manifest , that among Christians their sons are more to be accounted of and regarded , then their dogs : and if any do not otherwise esteem of them , that they are not Christians . 
 But this natural affection toward our most deer offspring is plainly seen in the heathen themselves : that whomsoever you totally deprive of this , you deny them also to be men . The mother's of Carthage testify this to be true , when as in the third Punic war the most choice and gallant young men in all the City were sent as pledges into Sicilia , whom they followed unto the ships with most miserable weeping and lamentation , and some of them being with grief separated from their deer sons , when they saw the sails hoised , and the ships departing out of the haven , for very anguish cast themselves headlong into the water : as Sabellicus witnesseth . Egaeus does testify this , who when he saw the ship of his son Theseus , returning out of Creete with black sails , thinking that his son had perished , ended his life in the next waters : Sabell . lib . 3. cap . 4. Gordianus the elder , Proconsul of Affrica , does testify this , who likewise , upon rumours of the death of his son , 
 173 
 hanged himself . Campoful . lib . 5. cap . 7. Also Jocasta the daughter of Creon , Auctolia daughter of Simon , Anius King of the Tuscan , Orodes King of the Parthians , and and infinite number of others . Concerning whom read Plutarch stat . lib . 2. and other authors etc. To these may be added that sentence , Love descendeth , etc. So that you see , it is no less proper to a man entirely to love his children , then for a bird to fly : that if our writers at any time have confessed the Islanders to be men ( much less to be Christians , ) they must , will they nill they , ascribe unto them this love and affection towards their children : If not , they do not only take from them the title and dignity of men , but also they debase them under every brutus beast , which even by the instinct of nature are bound with exceeding great love , and tender affection towards their young ones . 
 I will not add against this shameless untruth most notable examples of our own countrymen : I will omit our laws of manstealing , more ancient then the Islanders themselves , being received from the Noruagians , and are extant in our book of laws under the title Manhelge cap . 5. Whosoever selleth a freeman ( any man much more a son ) unto strangers etc. 
 Now if any man be driven to that hard fortune , that he must needs commit his own son into the hands of some inhabitant or stranger , being urged thereunto by famine , or any other extreme necessity , that he may not be constrained to see him hungerstarved for want of sustenance , but keepeth his dog still for his own eating , this man is not to be said , that he esteems equally or more basely of his son then of his dog : whither Islanders or any other countrymen do the same . 
 The Germane or the Danish mariners might perhaps find among us certain beggars laden with children ( for we have here a great number of them ) who in jesting manner for they are much given to trifling talk , might say : Give me this , or fell me that : and when the stranger 174 
 should ask , What will you give me for it ? the beggar might answer : I have ten or foureteene children , I will give you some one or more of them , etc. For this rabble of beggars uses thus fondly to prate with strangers . Now if there be any well disposed man , who pitying the need and folly of these beggars , releaseth them of one son , and does for Gods sake by some means provide for him in another country : does the beggar therefore ( who together with his son being ready to die for hunger and poverty , yields and com-mitteth his son into the hands of a merciful man ) make less account of his son then of his dog ? Such works of love and mercy have be performed by many , aswell Islanders themselves as strangers : one of which number was that honourable man Accilius Julius , being sent by the most gracious King of Denmarke into Island in the year of our Lord 1552 , who , as I have herd , took , and carried with him into Denmarke fiftene poor boys : where afterwards it was reported unto me , that by his good means every one of them being bound to a several trade , proved good and thrifty men . 
 What if some man be driven to that pass , that he does not only fell his son , but not finding a chapman , his own self kills and eateth him ? Examples of this kind be common , namely of the unwilling and forced cruelty of parents towards their children , not being pricked on through hate , or want of natural affection , but being compelled thereunto by urgent necessity . Shall any man hereupon ground a generail reproach against a whole nation ? We read that in the siege of Samaria , two mother's slew their sons , and eat them sodden : 4. King . chap. 6. We read in the siege of Jerusalem , how lamentable the voice of that distressed mother was , being about to kill her tender child : My sweet babe , say she ( for I will report Eusebius own words , concerning this matter , though very common , that the affection of a mother may appear ) born to misery and mishap , for whom should I conveniently reserve thee 
 175 
 in this tumult of famine , of war , and sedition ? If we be subdued to the government of the Roman , we shall wear out our unhappy days under the yoke of slavery . But I think famine will prevent captivity . Beside , there is a rout of seditious rebels much more intolerable then either of the former misery's . Come on therefore , my son , be thou meat unto thy mother , a fury to these rebels , and a byeword in the common life of men , which one thing only is wanting to make up the calamities of the Jewes . These sayings being ended , she kills her son , roasting and eating one half , and reserving the other , etc. Eusebius lib . 3. cap . 6. Now , what man will not believe that this unhappy mother would full gladly have passed over this her son into the possession of some master or chapman , if she could have happened upon any such , with whom she thought he might have been preserved ? That famine is well known which oppressed Calagurium , a city of Spaine , when in old time Cneius Pompeius laid siege thereunto ( Valerius lib . 7. cap . 7. ) the citizens whereof converted their wives and children into meat for the satisfying of their extreme hunger , whom doubtless they would with all their hearts have sold for other victuals . That famine also is well known which in the year of our Lord 851 ( Vincent , lib . 25. cap . 26. ) afflicted Germany , insomuch that the father was glad to devour his own son . It is well known after the death of the Emperor Henry the seventh , in a famine continuing three whole years , how the parents would devour their children , and the children their parents , and that especially in Polonia and Bohemia . And that we may not only allege ancient examples : it is reported that there was such a grievous dearth of corn in the years 1586 , and 1587 , throughout Hungary , that some being compelled for want of food were feign to fell their children unto the most bloody and barbarous enemy of Christians , and so to enthral them to the perpetuali yoke of Turkish slavery : and some are said to have taken their children , whom they could no longer 
 176 
 1592. sustain , and with cruel mercy to have cast them into Danubius , and drowned them . But should these stories and the like make any man so mad as to affirm that this or that nation accustometh to kill their children for their own food , and to fell them willingly unto the Turks , or to drown and strangle them willingly in the water ? I cannot think it . So neither ( because beggars in Island being inforced through extreme and biting necessity , do willingly part with their sons ) is this custom generally to be imputed unto the whole nation , and that by way of disgrace , by any man , except it be such and one who hath taken his leave of all modesty , plain dealing , humanity , and truth . 
 But I could wish that the love of dogs in Islanders might be more sparingly reprehended by those people , whose matrons , and specially their noble women , take so great delight in dogs , that they carry them in their bosoms thorough the open streets : I will not say in Churches : which fashion Caesar blamed in certain strangers , whom he saw at Rome carrying about young apes and whelps in their arms , asking them this question : Whither women in their country brought forth children or no ? signifying hereby , that they do greatly offend , who bestow upon beasts these natural affections , wherewith they should be invited to the love of mankind , and specially of their own offspring : which strange pleasure never overtook , nor possessed the nation of the Islanders . Wherefore now ( Munster and Krantzius ) you must find us out other marks of Christianity , of the law of nature , of the Germanes law , and of holy simplicity . 
 IV 
 177 
 [ The eight 
 The eight section . 
 They honour their Bishop as their King : unto whose command all the whole people have respect . Whatsoever he prescribeth out of the law , the scriptures , or the customs of other nations , they do full holily observe . 
 THere was indeed at the beginning , about the time of the reformation of religion , great reverence had unto the bishop ; but never so great , that our politic laws at the bishops command should give place to outlandish laws & customs . Neither in the time of Albertus Krantzius , much less of Munster ( of which two the first deceased in the year of our Lord 1517 , and the second 1552 ) the bishops of Island had the authority of kings , when as many of the country which were of the richer sort , would not doubt to rebel ! against them ; which thing is too well known in our country . Yet in the mean time , the bishops being terrible with their authority of excommunication , reduced some under their subjection , and others at that time they cruelly persecuted . 
 Moreover , albeit at that time the bishop was had in great , yea , in exceeding great reverence , yet now adays , the darkness of popery being dispelled , the devil assaulteth men after another sort , and even here among us , he is not slack to arm their minds with contempt , and perverse stubbornness against God , and his holy ministry . 
 The ninth section . 
 They live there for the most part upon fish , because of their great want of corn , which is brought in from the port towns of other countries' : who carry home fish from thence with great gain . Also Munster say , they do there use stockfish in stead of bred , which grows not in that country . 
 Consider ( friendly reader ) how Munster is delighted to harp upon one string , that when he can write nothing of and unknown nation which may carry any 178 
 .... I59X show with it , he is feign either to bring in falsehood , or often to repeat the same things , & so to become tedious unto his reader : for he said a little before , that the Islanders live upon fish . His words above recited were these : Island containeth many people living only with the food of cattle , and sometime by taking of fish . And that I may omit the rest in which some trifle might be noted : whereas he sayeth that bred grows not in Island : it is most true : which I think is common therewith to Germany also , because bred grows not there neither , except it be in Munsters field where natural vinegar also does marvelously increase . But these toys , by the liberty of rhetoric forsooth , shall be out of danger . Howbeit , unto these reproaches , which strangers do gather from the meats and drinks of the Islanders , we will hereafter briefly answer , Sect. 
 U - 
 The tenth section . 
 The inhabitants do celebrate the acts of their ancestors , Munsterus . and of their times , with songs , and they grave them Kranizius-in rocks and promontories , that they may not decay with posterity , but only by the defect of nature . 
 There be diverse found among them that be minstrels , Frisius . and can play upon the lute , who with their delectable music do ensnare and take both fowls and fish . 
 WE deny not but that some worthy acts of our The Islanders forefathers be reserved in the songs and poems 
 of our countrymen , as also in prose : but that the same acts oftheir things have been engraven by us , or by our ancestors , ancestors . in rocks or promontories , we may in no case acknowledge that praise to be due unto us , nor yet the other of minstrels , and taking of birds and fish . For we hold it to be the part of and honest and ingenuous mind , as to refute false crimes , so not to challenge undeserved praise unto himself , nor to accept it being offered . 
 179 
 BUt now , let this be the end of our controversy with the authors aforesaid , being otherwise men of excellent learning , and of great renown , who notwithstanding so inconsiderately have intermeddled these things in their writings . And now the better part of my labour is finished . 
 But yet there remains that viperous Germane brood the mother whereof would have it come to light , as it were at a second birth , without name , that it might so much the more freely wound the fame of the Islanders with venomous sting . 
 Moreover , although I be not afraid to encounter with this beast , yet would I have all men to know with what mind I undertake this enterprise , namely , not that I mean to contend with his pestiferous rancour , by reproaches , and railing speeches ( for as it is in the common proverb : 
 I know , that if I strive with dung most vile , How ere it be , my self I shall defile ) 
 but that I may satisfy all honest and well affected men , even strangers themselves , who shall hereafter read or heare^ or have heretofore herd that Germane pasquill , lest they also should think that we worthily sustain so monstrous a disgrace : and also that I may from henceforth , if it be possible , restrain others ( who use those venomous Germane rhymes to the upbrading of our nation , and from hence borrow their scoffs , and reproachful taunts to the debasing of us Iselanders ) from that liberty of backbiting . 
 Therefore , that I may not be tedious to the reader with long circumstances , I will come to the rehearsing of those things which that railing Germane hath heaped up in his lewd pasquill : whom also I could bring in , repeating his friendly verses of the Islanders , within the compass of this my book , but that I do foresee that 180 
 the said slanderous libel being stuffed with so many and diverse reproaches , might breed offence to all honest men , and deter them from reading it , with the filthiness thereof . 
 I will therefore repeat the principali matters ( omitting those things which he hath common with others , or , that heretofore have been examined ) but far more modestly then he , lest ( as I said ) I cause good and learned men's ears to tingle at his lewd and unseemly rhymes : they that are desirous to see or hear him , let them inquire at the Stationers . It is no part of our meaning ( I say ) to defile these papers with his stinking slanders , or with the filthy sink of his reproaches . 
 First therefore , this our goodly Germane Historic - The first grapher objecteth that there be many Pastors in Island , objec , ion or which preach not to their people once in two years , as p ' it is read in the former edition of this pasquill , which notwithstanding the latter edition does refute : saying that the said Pastors use to preach but five times in and whole year : which two , how well they agree together , let the reader be judge , seeing it is manifest that the author himself , presently after the first edition , had scarce seen Island . So oftentimes one lie betrayeth another , according to that saying : Truth agreeth unto truth ; but falsehood agreeth neither to truth nor to falsehood . 
 But sith it is our part not to dissemble the truth in any place , we will not deny that holy sermons , about the time wherein this sycophant lived in Island , namely in the year 1554 , were seldomer in use then they are at this day , namely , the darkness of popery being scarcely at that time dispelled . Which also is to be understood concerning the Psalms of David mumbled by the common people in Latin , as he casts us in the teeth : for the Papists grounding all the hope of their salvation in the Mass , did little regard the sermon , or doctrine . But after we were freed from that missed , it hath be ( God be thanked ) far otherwise with us : although we cannot 
 181 
 altogether excuse the dulness , sloth , and preposterous care of certain of our Pastors . Which , whither it agreeth to any of their countrymen or no , let other nations judge . 
 The twelfth section . 
 The second Secondly , the trifler shamefully reporteth , that adulteries teproch . and whoredoms are not only public , and common vices among Islanders : but that they are not accounted by them for vices . 
 ALthough indeed these most filthy abominations , even in our common wealth , be not altogether unusual : notwithstanding , since all men know that they are far more common in other nations , where be greater multitudes of people , he did undeservedly , and maliciously note the Islanders rather with this reproach , then other people and nations , who are more infamous with this crime then our countrymen . 
 And albeit I wish with all mine heart that vices and enormities were much less winked at in our country , then we see they are , yet notwithstanding this juggler , by reason of his natural inclination to backbiting , hath added this in his last reproach : namely , that these vices by the Iselanders are not accounted for vice . For , in what common wealth dare the impudent companion affirm this to be true ? What ? in that common wealth which hath sworn to observe the law contained in our statute book under the title of Manhelge chap. 28 , whereby it is enacted , that whosoever committeth adultery with another men wife the second time , his goods being { I . 586. ] confiscate , he shall be punished with death ? Or in that common wealth , which not long since hath inflicted the penalty of 80 dallers upon a servant committing adultery with his master's wife ? Or in that common wealth which hath decreed , that if he does not pay , nor lay in sureties at the day appointed , he shall banished the country ? Or in that common wealth the politic laws whereof doe streightly command that whosoever be according to 182 
 law found in adultery with another men wife , by her husband , if he escape , he shall undergo the punishment of manslaughter ? Or in that common wealth , the politic laws whereof do also enjoin a man that is taken in carnail copulation with the mother , daughter , or sister , by the son , father , or brother , to redeem his life with the one half of that which he ought to have paid , if he had shed the innocent blood of the said party ? Or in that common wealth the politic laws whereof have noted and condemned adultery under the name of a most heinous offence ? and do straightly command that he which is taken the third time in that beastly act shall punished with death ? 
 You see therefore ( friendly readers ) what and injurious Notary we have , affirming that adultery and whoredom in Island deserveth not the name of sin and wickedness : for although some officers let slip this or that vice unpunished , yet ought not the whole nation , nor the laws , nor all good and godly men , in that regard , to be accused or evil spoken of . 
 The thirteenth section . 
 The third reproach is , whereby he does brand the Islanders The third with the mark of deceit and treachery towards the rePnch-Germans . 
 Doubtless the author of this libel was some vagabond huckster or pedlar , and had gone particularly into many corners of Island to utter his trumpery wares , which he also testifieth of himself in his worthy rhymes , that he had travailed thorough the greatest part of Island , whereupon when he had played the cozening mate with others ( for often times deceit and lying are joined together , and he hath sufficiently proved himself to be a liar , by this trial of his wit ) peradventure himself was beguiled by them whom he before time had defrauded . 
 From hence proceedeth this slander against our whole Nation : dissembling in the mean time with what honesty certain Germanes , making yearly voyages into 
 183 
 Island , deal with our men . But seeing by this complaint I have not determined to reproach others , but to lay open the undeserved reproaches of others against our nation , I do here of purpose surcease . 
 The foureteenth section . 
 4 > 5 > 6 , Fourthly , he say that in banquets none of the guests ^7 reproaches . use tQ rjse from the taye . but that the good wife of the house reaches to every one a chamber-pot , so oft as need requires . Moreover , he notes much unmanerlinesse of eating and drinking at banquets . 
 Fiftly , he objecteth customs of lying in bed , and of dining : namely that ten persons , more or less , men and women lie altogether in the same bed , and that they eat their meat lying in bed : and that in the mean time they do nothing but play at dice or at tables . 
 Sixtly , he reporteth that they wash their hands and their faces in piss . 
 Seventhly , he despitefully abaseth our solemnizings of marriages , spousals , birthdays , and our customs at burials . 
 THese , and a number of such like reproaches hath this impure slanderer spewed forth against and innocent nation , yea and that nation which hath deserved right well of him and his countrymen . Which are of the same kind with these , in so much that we altogether disdain to make answer unto them . For , that we may grant ( which notwithstanding we will in no case yield unto ) that this worthy Germane notary observed some such matter among base companions , and the very offscouring of the common people , with whom he was much more conversant then with good and honest persons ( for he had lived , as his rhymes testify , somewhat long upon the coast of Island , whither a confused rout of the meanest common people , in fishing time do yearly resort , who being nought aswell through their own lewdness , as by 184 
 1592. the wicked behaviour of outlandish mariners , often times do lead a bad and dishonest life ) notwithstanding we are in this place more manifestly wronged through the knavery of this one varlet , and desperate sycophant by his defaming of the whole nation ( as others also usually do ) then that it should need any refutation at all . Of which thing strangers themselves , who are not a little conversant in our Island , may be most sufficient witnesses . 
 I could also gather together many such filthy , unmannerly , and baudie fashions noted by others even in his own country . But I detest this dogged eloquence , neither take I any pleasure to be witty in the disgracing of others : and yet I will not show my self such a milksop as to be daunted with light words . Only , let all honest and good men consider , what disposition it argue , for one to object against a whole nation certain misdemeanours committed by some one or other particular man . If any man should travel throughout all the cities and towns of Germanie or any other nation , and heaping together the offences , and most lewd manners , the robberies , manslaughters , murders , whoredoms , adulteries , incests , riots , extortions , and other profane , and filthy acts , should affirm them to be common to all Germanes , or otherwise to any other whole nation , and should exaggerate all these things with notorious lies , is he to be accounted one that spends his time in a good argument ? But what marvel is it , though a varlet , and , that I may give him his true title , a filthy hog , that rimer ( I say ) hath bewrayed his nature and disposition in such like reproaches ? For it is well known that swine , when they enter into most pleasant gardens , do not pluck lilies , or roses , or any other most beautiful and sweet flowers ; but thrusting their snouts into the ground , do tumble and toss up and down whatsoever dirt and dung they can find , until they have rooted up most unclean things , namely such as are best agreeable to their nature , wherewith they greedily 
 185 
 glut themselves : Even so this hoggish Rimer lightly passes over the best and most commendable things of our Common wealth , but as for the worst , and those which have been committed by none , or by very few , namely , such things as best fit his humour and disposition ( that he might indeed show himself to be the same which we have termed him ) those things ( I say ) hath he scraped up together : whereupon hereafter by my consent , for his manners and disposition let him enjoy the name of a swine . 
 The fifteenth section . 
 The ninth XT 7 " Ee will here rehearse the ninth reproach , which reproach . W that slanderous hog hath drawn from the manner of living , and specially from the meat and drink of the Islanders , and that not in one or a few words , but in a large invective : namely , that they eat old and unsavoury meats , and that , without the use of bred . Also , that they eat diverse kinds of fish which are unknown to strangers : and that they mingle water and whey together for drink . All which this venomous pasquill , with eloquent railing and witty slander hath set out at the full . 
 And albeit we do scarce vouchsafe to stand longer about answering of him , yet in regard of others , who at this day partly wonder at the matter , and partly object it to our nation , we thought good to add some few things in this place . 
 First therefore we will divide this our nation into two parts : into beggars , and those that sustain both themselves , and , among others , beggars also . As touching all kinds of meats wherewith beggars and other poor men satisfy their hunger , it is no easy matter to rehearse and examine them : neither , because extreme necessity hath at some times compelled them to eat this or that , therefore is it meet to prescribe certain kinds and number of meats to the rest of the nation . For we have also a law amone the canons 186 
 1592. apostolical , which forbiddeth to eat things strangled : in the observing of which canons , antiquity hath seemed to be very devout . 
 Moreover , we will make a distinction of times also , that it may seem no strange accident in the time of famine , though many things are , and have be used by a great number of men to satisfy their hunger , which at other times are scarce meat for dogs . As very lately in the year 1590 we herd concerning the citizens of Paris , being environed with the most straight siege of Henrie the fourth , King of Navarre , suffering ( as Petrus Lindebergius speaks ) the famine of Saguntum : insomuch that they did not only eat their horses , but also taking the flesh of dead men , and beating their bones to powder in a mortar , they mingled therewith a handful or two of meal , esteeming it dainties . And it is well known also of other nations , who in the like urgent necessities have lived by eating of mice , cats and dogs . In like manner sometime are we Islanders constrained to do , not being besieged by our enemies ( although hitherto we have abstained from men flesh , yea , and to our knowledge , from dogs , mice , and cats ) for whereas we provide things necessary for food out of the land and sea , & no sustenance , or very little , is brought unto us by strangers : so often as God withholdeth his gifts of land and sea , then must follow and ensue a dreadful scarcity of victuals , whereupon the inhabitants are sometime vexed with grievous famine . And therefore it is likely that they among us which used to live from hand to mouth , and had not some provision of former years remaining , have been driven to great extremities , so often as need hath inforced them thereunto . But whither this thing ought worthily to minister occasion to a public and perpetuali reproach against the Islanders , more then other nations , I refer it to the judgement of indifferent and honest minds . 
 Moreover , whereas diverse use to object concerning 187 
 The Islanders means of preserving their meats without salt . 
 the proper & accustomed fare of our country , especially of flesh , fish , butter being long time kept without salt : also concerning white-meats , want of corn , drinking of water , and such like : in most places of Island ( for there be many of our countrymen also , who , after the manner of the Danes and Germanes so far forth as ought in a mean to suffice chaste and temperate minds , although we have not any great variety of sauce , being destitute of Apothecaries shops , are of ability to furnish their table , and to live moderately ) we confess it to be even so : namely that the foresaid kinds of victuals are used in most places without the seasoning of salt . And I will further add , that the very same meats , which certain strangers abhor so much as to name , yet strangers themselves , when they are among us do use to eat them with delight . For albeit for the most part we have no corn , nor meal , nor yet salt the provocation of gluttony , for the seasoning of our victuals , is common to us all : yet notwithstanding almighty God of his goodness hath taught our men also the way , how they should handle , and keep in store those things which belong to the sustentation of life , to the end it may appear , that God in nourishing and sustaining of us Islanders , is not tied to bred and salt . 
 But whereas strangers boast that all their victuals are more pleasant and wholesome : yet we deny that to be a sufficient reason , why they should upbraid us in regard of ours : neither do we think God to be a debtor unto our dainty mouths : but rather we give him thanks with our whole hearts , that he vouchsafeth without this delicate and nice fare , which is esteemed to be so pleasant and wholesome , to grant even unto the men of our country many years , and a good age as also constant health , and flourishing strength of body ; all which we account to be signs of wholesome and convenient nourishment , and of a perfect constitution . Beside , our wits are not altogether so gross and barren , 188 
 as the philosophers seem to assign unto this our air , and these nourishments , which perhaps many of our countrymen could much rather verify in deeds then in words , if ( as the Poet say ) envious poverty did not hold us down . 
 But here the judgement of the common people , as often in other matters , does too plainly deceive ( I except all good and well experienced men ) some of them which would seem to be wise : namely , that whatsoever their use does not admit , or that they have not seen , nor had trial of beforetime , they presently condemn . As for example , he that never saw the sea will not be persuaded that there is a mediterrane sea : so do they measure all things by their own experience and conceit , as though there were nothing good and profitable , but that only wherewith they maintain their lives . But we are not grown to that pitch of folly , that because we have herd of certain people of Aethiopia , which are fed with locusts , being therefore called by Diodorus , Acridophagi , and of a certain nation of India also , whom Clitarchus & Megastenes have nam Mandri , as Agatarchides witnesseth , or of others that live upon frogs or sea-crabs , or round shrimps , which thing is at this day commonly known , that ( I say ) we should therefore presume to make them a laughing stock to the common people , because we are not accustomed to such sustenance . 
 The sixteenth section . 
 TEnthly , that uncivil ! beast casts our men in the The tenth reteeth with their good hospitality . They do not frocfl - 
 ( say he ) carry about money with them in their purses , neither is it any shame to be entertained in a strange place , and to have meat and drink bestowed of free cost . For if they had any thing which they might impart with others , they would very gladly . Moreover , he makes mention of certain churches or holy chapels ( as of a base thing ) which many of the Islanders have 189 
 built in their own houses : & that first of all in the morning , they have recourse thither , to make their prayers , neither do they suffer any man before they have done their devotion , to interrupt them . These be the things which he hath set down as some notable disgrace unto the Islanders . And no marvel : 
 For filthy swine detest all cleanly ones , And hogs unclean regard not precious stones . 
 Which I fear , lest it may be too truly affirmed of this slanderer , as it is manifest out of these two last objections . 
 Howbeit , since he himself is a most sufficient witness of his own virtues , we will refer the reader , who is desirous to know more of him unto his book of rhymes against Island , which we have now examined in our former sections : at whose railing & filthy speeches we have be ashamed on his behalf : insomuch that those things which he with satyrical , satyrical ? nay satanical biting and reviling of our nation , hath not blushed to write , are irksome for us to repeat : so great & abominable is his insolency , & his reproaches so heinous . Good God! whosoever shall view this cartlode of slanders ( for we have mentioned the least part thereof , because I was loath to loose my labour , or , as the wise man say , to answer a fool according to his foolishness , whereas in his rhymes there is not one word without a reproach ) will he not judge the author of this pasquill to have be a most lewd man , yea the very dross of mankind , without piety , without humanity ? 
 But here I have just occasion to doubt whither the author of these revilings hath be the more injurious to Islanders , or the Printer thereof Joachimus Leo ( and whatsoever else they be who in their editions dare neither profess their own name , nor the name of their City ) which Leo hath now twice , if not oftener , published the said pamphlet at Hamburg . Do you suffer this to go unpunished , Oh you counsel and commons of Ham-190 
 burg ? What ? Have you determined to gratify Island in this sort , which these many years , by reason of your abundant traffic with us , and your transporting home of all our commodities , of our beeves and muttons , and commo-of and incredible deal of butter and fish , hath be esofl^and-unto your Ci tie in stead of a storehouse ? In times passed ancient also , certain Cities of England and of Holland have t^iue of reaped the commodities or this Isle : Moreover , there island hath be ancient traffic of Denmarke , Breme , and Lubeck with the Islanders . But they never gained by any of their chapmen such commendations , and such thanks , as are contained in this libel : It hath in your , in your City ( I . say ) be bred , brought forth , iterated , if not the thirde time published : which hath armed other people , unto whom the name of Island was otherwise scarce known , to the disdain and contempt of this our Nation : and this injury offered by a Citizen of yours , hath Island sustained these 30. years and more , and doth as yet sustain . But many such accidents often come to pass without the knowledge of the magistrate , neither do we doubt but that good men are grieved at such infamous libels , and do take diligent heed that they be not published : for such editions are contrary to the law of nature : Do not that to another which thou wouldst not have done unto thy self : and to 
 the laws Imperial of infamous libels : wherein is Laws against enjoined a most grievous penalty unto those , who invent , write , utter , or cause such libels to be bought or sold , or do not presently upon the finding thereof tear them in pieces . 
 But now time bids us to found a retreat : and to return home unto thee Island ( our most deer mother ) whom neither poverty , nor cold , nor any other such inconveniences shall make irksome unto us , so long as thou ceasest not to give hearty and willing entertainment unto Christ : where , first we do earnestly exhort thee to the serious and ardent affection , and love of God , and of the heavenly knowledge revealed unto us in Christ : 
 191 
 that thou wouldst prefer this before all things , being inflamed with desire of doctrine , and of the word : that thou wouldst not lightly esteem , contemn or hate the holy ministry and ministers , but reverence , cherish , and love them . Accounting those that practise the contrary as wicked and profane : and managing all thine affairs both private and public , according to the prescript rule of piety and honesty , that unto this , thy states and order Ecclesiastical and politic may in all things be conformed : and so in either kind of life relying thy self upon that level and line of equity and justice , and avoiding others , who upon stubborness and impiety swerve therefrom . That thou wouldst also inflict just punishments upon offenders : All which we doubt not but the Magistrate will have respect unto . But especially that thou admittest none to be Magistrates , but men of approved fidelity and honesty , and such as may adjoin unto these virtues others hereto belonging , by which means inconveniences may fitly be prevented . For if this matter be well handled , namely that they which are the best of all good men be chosen to bear public authority , wicked and unfit men being altogether rejected ; the condition of the subject's shall most prosperous : the lives and manners of all men shall prove by so much the more commendable : godliness also and honesty shall become the more glorious . But on the contrary , if pastors of Churches be not answerable to their function , either in life or doctrine ; if all men without respect or difference be admitted to the government of the common wealth , who aspire thereunto by their own rashness , ambition , or avarice , and desire of honour , yea though they be suspected or convicted of crimes and dishonesty , or be pro tectours or unjust favourers of such persons as are suspected and convicted ; then what will be thy state , o Island ? What will be thy outward show or condition ? Doubtless most miserable . Neither shalt thou by any other means more suddenly approach to thy ruin and destruction , 
 192 
 i592-then if thou committest thy self to the government of such men , who to the uttermost of their power , although they be of thine own brood , daily seek thine overthrow for their own private advantage and secret malice . Wherefore ( to be short ) let these be to advertise my deer Country , how behovefiill it is that the matters aforesaid be put in practice . 
 But whilst I am speaking these things unto thee ( my Country ) o that my deep and doleful sighs , which lie hid in the former speech , might pierce the ears of our Kings most excellent Majesty , before whom , on thy behalf I do bewail the public misery's , which in this respect especially do arise , because we are so far distant from the seat and royal presence of our King , that many therefore take more liberty , and promise more securi tie of offending unto themselves . But we will commit all these matters to the most just Judge of heaven and earth who beholdeth all things in equity . 
 Now it remains ( my beloved Country ) that thou wouldst take in good part these my labours employed in thy service , and accept them with that favourable and courteous mind which I have expected . And although they be not of such worth as I could wish , yet sith a willing mind is worth all , I would not therefore give over because I mistrusted my self as one insufficient to contend for thine innocence , for thy reputation , and thine honour , my deer Country . But rather whatsoever it be ( if it be ought ) and how mickle-soever which for my slender ability I was able to afford in thy defence , I thought good not to suppress it : for I esteem not those men worthy of commendation , who despairing 
 To overgrow the limbs of Lyco stout , Neglect to cure their bodies of the gout . 
 And in very deed , it doth not whit repent me of my labour , if this little treatise shall tend neither to thine nor to mine own disgrace . But if it shall any 
 iv 193 N 
 thing avail to thine honour or defence , I will think my travail right well bestowed . Yea , if by this my slender attempt I may but only excite other of thy children , and my native Countrymen , being far my superiors both in learning and industry to take thy cause in hand , either now or hereafter , what reason is there why any man should say that it is not worth my labour ? Now , if they address themselves to write , howsoever my fame shall obscured , yet will I comfort my self with their excellency , who are like to impair my credit : for albeit a man ought to have speciali regard of his name and fame , yet is he to have more of his Country , whose dignity being safe and found , we also must needs esteem our selves to be in safety . 
 Written at Holen Hialtedale in Island , the year of our Lord 1592. the 17. of the Kalends of May . 
 