The voyage of Ingulphus Abbot of Croiland unto Jerusalem , performed ( according to Florentius Wigorniensis ) in the year of our Lord , 1064 , and described by the said Ingulphus himself about the conclusion of his brief Historic . 
 A.D. 1064. 
 densis , natus in Anglia , & a parentibus Anglicis , quip urbis pulcherrimae 
 A.D. 1051. 
 A.D. 1064 , According to Florentine IFigomieneie . 
 288 
 IV 289 TO 
 A.D. 
 IO64 . 
 The same in English . 
 IIngulphus and humble servant of reverend Guthlac and of his monastery of Croiland , born in England , and of English parents , at the beautiful ! city of London , was in my youth , for the attaining of good letters , placed first at Westminster , and afterwards sent to the University of Oxford . And having excelled diverse of mine equals in learning of Aristotle , I inured my self somewhat unto the first & second Rhetoric of Tullie . And as I grew in age , disdaining my parents mean estate , and forsaking mine own native soil , I affected the Courts of kings and princes , and was desirous to be clad in silk , and to wear brave and costly attire . And lo , at the same time William our sovereign king 290 
 now , but then Earl of Normandie , with a great troup of followers and attendants came unto London , to confer with king Edward the Confessor his kinsman . 1051. Into whose company intruding my self , and proffering my service for the performance of any speedy or weigh tie affairs , in short time , after I had done many things with good success , I was known and most entirely beloved by the victorious Erle himself , and with him I sailed into Normandie . And there being made his secretary , I governed the Earls Court ( albeit with the envy of some ) as my self pleased , yea whom I would I abased , and preferred whom I thought good . When as therefore , being carried with a youthful heat and lusty humour , I began to be weary even of this place , wherein I was advanced so high above my parentage , and with and inconstant mind , and affection too too ambitious , most vehemently aspired at all occasions to climb higher : [ II i . 10. ] there went a report throughout all Normandie , that diverse Archbishop's of the Empire , and secular princes were desirous for their souls health , and for devotion sake , to go on pilgrimage to Jerusalem . Wherefore out of the family of our lord the Earl , sundry of us , both gentlemen and clerks ( principali of whom was my self ) with the licence and good will of our said lord the earl , sped us on that voyage , and travailing thirtie horses of us into high Germanie , we joined our selves unto the Archbishop of Mentz . And being with the companies of the Bishops seven thousand persons sufficiently provided for such and expedition , we passed prosperously through many provinces , and at length attained unto Constantinople . Where doing reverence unto the Emperor Alexius , we saw the Church of Sancta Sophia , and kissed diverse sacred relics . Departing thence through Lycia , we fell into the hands of the Arabian thieves : and after we had be robbed of infinite sums of money , and had lost many of our people , hardly escaping with extreme danger of our lives , at length we joyfully entered into the most wished ci tie of 
 291 
 Jerusalem . Where we were received by the most reverend , aged , and holy patriarch Sophronius , with great melody of cymbals and with torchlight , and were accompanied unto the most divine Church of our Saviour his sepulchre with a solemn procession aswell of Syrians as of Latines . Here , how many prayers we uttered , what abundance of tears we shed , what deep sighs we breathed forth , our Lord Jesus Christ only knoweth . Wherefore being conducted from the most glorious sepulchre of Christ to visit other sacred monuments of the city , we saw with weeping eyes a great number of holy Churches and oratories , which Achim the Sultan of Egypt had lately destroyed . And so having bewailed with sad tears , and most sorrowful and bleeding affections , all the ruins of that most holy city both within and without , and having bestowed money for the re-edifying of some , we desired with most ardent devotion to go forth into the country , to wash our selves in the most sacred river of Jordan , and to kiss all the steps of Christ . Howbeit the thievish Arabians lurking upon every way , would not suffer us to travel far from the city , by reason of their huge and furious multitudes . Wherefore about the spring there arrived at the port of Joppa a fleet of ships from Genoa . In which fleet ( when the Christian merchant's had exchanged all their wares at the coast towns , and had likewise visited the holy places ) we all of us embarked , committing our selves to the seas : and being tossed with many storms and tempests , at length we arrived at Brundusium : and so with a prosperous journey traveling thorough Apulia towards Rome , we there visited the habitations of the holy apostles Peter and Paul , and did reverence unto diverse monuments of holy martyrs in all places throughout the city . From thence the archbishop's and other princes of the empire traveling towards the right hand for Alemain , and we declining towards the left hand for France , departed asunder , taking our leaves with unspeakable thanks and courtesies . And so at length , of 
 292 
 thirty horsemen which went out of Normandie fat , lusty , and frolic , we returned thither scarce twenty poor pilgrim's of us , being all footmen , and consumed with leanness to the bore bones . 
 A.D. 
 c . 1097. 
 