Mention made of one Hardine of England one of the chiefest personages , and a leader among other of two hundred sail of ships of Christians that landed at Joppa in the year of our Lord God 1102. 
 The same in English . [ II i . 13. ] 
 WHile the Sarazens continued their siege against 
 Joppa , two hundred sail of Christian ships arrived at Joppa , that they might perform their devotions at Hierusalem . The chief men and leaders of these Christians are reported to have be : Bernard Witrazh of the land of Galatia , Hardine of England , Otho of Roges , Haderwerck one of the chief noble men of Westphalia , etc. This Christian power through Gods speciali provision , arrived here for the succour and relief of the distressed & besieged Christians in Joppa , the third day of July , 1102. and in the second year of Baldwine king of Jerusalem . Whereupon the multitude of the Sarazens , seeing that the Christian power joined themselves boldly , close by them even face to face in a lodging hard by them , the very next night at midnight , removed their tents , and pitched them more then a mile off , that they might the next morning be advised whither they should return to Ascalon , or by often assaults vex the citizens of Japhet . 
 Chronicon Hierosolymitanum , eodem libro 9. cap . 12. continueth this historic of these two hundreth sail of ships , and shows how by their prowess chiefly , the multitude of the Sarazens were in short space vanquished and overthrown : The words are these ; Ab ipso verb die tertiae feriae dum sic in superbia & elatione suae multitudinis immobiles Saraceni persisterent , & multis armorum terroribus Christianum populum vexarent , 
 299 
 The same in English . 
 YEt notwithstanding , after the said third day of July , the Sarazens persisted high minded and insolent , by reason of their great multitude , and much annoyed the Christian people with their many forceable and terrible weapons ; whereupon , on the sixt day of July early in the morning king Baldwine issued out of Japhet , his trumpets and cornets yielding a great and loud found , and with a very strong army as well of horsemen as footmen , who on every side making great shouts and outcries , with fierce and sharp battle set on the main power of their enemies . The Christians also who arrived in the navy , rearing great clamours and noises , with loud voices and shoutings in horrible wise together , with king Baldwine assaulted likewise with strong battle the Babylonians , and afflicted them with most soar and deadly wounds , until the Sarazens being wearied with fighting , nor able longer to endure and hold out against the valour of the Christians , fled towards Ascalon . And other of them hoping to escape from them that pursued them , leapt into the sea , and were swallowed up in the waves thereof . And so the city of Joppa with the inhabitants thereof were freed 
 300 
 of their enemies . There were slain this day three thousand Sarazens , and but a few of the Christians perished . 
 