A Fleet of Englishmen , Danes , and Flemmings , arrived at Joppa in the Holy land , the seventh year of Baldwine the second king of Hierusalem . Written in the beginning of the tenth book of the Chronicle of Hierusalem , in the 8. year of Henry the first of England . 
 Cap. 1. 
 TO the same time also in the seventh year of the reign of Baldwine the Catholic king of Hierusalem , a very great warlike Fleet of the Catholic nation of England , to the number of about seven thousand , having with them more men of war of the kingdom of Denmarke , 
 of Flanders and of Antwerpe , arrived with ships which they call Busses , at the haven of the city of Japhet , determining there to make their abided , until they having obtained the kings licence and safeconduct , might safely worship at Hierusalem . Of which navy the chiefest and best spoken repairing to the king , spoke to him in this manner . Christ preserve the Kings life , and prosper his kingdom from day to day ; we , being men and soldiers of Christian profession , have , through the help of God , sailed hither through mighty and large seas , from the far countries' of England , Flanders , and Denmarke , to worship at Jerusalem , and to visit the sepulchre of our Lord . And therefore we are assembled to entreat your clemency touching the matter , that by your favour and safe conduct we may peaceably go up to Jerusalem , and worship there , and so return . 
 301 
 [ II i . 14. ] 
 [ Chap. 2. 
 THe king favourably hearing their whole petition , granted unto them a strong band of men to conduct them , which brought them safely from all assaults and ambushes of the Gentiles by the known ways unto Jerusalem and all other places of devotion . After that these pilgrim's , & new Christian strangers were brought thither , they offering unto our Lord their vows in the temple of the holy sepulchre , returned with great joy , and without all let unto Joppa ; where finding the king , they vowed that they would assist him in all things , which should seem good unto him : who , greatly commending the men , and commanding them to be well entertained with hospitality , answered that he could not on the sudden answer to this point , until that after he had called his nobles together , he had consulted with my lord the Patriarch what was most meet and convenient to be done , and not to trouble in vain so willing and army . And therefore after a few days , calling unto him my lord the Patriarch , Hugh of Tabaria , Gunfride the keeper and lieutenant of the tower of David , and the other chiefest men of war , he determined to have a meeting in the city of Rames , to consult with them what was best to be done . 
 Chap. 3. 
 WHo , being assembled at the day appointed , and proposing their diverse opinions & judgements , at length it seemed best unto the whole company to besiege the city Sagitta , which is also called Sidon , if peradventure , through Gods help , and by the strength of this new army , by land and sea it might be overcome . Whereupon all they which were there present , and required that this city should be besieged , because it was one of those cities of the Gentiles which continually rebelled , were commended , and admonished of the king every one to go home , and to furnish them-302 
 selves with things necessary , and armour for this expedition . Every one of them departed home ; likewise Hugh of Tabaria departed , being a chief man of war against the invasions of the enemies , which could never be wearied day nor night in the county of the Pagans , in pursuing them with war and warlike stratagems all the days of his life . Immediately after this consultation the king sent ambassadors to all the multitude of the English men , requiring them not to remove their camp nor fleet from the city of Japhet , but quietly to attend the kings further commandment . The same ambassadors also declared unto the whole army , that the king and all his nobility had determined to besiege and assault the city Sagitta by sea and by land , and that their help and forces would there be needful ; and that for this purpose , the king and the patriarch were coming down unto the city of Acres , and that they were in building of engines , and warlike instruments , to invade the walls and inhabitants thereof : and that in the mean season they were to remain at Japhet , until the kings further commandment were known . Whereupon they all agreed that it should so be done according to the kings commandment ; and answered that they would attend his directions in the haven of Japhet , & would in all points be obedient unto him unto the death . 
 Chap. 4. 
 THe king came down to Acres with the patriarch , and all his family , building , and making there by the space of fortie days engines , and many kinds of warlike instruments : and appointing all things to be made perfectly ready , which seemed to be most convenient for the assaulting of the city . Assoon as this purpose and intent of the king was come unto the ears of the inhabitants of Sagitta , and that and invincible power of men of war was arrived at Japhet to help the king , they were greatly astonished , fearing that 
 303 
 by this means , they should be consumed and subdued by the king by dint of sword , as other cities , to wit , Caesaria , Assur , Acres , Cayphas , and Tabaria were vanquished and subdued . And therefore laying their heads together , they promised to the king by secret mediators , a mighty mass of money of a coin called Byzantines : and that further they would yearly pay a great tribute , upon condition that ceasing to besiege and invade their city , he would spare their lives . Whereupon these businesses were handled from day to day between the king and the citizens , and they solicited the king for the ransoming both of their city and of their lives , proffering him from time to time more greater gifts . And the king for his part , being careful and [ II i . 15. ] perplexed for the payment of the wages which he ought unto his soldiers , hearkened wholly unto this offer of money . Howbeit because he feared the Christians , lest they should lay it to his charge as a fault , he durst not as yet meddle with the same . 
 Chap. 5. 
 IN the mean space Hugh of Tabaria being sent for , accompanied with the troops of two hundred horsemen and foure hundred footmen , invaded the country of the Gross Carl called Suet , very rich in gold and silver most abundant in cattle frontering upon the country of the Damascenes , where he took a prey of inestimable riches and cattle , which might have sufficed him for the besiege of Sagitta , whereof he meant to impart liberally to the king , and his company . This prey being gathered out of sundry places thereabouts , and being led away as far as the city of Belinas , which they call Caesaria Philippi , the Turkes which dwelled at Damascus , together with the Saracens inhabitants of the country perceiving this , flocking on all parts together by troops , pursued Hughes company to rescue the prey , and passed forth as far as the mountains , over which Hughes footmen did drive the prey . 
 3°4 
 There began a great skirmish of both parts , the one side made resistance to keep the prey , the other endeavoured with all their might to recover it , until at length the Turkes and Saracens prevailing , the prey was rescued and brought back again : which Hugh and his troops of horsemen , suddenly understanding , which were on the side of the mountains , incontinently rid back upon the spur , among the straight and craggy rocks , skirmishing with the enemies , and succouring their footmen , but as it chanced they fought unfortunately . For Hugh , being unarmed , and immediately rushing into the midst of all dangers , and after his wonted manner invading and wounding the infidels , being behind with and arrow shot through the back which pierced through his liver and breast , he gave up the ghost in the hands of his own people . Hereupon the troops of the Gentiles being returned with the recovered prey , and being divided through the secret and hard passages of the craggy hills , the soldiers brought the dead body of Hugh , which they had put in a litter , into the city of Nazareth , which is by the mount Thaber , where with great mourning and lamentation , so worthy a prince , and valiant champion was honourably and Catholicly interred . The brother of the said Hugh nam Gerrard , the same time lay sick of a grievous disease . Which hearing of the death of his brother , his sickness of his body increasing more vehemently through grief , he also deceased within eight days after , and was buried by his brother , after Christian manner . 
 Chap. 6. 
 AFter the lamentable burials of these so famous Princes , the King , taking occasion of the death of these principali men of his army , agreed , making none privy thereto , to receive the money which was offered him for his differing off the siege of the city of Sagitta , yet dissembling to make peace with the Sara-w 305 u 
 A.D. 
 1107. 
 cens , but that he meant to go through with the work , that he had begun . Whereupon sending a message unto Japhet , he advised the English soldiers to come down to Acres with their fleet , and to confer and consult with him touching the besieging and assaulting of the city of Sagitta , which rising immediately upon the kings commandment , and forthwith hoisting up the sails of their ships aloft with pendants and stremers of purple , and diverse other glorious colours , with their flags of scarlet colour and silk , came thither , and casting their ancres , road hard by the city . The king the next day calling unto him such as were privy & acquainted with his dealings , opened his grief unto the chief Captains of the English men and Danes , touching the slaughter of Hugh , and the death of his brother , and what great confidence he reposed in them concerning these wars : and that now therefore they being departed and dead , he must of necessity differre the besieging of Sagitta , & for this time dismiss the army assembled . This resolution of the king being spread among the people , the army was dissolved , and the Englishmen , Danes and Flemings , with sails and oars going aboard their fleet , saluted the king , and returned home unto their native countries . 
 