The voyage of Henrie Earl of Derbie , after Duke of Hereford , and lastly Henry the fourth king of England , to Tunis in Barbarie , with and army of Englishmen written by Polidore Virgill . page . 1389. 
 Ranci interim per inducias nacti ocium , ac simul Genuensium precibus defatigati , bellum in Afros , qui omnem oram insulasque Italiae latrociniis infestas reddebant , suscipiunt . Richardus quoque rex Angliae rogatus auxilium , mittit Henricum comitem Derbiensem cum electa Anglicae 
 pubis manu ad id bellum faciendum . Igitur Franci Anglique viribus & animis consociatis in Africam trajiciunt , qui ubi littus attigere , eateniis a Barbaris descension prohibiti sunt , quoad Anglorum sagittariorum virtute factum est , ut aditus pateret : in terram egressi recta Tunetam urbem regiam petunt , ac obsident . Barbari timore affection de pace ad eos legatos mittunt , quam nostris dare placuit , ut soluta certa pecuniae summa ab omni deinceps Italiae , Galliaeque ora manus abstinerent . Ita peractis rebus post paucos menses , quam eo itum erat , domum repediatum est . 
 The same in English . 
 THe French in the mean season having got some leisure by means of their truce , and being solicited and urged by the entreaties of the Genuois undertook to wage war against the Moors , who robbed and spoiled all the coasts of Italy , and of the Islands adjacent . Likewise Richard the second , king of England , being sued unto for aid , sent Henry the Earl of Derbie with a choice army of English soldiers unto the same warfare . Wherefore the English and French , with forces and minds united , sailed over into Africa , who when they approached unto the shore were repelled by the 45° 
 Barbarians from landing , until such time as they had passage made them by the valour of the English archers . Thus having landed their forces , they forthwith marched unto the royal city of Tunis , and besieged it . Whereat the Barbarians being dismayed , sent Ambassadors unto our Christian Chieftains to treat of peace , which our men granted unto them , upon condition that they should pay a certain sum of money , and that they should from thenceforth abstain from piracies upon all the coasts of Italy and France . And so having dispatched their business , within a few months after their departure they returned home . 
 The Historic is somewhat otherwise recorded by Froysard and Holenshed in manner following , Pag - 473 - 
 IN the thirteenth year of the reign of king Richard the second , the Christians took in hand a journey against the Saracens of Barbarie through suit of the Genouois , so that there went a great number of Lords , Knights , and Gentlemen of France and England , the Duke of Burbon being their general . Out of England there went John the Beaufort bastard son to the Duke of Lancaster ( as Froysard hath noted ) also Sir John Russell , Sir John Butler , Sir John Harecourt and others . They set forward in the latter end of the thirteenth year of the Kings reign , and came to Genoa , where they remained not very long , but that the galleys and [ II i . 70. ] other vessels of the Genouois were ready to pass them over into Barbarie . And so about midsummer in the beginning of the foureteenth year of this kings reign the whole army being embarked , sailed forth to the coast of Barbary , where near to the city of Africa they landed : at which instant the English archers ( as the Chronicles of Chro-Genoa write ) stood all the company in good stead with their long bows , beating back the enemies from the ’ shore , which came down to resist their landing . After 
 iv 451 2F2 
 they had god to land , they environed the city of Africa ( called by the Moors Mahdia ) with a strong siege : but at length , constrained with the intemperancy of the scalding air in that hight country , breeding in the army sundry diseases , they fell to a composition upon certain articles to be performed in the behalf of the Saracens : and so 61 days after their arrival there they took the seas again , and returned home , as in the histories of France and Genoa is likewise expressed . Where , by Polydore Virgil it may seem , that the lord Henry of Lancaster earl of Derby should be general of the English men , that ( as before you herd ) went into Barbary with the French men and Genouois . 
 