A brief relation of the siege and taking of the City of Rhodes , by Sultan Soliman the great Turke , translated out of French into English at the motion of the Reverend Lord Thomas Dockwray , great Prior of the order of Jerusalem in England , in the year , 1524. 
 Illing faithfully to write and reduce in verity Historiali , the great siege , cruel oppugnation , and piteous taking of the noble and renowned city of Rhodes , the key of Christendome , the hope of many poor Christian men , withholden in Turkic to save and keep them in their faith : 
 the rest and yearly solace of noble pilgrimss of the holy sepulchre of Jesu Christ and other holy places : the refuge and refreshing of all Christian people : having course of merchandise in the parties of Levant , I promise to all estates that shall see this present book , that I have left nothing for fear of any person , nor preferred it for favour . And first I shall show the occasions that moved this cruel bloodshedder , enemy of our holy Christian faith , Sultan Soliman , now being great Turke , to come with a great host by sea and by land , to besiege and assail the space of sixe months , night and day , the noble and mighty city of Rhodes , The year of the incarnation of our Lord Jesu Christ , 
 1522. 
 [ The occasions 
 The occasions why the great Turke came to besiege the City of Rhodes . 
 THe first and principali cause was that he did consider and saw by experience , that there was none other Town nor place in Levant that warred against him nor kept him in doubt , but this poor rock of Rhodes . And hearing the continual complaints of his subjects aswell of Syria , as of Turkey , for the domages and prizes daily done of their bodies and goods by Christian men of war received into Rhodes : And also of the ships and galleys of the religion , he took conclusion in himself , that if he might put the said Town in his power and subjection , that then he should be peaceable lord of all the parties of Levant , and that his subject's should complain no more to him . 
 The second , that he might follow the doings of his noble predecessors , and show himself very heir of the mighty and victorious lord Sultan Selim his father , willing to put in execution the enterprise by him left the year one thousand five hundred twentie and one . The which Selim the great Turke put in all readiness his army to the number of three hundreth sails purposing for to send them against Rhodes , if mortality had not happened in his host , and he afterward by the will of our lord was surprised and taken with death : wherefore he being in the latter end of his days , ( as some Turkes and false Christian men that were at this siege showed me ) did charge by his testament , or caused to charge his son now being great Turke , that after his death he should make his two first enterprises , the one against Bellegrado in Hungarie , and the other against Rhodes , [ II i . 73. ] for to get him honour , and to set his Countries and subjects in rest and surety . The which fatherly motion easily entered into him and was imprinted in the heart and young will of the said Solyman , his son , the which soon after the death of his father put in effect the first enterprise , and raised and huge host both by 
 water and by land , and went himself in person against Bellegrado , a right strong place in Hungarie . And after taking of that he had besieged it the space of two months or thereabouts , for fault of ordinance and victuals , it was yielded to him by composition the eight day of September , in the year of our lord , one thousand five hundred twentie and one . The said Solyman having this victory , being swollen and raised in pride and vainglory , turned his heart against Rhodes . Nevertheless , he not ignorant of the strength of it , and considering the qualities of the people that were within it , of whom he should be well received as his predecessors had be aforetimes , doubted much , and knew not how to furnish his enterprise . For his captains and Bashas turned him from it as much as they might by many reasons , they knowing the force of it , save only Mustofa Basham his brother in law , the which counseled and put him in mind to go thither . Finally , he purposed entirely to have it by treason or by force . And also for the same cause and purpose , his father in his days had sent a 
 Jewe physician into Rhodes as a spy , to have the better Foreign physi-knowledge of it : the said Solyman was informed that t1 ™ 5 be^ome he was there yet , wherefore he sent him word that he n should abide there still for the same cause . And gave in charge to one of the chief men in Sio , to send unto the said Jewe all things needful to maintain him . And the same Jewe wrote to him of Sio , under privy words , all that was done in Rhodes to give knowledge thereof to the great Turke : and the better to hide his treason , the said Jewe made himself to be baptised . 
 And to be the more nam to be expert in Physic , he did some fair cures to such as were diseased , whereby he began to be well trusted , and came in favour with many substantiali folks of the town . Among all other things whereof he advertised the great Turke , one was of a wall that was taken down for to be new built at the bulwark of Auvergne , certifying him that if he came hastily with his host , he might easily and at 
 unawares surprise the town in such estate as it was at that time . Many other advertisements and warnings he showed the Turke , which shall be declared hereafter . But beside his advertisement , the said great Turke stirred and provoked by a false traitor , a Portingale knight of ours , that time Chanceller of the said holy Religion , a man of great authority , dignity , and understanding , and one of the principali lords of the counsel of the same , nam Sir Andrew de Merall , by little and little was moved and kindled to the said enterprise of treason , whereof was no marvel , for it was a great hope and comfort to have such a person for him , that knew all the estate and rule of the religion and of the town . And for to declare the occasions of the cursed and unhappy will of the said traitor that had be occasion of so great loss and damage , and shall be more at the length , if the divine power set not to his hand . 
 And here it is manifestly to be understood of all men , that after the death of the noble and right prudent lord , Fabrice of Cacetto , great master of Rhodes , the said Sir Andrew inflamed with ambition and covetousness to be great master , and seeing himself deceived of his hope , by the election made the two and twentieth day of January , of the right reverend and illustrate lord , Philip de Villiers Lisleadam , before him : from that time he took so great envy and desperation , enmity and evil will , not only against the said lord , but against all the holy religion , that he set all his study and purpose , to betray and fell his religion and the city of Rhodes to the cursed misbelievers , forgetting the great honours and goodness that he hath had of the religion , and hoped to receive , with many other particular pleasures that the said lord master had done to him . But the devil , unkindness , and wickedness had so blinded the eyes of his thought , that he in no wise could refrain him , but at every purpose that was spoken afore him , he was short and might not dissemble . And one day among other he said before many knights , that he would that his 
 soul were at the devil , and that Rhodes and the religion were lost . And many other foolish and dishonest purposes and words he uttered , whereat none took heed , nor thought that he had the courage to do that thing that he hath done . Howbeit , obstinate as Judas , he put in execution his cursed will : for soon after that the tidings of the election was sent Westward to the said noble lord , the said the Merall did send a Turke prisoner of his to Constantinople , under shadow to fetch his ransom . By whom he advertised the great Turke and his counsel , of the manner and degree of Rhodes , and in what state and condition the town was in of all manner of things at that time , and what might happen of it , provoking and stirring him to come with a great host to besiege the town . And after the coming of the said reverend lord great master , he gave other advice to the great Turke , showing him that he could never have better time to come , seeing that the great master was [ II i . 74. ] new come , and part of the wall taken down , and that all Rhodes was in trouble by occasion of some Italian knights , rebels against the lord great master : of the which rebellion he was causer , the better to bring his cursed mind to pass : and also gave the said great Turke knowledge that all Christian princes were busy , warring each upon other , and that he should not doubt but if the rebellion lasted among them , the town should be his without fail , as it is seen by experience . And for lack of succours of every part , and especially of such as might easily have helped us being our neighbours , with their galleys and men of war , wherefore it is now in the hands of the enemies of the Christian faith . The which monitions and reasons of the false traitor being understood and pondered by the great Turke and his counsel , it was considered of them not to lose so good occasion and time . Wherefore he made most extreme diligence to rig and apparel many ships & vessels of diverse sorts , as galliasses , galleys , pallandres , fustes , and brigantine , to the number of 350. sails and more . 
 When the prisoner that the said the Merall did send into Turkey had done his commission , he returned into Rhodes , whereof every man had marvel . And many folks deemed evil of his coming again , as of a thing unaccustomed , but none durst say any thing , seeing the said the Merall of so great authority and dignity , and he cherished the said prisoner more then he was wont to do . Therefore belike he had well done his message , and had brought good tidings to the damnable and . shameful mind of the said traitor de Merall . 
 How the great Turke caused the passages to be kept , that none should bear tidings of his host to Rhodes . 
 THe great Turke intending with great diligence to make ready his host both by sea and by land , the better to come to his purpose , and to take the town unwarily as he was advertised , thought to keep his doings as secret as he might , and commanded that none of his subject's should go to Rhodes for any manner of thing . And likewise he took all the barks and brigantine out of the havens and ports in those coasts , because they should give no knowledge of his army . And also he made the passages by land to be kept , that none should pass . Howbeit , so great apparel of and army could not be long kept close : for the spies which the lord great master had sent into Turkey , brought tidings to the castle of saint Peter , and to Rhodes , of all that was said and done in Turkey . Nevertheless , the said lord gave no great credence to all that was brought and told , because that many years before , the predecessors of the great Turke had made great armies : and always it was said that they went to Rhodes , the which came to none effect . And it was held for a mock and a byeword in many places , that the Turke would go to besiege Rhodes . And for this reason doubt was had of this last army , and some thought that it should have gone into Cyprus or to Cataro , a land of the lordship of 6 
 Venice . Howbeit the great master not willing to be taken unwarily , but the mean while as careful and diligent for the wealth of his town , & his people , understanding these tidings of the Turkes army , did all his diligence to repair and strengthen the town . among all other things to built up , and raise the bulwark of Auvergne , and to cleanse and make deeper the ditches . And the more to cause the workmen to haste them in their business , the said lord oversawe them twice or thrice every day . 
 How the lord great master counseled with the lords for provision for the town . 
 THen the said reverend lord thought to furnish and store the town with more victuals for the sustenance thereof , and for the same many times he spoke with the lords that had the handling and rule of the treasury , and of the expenses thereof in his absence , and since his coming : That is to wit , with the great Commander Gabriel de pommerolles , lieutenant of the said lord : The Turcoplier Sir John Bourgh of the English nation : and the Chanceller Sir Andrew de Meral , of whom is spoken afore , and of his untruth against his religion . The which three lords said , that he should take no thought for it , for the town was well stored with victuals for a great while , and that there was wheat enough till new came in : Notwithstanding it were good to have more , or the siege were laid afore the town , and therefore it were behooveful to send for wheat and other necessaries into the West for succours of the town , and at that time to purvey for every thing . 
 Sir Joh. Bourgh the English Turcoplier . 
 Of the provision for victuals and ordinance [ ii . ii . 75. ] of war . 
 AS touching the store and ordinance of war , the said lords affirmed that there was enough for a year and more , whereof the contrary was found , for it failed a month or the city was yielded . It is of truth that 
 there was great store , and to have lasted longer then it did . But it was needful to spend largely at the first coming of the enemies to keep them from coming near , and from bringing earth to the ditches sides as they did . And moreover you are to consider the great number of them , and their power that was spread round about the town , giving us so many assaults and skirmishes in so many places as they did , and by the space of sixe whole months day and night assailing us , that much ordinance and store was wasted to withstand them in all points . And if it failed , it was no marvel . Howbeit the noble lord great master provided speedily for it , and sent Brigantine to Lango , to the castle of saint Peter , and to the castles of his isle Feraclous and Lyndo , for to bring powder and saltpeter to strength the town , but it sufficed not . 
 And for to speak of the purveiance of victuals , it was advised by the lord great master and his three lords , that it was time to send some ships for wheat to places thereabouts , before the Turks host were come thither . And for this purpose was appointed a ship nam the Gal-lienge , whose captain hight Brambois , otherwise called Wolf , of the Almain nation , and expert man of the sea , the which made so good diligence , that within a month he performed his voyage , and brought good store of wheat from Naples and Romania , which did us great comfort . 
 How a Brigantine was sent to Candie for wine , and of diverse ships that came to help the town . 
 AFter this , a motion was made to make provision of wine for the town , for the men of Candie durst not sail for to bring wine to Rhodes as they were wont to do for fear of the Turkes host : and also they of the town would send no ship into Candie , fearing to be taken and enclosed with the said host by the way . Howbeit some merchant's of the town , were willing 
 to have adventured themselves in a good ship of the religion , nam the Marry , for to have laden her with wine in Candie . But they could not agree with the three lords of the treasure , and their let was but for a little thing : and all the cause came of the said traitor de Merall , feigning the wealth of the treasure ; for he intended another thing , and brake this good and profitable enterprise and will of the said merchant's , seeing that it was hurtful to the Turke , whose part the said traitor held in his devilish heart : that notwithstanding , the reverend lord great master , that in all things from the beginning to the end , hath always showed his good will , and with all diligence and right that might be requisite to a sovereign captain and head of war , found other expedience , and sent a Brigantine into Candie , in the which he sent a brother sergeant nam Anthonie of Bosus , a well sprighted man and wise , that by his wisdom wrought so well , that within a small time he brought fifteene vessels called Gripes , laden with wine , and with them men of war the which came under shadow of those wines , because the governors of Candie durst let none of their men go to the succour of Rhodes for fear of the Turke . And beside those fifteene Gripes came a good ship whose capitaine and owner was a rich young gentleman Venetian , Messire John Antonio de Bonaldi , which of his good will came with his ship laden with 700. buts of wine to succour the town with his person and folks , whose good and lowable will I leave to the consideration of the readers of this present book . For he being purposed to have had his wines to Constantinople , or he was informed of the business of Rhodes , and was in the porte du Castle in Candie , would not bear his victuals to the enemies of the faith , but came out and returned his way towards Rhodes , forgetting all particular profit and advantage . He being arrived at Rhodes , dispatched and sold his wine , which was a great increase and comfort for the town . And when he had so done , he presented his person , his ship , and 
 his folk , to the reverend great master , the which retained him , and set him in wages of the Religion . And during the siege , the said capitaine behaved him worthily in his person , and put himself in such places as worthy men ought to be , spending his goods largely without demanding any payment or recompense for his doing , of the Religion . 
 How the corn was shorn down half ripe and brought into the town for fear of the Turkes host . 
 DUring these things , the reverend lord great master careful and busy to have every thing necessary , as men and other strengths , sent vessels called brigantine , for to cause the wafters of the sea to come into Rhodes for the keeping and fortifying of the town , the [ II i . 76. ] which at the first sending came and presented their persons and ships to the service of the religion . 
 Harvest in After that the said lord caused to shear down the Apnl and jsje^ anj caused ; tO to be brought into the 
 ’ town , which was done in Aprill : and then in May in some places , he made to shear the wheat half ripe , howbeit the most part was left in the fields , because the Turkes host was come out of the straights of Constantinople . And doubting that any number of ships should come before to take the people of the said Isle unawares , the said lord made them to leave shearing of wheat , and caused the people of the furthest part of the Isle to come into the town . 
 While that the great master provided for all things after the course of time and tidings that he had , there arrived a Carrack of Genoa laden with spicery from Alexandria , the which passed before the port of Rhodes the eight day of Aprill , and rid at anchor at the Fosse , 7. or 8. miles from the town , for to know and hear tidings of the Turkish host . Then the lord willing to furnish him with people as most behooveful for the town , sent a knight of Provence nam sir Anastase 
 de sancta Camilla , commander de la Tronquiere to the captain of the Carrack , praying him to come into the haven with his ship for the defence of the town , proffering him what he would , assuring him his ship . The captain excused him , saying , that the merchandise was not his own , but belonged to diverse merchant's to whom he must yield account . Howbeit at the last after many words and promises to him made , he came into the haven , the which captain was nam messire Domingo de Fournati , and he in his person behaved him valiantly in the time of the said siege . 
 How the great master caused generail musters to be made , and sent a vessel to the Turkes navy , of whom he received a letter . 
 AFter the month of April the lord master seeing that the Turkes host drew near , and that he had the most part of the wafters within the town , he caused general musters of men of arms to be made . And began at the knights , the which upon holy Rood day in May made their musters before the Commissioners ordained by the said lord in places deputed to each of them called Aulberge . The which Commissioners made report to the lords that they had found the knights in good order of harness & other things necessary for war , & their array fair & proper , with crosses on them . When the muster of the knights was done , the lord master thought to make the musters of them of the town , and strangers together : but his wisdom perceived that harm should come thereby , rather then good , doubting that the number of people should not be so great as he would , or needed to have , whereof the great Turke might have knowledge by goers and comers into Rhodes , and therefore he caused them of the town to make their musters several by bands and companies , and the strangers also by themselves , to the end that the number should not be known , notwithstanding that there was good quantity of good men and well willing 
 to defend themselves . And the more to hearten and give them courage and good will , some knights of the Cross , decked their men with colours and devises , and took with them men of the town and strangers , and with great noise of trumpets and timbrels , they made many musters , as envying each other which should keep best array and order , and have the fairest company . It was a great pleasure to see them all so well agree , and so well willing . 
 The number of the men of the town amounted and were esteemed , three or foure thousand , beside men of the villages , that might be 1500. or 2000. 
 The eight day of the same month , the Turkes hearing of those tidings , made a fire for a token in a place called le Fisco , in the main land right against Rhodes . And certain days afore they had made another , that is to weet , when the ship of a knight nam Menetow went thither , and had with him the clarke of the galleys nam Jaques truchman , the which under shadow to speak with him , was withholden of the Turkes . For the great Turke had commanded to take him or some other man of the Rhodes to have perfect knowledge in what estate the town was then in every thing . And they of the town weening that the second fire was for to deliver Jaques , the reverend lord great master sent one of his galliasses , whose patron was called messire Boniface of Provence , to know the cause thereof . And when he arrived at the said place of le Fisco , he demanded of the Turkes wherefore they had made the token of fire . And they said that it was because their lord had sent a letter to the great master , but as yet it was not come , and desired him to tarry till it were brought . The patron as wary & wise in the business of the sea , thought in himself that the Turkes made such prolonging to some evil intent , or to surprise his vessel being alone , wherefore he bade them give him the letter speedily , or else he would go his way , and neither tarry for letter nor other thing : and told them of the evil and dishonest 
 1522. ’ deed that they had done the days afore , to withhold the [ II i . 77. ] clarke under their words and safeconduct : and therewith he turned his galliass to have gone away . The Turkes seeing that , gave him the letter , the which he took , and when he was arrived at Rhodes , he presented it to the lord great master , which assembled the lords of his counsel , and made it to be read : The tenor whereof was such as followeth . 
 The copy of the letter that the great Turke sent to the lord great master , and to the people of the Rhodes . 
 SUltan Solyman Basham by the grace of God , right mighty emperor of Constantinople , and of himself holding both the lands of Persia , Arabia , Syria , Mecha , and Jerusalem ; of Asia , Europe , TEgypt , and of all the Sea , lord and possessor : To the reverend father lord Philip , great master of Rhodes , to his counsellors , and to all the other citizens great and small , greeting . Sending convenient and worthy salutations to your reverences , we give you to weet , that we have received your letters sent unto our imperiali majesty by George your servant , the tenor whereof we do well understand ; and for this occasion we send unto you this our present commandment , to the end that we will that you know surely how by our sentence we will have that Isle of Rhodes for many damages and evil deeds which we have , and hear from day to day of the said place done to us and our subject's , and you with your good will shall hold it of us & do us obeisance , and give the city to mine imperiali majesty . And we swear by God that made heaven and earth , and by 26000. of our prophets , and by the 4. Misafi that fell from the skies , and by our first prophet Mahomet , that if you do us homage , and yield you with good will upon these oaths , all you that will abide in the said place , great and small , shall not need to fear peril nor damage of mine imperiali majesty , neither you , your goods , nor your men : and who so will go to any other 13 
 place with his goods and household , may so do , and who so will dwell and inhabit in any other places under mine Imperiali majesty , may remain where they like best , without fear of any person . And if there be any of the principals and worthy men among you that is so disposed , we shall give him wages and provision greater then he hath had . And if any of you will abide in the said isle , ye may so do after your ancient usages and customs , and much better . And therefore if that ye will accept these our oaths and entreatings , send unto us a man with your letters to mine Imperiali majesty , or else know ye that we will come upon you with all provisions of war , and thereof shall come as it pleases God . And this we do , to the end that you may know , and that you may not say , but we have given you warning . And if you do not thus with your good will , we shall vault and undermine your foundations in such manner , that they shall torn upside down , and shall make you slaves , and cause you to die , by the grace of God , as we have done many , and hereof have you no doubt . Written in our court at Constantinople the first day of the month of June . 
 How the Turkes came to land in the Isle of Lango , and were driven to their ships again by the Prior of S. Giles . 
 WHen the lord great master and his counsel had herd the tenor of the letter , they would give none answer to the great Turke , but that he should be received with good strokes of artillery . So that to a foolish demand behooved none answer . And it was very like that he would have nothing . For sixe days after , that was the 14. day of the said month of June , the Brigantine that went towards Sio to know of the said army , came again and said , that of a truth the said army was coming , and that nigh to Lango and Isle of the religion , and 100. mile from Rhodes , they had seen and told 30. sails that were most part galleys and 14 
 fustes : the which vessels set men on land in you isle of Lango . Then the prior of S. Giles , Messire pre John de Bidoux commander of the said place , tarried not long from horseback with his knights and people of the isle , and he met so well with the Turkes , that he drove them to their ships , and slew a certain number of them : and of the side of Pre John some were hurt , and his horse was slain . When the enemies were entered into their galleys , they went to a place called castle Judeo on the main land , between the said isle of Lango and the castle of S. Peter . 
 How part of the navy and army of the great Turke came before the city of Rhodes . 
 THe 18. day of the said month of June , these 30-gallies went from the said place , and passed by the Cape of Crion , entering the gulf of Epimes beside Rhodes , and were discovered from the shade of the hill of Salaco , a castle in the isle of Rhodes . On the morrow they came out of the gulf by plain day , and sailing along by the coasts , they entered into a haven on main land called Malfata , where they abided three days . Then [ II i . 78. ] they went from thence , and returned to the gulf of Epimes , where they abided two days and two nights . 
 The 24 day of the same month they issued out of Epimes , and traversing the channel , they came to the isle of Rhodes in a place before a castle called Faves , and they went to land , and burned a great field of corn the same day , which was the feast of S. John Baptist our patron . The guard of a castle nam Absito in the isle of Rhodes discovered and spied the great host , and in great haste brought word to the lord master , and said that the said host , that was in so great number of sails that they . might not be numbered , was entered into the gulf of Epimes . The 30 sails that lay in the isle arose in the night , and went to the said host in the gulf . 
 The 26 day of June the said great host arose and went out of Epimes and hour after the sun rising , & 15 
 traversing the channel , they came to a place called the Fosse , eight miles from the town . And the 30 first sails turned back towards the cape of S. Martin and other places to watch for ships of Christian men , if any passed by to Rhodes . The great host abided still till noon or one of the clock , and then arose , not all , but about 80 or 100 ships , as galleys , galliasses , and fusts : and passed one after another before the town and haven of Rhodes three miles oftj and came to shore in a place nigh to land , called Perambolin , sixe miles from the town . In the which place the said host abided from that time to the end of that unhappy siege . 
 The number and ' names of the vessels that came to besiege Rhodes . 
 THe number of the ships were these : 30 galliasses , 103 galleys , aswell bastards as subtle mahonnets , 15 taffours , 20 fusts , 64 great ships , sixe or seven galleons , & 30 galleres , beside the navy that waited for Christian men , if any came to succour us . These were the vessels that came at the - first to lay the siege . And sith that the said host came out of Perambolin , there came from Syria 20 other sails , aswell galleys as fusts . And many other ships came sith , and joined with the said army in the time of the said siege . And it was said that there were 400 sails and more . 
 The same day that part of the host came to the said place , the reverend lord great master ordained a great brigandine to send into the West , to certify our holy father the pope , and the Christian princes how the Turks army was afore Rhodes . And in the said vessel he sent two knights , one a French man nam Sir Claude dansoyville called Villiers , and Sir Loys de Sidonia a Spaniard : and they went to the pope and to the emperor . 
 After the coming of the Turks navy into the said place , it was 14 or 15 days or they set any ordinance on land , great or small , or any quantity of men came 16 
 on shore , whereof we marveled . And it was told us by some that came out of the camp , and also by the spies that the lord great master had sent abroad arrayed as Turks , that they abided the commandment of their great lord , until the host by land were come into the camp . Howbeit there came some number for to view the town , but they went privily , for the ordinance of the town shot without cease . 
 All this while the galleys and galliasses went and came to land , bringing vitaile and people . At the which ships passing nigh the town , were shot many strokes with bombards , which made some slaughter of our enemies : and when the most part of them was passed , they began to set ordinance on the land with great diligence . Then the lord great master departed from his palace , and lodged him nigh a church called The victory , because that place was most to be doubted : and also that at the other siege the great business and assault was there . 
 How the lord great master made his petition before the image of S. John , and offered him the keys of the town . 
 THe day before were made many predications and sermons , and the last was in the church of S. John Baptist . When the sermon was done , a pontificali Mass was celebrate with all solemnities , and all the relics taken down , and the lord great master and all his knights with great devotions and reverence herd it . And when the Mass was ended , the lord great master made a piteous oration or prayer before Saint John Baptist his protector : and above all other words , which were too long to tell , he besought him meekly that it would please him to take the keys of that miserable city . The which keys he presented and laid upon the altar before the image , beseeching S. John to take the keeping and protection thereof , and of all the religion , as by his grace he had given to him unworthy , the governing unto that day : and by his holy grace to defend them 
 v 17 B 
 from the great power of the enemies that had besieged them . 
 How the women slaves would have set fire in the town . 
 THe eight day of July it was known that the Turkish women being slaves and servants in many houses of the town , had appointed to set fire in their master's houses at the first assault that should be made , to the end that the men should leave their posterns & defenses to go and save their houses and goods . And it was found that a woman of Marchopota being a slave , was first mover thereof , the which was taken and put to execution . 
 The same day some of our men went out for to skirmish with the Turkes , and many of them were slain with shot of our artillery , and of our men but one . 
 How the Turkes laid their artillery about the town , and of the manner and quantity of their pieces and gunshot . 
 THe 18. day of July , for the beginning and first day they set up a mantellet , under the which they put three or foure mean pieces , as sacres , wherewith they shot against the posterns of England and Provence . But the mantellet was soon broken and cast down , and their pieces destroyed with the shot of the wall , and they that shot them were most part slain . As this first mantellet was broken , by the great and innumerable people that they had they set all their ordinance on land , and carried it to the places where it should be bent , or nigh thereby . 
 And the 29. day of the same month , they set up two other mantellets . One beside a church of sane Cosme and Damian , and another towards the West . And from these mantellets they shot great pieces , as Culver-ings , double guns , and great bombards against the walls of England and Spaine , to the which mantellets the ordinance of the town gave many great strokes , and 18 
 often brake them . And the more to grieve the town and to fear us , they set up many other mantellets in diverse places , almost round about the town , and they were reckoned foure score : the which number was well lessened by the great quantity of strokes of artillery shot out of the town from many places . 
 The artillery of the Turkes was such as folio weth . 
 First there were sixe great guns , cannons perriers of brass , that shot a stone of three foot and a half : also there were 15. pieces of iron that shot stones of five or sixe spans about . Also there were 14. great bombards that shot stones of eleven spans about . Also there were twelve basilisks , whereof they shot but with 8. that is to weet , foure shot against the posterns of England and Spaine , and two against the gate of Italy : the other two shot sometime against Saint Nicholas tower . Also there were 15. double guns casting bullets as basilisks . The mean shot , as sacres and pasvolans , were in great number . The handgunshot was innumerable and incredible . Also there were twelve potgunnes of brass that shot upward , whereof eight were set behind the church of S. Cosme and Damian , and two at saint John de la Fontaine towards the port of Italy , and the other two afore the gate of Auvergne , the which were shot night and day : and there were three sorts of them , whereof the greatest were of sixe or seven spans about . And the said stones were cast into the town to make murder of people , which is a thing very inhumane and fearful , which manner of shooting is little used among Christian men . Howbeit by evident miracle , thanked be God , the said pieces did not great harm , and slew not passed 24. or 25. persons , and the most part women and children , and they began to shoot with the said pieces from the 19. day of the same month , unto the end of August , & it was accounted that they shot 2000. times , more or less . 
 Then the enemies were warned by the Jewe that wrote letters to them of all that was done and said in the town , that the said potgunnes did not harm : wherefore they were angry , for they thought that they had slain the third part of our people : and they were counseled by him to leave that shooting , for it was but time lost , and powder wasted , and then they shot no more with them . It is of a truth that they shot with the said potgunnes 12. or 15. times with bullets of brass or copper , full of wild fire , and when they were in the air , they flamed forth , and in falling on the ground , they brake , and the fire came out and did some harm . But at the last we knew the malice thereof , and the people was wary from coming near to them , and therefore they did hurt no more folk . 
 How the captain Gabriel Martiningo came to the succour of Rhodes , and all the slaves were in danger to be slain . 
 THe 24. day of the same month a brigantine arrived that was sent afore into Candie , wherein came a worthy captain nam Gabriel Martiningo with two [ II i . 80. ] other captains . And there went to receive him messieur prou John prior of S. Giles , and the prior of Navarre . Then after his honourable receiving as to him well appertained , they brought him before the lord great master , that lovingly received him , and he was gladly seen and welcomed of the people , as a man that was nam very wise and ingenious in feats of war . Then came a Spaniard renegado from the host , that gave us warning of all that was done in the field , and of the approaching by the trenches that our enemies made . 
 And in likewise there arose a great noise in the town , that the slaves Turks that wrought for us in the ditches had slain their keepers , and would have fled , which was not so . Nevertheless , the rumour was great , and they rang alarm : wherefore the said slaves coming to prison , as it was ordained in all the alarms , were met of 20 
 the people , which in great anger put them to death : so that there were slave and hundred & more the same day . And if the lord great master had not commanded that none should hurt them , they had be all slain , and there were fifteene hundreth of them : which slaves did great service in time of the siege : for they laboured daily to make our defences , and to cast earth out of the ditches , and in all works they were necessary at our needs . 
 How the great Turke arrived in person before Rhodes . 
 THe 25 day of the said month many of our men went out for to skirmish in the field and made great murder of Turks , and in likewise did our artillery . And it is to be noted that the 28 day of the same month the great Turke in person passed le Fisco a haven in the main land with a galley and a fust , and arrived about noon , where his army lay , the which day may be called unhappy for Rhodes . For his coming , his presence and continual abiding in the field is and hath been cause of the victory that he hath had . When the galley that he came in was arrived , all the other ships of the host hanged banners aloft in their tops and on their sail yards . 
 Soon after that the Turke was arrived , he went to land , and mounted on his horse , and road to his pavilion which was in a high place called Megalandra , foure or five miles from the town out of the danger of the gun shot . And on the morrow , as it was reported to us , he came to a Church nigh the town called Saint Steven , for to view the Town and fortresses , whereas they had set up mantellets for to lay their ordinance . 
 THe last day of July , one of our brigandines went out with a good company of men arrayed as Turkes , and some of them could speak Turkish , and went by night to land through the Turkes host , and demanded 21 
 if there were any that would pass over into Turkey , that they should haste them to come . The Turkes weening that they had been of Turkey , there entered a 12. persons , the which were carried to Rhodes , by whom we knew what they did in the camp . 
 The first day of August the Captain Gabriel Martin-ingo was made knight of the order of the religion by the lord great Master , and was made the first ancient of the Italian nation , of the first baliage or priory that should be vacant . And in the mean season the religion should give him twelve hundred ducats for pension every year , and the same day he was received to the Council in the room of a bailiff . 
 The fift day of the said month our master gunner was slain with a gun , which was great loss for us at that time . 
 The 15. day of the said month was known and taken for a traitor , Messire John Baptista , the physician aforesaid , which confessed his evil and devilish doings , and had his head stricken of . 
 Of the marvelous mounts that the Turks made afore the town , and how the captains were ordered in the trenches . 
 AFter the coming of the great Turke , the enemies began to shoot with ordinance of another sort then they did before , and specially with harquebusses and handguns , and also to make their trenches and approaches . And also they did more diligence then afore , to bring you earth nigh the town with spades and pick-axes . And it is to weet , that they moved the earth from half a mile off , and there were shot out of the town innumerable strokes with ordinance against the said earth , and innumerable quantity of people hid behind the said earth , were slain . Nevertheless they never left working till they had brought it to the brims of the ditches : and when it was there , they raised it higher and higher in strengthening it behind . And in conclusion the said earth was higher 
 1522. then the walls of the town by 10. or 12. foot , and it seemed a hill . And it was against the gate of Auvergne and Spaine , and beatrice our men that were at the gates & bulwarks , in such wise , that none durst be seen till certain defences and repairs were made of planks and boards to cover our people and keep them from the shot . 
 And at the gate of Italy was made such another heap , and in none other part . 
 When the trenches were thus made to the ditches , the enemies made holes in the walls of the ditch outward : [ II i . 81. ] wherethorow they shot infinitely with handgunnes at our men aswell on the walls as on the bulwarks , and slew many of them . Then the bashas and captains entered into the trenches , each to his place after their order and dignity : that is to wit , Mustafa Basham as chief captain entered the trench direct to the bulwark of England with his people & captains under him . Pery Bassha went to the trenches against the gate of Italy with his folks and captains under him . Acmek Bassha was in the trenches of Auvergne and Spaine with the Agam of the Janizaires and the Beglarby of Romany with him . The Beglarby of Natolia was in the trenches of Provence . Allibey was with his company against the gardens of saint Anthony on the North side , and diverse other captains with him , and set his ordinance against the wall of the gate of Almain , which was but weak , and set up seven mantellets by the mills towards the West : and by the space of eight or nine days they beatrice upon the same wall ; which put us in great fear , if they had continued . Howbeit the noble lord great master forthwith caused repairs to be made within , and planks 8c tables to be set to fortify the said weak wall : and abided there from the morning till night , to cause it to be the more hasted . The artillery of the gate of Almain , and the Massif of the gate of the camp and of the palace beatrice so soar and so often upon the said mantellets that it wearied the enemies to make and repair them so often : and they took up the pieces , and bore them away . And also they could not well beatrice the said 
 wall because the brims of the ditch without were almost as high as the wall that they beatrice . But or they bore the artillery away , they beatrice the steeple of S. Johns church so , that the most part was broken and cast down . The foresaid mantellets were appointed to beatrice S. Nicholas tower , and by the space of ten or twelve days they shot soar against it : but they had so sharp and vigorous answer , that there was not one mantellet that abided whole and hour . The captain of the said tower and his folk did such diligence and business in shooting off their pieces , that the enemies durst set up no more mantellets by day , nor shoot no more but only by night , while the Moon did shine , which is a thing worthy of memory , of marvel , and of praise . At the last when they had beaten against the said tower a certain time , seeing that it furthered nothing , they took their ordinance from thence , and bore it where they thought best . 
 During the shot in the said place , the other captains were not idle nor in a sleep , but without cease night and day they beatrice the wall of England and Spaine , and set foureteene mantellets against it , shooting great bombards , whereof some of the stones were five or sixe spans about , and some other of nine or ten : and within a month and less they cast down the wall almost even smooth with the Barbican . And when the said wall was so beaten , they set to beatrice the bulwark of Spaine for to raise the defences : and in their trenches they set three great bombards , which shot stones of eleven spans in compass , and with the said pieces they beatrice the said bulwark and wall in such wise , that they made great bracks , and the stones and earth that fell , served the enemies for ladders , so that they might come upon the plain ground . In like sort they raised the defences from the height of the bulwark at the postern of Provence , and set three great pieces on the brim of the ditch , which shot stones of eleven spans against the wall , and within a while they made a breach as at the postern of Spaine . The artillery of the town did shoot 
 without cease against the mantellets , and brake many of them , but they made other as it is said in the nights . For they had all things that belonged to them , & needed . And out of the postern of England was shot a gun that brake down one of the said mantellets , and hit upon one of the pieces , and slew foure or five men , and bore away both the legs of the master of the ordinance , which died soon after : whereof the great Turke was very ill content , and said that he had rather have lost one of his bashas or captains then the said master . Also it is to known that there were three or foure mantellets addressed against the plain ground of Italy , and by continual beating of shot that they made , there was also a breach , and by the earth and stones that were fallen , they might come up to it . 
 Of the politic repairs and defences that the ingenious captain Gabriel Martiningo , made within the town against the breaches in the walls . 
 THe captain Gabriel Martiningo , prompt , diligent , and expert to give remedies to the needful places , forthwith caused to make the traverses upon the wall whereas the breach was , with good repairs , and guns small and great which were set in the said traverses , the which shot not only at the breaches but to the trenches , and made great murder of enemies aswell at the assaults that they made as otherwhiles . And beside the traverses , the said captain planted small artillery , as harquebusses , and handgunnes upon certain houses within the town , that stood open against the breach , with good repairs : [ II i . 8 2. J and from that place great slaughter of Turks was made at the assaults . Also it is of truth that beside the said mantellets that shot against the wall of England and Spaine with great bombards , were two mantellets in and high place towards the way to the garden of Maupas , in the which were certain double guns , as basilisks with 
 hollow stones and wild fire in them , which shot against the wall into the town at all adventures for to make murder of people : howbeit , thanked be God , they did no great harm but to the houses . 
 After these great & terrible beatings , and that the enemies had way to mount upon the town walls , and come to hand with us by traversing of their trenches to the fallen earth within the breach more surely , and without hurt of our gunshot , shooting thorough holes that they made in the walls of the ditch without , they cast up much stone and earth , because it should cover them from the shot of the bulwark of Auvergne . And also they shot fervently against the bulwark of Spaine , for to raise the defences , of the which at the last they raised the most part , reserving only a few gunners below in the mine of the said bulwark , which little or nothing damaged them . And this is touching the gunshot , whereof I say not the third part , because it is a thing incredible to them that have not seen it . For some days they shot with those great bombards that were on the brim of the ditch , and from the mantellets bent against the wall of England and Spaine 20 or 30 times and more . And I believe verily that since the creation of the world such artillery , and so great quantity was never bent and laid before any town as hath be against Rhodes at this siege . Wherefore it is no marvel if the walls be and have be beaten down , and if there be breaches and cliffs in many places . 
 Of the mines that the Turks made : and how they overthrew part of the bulwark of England . 
 A Nd because as it is said before , that the greatest hope that the enemies had to get the town of Rhodes , was by mining , therefore now after that I have spoken of the gunshot and beatings , I shall show of the mines that the Turks made , the which were in so great quantity , and in so many places , that I believe the 26 
 1522. third part of the town was mined : and it is found by account made , that there were about 60 mines , howbeit , thanked be God , many of them came not to effect , by occasion of the countermines that they within made , and also trenches that the right prudent lord the great master caused to be made deep within the ditches , unto two or three foot of water . The which trenches and certain pits that he had caused in the said ditches to be wrought , or the host arrived , served right well since : for night and day there were men in them to watch and harken when the enemies mined , for to meet them , and cut their way , as was done many times . 
 And for to speak of the mines that had effect , and damaged us , it is to wit , that the fourth day of September , about foure hours after noon , the enemies put fire in two mines , one was between the postern of Spaine and Auvergne , which did not hurt but to the Barbican . The other was at the bulwark of England , which was so fell and strong , that it caused most part of the town to shake , and cast down a great part of the said bulwark at the spring of the day : and by the earth and stones that fell into the ditches , the enemies came upon the bulwark with their banners , and fought soar and mightily with our men , not with hands , but with shot of handgunnes . The lord great master that was come 15 days or more with his succours to the said bulwark , went with his company to help them that fought . After that they had fought the space of two or three hours , the enemies repelled and driven back by our men from the said bulwark , and beaten with ordinance on every side , withdrew them with their loss , shame , and damage . And this was the first A thousands victory that our lord gave us , and there abided of our enemies a thousand and more . English 
 When this assault was done , they made another at the bulwark . breach in the wall of Spaine , and mounted upon it , but the ordinance of the traverses of the walls and of the houses made so fair a riddance , that they were very 27 
 willing to withdraw themselves : for at the retreat , and also at their coming the said ordinance of the bulwark did them great damage , albeit that they had made some repair of earth . Of our men died that day 25 or thereabouts , aswell knights as other . And the same day in the morning departed out of this world Gabriel de Pomerolles lieutenant to the lord master , which on a certain day before fell from the wall as he went to see the trenches in the ditches , and hurt his breast , and for fault of good attendance he fell into a fever , whereof he died . 
 How the Turks assailed the bulwark of England , and how they were driven away . 
 THe ninth day of the said month , at seven in the morning the enemies put fire in two mines ; one at the postern of Provence , which had none effect : the other was at the bulwark of England , which felled another piece nigh to that that was cast down [ II i . 83. ] afore . And the said mine was as fierce as the other , or more , for it seemed that all the bulwark went down , and almost all they that were in it ran away . And when the standard of the religion came into the said bulwark , the enemies were at the breach ready to have entered : but when they saw the said standard , as people lost and overcome , they went down again . Then the artillery of the bulwark of Quosquino , and of other places , found them well enough , and slew many of them . Howbeit , their captains made them to return with great strokes of swords and other weapons , and to remount upon the earth fallen from the said bulwark , and pight seven banners nigh to our repair . Then our men fought with morispikes and fixed spears against them the space of three whole hours , till at the last they being well beaten with great ordinance and small on every side , withdrew themselves . And of their banners our men gate one , for it was not possible to get any more : for assoon as any of our men went up on our 
 1522. repairs , he was slain with small guns of the trenches , 
 and holes made in the walls of our ditches . And there Two thousand was slain of our enemies that day at the assault 2000 of mean men , and three persons of estate , which lay al^ar^U dead along in the ditch , with fair and rich harness . 
 And it was reported to us from the camp , they were three saniacbeis , that is to say , great seneshalles or stuards . And of Christian men of our part abided about thirty persons . And this was the second victory given to us by the grace divine . 
 How Sir John Bourgh Turcoplier of England was slain at and assault of the English bulwark . 
 THe 17 day of the same month , about midday , the enemy came again to give another assault to the said bulwark , at the same place aforesaid , without setting of fire in mines , and brought five banners with them , nigh to the repairs . Then was there strong fighting on both parts , and there were got two of their banners , of the which sir Christopher Valdenare , that time Castelaine of Rhodes , gate one : the other was in the hands of sir John Bourgh Turcoplier of England , chief captain of the succours of the said postern of England , a valiant man & hardy : and in holding of it he was slain with the stroke of a handgunne , which was great damage . The said banner was recovered by one of our men . And after long fighting on both sides , the enemies seeing that they god nothing but stripes , returned into their trenches . At the said fray the lord prior of S. Giles pre John was hurt thorough the neck with a handgun , and was in great danger of death , but he escaped and was made whole . The same day , and the same hour of the said assault , the enemies mounted to the breach in the wall of Spaine , and came to the repairs to the hands of our men , and fought a great while : but the great quantity of artillery that was shot so busily and so sharply from our traverses on each side , 29 
 and out of the bulwarks of Auvergne and Spaine , skirmished them so well , that there abided as many at that assault as at the other of England , well near to the number of 5000. And they withdrew themselves with their great loss and confusion , which was the third time that they were chased and overcome : thanked be our Lord , which gave us the force and power so to do , for they were by estimation a hundred against one . 
 Also the 22 day of the same month of September they fired a mine between Italy and Provence , which did no harm . 
 Of the terrible mine at the postern of Auvergne . 
 A Nd the 23 day of the same month they fired two mines , one at the postern of Spaine , and the other by the bulwark of Auvergne , the which mine by Auvergne was so terrible , that it made all the town to shake , and made the wall to open from above to beneath unto the plain ground : howbeit , it fell not , for the mine had vent or breath in two places , by one of the countermines , and by a rock under the Barbican , the which did cleave , and by that cleft the fury and might of the mine had issue . And if the said two vents had not be , the wall had be turned upside down . And for truth , as it was reported to us out of the camp , the enemies had great hope in the said mine , thinking that the wall should have be overthrown , and then they might have entered into the town at their pleasures : but when they saw the contrary , they were very ill pleased . And the captains determined to give assault at foure places at once , to make us the more ado , and to have and entrance into the town by one of the foure . And the said day and night they ceased not to shoot artillery : and there came in hope of the mine threescore thousand men and more into the trenches . 
 How the bulwark of Spaine was lost , and [ II i . 84. ] woonne again . 
 THe 24 day of the same month , a little before day , they gave assault at the breach of Spaine , to the bulwark of England , to the postern of Provence , and at the plain ground of Italy , all at one hour & one time . The first that mounted to the breach of Spaine , was the Agam of the Janissaries , a valiant man , and of great courage with his company , and bore three score or three score and tenne banners and signs , and pight them in the earth of the breach , and then fought with our men , and mounted on our repairs , making other manner of fray and more rigorous then the other that were passed , and the said skirmish lasted about sixe hours . And forthwith , as the assault was given , a great sort of Turks entered into the bulwark of Spaine , and set up eight or nine signs or banners upon it , and drove our men out , I can not tell how , unwares or otherwise . And they were lords of it three hours and more . Howbeit there were of our men beneath in the mine of the said bulwark , the which bulwark so lost , gave us evil hope . But incontinently the lord great master being at the defence of the postern of England , having knowledge of the said loss , and that there was great fighting and resistance on both sides at the breach of Spaine , marched thither with the banner of the crucifix , leaving the charge of the said bulwark in the hands of the bailiff de la Moree messieur Merry Combant . And the lord mounted on the wall of Spaine , whereas then began a great skirmish , and every man laid his hands to work , as well to put the enemies out of the breach , as to recover the bulwark that was lost . And the said lord sent a company of men into the bulwark by the gate of the mine , or by the Barbican , the which entered at the said gate , and went up , where they found but few Turkes . For the artillery of the postern of England , right against the bulwark of Spaine , had so well met and 
 scattered them , that within a while our men had slain all them that were left . And thus the said bulwark was got and recovered again , and with all diligence were made new repairs and strengths to the said place . And in like sort , the enemies were put from the breach , and few of them escaped , and all their banners and signs were left with us . Surely it may be said , that after the grace of God ( the traverses of Spaine and Auvergne , and the small artillery set on the houses right against the said breaches , as it is said , with the coming and presence of the lord great master ) hath given us this days victory . 
 As touching the murder of the people , done by the artillery of the bulwarks of England and Spaine , the quantity was such that a man could not perceive nor see any ground of the ditches . And the stench of the mastiffs carrions was so grievous , that we might not suffer it seven or eight days after . And at the last , they that might save themselves did so , and withdrew themselves to the trenches : and the reverend lord great master abided victorious of the said place , and in like sort of the other three assaults , the which were but little less then that of Spaine , for they fought long . But in conclusion , the enemies beaten on all sides , and in so many sorts , with artillery were put back , and vanquished , that there died that day at all the foure places fifteene or sixteene thousand . And the slaughter was so great at the plain Italy , of the cursed enemies , that the sea was made red with their blood . And on our side also died to the number of and hundred men or more . And of men of dignity in the town , having charge , died Sir Francis de Frenolz commander of Romania , which Sir Francis was chief captain of the great ship of Rhodes , and he was slain at the plain of Italy , wounded with two strokes of harquebusses : it was great damage of his death , for he was a worthy man , perfect , and full of virtues . There died also messieur Nastasy de sancta Camilla aforenamed , having two hundred men under him of the lord great master's succours . There died also diverse other worthy 
 men that day , and many were maimed . Among all other that lost any member , messieur John de le Touz called Pradines , being at the said bulwark , with a stroke of artillery had his arm smitten away , in great danger to have lost his life ; howbeit by the help of God he died not . In like sort the same day was hurt Sir William s*r Will-Weston abovesaid , captain of the postern of England , and had one of his fingers stricken away with and harque - gi^ pos . bush : which knight behaved himself right worthily at terne hurt . all the assaults . Of the Turkes part , of great men , were two principali captains slain under the Agam of the Janissaries , and another captain that was come out of Surey to the camp certain days before , with sixe hundred Mamelukes , and two or three thousand Moors . 
 And of them that were hurt of great men the Beglarby of Natolia had a stroke with and arrow as he was in the trench of Provence . And many other were wounded , whose names be not rehearsed here , because of shortness . 
 How the great Turke for anger that he could [ II i - 85. ] not get the town , would have put his chief captain to death , and how they made 11 mines under the bulwark of England . 
 DUring this assault , the great Turke was by his pavilion in a place that he had caused to be made , and saw all the business , and how his people were so sharply put back , and the victory lost on his side , & was very soar displeased , and half in despair : and he sent for Mustafa Basham with whom he was angry , and chid him bitterly , saying that he had caused him to come thither , and had made him to believe that he should take the town in fifteene days , or a month at the furthest ; and he had been there already three months with his army , and yet they had done nothing . And after these words he was purposed to put him to death in the camp : but the other Bashas showed him that he ought not to do justice in the land of his enemies , for it would comfort them v 33 c 
 and give them courage . Whereby he did moderate his anger , and left him for that time , and thought to send him to Cairo , lest the people there would rebel , by occasion of the captain of Cairo which died a few days before . Howbeit he departed not so suddenly , and or he went he thought to assay if he might do some thing for to please the Turke , aswell for his honour as for to save his person , and was marvellous diligent to make mines at the bulwark of England for to overthrow it . And by account were made 11 mines aswell to the said bulwark as elsewhere , beside them spoken of before , and that they had fired . But the most part of the said mines came to no proof though they put fire in them , and many were met with countermines , and broken by our men by the good diligence and solicitude of sir Gabriel Du-chef steward of the house of the lord great master , which had the charge of the said countermines at the same bulwark . In the which business he behaved himself well and worthily , and spared not his goods to cause the people to work and travel , but spent thereof largely . 
 How the Turks were minded to have gone their way , and of the traitors within the town , and of many great assaults . 
 THe Turks seeing that by mining they were nothing furthered , nor might not come to their intentions , and having but small store of gunpowder , were in deliberation and mind to have raised the siege , and gone their way . And in deed some of them bore their carriages towards the ships : and also certain number of people went out of the trenches with their standards straight to the ships . And it was written unto us from the camp how the Janissaries and other of the host would fight no more : and that they were almost all of one opinion for to go away , save some of the captains of the foresaid Mustafa Bassha or Acmek Bassha . And in the mean season the false traitors that were in the town wrote letters to the camp , giving them knowledge of all that 34 
 was said and done among us . And also and Albanese fled to the enemies camp , and warned them not to go , for the gunshot was nigh wasted , and that the most part of the knights and people should be theirs shortly . 
 In like sort then wrote the abovesaid Chanceller Sir Andrew de Merall , whose treason as then was not known : but when it comes to the effect of his treason , I shall show the knowledge that he gave to the enemies at diverse times . 
 When the bashas and captains of the host understood the said warnings , they all purposed for to tarry , and caused those tidings of the town to be known over all the army . And began again to shoot artillery faster then ever they did , for new shot was come into the camp . Then Mustafa Bassha being in despair that he could do nothing by mines , by gunshot , nor by assaults , he being ready to depart for to go into Surey by the great Turkes commandment , before his departing he thought once again to assay his adventure , and made three assaults three days together . The first was on a Saturday the fourth day of October and hour before night . The other on Sunday in the morning . And the third on Munday after dinner . And the said three assaults were made to the bulwark of England . And it was assailed but with stones and bags full of artificiali fire . And at these three assaults many of our men were hurt with the said fire , and with the stones that came as thick as rain or hail . But in the end the enemies god nothing but strokes , and returned into their trenches evil contented , and murmuring , and sware by their Mahomet that Mustafa Bassha should not make them to mount any more to the said bulwark . And that it was great folly for them to cause them to be slain at the will and fantasy of one man . These words said in Greek by some of the enemies were herd of our men as they went down from the bulwark . And because ( as it is said ) that the enemies at the assaults that were made , came up by the earth and stones that fell from the breaches , 35 
 some of our men advised to dense the barbican , and take the earth out of the ditch , to the end that the enemies should not easily come upon the wall . And in effect weening that it were well and behooveful to be done , by great diligence night and day by mines they voided the barbican , and the most part of the earth that lay in the ditch was brought into the town , the which was hurtful afterwards , and was cause that the enemies god the foot of the wall . Notwithstanding , they had it but scarcely . But this cleansing furthered the time , and caused them to get it sooner then they should have done if the earth had lain still : but their final intent was to raise the defence of the bulwarks , and then pass at their pleasure , and enter into the barbican , as they have done : for the enemies seeing that the barbican was cleansed , thought to get into it by trenches , and so they did , howbeit they were certain days letted by our handgun shot . The enemies seeing that they might not come near it , covered their trenches with tables to save themselves : and then they made a mine whereby they might go to the barbican . So by these two means , afterwards they were repaired with earth and with a certain wall that they made for to eschew the shot of the bulwarks of Auvergne and Spaine : and in the mine they found but two gunners , which they slew by force of men . By this manner they being covered on all parts and without any danger , passed thorough and leapt into the barbican , and god the foot of the wall ; which was the 17 day of October , and unhappy day for the poor town , and occasion of the ruin thereof , and winning of the same . 
 At this point they slept not , but lightly and with great delight they began to pick and hew the wall . And weening to make remedy therefore , and to find means to drive them from the said barbican with engines of fire and barrels of gunpowder , we slew many of them , but it availed nothing : for the quantity and multitude of people that traveled there was so great , 36 
 that they cared not for loss of them . And if we had had men enough within the town , there might have be remedy to have raised them from thence : but considering that our force and total hope was in people , we left to do many things that might have been done , and that should have be good then and other times also , for fault of men of war . At the last it was pondered by Sir Gabriel Martiningo , that there was no remedy but to hew the wall for to meet them , and beatrice them with ordinance and with engines of fire to burn and undo them . Then our men began to hew the wall , and made some holes to shoot at the enemies that slept not , but did as we did , and shot at us , and indeed they slew & hurt many of our men . Then Sir Gabriel Martiningo ordained to make repairs within the town at the front where they did cut the wall , to the end that after the walls were cut , the enemies should know with whom to meet . The traverses were made on each side with good artillery great and small : and the said traverses and repairs were of the length that the enemies had cut the wall , and began at the massife of Spaine made by the reverend lord great master Merry d’Amboise , & ended at the church of S. Salvador . The which traverses and repairs the vulgar people call the Mandra , that is to say , the field . 
 The mean time that the repairs and traverses were made with all diligence , Sir Gabriel Martiningo never ceased going to every place to purvey for all things : and he being on the bulwark of Spaine to ordain all things that were needful , there came a stroke of a handgun from the trenches that smote out his eye , and put him in danger of his life , but thanked be God , he recovered his health within a month and a half . His hurt came ill to pass , for the need that we had of him that time in all things , and specially to the repairs of the breaches . Nevertheless the lord prior of S. Giles ( not ignorant in all such things ) with other men expert in war , attended to the said repairs and traverses , there and elsewhere . 
 The enemies on the other side night and day without rest ( for the great number of labourers that they had hourly and newly ready ) hewed and undermined the said wall .. 
 And the 20 day of October they put fire in the undermines , weening to have cast down the wall , but they could not : then they would have pulled it down with great ropes and ancres , but the artillery of the bulwark of Auvergne brake their ropes , and sent them away lightly . 
 At the last they made a mine under the said wall and breach : and the 26 day of the same month they did put fire to the same mine , weening to have overthrown the wall , which it did not , but raised it , and made it to fallen almost straight upright , which was more disadvantage to the enemies then profit . Then they shot artillery at it , which in few days beatrice it down , and they had opening and way to come into the Town . Nevertheless it was not necessary for them as then to enter : for the artillery of our repairs beatrice them in the forepart , and the artillery lying at the two mills at the postern of Quosquino , and in that of England , whereas was a basilisk that beatrice right upon the breach with other pieces : and therefore the enemies sought other means , and began to raise the earth between our two walls , drawing towards the bulwark of England on the one side , and towards Auvergne on the other side , and would have [ II i . 87. ] cut the wall further then our traverses were for to come in unbeaten of our artillery . Then were the repairs enlarged and made greater with the wall that was cut , of the height of twelve , & 16 foot in breadth : and so the enemies might go no further forward , but shot great artillery against our repairs , for to break and cast them down , and also they made trenches for to come right to the breach , and unto the repairs : and certainly we looked day by day , and hour by hour for to have some assault . The reverend lord great master , the which , as it is said , had left the bulwark of England the day that 38 
 the great assault was made , and since that time he moved not from thence while they hewed the wall , & where as the breach was , because that they were most dangerous & most unquiet places . And continually the said lord kept him behind the said repairs with his knights and men of succours , intentively ready and prepared to live and die , and to receive his enemies as they ought to be received . And he abided three or foure days at the said breach , continuing since it was made , unto the end , fighting with his enemies every day in great peril of his body : for oftentimes he put himself further in the press then needed for the danger of his person , but he did it for to hearten and strengthen the courage of his people , being so well willing to defend and die for the faith . 
 How the enemies assailed the posterns of Provence and Italy , and how they were driven away . 
 BY the will of our Lord , the enemies always in fear and dread , would give none assault , but continually shot against our repairs , and made trenches for to pass forward into the town : by the which trenches they shot infinitely with harquebusses and handgunnes , and slew many of our folk , and specially of them that wrought and made the repairs that were broken and erased . And they put us in such extremity , that we had almost no more slaves nor other labouring people for to repair that which they brake night and day , which was a great hindrance for us , and the beginning of our perdition . And if we had much to do in that place , there was not less at the gate of Provence , and at the plain of Italy : for daily they were doing either with assault or skirmish , and most at the plain of Italy . Howbeit by the help of our Lord with the good conducting of the captain of succours of the same place , the prior of Navarre , that was prompt and intentive , and could well encourage his men , the enemies had always the worst , and were 39 
 driven from the said plain , and from the breach of Provence . 
 How the treason of Sir Andrew de Merall was known , and of the marvellous assaults that the Turks made . 
 UPon these terms and assaults , the treason of the chancellor Sir Andrew de Merall , of whom I spoke before , was perceived : for a servant of his , nam Blasie , was found shooting a quarrel of a crossbow with a letter , whereof he was accused to the lord great master , which commanded to take him and examine him by justice , and he confessed the shot of that letter & of other before , at the commandment of his master : and said that he had great acquaintance with the Turks bashas , and that it was not long since he had written a letter to them , warning them that they should not go , for gunshot began to fade , and the men were wasted by slaying and hurting at the assaults in great quantity : and if they abided still and gave no more assaults , at the last the town should be theirs . And diverse other things the servant said of his master , of the which I have spoken part before at the beginning , and of the warning that he gave to the great Turke for to come . 
 But to return to the plain of Italy . After many battles and assaults done in the said place , by continual shot of seventeene great guns that beatrice the said plain , the repairs and traverses were almost broken and lost . And by trenches the enemies were come joining to the breach , and never ceased to grate the earth and scrape the earth to cause the repairs & traverses to fallen : and at the last the most part fell down , & our men were constrained to leave the said plain , save a cantell that was towards the sea , as it were the third part thereof . Certain days afore the enemies came to the foot of the plain , and did cut it , and rased the earth , & at the last they passed thorough unto the town wall : and anon began to hew and cut as they did at that of Spaine . 
 1522. The lord great master seeing that , anon cast down a part of the church of our Lady de la Victoria , and of and other church of S. Panthalion . And within they began to make the repairs and traverses as at the place of Spaine , whereto was made extreme diligence , but not such as the lord would , and as was needful , because there were no labourers for to help . After that the enemies had won the most part of the bulwark of England & the plain of Italy , they purposed to make assault to the said [ II i . 88. ] plain , and to the breach of Spaine , and to enter into our repairs to win them for to make and end of us . And for ever to affeeble the repairs and for to abash us , the 28 day of November all along the day and night they ceased not to shoot great artillery , both from the brims of the ditches with those great pieces , casting stones of nine & eleven foot about , and from the mantellets without . And as it was reckoned , they shot the same day and night 150 times or more against our repairs and traverses of the wall . 
 And in the morning the 29 day of the same month , the vigil of S. Andrew at the spring of the day , the enemies went thorough the breach with their banners , and entered into the repairs with greater number of people then they did at the great battle in September , hardily and furiously for to fight with us . But at their coming in , the artillery of the traverses , and the handgunnes , and the gunshot of the mills found them so well and so sharply , that he that came in , was anon dispatched and overthrown , and there abided above 2000 of the Turks slain . The other that came after seeing their fellows so evil welcomed , as people that were astonished and lost , they turned again to their trenches : at whom the artillery of the mills shot victoriously , and hasted them to go apace : and by report from the camp there died sixe thousand or more that day : the which day might be called very happy , and well fortunate for us , thanked be God , for there was none that thought to escape that day , but to have died all , and lost the town : howbeit , the 
 pleasure of our Lord was by evident miracle to have it otherwise , and the enemies were chased and overcome . And it is to be noted that the same day the rain was so great and so strong , that it made the earth to sink a great deal that they had cast into the ditches , for to cover them from the shot of Auvergne . And the said earth being so sunken , the artillery of the said bulwark ( unwares to them ) smote them going and coming , and made great murder of the said dogs . The said day also the enemies came to the plain of Italy for to assault it ; but when they understood that their fellows had be put back so rudely , and with so great slaughter , they were afraid , and so they returned again to their trenches . 
 How the Turks god the plain ground of Spaine . 
 A Nd that done , Acmek Basham seeing their business every day go from worse to worse , and that at the assaults were but loss of people , without doing of any good , and that there was no man that willingly would go to it any more , he intended to give no more assaults , but to follow his trenches , and by them enter covertly without loss of a man from the breach to the other end of the town . Semblably he intended for to win the plain earth beside Spaine : the which to get , he came at pleasure to the foot of the wall , & began to beatrice down the plain ground , and to give many skirmishes and conflicts to our folk that kept it . And there were slain many good men . And at the last , for default of more help and of gunshot , it was left and given up of our men , and so lost . That done , the enemies came thither as in other places . And this is the third place where they came never to the foot of the wall . And whoso well considered in what estate the poor town was at that time , seeing their enemies have so great advantage , might well say , and judge , that at length it should be taken , and a lost town . 
 How a Genouois came to the gate of the town for to speak for a treaty , and deliverance of the same . 
 A Few days after the said journey a Christian man that was in the camp , the which by his speech was a 
 Genouois or Siotis , came to the gate of Auvergne , and demanded to parley , and after that he was demanded what he would have , he said that he had marvel of us why we would not yield our selves , seeing the piteous estate the town was in : and he as a Christian man counseled us to yield our selves with some agreement : and that if we would look thereto , that some should be found expedient to do somewhat for our safeguard . And it is very like that he said not such words , nor spoke so farforth in the matter , without commission from some of the chief of the camp , or of the great Turke himself . To the which Siotis was answered , that he should go away with and evil hap , and that it needed not to speak of appointment : and that though the enemies had great advantage , there was yet enough wherewith to receive and feast them , if they made any assault . These words herd , he went away : and two days after he came again , and demanded to speak with a merchant Genouois of the town , nam Matthew de Ura , and he was answered that he which he demanded , was sick , and might not come , but that he should deliver the letter , and it should be given to him . The said Siotis said nay , and that he would give it himself , and speak with him : and said that he had also a letter of the Grand signior , for the lord master . Upon this he was bidden to go his way : and to set him packing , they shot after him a piece of artillery . The next [ II i . 89. ] day after Ballantis Albanese that was fled thorough the breach of Spaine to the camp , came from the said Genouois proposing such words , or like as the other had said , saying likewise that the Grand signior had sent a letter to the lord master . To whom no words were spoken , nor answer made , for the lord great master 
 as wise and prudent considering that a town that will hear entreatings is half lost , defended upon the pain of death sith that Siotis had spoken these two times , that none should be so hardy to speak nor answer them of the camp , without his knowledge & commandment : but seeing they were such ambassadors , they reported the words of the said Albanese , or ever the said lord had knowledge of the words of the Siotis . The which words spread thorough the town put many folk in thought , and would have undone that that the Siotis said : the which is no marvel whereas is much people , for with good will and most often they regard sooner to save the lives of them and their children , then they do to the honour of the residue . Howbeit not one durst speak a word openly of that business , but all secretly : and some came and spoke to certain lords of the great cross for to speak to you lord great master . And in effect some lords spoke thereof to him , persuading him that it should be good to think thereon , seeing that the town went to loss . To whom the said lord showed many things for his honour and the Religion : and that no such things ought to be done or thought for any thing in the world , but rather he and they to die . The lords hearing this answer , went their ways , and then returned again to the said lord , advising him more to think well on all things , and to the salvation of his town and of his religion . And they said moreover , that they doubted that the people would rather have a peace then to die themselves , their wives and children . The lord seeing that such words were as things enforced , as who should say , if thou do it not , we shall do it as wise men and prudent , willing to make remedies of needful things by counsel , called the lords of his Council for to have advice in these doings , and other . And when they were assembled , the lord proposed the words that were to him denounced , and said : With these terms and words came two or three merchants and citizens of the town that knocked at the door of the Council , and presented a supplication 
 to the great master , and lords of the Council , whereby they required and besought meekly the said reverend lord to have respect to them and their poor households , and to make some appointment with the great Turke , seeing that the said matter was already forward in purpose , that he would do it ; and that it would please him to consider the piteous & sorrowful estate that the town was in ; & that there was no remedy to save it : and at the lest way , if the lord would not make appointment , to give them leave ( of his goodness ) to have their wives and their children out of the Rhodes to save them , for they would not have them slain nor made slaves to the enemies . And the conclusion was , that if the said lord would not purvey therefore , they would purvey for it themselves . And there was written in the said request the names of eight or ten of the richest of the town . Which words of the said supplication being herd , the said lord and his council were abashed and ill content as reason would , seeing that it was but a course game , and thought on many things to make answer to the said citizens , for to content and appease them : and also to see if they should intend to the appointment , as they required , and after as the Genouoys had reported : and the better to make the said answer , and to know more plainly in what estate the town was in all things : that is to wit , first of gunpowder , and then of men of war , and of the batteries . Also were demanded and asked the lord of S. Giles pre John , which had the charge of the gunpowder , and then the captain Sir Gabriel Martiningo , for being over their men of war ( as it is said ) as to him that knew the truth ; if the town might hold or not , or there were any means to save it . The said lord of S. Giles arose , saying and affirming upon his honour and his conscience that almost all the slaves and labourers were dead and hurt , and that scantly there were folk enough to remove a piece of artillery from one place to another , and that it was unpossible without folk any more to make or set up the repairs thee which every day 
 were broken and crushed by the great , furious , and continual shot of the enemies artillery . As for gunpowder the said lord said , that all that was for store in the town , was spent long ago , and that which was newly brought , was not to serve & furnish two assaults . And he seeing the great advantage of the enemies being so far within the town , without power to put or chase them away , for default of men , was of the opinion that the town would be lost , and that there was no means to save it . The words of the said lord finished , the captain Gabriel Martiningo for his discharge said and declared to the reverend lord and them of the Council , that seeing and considering the great beatings of the shot that the town had suffered , and after seeing the entering which the enemies had so large , and that they were within the town by their trenches both endlong and overthwart ; seeing also that in two other places they were at the foot of the wall , and that the most part of our knights and men of war and other were slain and hurt , and the [ II i . 90. ] gunpowder wasted , and that it was unpossible for them to resist their enemies any more , that without doubt the town was lost if there came no succors for to help and resist the siege . The which opinions and reasons of these two worthy men and expert in such feats , understood and pondered by the lord great master and the lords of the Council , they were most part advised for to accept and take treaty if it were offered , for the safeguard of the common people , and of the holy relics of the church , as part of the holy cross , the holy throne , the hand of St. John , and part of his head , and diverse other relics . Howbeit the lord great master to whom the business belonged very near , and that took it most heavily , and was more sorrowful then any of the other , as reason required , was always steadfast in his first purpose , rather willing to die then to consent to such a thing , and said again to the lords of the Council : Advice you , and think well on every thing , and of the end that may happen , and he proposed to them two points : that is to 
 wit , Whither it is better for us to die all , or to save the people and the holy relics . The which two points and doubts were long time disputed , and there were diverse opinions : nevertheless , at the last they said all , that howbeit that it were well and safely done to die for the faith , and most honour for us , notwithstanding seeing and considering that there is no remedy to resist against our enemies , and means to save the town ; and on the other part , that the great Turke would not oppress us to forsake our faith , but only would have the town , it were much better then , and tending to greater wealth to save all the jewels abovesaid , that should be defiled and lost if they came in the hands of the enemies of the faith . And also to keep so much small people , as women and children , that they would torment and cut some in pieces , other take , and perforce cause them to forsake their faith , with innumerable violences , and shameful sins that should be committed and done , if the town were put to the sword , as was done at Modon , and lately at Bellegrado . Whereby they did conclude , that it were better , and more agreeable to God , for to take the treaty , if it were proffered , then for to die as people desperate , and without hope . 
 How the great Turke sent two of his men to the town , to have it by entreating . And how the lord great master sent two knights to him , to know his assurance . 
 UPon these consultations and words almighty God that saveth them which trust in him , and that would not that so many evils and cruelties should come to the poor city & inhabitants of it , and also that the great Turke might not arise in over great pride and vainglory , put him in mind to seek to have the said town by treaty , which he ought not to have done for his honour , nor by reason , for the town was in a manner his . And in like sort he ought not to have let us go as he did , seeing that 47 
 we were his mortali enemies ever , and shall be still in the time coming , considering the great slaughter of his people that we have made in this siege . Howbeit , the eternal goodness hath blinded him , and hath pleased that these things should be thus , for some cause unknown of us . And for conclusion , the great Turke sent to have a communication and parley in following the words of the Genouese aforesaid . Then was a sign set upon the church of the abbey without the town , to the which was made answer with another at the mills of Quosquino . And forthwith came two Turks to speak with them of the town . Then the lord great master sent the Prior of S. Giles pre John , and the captain Gabriel Martiningo to know the cause of their coming . And when they came to them , without holding of long speech , the two Turkes delivered them a letter for to bear to the lord great master from the great Turke , and then returned safely into their tents . When the two lords had received it , they bore & presented it to the reverend lord great master , which caused it to be read . By the which the great Turke demanded of the lord great master to yield the town to him , and in so doing he was content to let him go & all his knights , and all the other people of what condition soever they were , with all their goods & jewels safe without fear of any harm or displeasure of his folks . And also he sware and promised on his faith so to do . The said letter was sealed with his signet that he uses , that is as it were gilded . And he said afterwards , that if the lord great master would not accept the said treaty , that none of the city , of what estate soever he were , should think to escape , but that they all unto the cats should pass by the edge of the sword , and that they should send him and answer forthwith , either yea or nay . After the sighed of the contents of the said letter of so great weight , and the time so short for to give so great and answer , and with demand , the said lord great master and all the lords of the Council were in great thought , howbeit they determined to give 
 and answer , seeing the estate of the town so ill that it could be no worse . Hearing the report and opinions a day or two before of the two lords ordained to view the defects of the town , saying that the town was lost without remedy : considering also that the principals of the town would have appointment . And in likewise , at the [ II i . 91. ] other counsel all the lords had already willed and declared , that it were better to save the town for respect of the poor people , then to put it all whole to the fury of the enemies , whereupon they agreed and concluded to take the foresaid treaty . After the conclusion taken , answer was made readily for a good respect ; that is to weet , to take the Turke at his word , to the end that he should not repent him of it , nor change his opinion . For every hour his people won and entered further and further into the town . And for to go unto the great Turke were ordained these two knights , sir Passin afore nam , and he bore the token of the White cross : and another of the town nam Robert the Perruse judge Ordinary . 
 When these two ambassadors had made them ready , they went out at the gate of Quosquino , and went to the tent of Acmek basham , capitaine general . And because it was late , and that they might not go that day to the great Turke , on the next day in the morning the foresaid captain Acmek led and conveyed our said ambassadors to the great Turkes pavilion , that they might have the more knowledge plainly , and for to hear his will as touching the words which were reported to the reverend lord great master , and after , the contents of his letter and writings . 
 When the said two ambassadors were departed out of the town , there did enter two men of authority of the camp ; one was nephew or kinsman of the said Acmek , the other was the great Turkes truchman , which the lord master caused to be well received , and they were lodged nigh the said gate of Quosquino . And then truce was taken for 3. days , and the enemies came to our repairs , and spoke with our folk and drank one with another . 
 v 49 WORSER 
 How the ambassadors of Rhodes spoke with the great Turke , and what answer they had . 
 WHen our ambassadors had made reverence to the great Turke , they said that the lord great master of Rhodes had sent them to his Imperiali majesty to know what he requested , and desired that they might talk together , and how the great master had received his letter . The great Turke answered them by his truchman , that of demanding to speak together , nor writing of letter to the great master he knew nothing . Howbeit , sith the great master had sent to him for to know his will , he bade say to them that the great master should yield him the town . And in so doing he promised by his faith for to let him go with all his knights , and all other that would go with their goods , without receiving any displeasure of his people of the camp . And if he accepted not the said treaty , to certify him that he would never depart from Rhodes till he had taken it , and that all his might of Turkey should die there , rather then he would fail of it , and that there should neither great nor little escape , but unto the cats they should be all cut in pieces , and said that within 3. days they should give him and answer , for he would not that his people should lose time , and that during the said truce they should make no repairs nor defences within the town . 
 When the great Turke had ended his words , our ambassadors took their leave of him , and returned to the town , and there was given to each of them a rich garment of branched velvet , with cloth of gold of the Turkish fashion . Then Acmek basham took sir Passin , and led him to his pavilion , and entreating him right well , caused him to abide all that day and night : and in eating and drinking they had many discourses of things done at the siege , questioning each with other . And among all other things our ambassador demanded of Acmek , and prayed him to tell for truth how many men died of the camp while the siege was laid . The said 5° 
 Basham sware upon his faith and certified , that there were dead of the camp of violent death , that is to say , of gunshot and other ways , 64000. men or more , beside them that died of sickness , which were about 40. or counterfeit . saw e thousand . Rhodes . 
 How one of the ambassadors made answer of his message , and how the Commons would not agree to yield the town . 
 Return we now to our purpose and to the answer that our ambassadors brought to the lord great master . The said Robert Perruse made the answer , and told what the great Turke had said , certifying that he would have and answer quickly either yea or nay . The which answer after the demand of the great Turke hath be purposed and concluded by the whole counsel , and his offer & treaty accepted , howbeit the said ambassadors had it not to do so soon nor the first time that they went for good reasons , but yet they would not defer it , for fear lest he should repent him . And [ II i . 92. ] upon these determinations that they would have sent the said Peruse to bear the answer , came some of the common people of the town to the lord great master , that was with the lords of the counsel , and said that they were advertised of the appointment that he had made with the great Turke , and that he would yield the town with covenants by him taken , which they supposed ought not to be done without calling of them . And because they were not called to it , they said that they would not agree thereto , and that it were better for them to die , for the great Turke by some way would put them all to death , as was done in Bellegrado in Hungarie . 
 How the lord great master sent two ambassadors for the Commons to the great Turke . 
 WHen the reverend lord great master had herd their words , he said graciously to them , that as touching the acceptation of the great Turks offer , it was 
 needful so to do in the degree that the town was , and the causes wherefore he had done it the counsel had seen and discussed , and that it was a thing that might not , nor ought not to be said nor published in common , for reporting of it to the enemies by traitors , but be kept still and secret . And moreover , that it was concluded to make and answer shortly , for to take the great Turke at his word , lest he repented him . For if they had be called , or the answer had be given , it had be overlong business , and in the mean time the Turke might have changed his mind , and that that he had done and concluded with the great Turke , the lords of the counsel had well regarded and considered in all things , and for their profit and advantage , as much or more as for that of the Religion . And that they would send to the great Turke again other ambassadors , the better to know his will , and to be surer of his promise . Then the lord great master ordained two other ambassadors for to go to the great Turke , which were two Spaniardes , the one nam sir Raimon Market , and the other messire Lopez , at whose issuing entered Sir Passin the first ambassador , and the other two went to the tent of Acmek basham , for to lead them to the great Turke . And when they were within the Turkes pavilion , and had done him reverence as appertained , our ambassadors said that the great master had herd and seen his demand to yield the town . And for y‘ it is a thing of great weight , and that he had to do and say with many men of diverse nations , and because the time of answer was so short , he might not do that that he demanded so soon . Howbeit he would speak with his people , and then he would give him and answer . 
 How the Turke began the assault , and how the Commons agreed to yield the town . 
 WHen the great Turke herd the answer of our ambassadors , he said nothing , but commanded his Bashas that they should begin the battle again to 52 
 the town , the which was done , and then the truce was broken , and the shot of the enemies was sharper then it was afore . And on the other side nothing , or very little for fault of powder : for that that there was left , was kept for some great assault or need . Howbeit the said Amek Basham kept one of the ambassadors , and messire Lopez only entered . The great master seeing the war begun , and the shot thicker then it was afore , and the enemies entered hourly by their trenches further into the town , called them that before had said to him , that they would not the town should be yielded , but had rather for to die . And therefore the said lord said that he was content for to die with them , and that they should dispose them to defend themselves well , or to do their endeavour better then they had done in times past . And to the end that each one of them should have knowledge of his will ( for as then he spoke but to foure or five of them that gainsaid him ) he made a cry through all the town , that all they that were held to be at the posterns or gates should give attendance , and not to come away day nor night on pain of death : for afore , the Rhodians came but little there . And that the other that were not of the posterns , or that were of his succours , should go to the breach of Spaine where the said lord was continually , and not to go away day nor night on ; the abovesaid pain . The said cry made , each one were obedient for a day or twaine , howbeit a young Rhodian left his postern and went to his house , which on the next day was hanged for breaking of the lords commandment . Notwithstanding that , by little and little the people annoyed them , and their hearts failed , and left the posterns and breaches : in such wise , that the enemies might come in without finding great resistance , but of a few that the lord master caused to abide there ( that is to weet ) knights of his succours . And in the night he sought out more people for to keep you watch at the said breach , and paid to them as much as they would . The said lord seeing himself thus aban - 
 doned and left of his people , he sent to ask them again wherefore they did not their endeavour , and why they came not to day , as they said before . Which made answer that they saw and knew well that the town was lost for certain reasons that were told them : by occasion whereof they had gainsaid the ordinance of the said lord , and said that they had be wrong informed of diverse things : and on the other side , that they feared that the Turke would not hold his word . But since they saw that there was none other remedy but to abide the adventure and fortune , they said that they put all to the said lord to do what he thought good , and that he would see what were best for them . And required the lord to do them so much favour as to let them choose one or two among them for to go to the great Turke with his ambassadors for to have surety of him . The which was granted , and two ordinary ambassadors were chosen for them ; one Nicholas Vergo tie , and the other Piero of saint Cretice , and the foresaid Passin should return with them for to make the said answer . Then the great master or they departed ( prolonging the time as much as he might ) advised to send a letter to the great Turke , the which his grandfather had written or caused to be written . In the which letter he gave his malediction or curse to his children and successors , if they enterprised to besiege Rhodes . The said Robert Perruse bore the said letter , and as he was accustomed , he went to Acmek Basham for to cause him to have audience , and to present the said letter . And the Basham said he would see the letter : for it is the guise in the great Turkes court , that none may speak to him nor give him a letter , but he be advertised first what shall be said , or what shall be written . When the Basham had seen the words written in the said letter , he brake it and cast it on the ground , and did tread upon it , saying many injurious and villainous words to the said judge . And bade him return apace to his great master , and bid him to think on his 
 business , and to make answer to the great lord ( as he had sent and commanded ) or else it should not be long or he saw his dolorous and woeful end . And that same day were taken two men of ours that bore earth towards the bulwark of England . Of whom the said Acmek caused and officer to cut off their noses , fingers and ears , and gave them a letter to bear to the lord great master , wherein were great words and threatenings . After the said Perruse was returned , messire Passin was sent again to the said Basham , for to know of him if the great Turke would be content with any sum of money for his costs and expenses , that he had made for his army . The which answered that such words or offers of silver were not to be said nor presented to the great lord on pain of life , and that he set more by honour then by silver . And therefore he bade him return and say to the great master that he should make answer to the great lord after his demand , to yield or not yield the town . The said Passin made relation of the words of the Basham to the great master : the which for the great sorrow that he had deferred always , saw himself in such piteous estate . Notwithstanding , the said lord putting all to the will of our lord , 8c considering that there was no remedy to do otherwise , nor to resist any more his enemies : and being constrained on all sides to make the appointment , with great heaviness , inestimable dolours and bewailings , at the last gave his voice to yield the town ( with the treatise or offers to him presented ) which was the 20. day of December , the year of our lord a thousand five hundreth and two and twentie . 
 And answer to such as will make question for the deliverance of the city of Rhodes . 
 A Nd if by any it were demanded wherefore the said lord great master hath yielded the town to the great Turke , requesting it with treaty and covenants , which was a sign that he feared and would no more fight , but 55 
 go his way . To this I answer : Notwithstanding that the great Turke was advertised by some traitors , and by other that fled into the camp , that the powder almost failed , and that there were but few men of war within the town , yet he believed not , nor gave credence of all that was reported to him , but thought verily that we had enough for a great while , and considered that he must tarry till they were wasted and spent , whereto behooved time . And seeing all his estate entered into strange places , and into the lands of his enemies , and had be there already sixe months , ( and not without great danger of his own person ) thinking on the other side , that taking the town by assault , he should loose many of his folk ; and yet when he had overcome and won the town , they should fallen each upon other in departing of the booty or pillage , doubting finally the hazard of war . For these reasons and other that may be alleged , the great Turke had much rather to have the town by composition and treaty , then otherwise . And it sufficed him to drive his old enemies out of the countries' of Levant , and set the subject's of his [ II i . 94. ] countries' in rest and surety . And we of the town that knew our weakness , & that we might do no more , it seemed better to save so much small people , then we and they to fallen into the fury of our enemies , for otherwise could we not have done , but tempt God , and died as in despair . 
 How the city of Rhodes was yielded to the great Turke , and of the evil behaviour of certain Turkes . 
 BUt to return to our principali : After that the reverend great master had given his voice to the yielding of the town , he sent the said Passin again for to bear it to the great Turke . And with him went the two men that were chosen of the Commons , and they went all three together to the tent of Acmek Basham . To whom the said Passin first made this piteous answer 56 
 and conclusion to yield the town . Notwithstanding , he said the people had ordained two men among them for to go to the great Turke , to speak of their particular doings , and to have some surety of their persons , wives , and children , to the end that it were not done to them , as to those of Bellegrado . The said Acmek led the three ambassadors towards the great Turke . And when they were entered into the pavilion , the said messire Passin made the report of his ambassade to the said lord , and said that the great master yielded him the town under the promise made by his Imperiali majesty , with the treaty promised . Of the which promise he held him sure and certain , and that he would do no less : howbeit , the people had required him to give them licence to go to his majesty for to ask some request of him . Then the two citizens besought the great Turke that he would for surety remove his camp from the town , to the end that they should have no manner of harm to their bodies nor goods , and that they that would go , should go , and that they that would abide still , might be well entreated . The great Turke answered by his interpreter to messire Passin , that he accepted the town , and promised again upon his faith , and on his honour to the lord great master , that he would perform that he had promised , and sent to him by the same Passin that he should not doubt of the contrary : and if he had not ships enough for to carry his people and their goods , that he would let them have of his , and that he would deliver the artillery that was wont to be in the ships of you Religion . And as touching the request of the people , he said that he would remove the camp , and that they that would abide , might abide , and they should be well entreated , and should pay no tribute in five years , and their children should not be touched , and who so would go within the said space of five years , they should go in good time . These words ended , our ambassadors took leave of him , & when they were departed , they spoke again with the said 
 Acmek Basham for to have a letter of the contents of the promise of the said lord . And by his commandment the said letter was made , whereby he promised to let go the great master with all his knights , strangers and men of the town that would go with their goods , without having displeasure of any of his people of the camp , or by the ways . When the letter was made , it was delivered to messire Passin . And as touching withdrawing of the camp , the said Basham promised again that he would do it , since the great lord would so : howbeit he removed but from the trenches , and some of his people went a little way off . And the said Basham demanded in the Turkes behalf , that they should send to him in hostage foure and twentie knights , whereof two should be of the great Cross , and two and twentie citizens . And the said lord should send only a captain with three or foure hundred Janissaries , for to keep the town when the camp were withdrawn . And so it was done ; and beside this he gave twelve days respite to the lord great master , to prepare him and depart out of Rhodes . And in conclusion all this done , our ambassadors returned and made the report to the reverend great master of all that they had done and practised with the great Turke , and the said Basham , and gave him the letter for to go surely . Then the great master with his counsel ordained the foure and twentie persons , and other of the town . When they were ready , they went to the camp , where they were well entreated foure days . During this time , Ferra Basham passed from the main land to the camp , with foure and twentie or five and twentie thousand Janissaries , which by the commandment of the great Turke was gone upon the borders of the countries of the Sophy . For the Turke seeing the people of the camp discouraged and willing no more to go to the assaults , sent to the said Basham to come to Rhodes with his people , which would have withstood us soar , as fresh men . And it was the work of God and a wonderful miracle , that they came after that the 58 
 appointment was made : for if they had come afore , it is to be supposed that the deed had gone otherwise , and there had be many strokes given : but I believe that the end should have be piteous for us , but God would not that the Turke should have victory upon us as he might have had , seeing the great advantage that he had in all things , but he blinded him and would not that he should know his might . And on the other part it may be said and marveiled how it was possible always [ II i . 95. ] to have overcome our enemies in all assaults & skirmishes , and at the end to lose the town , it was the will of God that so hath pleased for some cause to us unknown . 
 It is to be thought , that lack of men and gunshot , and the enemies so far within the town , and ready to enter at other places , with the treasons , have caused the town to be lost . Two or three days after the coming of the said Basham , his Janissaries and other of the camp entered into the Town , which was on Christmas day , within the time given to us , and then the Turkes word was broken , if it were his will or not , I cannot tell . Nevertheless there was no sword drawn , and in that respect promise was kept . But they made pillage , and entered by force into the houses of the castle , and took all that they might and would . After that they had ransacked the houses , they entered into the churches , and peeled all that they found , and brake the images . And there was no crucifix , nor figure of our lady , nor of other saints , that were left whole . Then with great inhumanity they went into the hospitali of poor and sick folk , called the Fermorie , and took all the silver vessel that the sick folk were served with , and raised them out of their beds , and drove them away , some with great strokes and staves , and some were cast down from the galleries . When these hounds had done that act , they went to the church of saint John and took down the tombs of the great master's , and sought if there were any treasure hid in them , and they forced certain women and maidens . And all they that were christened and had 
 be Turkes afore , were they men , women or children , and children that the said men had made Christians , they led into Turkey , which thing is of greater importance then any of the other . The morrow after Christmas day , the reverend lord great master went to the great Turkes pavilion for to visit him , and to be better assured of his promise , the which lord he made to be well & graciously received . And he signified unto him by his interpreter , that the case so happened to him was a thing usual and common ; as to lose towns and lordship's , and that he should not take overmuch thought for it : and as for his promise , he bade that he should not doubt in any thing , and that he should not fear any displeasure to his person , and that he should go with his people without fear . With these words the said lord thanked him , and took his leave and departed . 
 FINIS . 
 Lenvoy of the Translator . 
 Go little book , and woeful Tragedy , Of the Rhodian fearful oppugnation , To all estates complaining ruthfully ■ Of thine estate , and sudden transmutation : Excusing me if in thy translation Ought be amiss in language or in work , I me submit with their supportation , To be correct , that am so small a clerk . 
 