A letter of the king of England Henry the eight , to John king of Portugale , for a Portingale ship with the goods of John Gresham and Wil. Locke with others , unladen in Portugale from Chio. 
 63 
 A.D. 
 1531 - 
 The same in English . 
 TO the high and mighty prince , John by the grace of God , king of Portugale , and of Algarve on this side and beyond the sea in Africa , lord of Ghinea , and of the conquest , navigation , and traffic of . / Ethiopia , Arabia , Persia , India , etc. our most deer and well-beloved brother . 
 Henry by the grace of God , king of England and of France , defender of the faith , and lord of Ireland : to John by the same grace , king of Portugale and Algarve , on this side and beyond the sea in Africa , and lord of Ghinea , and of the conquest , navigation , and traffic of Aethiopia , Arabia , Persia , India , etc. our most deer and well-beloved brother , sends greeting . So much you more willingly and readily we undertake the recommending of all just causes unto your highness , because by the daily testimony of our subject's which traffic in your kingdoms and dominions , we are informed , that according to the duty of a most worthy prince , so carefully and exactly you minister justice unto every man , that all men 
 v 65 E 
 most willingly repair unto your highness , with full trust to obtain the same . Whereas therefore our well-beloved and trusty subject John Gresham merchant of London , of late in humble manner hath signified unto us , that one William Heith his Factor and Agent , certain months ago had hired in Candie a certain Portugale ship called Santo Antonio , ( the patron whereof is Diego Perez ) and covenanted with the patron of the said ship , that he should first sail to the Isle of Sio , to take in merchandise of sundry sorts , & then eftsoons return to Candie , to be freighted with other goods , all which he was to bring into our kingdom of England , to the valve of 12000 ducats , as by their bills of covenant & agreement more plainly appears : it so fell out , that you aforesaid Diego your highness subject having received the said goods , very treacherously & much contrary to his covenant , to the exceeding great loss of our subject's , putting in by the way into and haven of Portugale , & altering his purpose of coming into England , he remains still in that haven , & likewise detaineth our subject's goods . Which injury ( seeing it is done in your Highness kingdom ) we hope your Highness will see reformed according to equity & right , the rather at our request , which always have had a speciali care of the causes & goods of your Highness , & of your subject's whensoever they come into our kingdom , whereof we made proof the last year . Wherefore we instantly request your Highness , y‘ you would so receive John Ratcliffe the bearer of these present letters , 8c the new appointed agent of John Gresham , which cometh into your dominions about this business , being thus commended unto you in this business , & recovering & freely bringing home of the said goods , & in remitting of the customs , unless they were sold there ( the like whereof we did towards your subject's ) seeing by the fraud & deceit of the patron of the ship , the wares were brought thither , & finally in dispatching you whole matter , according to justice , & so further the same by directing 66 
 your highness letters to your officers whom it may concern , that we may perceive , that our subject's right and liberty hath especially been maintained upon this our commendation . Which we will take in most thankful part , and your highness shall find us in the like or a greater matter most ready to gratify you , whom we wish most heartily well to fare . From our Court at Waltham the 15. of October 1531. 
 