The true report of the siege and taking of Famagusta , of the antique writers called Tamassus , a city in Cyprus 1571. In the which the whole order of all the skirmishes , batteries , mines , and assaults given to the said fortress , may plainly appear . Englished out of Italian by William Malim . 
 To the right honourable and his singular good Lord , and only Patron the Earl of Leicester , Baron of Denbigh , Knight of the honourable order of the Garter , one of the Queens Majesties most honourable privy Council etc. William Malim wishes long health with increase of honour . 
 TO hath be a natural instinct ( right honourable and mine especial good lord ) ingraffed in noble personages hearts , much approved and confirmed also by custom , for them to seek from time to time , by some means in their life , by the which they after their death 
 might deliver over their name to their posterity : lest otherwise with their body , their fame also altogether might perchance be buried . Upon the which consideration we read many notable and famous things to have be erected in time past of noble personages ( having had wealth at will ) in such sort , that not only certain ruins of the same sumptuous works built so many hundred years past , do still remain , but also the most part of those princes , the authors of them , do continually by them dwell in our memories . As the Pyramids made at Memphis , or near the famous river of Nilus , by the great expenses of the kings of Egypt : the tower called Pharia , made in the Hand of Pharos by king Ptolomee : the walls of Babylon , made or at the least reedified by 118 
 queen Semiramis : Dianas church at Ephesus built by all the noble persons of Asia : Mausolus tomb or sepulchre , made by his wife queen of Caria : Colossus Solis placed at Rhodes , I remember not by what Princes charge , but made by the hands of Cares Lindius scholar to Lysippus : and the image of Jupiter , made of Ivory by the hands of the skilful workman Phydias . The which monuments made of barbarous and heathen Princes to redeem themselves from oblivion deserved both for the magnificence , and perfect workmanship of the same , to be accounted in those days as the seven wonders of the world . Since the which time , and easier , readier , and lighter way , being also of more continuance then the former , hath be found out , namely , Letters , which were first invented by the Caldies and Egyptians , as we read , and augmented since by others , to our great benefit , and now last of all ( not long time passed ) the same to have be committed to Printers presses , to the greatest perfection of the same : men being first enforced to write their acts and monuments in beasts skins dried , in barks of trees , or otherwise perchance as unreadily . By the which benefit of letters ( now reduced into print ) we see how easy a thing it is , and hath be for noble persons , to live for ever by the help of learned men . For the memory of those two worthy and valiant captains Scipio and Hannibal had be long before this present quite forgotten , except Titus Livius , or some such learned Historiographer had written of them in time . And Alexander Magnus himself that great conqueror had nothing been spoken of , had not Q. Curtius , or some other like by his learned style revived the remembrance of him , and called back again his doings to his posterity . For the which cause we see commonly in all ages learned men to be much made of by noble personages , as that rare pattern of learning Aristotle to have be greatly honoured of that former renowned Monarch Alexander : who affirmed openly , that he was more bound to his Master Aristotle , then to king Philip his father , 
 because the one had well framed his mind , the other only his body . Many other like examples I could allege at this present , if I knew not unto whom I now wrote , or in what : for your honour being skilful in histories , and so familiarly acquainted with the matter it self , that is in still entertaining learned men with all courtesy , I should seem to light a candle at noon tide , to put you in remembrance of the one , or to exhort you to do the other , daily being accustomed to perform the same . Crassus say that in Tullies first book , De Oratore : that a Lawyers house is the oracle of the whole city . But I can justly witness , that for these five years last passed , since my return from my travel beyond the seas , that your lodging in the Court ( where I through your undeserved goodness to my great comfort do daily frequent ) hath be a continual receptacle or harbour for all learned men coming from both the eyes of the realm , Cambridge , and Oxford ( of the which University your lordship is Chanceller ) to their great satisfaction of mind , and ready dispatch of their suits . Especially for Preachers and Ministers of true religion : of the which you have been from time to time not only a great favourer , but and earnest furtherer , and protector : so that these two nurseries of learning ( in one of the which I have before this spent part of my time , that I may speak boldly what I think ) should wrong your honour greatly , and much forget themselves , if by all means possible they should not hereafter ( as at this present to their small powers many well learned gentlemen of them do ) labour and travel in showing of themselves thankful , to reverence and honour your lordship , and honest their own names : whose studies certainly would suddenly decay and fallen flat , if they were not held up by such noble props , and had not some sure ankerholds in their distress to lean unto . How ready daily your travel is , and hath long been beside to benefit all other persons , in whom any spark of virtue or honesty remains , I need not labour to express , the world 
 1 20 
 knowing already the same . But whosoever they be , that in all their life time have and especial care by all means to profit as many as they be able , and hurt none , do not only a laudable act , but lead a perfect and very godly life . Whereupon Strabo affirmeth this most truly to be spoken of them : Mortales tum demum Deum imitari , cum benefici fuerint . That is , Mortali men then specially to follow the nature of God , when they are beneficial and bountiful to others . Great commendation undoubtedly it brings to any noble personage , that as the Moon , that light and brightness which she receives of the Sun , is wont presently to spread abroad upon the face of the earth , to the refreshing and comforting of all inferior and natural things bearing life : so for him , to bestow all that favour and credit , which he hath got at the princes hands , to the help and relief of the worthy and needy . Great is the force ( my right honourable lord ) of true virtue , which causeth men , as Tully writeth in his book De Amicitia , to be loved & honoured oft of those persons , which never saw them . Whereof I never had better proof ( I take God & mine one conscience to witness , the which I declared also to certain of my friends assoon as I returned ) then at my last being at Constantinople , in the year of our Lord Master 1564 , whereas I oft resorting ( as occasion served ) to the right honourable Christian ambassadors , while I made my p 
 abided there ( namely unto Monsieur Antonio Petrimol , lieger there for the French king , Sig. M. Victor Braga-dino , for the signiory of Venice , Sig. Lorenzo Giustiniano , for the state of Scio , or Chios , and Sig. Albertacio delli Alberti , for the duke of Florence ) herd them often report and speak very honorably of your lordship , partly for your other good inclinations of nature , but especially for your liberality , & courteous entreating of diverse of their friends & countrymen , which upon sundry occasions had be here in this our realm . So that to conclude , all men justly favour your honourable dealings and deserts : and I for my part have reverenced and honoured 
 121 
 Scio lost . 
 the same evermore both here at home , and elsewhere abroad , wishing often to have had some just occasion to pay part of that in good will , which my slender ability will never suffer me fully to discharge . For unto whom should I sooner present any thing any way , especially concerning matters done abroad , then unto your lordship , by whom I was much cherished abroad in my travel , and maintained since my return here at home ? For the which cause I have enterprised ( hoping greatly of your lordship's favour herein ) to cloth and set forth a few Italian news in our English attire , being first moved thereunto by the right worshipful M. D. Wilson Master of her Majesties Requests , your honours assured trusty friend , a great & painful furtherer of learning , whom I , and many other for diverse respects ought to reverence : who remembering that I had be at Cyprus , was willing that my pen should travel about the Christian and Turkish affairs , which there lately have happened : persuading himself , that somewhat thereby I might benefit this our native country . Against whose reasonable motion I could not greatly wrestle , hazarding rather my slender skill in attempting and performing this his requested task , then he through my refusal should seem to want any jot of my good will . In offering up the which news , although I shall present no new thing to your honour , because you are so well acquainted with the Italian copy , as I know : yet I trust your lordship will not mislike , that the same which is both pleasant to read , and so necessary to be known for diverse of our captains and other our countrymen , which are ignorant in the Italian tongue , may thus now show it self abroad , covered under the wing of your lordship's protection . Certainly it moveth me much to remember the loss of those three notable Hands , to the great discomfort of all Christendome , to those hellish Turkes , horseleeches of Christian blood : namely Rhodes besieged on S. John Baptists day , and taken on Johns day the Evangelist , being the 27 of December 1522. Scio or Chios being 
 122 
 lost since my being there , taken of Piali Basham with 80 galleys , the 17 of April 1566. And now last of all not only Famagusta the chief hold & fortress in Cyprus Cyprus lost . to have be lost of the Venetians the 15 of August last passed 1571 ( the chief governors & captains of them being hewn in sunder by the commandment of that tyrant Mustafa Basham ) but all the whole Hand also to be conquered by those cruel Turks , ancient professed enemies to all Christian religion . In the which evil success ( coming to us as I take it for our offences ) as I lament the generail loss : so I am surely pensive to understand by this too true a report of the vile death of two particular noble gentlemen of Venice , Sig. M. 
 Lorenzo Tiepolo , and Sig. M. Giovanni Antonio Querini : of both the which I in my travail was very courteously used , the former of them being then ( as now also he was in this overthrow ) governor of Baffo in Cyprus , the other captain of one of the castles at Corcyra in Greece , now called Corfu . But things past are passed amendment , and they could never die more honourably , then in the defence of their country . Beside that the late blows , which the Turks have received since this their fury , in token of Gods wrath against them , do much comfort every Christian heart . Moreover this uniform preparation which is certainly concluded , and forthwith looked for , by very many Christian Princes ( would God by all generally ) against these barbarous Mahometists : whose cruelty and beastly behaviour I partly know , and am able to judge of , having be in Turky among them more then eight months together . Whose unfaithfulness also and breach of promise , as the Venetians manly courage in defence of themselves , and their fortress , your honour may easily read in this short treatise and small handful of leaves , I having set down also a short description of the Hand of Cyprus , for the better understanding of the whole matter . The which I not only most humbly beseech your honour now favourably to accept as and earnest penny of more to 
 123 
 come , and of my present good will : but with your accustomed goodness towards me , to defend the same against such persons , whose tongues too readily roll sometime against other men's painful travels , persuading themselves to purchase the sooner some credit of learning with the ruder sort , by controlling and overdaintie sifting of other men's laboured tasks . For I know in all ages to be found as well Basilisks as Elephants . Thus nothing doubting of your ready aid herein , as I assuredly trust of your honours favourable acceptation of this my poor present , wishing long life with the increase of Gods holy spirit to your lordship and to all your most honourable family ( unto whom I have wholly dedicated my self by mine own choice and election for ever ) I , craving pardon for my former boldness , most humbly thus take my leave . From Lambhith the 23 of March . Ann. 1572. 
 Your honours most humble and faithful servant for ever , William Malim . 
 