Her Majesties letter to the Turke or Grand Signior 1581. promising redress of the disorders of Peter Baker of Ratcliffe , committed in the Levant . 
 This was Baker of Ratcliffe , who with the bark called the Roe , robbed certain Grecians in the Levant . 
 ELizabeth by the divine grace of the eternal God , of England , France and Ireland most sacred Queen , and of the most Christian faith , against all the profaners of his most holy Name the zealous and mighty defendor , etc. To the most renowned and Emperious Caesar , Sultan Murad Can , Emperor of all the dominions of Turkey , and of all the East Monarchic chief above all others whosoever , most fortunate years with the success of all true happiness . As with very great desire we wish and embrace the love and amity of foreign Princes , and in the same by all good duties and means we seek to be confirmed : so to us there may be nothing more grievous and disliking , then that any thing should happen through the default of our Subject's , which any way might bring our faith and fidelity into suspicion : Although we are not ignorant how many good princes by the like misadventure be abused , where the doings of the Subject's are imputed to the want of good government . But such matters of importance and so well approved we may not omit : such is to us the sacred estimation of our honour , and of our Christian profession , as we would the same should appear aswell in the concluding of our promises and agreements , as in the faithful performing of the same . 
 The matter which by these our letters we specially behold , is a most injurious and grievous wrong which of late came unto our understanding , that should be done unto certain of your subject's by certain of our Subject's , as yet not apprehended : but with all severity upon their apprehension they are to be awarded for the same . And as the deed in it self is most wicked , so is it much more intolerable , by how much it doth infringe the credit of our faith , violate the force of our authority , and impeach the estimation of our word faithfully given unto your Imperiali dignity . In which so great a disorder if we should not manifest our hatred towards so wicked and evil disposed persons , we might not only most justly be reproved in the judgement of all such as truly favour Justice , but also of all Princes the patroness of right and equity , might no less be condemned . That therefore considered , which of our parts is ordained in this cause which may be to the good liking of your highness , we are most especially to request of your Imperiali Majesty , that through the default and disorder of a sort of evil and wicked disposed persons , you will not withdraw your gracious favour from us , neither to hinder thee traffic of our Subject's , which by virtue of your highness sufferance , and power of your licence are permitted to trade into your dominions & countries' , or that either in their persons or goods they be prejudiced in their traveling by land or by water , promising unto your greatness most faithfully , that the goods whereof your subject's by great wrong and violence have be spoiled , shall wholly again be restored , if either by the lives or possessions of the robbers it may any way be brought to pass : And that hereafter ( as now being taught by this [ II i . 14.6 . ] evil example ) we will have speciali care that none under the title of our authority shall be suffered to commit any the like wrongs or injuries . 
 Neither they which have committed these evil parts had any power under your highness safeconduct granted unto our subject's , but from some other safeconduct , whither it were true or feigned , we know not , or whither they bought it of any person within the government of Marseils : but under the colour thereof they have done that , which the truth of our dealing doth utterly abhor . Notwithstanding howsoever it be , we will surely measure their evil proceedings with most sharp and just correction , and that it shall repent them of the impeachment of our honours , as also it shall and example of our indignation , that others may dread at all times to commit the like offence . Wherefore that our amity might be continued , as if this unfortunate hap had never chanced , and that the singular affection of our Subject's towards your Imperiali Majesty vowed , and daily more and more desired , might be conserved and defended , we thereunto do make our humble suit unto your greatness : And for so great goodness towards us and our people granted , do most humbly pray unto the Almighty creator of heaven and earth , ever to maintain and keep your most renowned Majesty in all happiness and prosperity . 
 Dated at our palace of Greenewich the 26. of June , Anno 1581. 
 