Commission given by M. William Hareborne the English Ambassador , to Richard Forster , authorising him Consul of the English nation in the parts of Alepo , Damasco , Aman , Tripolis , Jerusalem , etc. 
 William Harborne , her Majesties Ambassador , Ligier with the Grand Signior , for the affairs of the Levant do in her Majesties name confirm and appoint Richard Forster Gentleman , my Deputy and Consuli in the parts of Alepo , Damasco , Aman , Tripolis , Jerusalem , and 
 all other ports whatsoever in the provinces of Syria , Palestina , and Jury , to execute the office of Consuli over all our Nation her Majesties subject's , of what estate or quality soever : giving him hereby full power to defend , protect , and maintain all such her Majesties subject's as to him shall be obedient , in all honest and just causes whatsoever : and in like case no less power to imprison , punish , and correct any and all such as he shall find disobedient to him in the like causes , even in 260 
 1583-such order as 1 my self might do by virtue of her Majesties Commission given me the 26 of November 1582 , the copy whereof I have annexed to this present under her Majesties Seal delivered me to that use . Straightly charging and commanding all her Majesties subject's in those parts , as they will avoid her Highness displeasure and their own harms , to honour his authority , and have due respect unto the same , aiding and assisting him there with their persons and goods in any cause requisite to her Majesties good service , and commodity or her dominions . In witness whereof I have confirmed and sealed these presents at Rapamat my mansion house by Pera over against Constantinople , the 20 of June 1583. 
 A letter of directions of the English Ambassador to M. Richard Forster , appointed the first English Consuli at Tripolis in Syria . 
 Ousin Forster , these few words are for your remembrance when it shall please the Almighty to send you safe arrival in Tripolis of Syria . When it shall please God to send you thither , you are to certify our Nation at Tripolis of the certain day of your landing , to the end 
 they both may have their house in a readiness , and also meet you personally at your entrance to accompany you , being your self appareled in the best manner . The next , second , or third day , after your coming , give it out that you be crazed and not well disposed , by means of your travel at Sea , during which time , you and those there are most wisely to determine in what manner you are to present your self to the Beglerbi , Cadi , and other officers : who every of them are to be presented according to the order accustomed of others formerly in like office : which after the note of John Blank , late Vice-consul of Tripolis for the French , delivered you 261 
 herewith , is very much : and therefore , if thereof you can save any thing , I pray you do it , as I doubt not but you will . They are to give you there also another Janizary according as the French hath ; whose outward proceedings you are to imitate and follow , in such sort as you be not his inferior , according as those of our Nation heretofore with him resident can inform you . Touching your demeanour after your placing , you are wisely to proceed considering both French and Venetian will have and envious eye on you : whom if they perceive wise and well advised , they will fear to offer you any injury . But if they shall perceive any insufficiency in you , they will not omit any occasion to harm you . They are subtle , malicious , and dissembling people , wherefore you must always have their doings for suspected , and warily walk in all your actions : wherein if you call for Gods divine assistance , as does become every faithful good Christian , the same shall in such sort direct you as he shall be glorified , your self preserved , your doings blessed , and your enemies confounded . Which if contrariwise you omit and forget , your enemies malice shall satisfied with your confusion , which God defend , and for his mercies sake keep you . Touching any outlopers of our nation , which may happen to come thither to traffic , you are not to suffer , but to imprison the chief officers , and suffer the rest not to traffic at any time , and together enter in such bonds as you think meet , that both they shall not deal in the Grand Signiors dominions , and also not harm , during their voyage , any his subject's ships , vessels , or whatsoever other , but quietly depart out of the same country without any harm doing . And touching those there for the company , you are to defend them according to your privilege & such commandments as you have had hence , in the best order you may . In all and every your actions , at any hand , beware of rashness and anger , after both which repentance follows . Touching your dealings in their affairs of merchandise , you are not to deal 262 
 otherwise then in secret and counsel . You are carefully to foresee the charge of the house , that the same may be in all honest measure to the companies profit and your own health through moderation in diet , and at the best hand , and in due time to provide things needful , to save what may be : for he that buyeth every thing when he needs it , harmeth his own house , and helpeth the retailer . So as it is , in mine opinion , wisdom to foresee the buying of all things in their native soil , in due time , and at the first hand every year , as you are to send the company the particular accounts of the same expenses . Touching your self , you are to cause to be employed fifty or threescore ducats , videlicet , twenty in Soap , and the rest in Spices , whereof the most part to be Pepper , whereof we spend very much . The Spices are to be provided by our friend William Barrat , and the Soap buy you at your first arrival , for that this ship lading the same commodity will cause it to amount in price . From our mansion Rapamat , the fift of September 1583. 
 