Remembrances for master S. to give him the better [ II i . 161. ] occasion to inform himself of some things in England , and after of some other things in Turkey , to the great profit of the Common weal of this Country . Written by the foresaid master Richard Hakluyt , for a principali English Factor at Constantinople 1582. 
 Ince all men confess ( that be not barbarously bred ) that men are born as well to seek the common commodity of their Country , as their own private benefit , it may seem folly to persuade that point , for each man means so to do . But wherein men should seek the 
 common commodity , and what way , and by what mean that is to be brought about , is the point or sum of the matter , since every good man is ready to employ his labour . This is to be done by and infinite sort of means , as the number of things be infinite that may be done for common benefit of the Realm . And as the chief things so to be done be diverse , so are they to be done by diverse men , as they be by wit and manner of education more fit , or less fit , for this and for that . And for that of many things that tend to the common benefit of the State , some tend more , and some less , I find that no one thing , after one other , is greater then Clothing , and the things incident to the same . And understanding that you are of right good capacity , and become a Factor at Constantinople , and in other parts in Turkey , I find no man fitter of all the English Factors there , then you . And therefore I am so bold to put you in mind , and to tell you wherein with some endeavour you may chance to do your Country much good , and give and infinite sort of the poor people occasion to pray for you here throughout the Realm : this that I mean is in matter of Cloth , etc. 
 231 
 1 Thirst , you cannot deny but that this Realm yields 1 ? the most fine Wool ! , the most soft , the most strong Wool , the most durable in Cloth , and most apt of nature of all other to receive Die , and that no Island or any one kingdom so small doth yield so great abundance of the same : and that no Wool is less subject to moths , or to fretting in press , then this , as the old Parliament robes of Kings , & of many noble Peers to be showed may plainly testify . 
 2 There is no commodity of this Realm that may set so many poor subject's on work , as this doth , that doth bring in so much treasure , and so much enrich the merchant , and so much employ the Navy of this Realm , as this commodity of our Wool doth . 
 Ample and full Vent of this noble and rich commodity is it that the common weal of this realm doth require . 
 Spaine now aboundeth with Wools , and the same are Clothed . Turkey hath Wools , and so have diverse provinces of Christendome and of Heatheness , and cloth is made of the same in diverse places . 
 1 But if England have the most fine , and the most excellent Wools of the world in all respects ( as it cannot be denied , but it hath ) 2 If there may be added to the same , excellent artificiali , and true making , and excellent dying , 3 Then no doubt but that we shall have vent for our Clothes , although the rest of the world did abound much more with Wool then it doth , and although their workmanship and their dying were in every degree equal with ours of England , unless the labour of our people employed that way , and the materials used in dying should be the cause of the contrary by dearth . 
 But if Foreign nations turn their Wools , inferior to ours , into truer and more excellent made cloth , and 
 232 
 shall die the same in truer , surer , and more excellent and more delectable colours , then shall they fell and make ample vent of their Clothes , when the English cloth of better wool shall rest unsold , to the spoil of the Merchant , of the Clothier , and of the breeder of the wool , and to the turning to bag and wallet of the infinite number of the poor people employed in clothing in several degrees of labour here in England . 
 Which things weighed , I am to tell you what things I wish you in this Realm , and after in Turkey , to endeavour from time to time , as your laisure may permit the same . 
 Before you go out of the Realm , that you learn : 
 i r I ' Oh know wool , all kind of clothes made in this A realm , and all other employments of wool , home or foreign , be you same in Felt cloaks , felt hats , in the read knit cap for Barbarie , called Bonettos rugios colorados , or whatsoever , etc. 
 All the deceits in Clothmaking ; as the sorting together of Wools of several nature's , some of nature to shrink , some to hold out , which causeth cloth to cockle and lie uneven . 
 The evil sorting of thread of good or bad wool , some tootoo hard spun , some tootoo soft spun delivered to be woven . 
 The faults in Weaving . 
 The faults in Walking , Rowing , and Burling , and in Racking the Clothes above measure upon the Teintors : all which faults may be learned of honest men , which faults are to be known to the merchant , to be shunned and not to be used . 
 2 Then to learn of the Dyers to discern all kind of colours ; as which be good and sure , and which will not hold : which be fair , which not ; which colours by the dearth of the substances be deer , and which by reason of the cheapness of the Materials with which they be died , be cheap colours . 
 233 
 [ II i . 162. ] 
 3 Then to take the names of all the materials and substances used in this City or in the realm , in dying of cloth or silk . 
 To learn to know them , as which be good , which bad . 
 And what colours they die . 
 And what princes they be of . 
 And of them which bee the Naturals of this Realm , and in what part of the Realm they are to be had . 
 And of all the foreign materials used in dying to know the very natural places of them , and the plenty or the scarceness of each of them . 
 These things superficially learned in the realm before you go , you are the fitter in foreign parts to serve your Country , for by this means you have and enterie into the thing that I wish you to travel in . 
 What you shall do in Turkey , beside the business of your Factorship . 
 1 TPOrasmuch as it is reported that the Woollen JT clothes died in Turkey be most excellently died , you shall send home into this realm certain Mowsters or pieces of Show to be brought to the Dyers hall , there to be showed , partly to remove out of their heads , the tootoo great opinion they have conceived of their own cunning , and partly to move them for shame to endeavour to learn more knowledge to the honour of their country of England , and to the universali benefit of the realm . 
 2 You shall devise to amend the Dying of England , by carrying hence and apt young man brought up in the Art , or by bringing one or other from thence of skill , or rather to devise to bring one for Silks , and another for Wool and for Woollen cloth , and if you cannot work this by ordinary means , then to work it by some great Bassas mean , or if your own credit there be not sufficient by mean of your small abided in those parties , to work it by the help of the French ambassador there resident , for which purpose you may insinuate your self into his 
 234 
 acquaintance , and otherwise to leave no mean unsought that tendeth to this end , wherein you are to do as circumstances may permit . 
 3 Then to learn to know all the materials and substances that the Turkes use in dying , be they of Herbs , simple or compound , be they Plants , Barks , Wood , Berries , Seeds , Grains , or Minerali matter , or what else soever . But before all other , such things as yield those famous colours that carry such speciali report of excellence , that our Merchants may bring them to this realm by ordinary trade , as a right mean for the better vent of our clothes . 
 4 To know the use of those , and where the natural place of them and of each of them is , I mean the place where each of them grows or is bred . 
 5 And in any wise , if Anile that coloureth blue be a natural commodity of those parts , and if it be compounded of and herb , to send the same into this realm by seed or by root in barrel of earth , with all the whole order of sowing , setting , planting , replanting , and with the compounding of the same , that ' it may become a natural commodity in this realm as Woad is , to this end that the high price of foreign Woad ( which devoureth yearly great treasure ) maybe brought down . So shall [ II i . 163. ] the merchant buy his cloth less deer , and so he shall able to occupy with less stock , be able to afford cloth cheaper , make more ample vent , and also become a greater gainer himself , and all this to the benefit of this realm . 
 6 To do the like with herb & plant , or tree that in dying is of any excellent use , as to send the same by seed , berry , root , etc. : for by such means Saffron was brought first into this realm , which hath set many poor on work , and brought great wealth into this realm . Thus may Sumack , the plant wherewith the most excellent blacks be died in Spaine , be brought out of Spaine , and out of the Hands of the same , if it will grow in this more cold climate . For thus was Woad brought into this 
 335 
 realm , and came to good perfection , to the great loss of the French our old enemies . And it does marvellously import this realm to make natural in this realm such things as be special in the dying of our clothes . And to speak of such things as colour blew , they are of greatest use , and are grounds of the most excellent colours , and therefore of all other to be brought into this realm , be it Anile or any other materiali of that quality . 
 7 And because yellows and greens are colours of small princes in this realm , by reason that Oide and Greenweed wherewith they be died be natural here , and in great plenty , therefore to bring our clothes so died to common sale in Turkey were to the great benefit of the merchant , and other poor subject's of this realm , for in sale of such our own natural colours we consume not our treasure in foreign colours , and yet we fell our own trifles dearly perhaps . 
 8 The wools being natural , and excellent colours for dying becoming by this means here also natural , in all the art of Clothing then we want but one only speciali thing . For in this so temperate a climate our people may labour the year throughout , whereas in some regions of the world they cannot work for extreme heat , as in some other regions they cannot work for extreme cold a good part of the year . And the people of this realm by the great and blessed abundance of victuali are cheaply fed , and therefore may afford their labour cheap . And where the Clothiers in Flanders by the flatness of their rivers cannot make Walkmilles for their clothes , but are forced to thicken and dress all their clothes by the foot and by the labour of men , whereby their clothes are raised to and higher price , we of England have in all Shires store of mills upon falling rivers . And these rivers being in temperate zones are not dried up in Summer with drought and heat as the rivers be in Spaine and in hotter regions , nor frozen up in Winter as all the rivers be in all the North regions of the world : so as our mills 236 
 REMEMBRANCES FOR A FACTOR may go and work at all times , and dress clothes cheaply . Then we have also for scouring our clothes earth's and claies , as Walker's clay , and the clay of Oborne little inferior to Soap in scouring and in thicking . Then also have we some reasonable store of Alum and Copporas here made for dying , and are like to have increase of the same . Then we have many good waters apt for dying , and people to spin and to do the rest of all the labours we want not . So as there wants , if colours might be brought in and made natural , but only Oil : the want whereof if any man could devise to supply at the full with any thing that might become natural in this realm , he whatsoever he were that could bring it about , might deserve immortali fame in this our Common wealth , and such a devise was offered to the Parliament and refused , because they denied to endow him with a certain liberty , some others having obtained the same before , that practised to work that effect by Radish seed , which only made a trial of small quantity , and that went no further , to make that Oil in plenty : and now he that offered this devise was a merchant , and is dead , and withal the devise is dead with him . 
 It is written by one that wrote of Afrike , that in Egypt in a city called Muhaisira there be many mills employed in making of Oil of the seed of and herb called Sesamum . Pena and Lobell , Physicians , write in our time , that this herb is a codded herb full of oily seed , and that there is plenty of this seed brought out of Egypt to diverse Cities in Italy . If this herb will prosper in this realm , our merchants may easily bring of it , etc. 
 9 Having herein thus troubled you by raising to your mind the consideration of certain things , it shall not be impertinent to tell you that it shall not be amiss that you note all the order of the degrees of labour used in Turky , in the art of Clothing , and to see if any way they excel in that profession our people of these parts , and to bring notice of the same into this realm . 
 io And if you shall find that they make any cloth of 237 
 Suf ply of the want of oil . 
 Leo Africanus ; lib . 8. 
 any kind not made in this realm , that is there of great use , then to bring of the same into this realm some Mowsters , that our people may fallen into the trade , and prepare the same for Turkey : for the more kinds of cloth we can devise to make , the more ample vent of our commodity we shall have , and the more sale of the labour of our poor subject's that else for lack of labour become idle and burdenous to the common weal , and hurtful to many : and in England we are in our clothing trade to frame our selves according to the desires of foreign nations , be it that they desire thick or thin , broad or narrow , long or short , white or black . 11 But with this proviso always , that our cloth pass out with as much labour of our people as may be , wherein great consideration ought to be had : for ( if vent might so admit it ) as it were the greatest madness in the world for us to vent our wool not clothed , so were it madness to vent our wool in part or in the whole turned into broad cloth , if we might vent the same in Kersies : for there is great difference in profit to our people between the clothing of a sack of wool in the one , and the like sack of wool in the other , of which I wish the merchant of England to have as great care as he may for the universali benefit of the poor : and the turning of a sack of wool into Bonnets is better then both etc. And also not to carry out of the realm any cloth white , but died if it may be , that the subject's of this realm may take as much benefit as is possible , and rather to seek the vent of the clothes died with the natural colours of England , then such as be died with foreign colours . 
 12 And if of necessity we must be forced to receive certain colours from foreign parts , for that this climate will not breed them , I wish that our merchants procure Anile and such other things to be planted in like climates where now it grows , in diverse other places , that this realm may have that brought in for as base princes as is possible , and that falling out with one place we may receive the same from another , and not buy the same 238 
 at the second or the third hand etc. For if a commodity that is to be had of mere necessity , be in one hand , it is dearly purchased . 
 i How many several colours be died is to be learned of our Dyers before you depart . 
 2 Then how many of those colours England does die of her own natural home materials and substances , and how many not . 
 3 Then to bring into this realm herbs and plants to become natural in our soils , that may die the rest of the colours , that presently of our own things here growing we can not yet die , and this from all foreign places . 
 4 There is a wood called Logwood or Palo Campechio , it is cheap and yields a glorious blue , but our workmen can not make it sure . This wood you must take with you , and see whither the Silk diers or Wool diers in Turky can do it , with this one you may enrich your self very much , and therefore it is to be endeavoured earnestly by you . It may bring down the price of Woad and of Anile . 
 Other some things to be remembered . 
 IF you can find out at Tripoly in Syria or elsewhere a vent for the Caps called in Barbarie , Bonettos colorados rugios , which is a read Scottish cap as it were without brims , you should do your country much good : for as a sack of wool turned into fine Devonshire kersies does set many more people on work then a sack spun for broad cloth in a grosser thread , so a sack of wool turned into those Bonnets does set many more poor people on work , then a sack turned into Kersies , by reason of the knitting . And therefore if you can endeavour that , you work great effect . And no doubt that a marvellous vent may be found out of them into Afrike by the way of Alexandria , and by Alcayer Southeast and Southwest thence . 
 2 And by the vent of our knit hose of Woollen yarn , Worsted yarn , and of Linen thread , great benefit to 
 239 
 This may be learned at Alger . 
 our people may arise , and a great valve in fine Kersies and in those knit wares may be couched in a small room in the ship . And for these things our people are grown apt , and by endeavour may be drawn to great trade . 
 3 Saffron the best of the universali world grows in this realm , and forasmuch as it is a thing that requires much labour in diverse sorts , and sets the people on work so plentifully , I wish you to see whither you can find out ample vent for the same , since it is gone out of great use in those parts . It is a spice that is cordial , and may be used in meats , and that is excellent in dying of yellow silks . This commodity of Saffron grows fifty miles from Tripoli in Syria , on and high hill called in those parts Garian , so as there you may learn at that port of Tripoli the valve of the pound , the goodness of it , and the places of the vent . But it is said that from that hill there passes yearly of that commodity fifteene modes laden , and that those regions notwithstanding lack sufficiency of that commodity . But if a vent might be found , men would in Essex about Saffronwalden and in Cambridge shire revive the trade for the benefit of the setting of the poor on work . So would they do in Hereford shire by Wales , where the best of all England is , in which place the soil yields the wild Saffron commonly , which shows the natural inclination of the same soil to the bearing of the right Saffron , if the soil be manured and that way employed . 
 4 There is a walled town not far from Barbarie , called Hubbed , towards the South from the famous town Telensin , about six miles : the inhabitants of which town in effect be all Dyers . And it is said that thereabouts they have plenty of Anile , & that they occupy that , and also that they use there in their dyings , of the Saffron aforesaid . The truth whereof , in the Southerly ports of the Mediteran sea , is easily learned in your passage to Tripoli , or in return from thence homeward you may understand it . It is reported at Saffronwalden that a 
 240 
 Pilgrim purposing to do good to his country , stole and head of Saffron , and hid the same in his Palmer's staife , which he had made hollow before of purpose , and so he brought this root into this realm , with venture of his life : for if he had be taken , by the law of the country from whence it came , he had died for the fact . If the like love in this our age were in our people that now become great travellers , many knowledges , and many trades , and many herbs and plants might be brought into this realm that might do the realm good . And the Roman having that care , brought from all coasts of the world into Italie all arts and sciences , and all kinds of beasts and fowls , and all herbs , trees , busks and plants that might yield profit or pleasure to their country of Italie . And if this care had not be heretofore in our ancestors , then had our life be savage now , for then we had not had Wheat nor Rye , Pease nor Beans , Barley nor Oats , Pear nor Apple , Vine nor many other profitable and pleasant plants , Bull nor Cow , Sheep nor Swine , Horse nor Mare , Cock nor Hen , nor a number of other things that we injpy , without which our life were to be said barbarous : for these things and a thousand that we use more the first inhabitors of this Hand found not here . And in time of memory things have be brought in that were not here before , as the Damask rose by Doctor Linaker king Henry the seventh and king Henrie the eights Physician , the Turky cocks and hens about fifty years past , the Artichowe in time of king Henry the eight , and of later time was procured out of Italy the Musk rose plant , the plum called the Perdigwena , and two kinds more by the Lord Cromwell after his travel , and the Abricot by a French Priest one Wolf Gardener to king Henry the eight : and now within these foure years there have be brought into England from Vienna in Austria diverse kinds of flowers called Tulipas , and those and other procured thither a little before from Constantinople by and excellent man called M. Carolus Clusius . And it is said that since we traded to Zante v 241 Q 
 that the plant that bears the Coren is also brought into this realm from thence ; and although it bring not fruit to perfection , yet it may serve for pleasure and for some use , like as our vines do , which we cannot well spare , although the climate so cold will not permit us to have good wines of them . And many other things have be brought in , that have degenerated by reason of the cold climate , some other things brought in have by negligence be lost . The Archbishop of Canterbury Edmund Grindall , after he returned out of Germany , brought into this realm the plant of Tamariske from thence , and this plant he hath so increased that there be here thousands of them ; and many people have received great health by this plant : and if of things brought in such care were had , then could not the first labour be lost . The seed of Tobacco hath be brought hither out of the West Indies , it grows here , and with the herb many have be eased of the reumes , etc. Each one of a great number of things were worthy of a journey to be made into Spaine , Italy , Barbarie , Egypt , Zante , Constantinople , the West Indies , and to diverse other places nearer and further ofF then any of these , yet forasmuch as the poor are not able , and for that the rich settled at home in quiet will not , therefore we are to make suit to such as repair to foreign kingdoms , for other businesses , to have some care herein , and to set before their eyes the examples of these good men , and to endeavour to do for their parts the like , as their speciali businesses may permit the same . Thus giving you occasion by way of a little remembrance , to have a desire to do your country good , you shall , if you have any inclination to such good , do more good to the poor ready to starve for relief , then ever any subject did in this realm by building of Almshouses , and by giving of lands and goods to the relief of the poor . Thus may you help to drive idleness the mother of most mischiefs out 
 242 
 WILLIAM HAREBORNE’S AMBASSAGE a.d. . 1583 - 
 of the realm , and win you perpetuali fame , and the prayer of the poor , which is more worth then all the gold of Peru and of all the West Indies . 
 