The voyage of the Susan of London to Constantinople , wherein the worshipful M. William Harborne was sent first Ambassador unto Sultan Murad Can , the great Turke , with whom he continued as her Majesties Ligier almost sixe years . 
 He 14 of November 1582 , we departed from Blackewall , bound for the City of Constantinople , in the tall ship called the Susan of London : the Master whereof was Richard Parsons , a very excellent and skilful man in his faculty . But by occasion of contrary 
 weather we spent two months before we could recover the Kowes in the Isle of Wight . Where the 14 of [ II i . 166. ] January following we took in the worshipful M. l^nuar1 fa William Hareborne her Majesties Ambassador to the JOttreteent • Turke , and his company , and sailed thence to Yarmouth in the foresaid Isle of Wight . The 19 we put from 
 Wight . The 26 we did see Cavo de Sant Vincente . The same day we were thwart of Cavo Santa Maria . The 27 we passed by Tariffa , and Gibraltar . The 28 in the morning we passed by Velez Malaga : and that night were thwart of Cavo de Gates . The 29 at night we had sighed of Cavo de Palos . The 30 in the morning we did see the high land of Denia , in the kingdom of Valentia , and that night we had sighed of the Hand Formentera . The 31 in the morning appeared the Hand of Cabrera . The first of February we put into a Port in Mallorca , called Porto de Sant _ Pedro : where they would have evil entreated us for & ? • , coming into the Harbour : we thought we might Malkrctt ' have be as bold there as in other places of christian - 
 C. Vincente . 
 C. Santa Maria . Tariffa . Velez Malaga . C. de Gates . C. de Pahs . Denia . 
 ' Formentera . 
 Cabrera . 
 February the 
 243 
 The ships dome , but it proved far otherwise . The first man 
 men gee on we met on ] and was a simple Shepherd , of whom we 
 demanded whither we might have a sheep or such like to refresh our selves , who told us yea . And by such conference had with him , at the last he came aboard once or twice , and had the best cheer that we could make him : and our Ambassador himself talked with him , and still he made us fair promises , but nothing at all meant to perform the same , as the end showed . In the mean time came in a ship of Marseils , the Master whereof did know our Ambassador very well , with whom our Ambassador had conference , and with his Merchants also . They came from Alger in Barbarie , which is under the government of the Great Turke . They did present our Ambassador with and Ape , wherefore he made very The Ambassa - much of them , and had them often aboard . By them dour betrayed . J suppose , he was bewrayed of his purpose as touching his message , but yet still we had fair words of the Shepherd aforesaid , and others . So that upon their words , our Purser and another man went to a Town which was three or foure miles from the port , and there were well entertained , and had of the people very fair speeches , and such small things as could be got upon the sudden , and so returned to the ship that day . Then we were emboldened , and thought all had be well , according to their talk . The next day , February the being the sixth day of Februarie , two of our Gentlesixth . men , with one of our Merchants , and the Purser , and 
 one of the Ambassadors men went to the Town aforesaid , thinking to do as the Purser and the other had done before , but it proved contrary : for at their coming thither they had fair words a while , and had bred and wine , and such necessaries for their money , until such time as they were beset with men , and the Majorcans never showed in their countenance any such matter , but as the manner of all the people in the dominions of Spaine is , for the most part to 244 
 be treacherous to us , if they think they have any advantage . For upon the sudden they laid hands on them , and put them in hold , as sure as might be in such a simple Town . Then were they well guarded with men both day and night , and still deluded with fair words , & they said to our men it was for no hurt , but that the Viceroy of the Hand would come aboard to see the ship . But they presently sent the Purser to the Town of Majorca , where he was examined by the Viceroy very straightly , what their ship and captain were , and what voyage they intended , but he confessed nothing at all . In the mean time they in the Town were likewise straightly examined by a Priest and other officers upon their oaths : who for their oaths sake declared the whole estate of their voyage . The Ambassadors man was a French man , and therefore was suffered to go to the ship on a message , but he could tell the Ambassador none other news , but that the Viceroy would come aboard the ship , and that our men should come with him , but they had another meaning . For the Marseilian Merchants were stayed in like manner in the Town , only to make a better show unto us . But in the mean time , being there three or foure days , there came men unto us every day , more or less , but one day especially there came two men on horseback , whom we took to be officers , being lusty men , and very well horsed . These men desired to speak with our Captain ( for all things that passed there were done in the name of our Captain John Gray ) for it was said by us there , that he was Captain of one of her Majesties ships : wherefore all things passed in his name : and the Ambassador not seen in any thing but rather concealed , and yet did all , because of his tongue and good inditing in that language . For he himself went on land clothed in Velvet , and talked with these men , and with him ten or twelve lusty fellows well weaponed , each one having 
 245 
 A . WORSER 
 1583 - 
 The English men are surprised . 
 rhe Spaniards a Boarespeare or a Cali ver , the Captain John Grey come to the sea being one of them , and our boat lying by very warily kept and ready . For then we began to suspect , taine . because the place was more frequented with men then it was wont . The men on horseback were in doubt to come near , because he came so well weaponed . But they bade him welcome , and gave him great salutations in words as their manner is : and demanded why he came so strong , for they said he needed not to fear any man in the Hand . Answer was made , that it was the manner of English Captains to go with their guard in strange places . Then they told our [ II i . 167. ] Ambassador ( thinking him to be the Captain ) that they were sent from the Viceroy to know what they did lack , for they promised him beef or mutton , or any thing that was in the Hand to be had , but their purpose was to have got more of our men if they could , and they said that we should have our men again the next day : with such pretty delusions they fed us still . Then our Ambassador did write a letter to the Viceroy in her Majesties name , and in our Captain John Grayes name , and not in his own , and sent it by them , desiring him to send his men , and not to trouble him in his voyage , for he had given him not such cause , nor any of his . So these men departed with great courtesy in words on both parts . And in all this time we did see men on horseback and on foot in the woods and trees more then they were accustomed to be , but we could perceive nothing thereby . The next day , or the second , came either foure or sixe of the best of them as we thought ( the Viceroy excepted ) and very many men beside in the fields , both on foot and on horse , but came not near The Spaniards the water side . And those in like order desired to Cparlegame ta sPea^e Captain , and that when he came on 
 pare ' land the trumpets might found : but then the Ambassador , whom they thought to be Captain , would not go , nor suffer the trumpets to be sounded ( for that 246 
 WILLIAM HAREBORNE’S AMBASSAGE a.d. 
 . 1583. 
 he thought it was a trap to take himself , and more of his company . But did send one of the principali of the Merchants to talk with them . And the Captain John Gray went also with him , not being known of the Spaniards , for he went as a soldier . Thus they received of those men the like words as they had of the other before mentioned , who said we should have our men again , for they meant us no hurt . Then our TheAmbana-Ambassadour did write another letter , and sent it mrw^th by them to the Viceroy , in like order as he did before , tot e Ker°y ' but he received no answer of any of them . In all this time they had privily gathered together the principali men of the Hand , and had laboured day and night to bring down ordinance , not making any show of their treachery towards us . But the same night following , ' we saw very many lights pass in the woods among the trees . And in the morning when the watch was broken 
 up , being Saturday the ninth of Februarie , at fair day tf light , one of our men looked forth , and saw standing e ruary‘ on land the carriage of a piece : then was one commanded to go into the top , and there he did descry two or three pieces , and also many men on the shore , with diverse weapons that they brought . Then they suddenly took foure or five brass pieces , and placed them on either side of the harbour where we should go out , and hid them with stones and bushes that we should not see them . Now I think the harbour not to be above the eight part of a mile over . Thus perceiving their meaning which was most plain : we agreed to take up our anchor and go out , and leave our men there , having none other way to take . Then our Ambassador entreated the Master of the Marseilian , his friend , to go on land with his boat , and to know the truth : who satisfied his request . And at his return he told us that it was very true , that they would lay hold of us if they could . Then we weighed our anchors : but having little wind , we towed the ship forward with the boat . The Viceroy himself was at the water side with more then 
 247 
 five hundred men on both sides of the harbour as we thought . And when we came out with our ship as The ship far as their ordinance , our Ambassador and the Captain pareth^tode * n their armour , the Master commanding of the 
 fend herself . company , and trimming of the sails , the Pilot standing on the poop , attending to his charge , with other very well furnished , and every man in order about their business very ready , they on land on the contrary part having a very fair piece mounted on the North side openly in all our sights , as the ship passed by , they traversed that piece right with the main mast or afterquarter of the ship , and a Gunner standing by , with > a lint-stocke in his hand , about foureteene or fifteene foot long , being ( as we thought ) ready to give fire . Our whole noise of trumpets were sounding on the poop with drum and flute , and a Minion of brass on the summer deck , with two or three other pieces , always by our Gunners traversed mouth to mouth with theirs on land , still looking when they on land should shoot , for to answer them again . The Pilot standing on the poop , seeing this readiness , and the ship going very softly , because of the calmness of the wind , he called to them on the South side , where the Viceroy was , and said unto him : Have you wars with us ? If you have , it is more then we know ; but by your provision it seems so : if you have , shoot in Gods name , and spare not , but they held all fast and shot not . Then the Viceroy himself held up a paper , and said he had a letter for our Captain , and desired us to stay for it . Then we answered and said we would not , but willed him to send it by the Marseilians boat , and our men also . All this while , our trumpets , drum and flute sounded , and so we passed out in the face of them all . When they perceived that they could lay no hold on us , they presently sent to the The effect of Town for our men , whom within less then three hours theTtceroys after ey sent aboard with the said letter , wherein he Captain of desired our Captain and his company not to take it in ill the Susan . part , for he meant them no harm , but would have seen 
 248 
 WILLIAM HAREBORNE’S AMBASSAGE a.d. 
 ..... I583 ' our ship . His letter did import these and such like fair speeches : for it altogether contained courteous salutations , saying that he might boldly come into any port [ II i . 168. ] within his Hand , and that he and his would show him what friendship they might : and that the injury that was offered was done at the request of the Shepherds and poor people of the country , for the more safeguard of their flocks , and because it was not a thing usual to have any such ship to come into that port , with many other deceitful words in the said letter . Then our effect °f Ambassador wrote unto him another letter to answer Ambassa-that , and gave him thanks for his men that he had sent °rs anmere ' him , and also for his good will , and sent him a present . 
 This done , we shot off half a dozen pieces , hoist our sails , and departed on our voyage . Then the Purser and the rest of our men that had been in hold , told us that they did see the Captain , and other gentlemen of the Hand , having their buskin's and stockings torn from their legs , with labouring in the bushes day and night to make that sudden provision . The 12 of February we saw and Hand of Africa side called Galata , where they use Galata . to drag out of the Sea much Coral , and we saw likewise Sardinia , which is and Hand subject to Spaine . The 13 Sardinia . in the morning we were hard by Sardinia . The 15 we did see and Hand near Sicilia , and and Hand on Africa side Fauagniana . called Cysimbre . The same day likewise we saw and Hand Cisimbri . called Pantalaria , and that night we were thwart the Pantalaria . middle of Sicilia . The 16 at night we were as far as Sicilia . Capo Passaro , which is the Southeast part of Sicilia . The C. Passaro . 24 we were put into a port called Porto de Conte , in and Porto de Conte Hand called Cephalonia : it is and out Hand in the m CePhalma-dominions of Grecia , and now at this present governed by the Signory of Venice , as the rest of Grecia is under the Turke , for the most part . The 27 we came from thence , and that day arrived at Zante which is also in Zante . 
 Grecia : for at this present we entered the parts of Grecia . The second of March we came from Zante ; and the same day were thwart of and Hand called , Prodeno : and Prodeno . 
 249 
 Cerigo . 
 C. Malto . Menelaus . 
 Bellapola . Both Milos . 
 Falconara . 
 Antemila . Fermenia , Zea . 
 Negroponte . Andri . 
 Psara . Sarafo . 
 Signora , a port in Metelin . 
 Porto Delfin . The city of Chio. 
 A By . 
 Ermine , or Customer . 
 the 4 we were thwart of and Hand called Sapientia . There stands a fair Town and a Castle on the main over against it , called Modon . The same day by reason of contrary winds we put back again to Prodeno , because we could not fetch Sapientia . The ninth we came from thence , and were as far as Sapientia again . The tenth we were as far shot as Cavo Matapan ; and that day we entered the Archipelago , and passed thorough between Cerigo and Cavo Malio . This Cerigo is and Hand where one Menelaus did sometime reign , from whom was stolen by Paris fair Helena , and carried to Troy , as ancient Records do declare . The same day we had sighed of a little Hand called Bellapola , and did likewise see both the Milos , being Hands in thee . Archipelago . The 11 in the morning we were hard by and Hand called Falconara , and the Hand of Antemila . The 12 in the morning we were between Fermenia and Zea , being both Hands . That night we were between Negroponte and Andri , being likewise Hands . The 13 in the morning we were hard by Psara and Sarafo , being Hands nine or tenne miles from Chio , and could not fetch Chio. So we put room with a port in Metelin called Signora , and about nine of the clock at night we anchored there . The 15 we came from thence , the sixteenth we put into Porto Delfi . The port is 9 English miles to the Northward of the City of Chio , ( and it may be twelve of their miles ) this night we stayed in the said port , being in the Hand of Chio. Then went our Merchant and one or two with him to the City of Chio. And when the By , who is the governor of the Hand ( and is in their language a Duke ) had communed with the Merchant , and those that were with him , and understood of our arrival within his dominion , the day following he armed his galleys , and came to welcome our Ambassador , accompanied with the Ermine , that is , the Kings Customer , and also the French Consuli , with diverse of the chief of the City , and offered him as much friendship as he could or would desire : for he did offer to attend 
 25° 
 upon us , and tow us if need were to the Castles . The 21 we departed from thence , and that day passed by port Signora again . This Hand of Metelin is part of Asia , and is near to Natolia . The 22 we passed by a head land called Baberno , and is also in Asia . And that day at night we passed by the Isle of Tenedo , part of Asia , and by another Hand called Maure . And the same day we passed thorough the straights of Galipoli , and by the Castles , and also by the Town of Galipoli it self , which stands in Europa . And that night we were in sighed of Marmora which is near Natolia , and part of Asia . The 23 in the morning we were thwart of Araclia , and that night we anchored in Silauria . The 24 in the morning the Merchant and the Pilot were set on land to go to the City about the Ambassadors business , but there 
 A.D. 
 I583 - 
 Baberno . Tenedo . Maure . Galipoli . 
 Marmora . 
 Araclia . 
 Silauria . 
 they could not land because we had the wind fair . 
 That place of some is called Ponte grande , and is foure Ponte grande . and twenty miles on this side of Constantinople , and because of the wind , they followed in the skiff until they came to a place called Ponte picola , and there Ponte plcola . is a little bridge , it stands eight Turkish miles from Constantinople , there the Merchant and the Pilot landed . At this bridge is and house of the great Turkes with a fair Garden belonging unto it , near the which is a point called Ponta S. Stephano , and there the P°nte s-shippe anchored that day . The 26 day the ship came fhano . to the seven Towers , and the 27 we came nearer . The 
 29 there came three galleys to bring us up further : [ II i . 169. ] and when the ship came against the great Turks The arnvall palace , we shot ofF all our ordinance to the number of °f the Susan at foure and thirty pieces . Then landed our Ambassa - onstawtm-dour , and then we discharged foure and twenty pieces , who was received with more then fifty or threescore 
 ople . 
 men on horseback . The ninth of April he presented the great Bassa with sixe clothes , foure Cannae of silver double gilded , and one piece of fine holland , and to three other Bassas , that is to say , the second Bassa , which is a gelded man , and his name is Mahomet Bassa , to 25* 
 The Ambassador gives a present to the great Bassa . 
 The Ambassadors entertainment with the Bassas . 
 a.d. 
 J583 - . 
 the third who married the great Turks sister , and to the fourth whom they call Abraham Bassa , to every one of these he gave foure clothes . Now , before the great Bassa , and Abraham Bassa , at their return from the Court ( and as we think at other times , but at A man half that time for a certain ) there came a man in manner naked goes of a fool > who gave a great shout three or foure Bassa^^^ timesj crying very hollowly , the place rebounded with the found , and this man , say they , is a prophet of Mahomet , his arms and legs naked , on his feet he did wear wooden pattens of two sorts , in his hand , a flag , or streamer set on a short spear painted , he carried a mat and bottles , and other trumpery at his back , and sometime under his arm , on his head he had a cap of white Camels hair , flat like and helmet , written about with letters , and about his head a linen roll . Other servingmen there were with the said Bassas , with read attire on their heads , much like French hoods , but the long flap somewhat smaller towards the end , with scufies or plataeae of mettle , like unto the chape of and ancient arming sword , standing on their foreheads like other Janissaries . These Bassas entertained us as follows : First , they brought us into a hall , there to stand on one side , and our Ambassador and gentlemen on the other side , who sat them down on a bench covered with carpets , the Ambassador in the midst ; on his left hand sat our gentlemen , and on his right hand the Turkes , next to the door where their master goes in and out : the common sort of Turkes stayed in the Court yard , not suffered to come near us . When our Ambassador had sitten half and hour , the Bassas ( who sat by themselves in and inner small room ) sent for him ; to whom the Ambassador and his gentlemen went : they all kissed his hand , and presently returned ( the Ambassador only excepted , who stayed there , and a Turks chaus with him ) with the Ambassador and his gentlemen went in also so many of our men as there 
 252 
 WILLIAM HAREBORNE’S AMBASSAGE a.d. 
 1583. 
 were presents to carry in , but these neither kissed his hand nor tarried . After this I went to visit the church of Santa Sophia , which was the chief church when it Santa Sophia . was the Christians , and now is the chief see and church of primacy of this Turke present : before I entered I was willed to put off my shoes , to the end I should not profane their church , I being a Christian . 
 The pillars on both sides of the church are very costly description and rich , their Pulpits seemly and handsome , two are °ft , le'trchurc , l common to preach in , the third reserved only for their Paschall . The ground is covered with Mats , and the walls hanged with Tapestry . They have also Lamps in their churches , one in the middle of the church of exceeding greatness , and another in another part of the church of clean gold , or double gilded , full as big as a barrel . Round about the church there is a gallery built upon rich and stately pillars . 
 That day I was in both the chapels , in one of the which lies the Turkes father , and five of his sons in tombs right costly , with their turbents very white and clean , shifted ( as they say ) every Friday , they be not on their heads , but stand on moulds made for that purpose . At the ends , over , and about their tombs are belts , like girdles , beset with jewels . In the other chapel are foure other of his sons , and one daughter , in like order . In the first chapel is a thing foure foot high , covered with green , beset with mother of pearl very richly . This is a relic of Mahomet , and stands on the left side of the head of the great Turks tomb . These chapels have their floors covered , and their walls hanged with Tapestry of great price , I could valve the covering and hangings of one of the chapels , at no less then five hundred pounds , beside their lamps hanging richly gilded . These chapels have their roofs curiously wrought with rich stone , and gilded . And there lie the books of their Laws for every man to read . The 11 day of April the ship came to the Key of the Custom custom house . 
 253 
 The Ambassador presents the Admiral UchaK . 
 The Susan gpeth from the Customhouse . The AdmiraU departeth to the sea . 
 [ II i . 170. ] 
 The Ambassadors repair to the great Turks court . 
 house . The 16 the Ambassador and we his men went to the Captain Bassa , who is Admiral of the seas , his name is Uchali , he would not receive us into his house , but into his galley , to deliver our present , which was as follows : Foure pieces of cloth , and two silver pots gilded & graved . The poop or stern of his gaily was gilded both within and without , and under his feet , and where he sat was all covered with very rich Tapestry . Our Ambassador and his gentlemen kissed his hand , and then the gentlemen were commanded out , and our Ambassador sat down by him on his left hand , and the chaus stood before him . Our men might walk in the gaily before and after , some of us tarried , and some went out again . The gaily had seven pieces of brass in her prow , small and great , she had thirty banks or oars on either side , and at every bank or oar seven men to row . The 18 day the ship went from the Key . And 21 the Admiral took his leave of the great Turke , being bound to the Sea with sixe and thirty galleys , very fairly beautified with gild and painting , and beset with flags and streamers , all the which galleys discharged their ordinance : and we for his farewell gave him one and twenty pieces . Then he went to his house with his galleys , and the 22 he went to the Sea , and the Castle that stands in the water gave him foureteene or sixteene pieces : and when he came against the Turks Seraglio he shot ofF all his calivers and his great pieces , and so he went his way . The 24 our Ambassador went to the Court , whose entertainment with the order thereof follows . When we came first on land there was way made for us by two or three Bassa's and diverse chauses on horseback with their men on foot , to accompany , our Ambassador to the Court . Also they brought horses for him and his gentlemen for to ride , which were very richly furnished : and by the way there met with us other chauses to accompany us to the Court . 
 254 
 WILLIAM HAREBORNE’S AMBASSAGE a.d. 
 1583 - 
 When we came there we passed thorough two gates , at the second gate there stood very many men with horses attending on their master's . When we came within that gate we were within a very fair Court yard , in compass twice so big as Pauls Churchyard . On the right hand of the said Court was a fair gallery like and Alley , and within it were placed rails and such other provision . On the left side was the like , half the Court over : it was divided into two parts , the innermost fairer then the other . The other part of that side is the place where the Council do usually fit , and at the inner end of that is a fair place to fit in , much like unto that place in Pauls Churchyard , where the Mayor and his brothers use to fit , thither was our Ambassador brought , and set in that place . Within that said place is another like open room , where he did eat . Assoon as we came enterin , we were placed in the innermost alley of the second room , on the left side of the Court , which Ambassadors was spread with carpets on the ground fourescore or men . fourescore and tenne foot long , with and hundred and fiftie several dishes set thereon , that is to say , Mutton boiled and roasted , Rice diversely dressed , Fritters of the finest fashion , and dishes daintily dight with pretty pap , with infinite others , I know not how to express them . We had also roasted Hens with sundry sorts of fowls to me unknown . The gentlemen and we sat down on the ground , for it is their manner so to feed . There were also Greeks and others set to furnish out the room . Our drink was made with Rose water and Sugar and spices brewed together . 
 Those that did serve us with it had a great bag tied over their shoulders , with a broad belt like and arming belt full of plataeae of copper and gilded , with part of the said bag under his arm , and the mouth in his hand : then he had a devise to let it out when he would into cups , when we called for drink . The Ambassador when he had eaten , passed by us , with 2SS 
 the chauses aforesaid , and sat him down in and inner room . This place where he sat was against the gate where we came in , and hard by the Council chamber end , somewhat on the left side of the Court , this was at the East end of the Court , for we came in at the West . All this time our presents stood by us until we had dined , and dinner once ended , this was their order of taking up the dishes . Certain were called in , like those of the Black guard in the Court of England , the Turks call them Moglans . These came in like rude and ravening Mastiffs , without order or fashion , and made clean riddance : for he whose hungry eye one dish could not fill turned two , one into the other , and thus even on the sudden was made a clean riddance of all . Then came certain chauses and brought our gentlemen to fit with the Ambassador . Immediately came officers & appointed Janisers to bear from us our presents , who carried them on the right side of the Court , and set them hard by the door of the Privy chamber , as we call it : there all things stood for the space of and hour . Thus the Ambassador and his gentlemen sat still , and to the Southward of them was a door whereas the great Turke himself went in and out at , and on the South side of that door sat on a bench all his chief lords and gentlemen , and on the North side of the West gate stood his guard , in number as I guess them a thousand men . These men have on their heads round caps of mettle like skulls , but sharp in the top , in this they have a bunch of Ostrich feathers , as big as a brush , with the corner or edge forward : at the lower end of these feathers was there a smaller feather , like those that are commonly worn here . Some of his guard had small staves , & most of them were weaponed with bows and arrows . Here they waited , during our abided at the Court , to guard their Lord . After the Ambassador with his gentlemen had sitten and hour and more , there came three or foure chauses , and brought them into the great Turkes aS6 
 WILLIAM HAREBORNE’S AMBASSAGE a.d. 
 1583-presence . At the Privy chamber door two noble men took the Ambassador by each arm one , and put their fingers within his sleeves , and so brought him to the great Turke where he sumptuously sat alone . He kissed his hand and stood by until all the gentlemen were brought before him in like manner , one by one , and led backwards again his face towards the Turke ; for they might neither tarry nor turn their backs , and in like manner returned the Ambassador . The salutation that the Noble men did , was taking them by the hands . All this time they trodden on cloth of gold , most of the Noble men that sat on the South side of the Privy chamber sat likewise on cloth of gold . Many officers [ II i . 171. ] or Janissaries there were with staves , who kept very good order , for no Turke whatsoever might go any further then they willed him . At our Ambassadors entering 
 they followed that bore his presents , to say , twelve fine Turke is broad clothes , two pieces of fine holland , tenne pieces of plate double gilded , one case or candlesticks , the case whereof was very large , and three foot high and more , two very great Cannae or pots , and one lesser , one basin and ewer , two poppinjayes of silver , the one with two heads : they were to drink in : two bottles with chains , three fair mastiffs in coats of red cloth , three spaniels , two bloodhounds , one common hunting hound , two greyhouds , two little dogs in coats of silk : one clock valued at five hundred pounds sterling : over it was a forest with trees of silver , among the which were deer chased with dogs , and men on horseback following , men drawing of water , others carrying mine oar on barrows : on the top of the clock stood a castle , and on the castle a mill . All these were of silver . And the clock was round beset with jewels . 
 All the time that we stayed at the Council chamber door they were telling or weighing of money to send into Persia for his Soldiers pay . There were carried out and hundred and three and thirty bags , and in every bag , as it was told us , one thousand ducats , which amounteth 
 v 257 R 
 to three hundred and thirty thousand * , and in sterling English money to fourescore and nineteene thousand pounds . The Captain of the guard in the mean time went to the great Turke , and returned again , then they of the Court made obeisance to him , bowing down their heads , and their hands on their breasts , and he in like order resaluted them : he was in cloth of silver , he went and came with two or three with him and not more . Then we went out at the first gate , and there we were commanded to stay until the Captain of the guard was passed by and all his guard with him , part before him and part behind him , some on horseback and some on foot , but the most part on foot carrying on their shoulders the money before mentioned , and so we passed home . There was in the Court during our abided there , for the most part a fool resembling the first , but not naked as was the other at the Bassas : but he turned him continually , & cried Hough very hollowly . The third of May I saw the Turke go to the church : he had more then two hundred and fifty horses before and behind him , but most before him . There were many empty horses that came in no order . Many of his Nobility were in cloth of gold , but himself in white satin . There did ride behind him sixe or seven youths , one or two whereof carried water for him to drink as they said . There were many of his guard running before him and behind him , and when he alighted , they cried Hough very hollowly , as the aforesaid fools . 
 