A letter written in Spanish by Sir Edward Osborne , to the king of Alger , the 20. of July , 1584. in the behalf of certain English captives there detained . 
 The same in English . 
 Right high and mighty king , 
 May it please your highness to understand , that the most high and most mighty majesty of the Grand Signor hath confirmed certain articles of privileges with the most excellent majesty of our Queen of England , that her subject's may freely go and come , and traffic by sea and land in the dominions of his most mighty majesty , as appears more at large by you said articles , whereof we have sent the copy unto M. Joh. Tipton our Commissary , to show the same unto your highness . Against the tenor of which articles , one of our ships which came from Patras which is in Morea , laden with corants and other merchandizes which were bought in those parts , was sunk by 2. galleys of your ci tie of Alger , and the greatest number of the men thereof were slave and drowned in the sea , the residue being detained as slaves : And act very contrary to the meaning of the aforesaid articles and privileges : which is the occasion that by these presents we beseech your highness very humbly , that since it hath pleased the most mighty majesty of the Grand Signor to favour us with the said 269 
 A.D. 
 I584 . 
 And English ship sunk by two galleys of Alger . 
 privileges , it would please your Highness in like manner to assist us in the same , granting us by your authority , your aid and favour , according as our hope is , that these poor men so detained in captivity , as is aforesaid , may be set at liberty , & return into their country . And likewise that your highness would send to give order to the captains , master's and people of your galleys , that from henceforth they would suffer us to use . our _ traffic with sixe ships yearly into Turkey unto the dominions of the Grand Signor in peace and safety , [ IL i . 176. ] that they do not withstand those our said privileges , every one of our foresaid ships carrying with them a passport of his most high and most mighty majesty to be known by . And for that your so singular favour and courtesy which in so doing we shall receive , we on our part with all bounden duty unto your highness , will seek to honour you in that behalf , according as the said master John Tipton ( to whom we refer our selves touching all other circumstances ) shall more at large inform your highness , whose most excellent person and estate , we pray and beseech almighty God to prosper and increase with all felicity and honour . From the City of London , the 20. of July , 1584. 
 At the service of your highness , for and in the name of our whole company trading into Turkey , I Mayor of London , Edward Osburne . 
 