A commandment to Patrasso in Morea . 
 WHen this commandment shall come unto you , know you , that the Consuli of the English Nation in our port of Patrasso , hath given us to understand , that formerly we granted him a commandment that having paid once custom for the currants bought to lade in their ships , they shall not pay it again : according to which they bringing it to the port of Petrasso , informing thereof Mahomet the Nadir of Lepanto , he contrary to the tenor thereof and former order , does again take another custom of him , and requiring him to know why he so did contrary to our commandment , he answered us , he took it not for custom , but for a present . Moreover the said Consuli certified us how that the said Nadir contrary to ancient custom does not take for the kings right as he ought currents , but will have of the 285 
 poor men money at his pleasure , and therewith buyeth currents at a very low price , which after he does forcibly fell to us at a much higher price , saying it is remainder of the goods of the king , and by this means does hurt the poor men and do them wrong . Wherefore I come - [ II i . 182. ] manned you by this my commandment , that you look to this matter between this Consuli , the Nadir , and this people , and do therein equally according to right . And see that our commandment in this matter be observed in such sort , as they having once in the port paid full custom , do not pay it again , neither that this Nadir do take any more money of them by the way of present , for that therein it is most certain he does them injury contrary to the Canon . And if with you shall be found to the valve of one Asper taken heretofore wrongfully of them , see it presently restored to them , without any default . And from henceforth see that he do neither him nor his people wrong , but that he deal with them in all things according to our Canon , that the Consuli and his hereafter have no occasion any more to complain here in our Court , and that the Nadir proceed in gathering corants of the people after the old order and not otherwise . This know you for certain , and give credit to this my commandment , which having read deliver again into the Consuls hands . From Constantinople the year of Mahomet 993. 
 