To Assan Aga , Eunuch & Treasurer to Hassan Bassa king of Alger , which Assan Aga was the son of Fran. Rowlie of Bristow merchant , taken in the Swallow . 
 Received your letters of Will . Hamor gentleman my servant very thankfully , aswell for the fervent faith that by his report I hear you have in our lord Jesus Christ , by whose only merits and bloodshedding , you together with us and all other good Christians so truly believing , 
 shall saved , as also for your faithful obedience like a true subject to her Majesty , naturally loving your country & countrymen , declared in your favourable furtherance of the said Wil. Hamore , procuring their redemption . Of which your good & virtuous actions , as I rejoice to understand , so will I impart the same to your singular commendation , both to our mistress her Majesty , & her most honourable counsellers the nobility of England , to whom assure your self the report shall very welcome . And now this second time I am enforced by duty to God & her majesty , as also by the small regard your master had of the Grand Signors former commandments , to complain unto him , though not so vehemently as I had occasion by his most unworthy answer . But I hope , & the rather by your means , he will not contrary this second commandment , threatening him , not observing the same , loss of office & life . The due execution whereof by your virtuous & careful industry procured , will manifest to all the world , especially to her majesty , & 282 
 me her ambassador , your true Christian mind & English heart , intentively bent to Gods honour , & the liberty of the poor men , for which I trust you be ordained another Joseph , to follow his example in true piety , in such sort that notwithstanding your body be subject to Turkish thraldom , yet your virtuous mind free from those vices , next under God addict to you good service of your liege Lady & sovereign princes , her most excellent majesty , will continually seek by all good means to manifest you same in this & the like faithful service to your singular commendation , whereby both my self & others in that place having found you in all good offices faithfully affectionated , may in like case perform the like towards you , when & where you may have occasion to use me : which as I for my part do assuredly promise , & will no less faithfully perform : so accordingly I expect herein , and hereafter the like of you , whom most heartily saluted I commend to the divine tuition and holy direction . From my house Rapamat , this 28. of June 1586. 
 Your loving and good friend her Majesties Ambassador with the Grand Signor , Will . Hareborne . 
 