The Turkes letter to the King of Tripolis in Barbarie , commanding the restitution of and English ship , called the Jesus , with the men , and goods , sent from Constantinople , by Mahomet Beg , a Justice of the Great Turkes , and and English Gentleman , called Master Edward Barton . Anno 1584. 
 Onourable , and worthy Bassa Romadan Beglerbeg , most wise and prudent Judge of the West Tripolis , we wish the end of all thy enterprises happy , and prosperous . By these our highness letters , we certify thee , that the right honourable , William Hareborne , Ambassador 
 in our most famous Porch , for the most excellent Queens Majesty of England , in person , and by letters hath certified our highness , that a certain ship , with all her furniture , and artillery , worth two thousand ducats , arriving in the port of Tripolis , and discharged of her lading and merchandise , paid our custom according to order , and again , the merchants jaded their ship with oil , which by constraint they were enforced to buy of you , & having answered in like manner the custom for the same , determined to depart : a Frenchman assistant to the Merchant , unknown to the Englishmen , carried away with him another Frenchman indebted to a certain More in foure hundred ducats , and by force caused the Englishmen , and ship to depart : who neither suspecting fraud , nor deceit , hoist sails . In the mean time , this man , whose debtor the Frenchman had 
 314 
 stolen away , went to the Bassa with the supplication , by whose means , and force of the Castle , the Englishmen were constrained to return into the port , where the Frenchman , author of the evil , with the Master of the ship and Englishman , innocent of the crime were hanged , [ IL i . 193. ] and sixe and twentie Englishmen cast into prison , of whom through famine , thirst , and stink of the prison , eleven died , and the rest like to die . Further , it was signified to our Majesty also , that the merchandise and other goods , with the ship , were worth 7600. ducats : which things if they be so , this is our commandment , which was granted and given by our Majesty , that the English ship , and all the merchandise , and whatsoever else taken away be wholly restored , and that the Englishmen be let go free , and suffered to return into their Country . Wherefore when this our commandment shall come unto thee , we straightly command , that the foresaid business be diligently looked unto , and discharged . And if it be so , that a Frenchman , and no Englishman hath done this craft , and wickedness unknown to the Englishmen , and as author of the wickedness is punished , and that the Englishmen committed nothing against the peace and league , or their articles : also if they paid custom according to order , it is against law , custom of Countries' , and their privilege , to hinder or hurt them . Neither is it meet , their ship , merchandise , and all their goods taken , should be withholden . we will therefore , that the English ship , merchandise , and all other their goods , without exception , be restored to the Englishmen : also that the men be let go free , and if they will , let none hinder them , to return peaceably into their Country : do not commit , that they another time complain of this matter , and how this business is dispatched , certify us at our most famous porch . 
 Dated in the City of Constantinople , in the 992. year of Mahomet , and in the end of the month of October ; and in the year of Jesus 1584. 
 315 
 