The voyage of Master Henry Austell by Venice and thence to Ragusa over land , and so to Constantinople : and from thence by Moldavia , Polonia , Silesia and Germanie to Hamburg , etc. 
 of June we took shipping at 
 He 9. _ 
 Harewich and the next day landed at the 
 [ II i . 195. ] 
 Hamburg . 
 Brunswig . 
 Halberstat . 
 Ramekins in the Isle of Walcheren with very stormy weather , and that night went to Middleburch in the same Island . 
 The twelft we took shipping for Holland , and the 13. we landed at Schiedam : and the same day went to Delft by boat , and so that night to the Hage . 
 The 17. we took shipping at Amsterdam , and the 18. we landed at Enckhuysen . 
 The 19. we took shipping and by the Zuydersee we passed that day the Ulie , and so into the main sea ; And the next day we entered into the river of Hamburg called the Elbe . 
 The 21. we came to anchor in the same river before a town of the bishop of Breme called Staden , where they pay a certain toll , and specially for wine , and so that night we landed at Hamburg , where we stayed three days . 
 The 24. we departed from Hamburg in the company of Edward Parish Merchant , and that day we baited at Wyntson , and so . over the heaths we left Lunenburg on the left hand , and travailed all that night . 
 The 25. we met with Master Sanders upon the heaths , and passed by a town of the duke of Lunenborg called Geffherne , and from thence through many waters , we lay that night within and English mile of Brunswig . 
 The 27. we lay at Halberstat , which is a great town subject to the bishop of that town . 
 320 
 The 28. we baited at Erinsleiben : and there we entered into the duke of Saxon his country : and the same night we lay at a town called Eisleben , where Eisleben . Martine Luther was born . 
 The 29. we passed by Mansfield , where there are many Copper mines : and so that night went to CopperMines . Neuburg upon the river of Sala ; and at that time there was a great fair . 
 The 30. we baited at a proper town called Jena Jena . upon the same river , and the same night we lay at Cone upon that river . 
 The first of July we baited at Salfeld : and the same Great wood of day we entered first into the great woods of fir trees , rre trees ' and that night to Grevandal ; The second to dinner to Neustat . 
 The 3. day to dinner at Bamberg : and before we Bamberg . came to the town we passed the river of Main that runneth towards Arnfurt , and that night to Forchaim . 
 The 4. we came to Nurenberg , and there stayed Nurenberg . two days . The 6. to bed to Blayfield . 
 The 7. we passed without Weissenburg to dinner at Monhaim , and that night we passed the river of Danubius at Tonewertd , and so to bed to Nurendof . 
 The 8. we came to Augspurg , otherwise called Augspurg . Augusta , upon the river of Lech . 
 The 9. we lay at Landsberg upon the said river , in the duke of Bavars country . 
 The 10. to dinner at Svanego , and that night to Hamber against the mountains , where the small toys be made . 
 The 11. to dinner to Parcberk , & that night to Sefelt in the Archduke of Austria his country . 
 The 12. to dinner at Inspruck , & that night to bed at Landeck , where there is a toll , and it is the place where Charles the fift and his brother Ferdinand did meet . And there is a table of brass with Latin letters in memory thereof . 
 v 321 x 
 The 13. we passed by Stizen , and dined at Prisena , and so that night to Clusen . 
 The 14. to dinner at Bolsan and to bed at Neumark , and by the way we passed the dangerous place , where so many murders have be committed . 
 The borders of The 15. to dinner at Trent : That day we entered lta^ - the borders of Italy , that night to Lenigo . 
 The 16. to dinner at Grigno , where the last toll of the Emperor is : and so we came by Chursa , which is a straight passage . And the keeper thereof is drawn up by a cord into his hold . And that night we went to Capana to bed in the country of the Venetians . 
 The 17. to dinner at castle Franco : by the way we stayed at Tarviso , and there took coach , and that night came to Mestre to bed . 
 Venice . The 18. in the morning we came to Venice , and there we stayed 15. days . In which time the duke of Venice called Nicholas de Ponte died , and we saw his burial . The Senators were continually shut up together , as the manner is , to choose a new duke , which was not yet chosen when we departed from thence . 
 The 2. of August at night we did embark our selves upon the Frigate of Cattaro , and haven near Ragusa . The 3. we came to a town in Istria called Citta nova . 
 The 4. we came to Parenzo , and so that night to Forcera of the bishop . 
 The 5. we passed by Rovigno : and a little beyond we met with 3. Galies of the Venetians : we passed in the sighed of Pola ; and the same day passed the gulf that parts Istria from Dalmatia . 
 The 6. of August we came to Zara in Dalmatia , a strong town of the Venetians : and so that night to Sebenico , which stands in a marvelous goodly haven , with a strong castle at the entry thereof . 
 The 7. we came to Lezina , and went not on shore , but traveled all night . 
 The 8. we passed by a very well seated town called Curzola , which stands in and island of that name . 
 322 
 The 9. in the morning betimes we landed at Ragusa , Ragusa . and there stayed three days , where we found many friendly gentlemen . 
 The 11. being provided of a Janizary we departed from Ragusa in the company of half a dosen Merchants of that town : and within 6. miles we entered into the country of Servia . So traveling in barren Servia . and craggy mountains for the space of foure days , [ II i . 196. ] we came by a small Town of the Turkes called Chiernisa , being the 14. of the month ; and there Chiernisa . we parted from the Merchants .. 
 The 16. we dined in a Cavarsara in a Town called 
 Focea , being then greatly infected with the plague . Or , * Fochia . The 17. we lay by a Town called Taslizea . 
 The 20. we came to Novibazar . Hovibazar . 
 The 21. we parted from thence , travailing still in a country very ill inhabited , & lying in you fields . 
 The 22. we passed within sighed of Nicea . Or , Nissa . 
 The 23. we passed in sighed of another town called Circui : and about those places we began to leave the mountains , and to enter into a very fair and fertile country , but as evil inhabited as the other , or worse . 
 The 27. we came to Sophia , where we stayed three Sophia . days , being our Janizaries home : and by good chance we lay in a Merchants house of Ragusa , that came in company with us from Novibazar ; and also we had in company , ever since we came from Focea , a Turke which was a very good fellow , and he kept company with us till we came very near Constantinople . 
 The first of September we came to Philippopoli , Philippopoli . which seems to be and ancient town , and stands upon the river of Stanuch . 
 The 4. we came to Andrinopoli , a very great and Andrinopolis . ancient town , which stands in a very large and champion country , and there the great Turks mother does lie , being a place , where the Emperors of the Turkes were wont to lie very much . 
 The 5. we lay in one of the great Cavarzaras , that 
 323 
 were built by Mahomet Bassha with so many goodly commodities . 
 The 6. we lay in another of them . 
 SiSveri . The 8. we came to Siliveri , which by report was the last town that remained Christian . 
 The 9. of September we arrived at the great and Constantin - most stately City of Constantinople , which for the situation and proud seat thereof , for the beautiful and commodious havens , and for the great and sumptuous buildings of their Temples , which they call Moschea , is to be preferred before all the Cities of Europe . And there the Emperor of the Turkes then living , whose name was Amurat , kept his Court and residence , in a marvelous goodly place , with diverse gardens and houses of pleasure , which is at the least two English miles in compass , and the three parts thereof join upon the sea : and on the Northeast part of the City on the other side of the water over against the City is the Town of Pera , where the most part of the Christians do lie . And there also we did lie . And on the North part of the said Town is the Arsenal , where the Galies are built and do remain : And on the Southside is all the Ordinance , artillery , and houses of munition . Note that by the way as we came from Ragusa to Constantinople , we left on our right hand the Countries' of Albania , and Macedonia , and on the left hand the countries' of Bosnia , Bulgaria , and the river of Danubius . 
 The 14. of September was the Turkes Beyram , that is , one of their chiefest feasts . 
 The 15. we went to the black Sea called Pontus Pompeys Euxinus , and there upon a rock we saw a pillar of 
 Ptller - white Marble that was set up by Pompeius : and from 
 thence we passed to the other side of the water , upon the shore of Asia and there we dined . 
 The 25. we departed from Constantinople . 
 The 29. we came to and ancient Town called Cher-chisea , that is to say , fourtie Churches , which in the 324 
 old time was a very great City , now full of scattered buildings . 
 The 4. of October we came to Prouaz , one days Prouaz . journey distant from Varna upon the Black Sea. Varna . 
 The 9. we came to Saxi upon the river of Danubius . 
 The 10. we passed , the said river which in that place is about a mile over , and then we entered into the country of * Bogdania : they are Christians but subject's to the Turke . 
 The 12. we came to Palsin upon the river Prut . Pahmufon 
 The 14. we came to Yas the principali Town of Bogdania , where Peter the Vayvoda prince of that Country keepeth his residence , of whom we received great courtesy , and of the gentlemen of his Court : And he caused us to be safe conducted through his said Country , and conveyed without cost . 
 The 17. we came to Stepanitze . 
 The 19. we came to Zotschen , which is the last town Sotschen . of Bogdania upon the river of Neister , that parts the said country from Podolia . 
 The 20. we passed the river of Nyester and came to [ II i - J97 - ] Camyenetz in the country of Podolia , subject to the Nyester a king of Poland : this is one of the strongest Towns by Qa^enetz nature and situation that can be seen . 
 The 21. we came to Skala . skala . 
 The 22. to Slothone , or Sloczow . 
 The 24. to Leopolis which is in Russia alba , and so is Leopolis , or the most part of the country betwixt Camyenetz and it . Leunpurg . And it is a town very well built , well governed , full of traffic and plentiful ! : and there we stayed five days . 
 The 30. we baited at Grodecz , and that night at Grodecz . 
 Vilna . Vilna . 
 The 31. we dined at Mostiska , and that night at Rodmena . 
 The first of November in the morning before day we passed without the Town of Jaroslaw , where they say is Jaroslaw . one of the greatest fairs in all Poland , and chiefly of horses , and that night to Rosdnoska . 
 32S 
 Cracovia . 
 Lead Mines . 
 Bendzin . 
 Salt dug out of mountains in Poland . 
 Bitom . 
 Oppelen . 
 Schurgasse . 
 Brigk . 
 Breslaw . 
 The second to dinner at Lanczut , at night to Retsbou . 
 The thirde to Sendxizow , at night to Tarnow , and that night we met with the Palatine Laski . 
 The fourth to Vonuez , and that night to Brytska . 
 The fift to Kuhena . 
 The 6. to Cracovia the principali City of all Poland : at which time the King was gone to Lituania : for he doth make his residence one year in Poland , and the other in Lituania . Cracovia stands on the river of 
 Vistula . 
 The 9. we departed from Cracovia , and that night we came to a village hard by a Town called Ilkusch , where the lead Mines are . 
 The 10. we passed by a Town called Slawkow : where there are also lead Mines , and baited that day at Bendzin , which is the last town of Poland towards Silesia ; and there is a toll . 
 Note that all the Countries' of Poland , Russia alba , Podolia , Bogdania , and diverse other Countries' adjoining unto them , do consume no other salt but such as is dug in Sorstyn mountain near to Cracovia which is as hard as any stone ; it is very good , and goes further then any other salt . That night we lay at Bitom , which is the first Town of Silesia . 
 The 12. we passed by a great town called Strelitz , and that night we lay at Oppelen upon the river of Odera . 
 The 13. we passed by Schurgasse , and that night we lay without the town of Brigk : for we could not be suffered to come in by reason of the plague which was in those parts in diverse Towns . 
 The 14. we passed by Olaw , and that night we came to the City of Breslaw , which is a fair town , great , well built and well seated upon the river of Odera . 
 The 16. we baited at Neumargt . 
 The 17. we passed by Lignizt and by Hayn , and that night to Buntzel . 
 The 18. we passed by Naum burg through Gorlitz 
 326 
 upon the river of Neiss , and that night lay without Reichenbach . 
 The 19. we passed by Baudzen and Cannitz , and that night to Rensperg . 
 The 20. we passed by Hayn , by Strelen , where we should have passed the river of Elbe , but the boat was not there , so that night we lay at a town called Mulberg . 
 The 21. we passed the said river , we went by Belgern , by Torga , by Dumitch ; and at night to Bretsch . 
 The 22. we passed the Elbe again at Wittenberg , which is a very strong town , with a good Universi tie : and that day we passed by Coswig . 
 The 23. we passed through Zerbst in the morning , 
 and that night to Magdeburg , a very strong Town , and well governed as we did hear . The most part of the Country , after we were come one days journey on this side Breslawe to this place , belongeth to the Duke of 
 A.D. 
 1585. 
 Magdeburg . 
 Saxon. 
 The 24. we passed by a castle of the Marks of Brandenburg called Wolmerstat , and that night we lay at Garleben . 
 The 25. we lay at Soltwedel . 
 The 26. at Berg. 
 The 27. we baited at Lunenborg , that night we lay at Lunenburg . Winson . 
 The 28. we came to Hamborg , and there stayed one Hamburg . week . 
 The 5. of December we departed from Hamborg , and passed the Elbe by boat being much frozen , and from the river went on foot to Boxtchoede , being a long Dutch mile off , and there we lay ; and from thence passed over land to Emden . 
 Thence having passed through Friseland and Holland , [ II i . 198. ] the 25. being Christmas day in the morning we came to Delft : where we found the right honourable the Earl of Leicester with a goodly company of Lords , knights , gentlemen , and soldiers . 
 327 
 The 29. to the Briel , and there stayed eight days for passage . 
 The fifth of January we took shipping . 
 The 7. we landed at Gravesend , and so that night at London with the help of almighty God . 
 