Another letter of the said M. Newberie , written to Master Leonard Poor of London , from Alepo . 
 Right well-beloved , my very hearty commendations unto you , and the rest of my friends remembered . My last I sent you was the 25. of February 
 last , from Deal out of the Downs , after which time with contrary winds we remained upon our own coast , until the 11. day of March , and then we set sail from March u . Falmouth , and the thirteenth day the wind came contrary with a very great storm , which continued eight days , and in this great storm we had some of our goods wet , but God be thanked no great hurt done . After which time we sailed with a fair wind within the Straights , and so remained at Sea , and anchored at no 
 453 
 Amber greese . 
 Sope. 
 Broken glass . 
 place until our coming into the road of Tripolis in Syria , which was the last day of April . This was a very good passage . God make us thankful for it . The foureteenth day of this present we came from Tripolis , and the twentieth day arrived here in Alepo , and with the help of God to morrow or next day , we begin our voyage towards Babylon and Balsara , and so into India . Our friend Master Barret hath him commended to you , who hath sent you in the Emanuel a ball of Nutmegs for the small trifles you sent him , which I hope long since you have received . Also he hath by his letter certified you in what order he sold those things , whereof I can say nothing , because I have not seen the account thereof , neither have demanded it : for ever since our coming hither he hath be still busy about the dispatch of the ship , and our voyage , and I likewise in buying of things here to carry to Balsara , and the Indies . we have bought in currall for 1200. and odd ducats , and amber for foure hundreth ducats , and some soap and broken glass , with all other small trifles , all which things I hope will serve very well for those places that we shall go unto . All the rest of the account of the Bark Reinolds was sent home in the Emanuel , which was 3600. ducats , which is 200. pound more then it was rated . For master Staper rated it but 1100. li . and it is 1300. pound , so that our part is 200. pound . Beside such profit as it shall please God to send thereof : wherefore you shall do very well to speak to M. Staper for the account . And if you would content your self to travel for three or foure years , I would wish you to come hither or go to Cairo , if any go thither . For we doubt not if you had remained there but three or foure months , you would like so well of the place , that I think you would not desire to return again in three or foure years . And , if it should be my chance to remain in any place out of England , I would choose this before all other that I know . My reason is , the place is healthful and 
 454 
 LETTERS FROM JOHN NEWBERY a.d. 1583. 
 pleasant , and the gains very good , and no doubt the profit will be hereafter better , things being used in good order : for there should come in every ship the fourth part of her Cargason in money , which would help to put away our commodities at a very good price . Also to have two very good ships to come together , would do very well : for in so doing , the danger of the voyage might be accounted as little as from London to Antwerpe . 
 Master Giles Porter and master Edmund Porter , went [ II i . 247 - ] from Tripolis in a small bark to Jaffa , the same day that we came from thence , which was the 14 day of this present , so that no doubt but long since they are in Jerusalem : God send them and us safe return e . At this instant I have received the account of M. Barret , and the rest of the rings , with two and twentie ducats , two medines in ready money . So there is nothing remaining in his hands but a few books , and with Thomas Bostocke I left certain small trifles , which I pray you demand . And so once again with my hearty commendations I commit you to the tuition of the almighty , who always preserve us . From Aleppo the 29 of 
 May 1583. Yours assured , John Newberie . 
 