The second voyage of M. Laurence Aldersey , to the Cities of Alexandria , and Cayro in Aegypt . Anno 1586. 
 Embarked my self at Bristoll , in the Hercules , a good ship of London , and set sail the 21 day of Februarie , about ten of the clock in the morning , having a merry wind : but the 23 day , there arose a very great storm , and in the mids of it we descried a small boat of 
 the burden of ten tons , with foure men in her , in very great danger , who called a main for our help . Whereupon our Master made towards them , and took them into our ship , and let the boat , which was laden with timber , and appertained to Chepstow , to run a drift . The same night about midnight arose another great storm , but the wind was large with us , until the 27 of the same month , which then grew somewhat contrary : yet notwithstanding we held on our course , and the tenth day of March , we descried a sail about Cape Sprat , which is a little on this side the straight of Gibraltare , but we spoke not with her . The next day we descried twelve sail more , with whom we thought to have spoken , to have learned what they were , but they made very fast away , and we gave them over . 
 Thursday the 16 of March , we had sighed of the straights , and of the coast of Barbary . The 18 day we passed them , and sailed towards Patras . Upon the 23 of March , we met with the Centurion of London which came from Genoa , by whom we sent letters to England , and the foure men also which we took in , upon the coast of England , beforementioned . 
 The 29 of March we came to Goleta a small Hand , Goleta . and had sighed of two ships , which we judged to be of England . 
 Tuesday the fourth of Aprill , we were before Malta , Malta . 39 
 and being there becalmed , our Master caused the two ship boats to be had out , and they towed the ship , till we were out of sighed of the Castle of Malta . The Zante . 9 day of Aprill we came to Zante , and being before the town , William Aldridge , servant to Master Thomas Cordall of London , came aboard us , with whom our Master and twelve more of our company , thought to have gone on shore , but they could not be permitted : Patras . so we all came aboard again , and went to Patras , where we arrived upon good Friday , and lay there with good entertainment at the English house , where was the Consuli Master Grimes , Ralph Ashley , and John Doddington , who very kindly went with us , and showed us the pleasures of the town . 
 They brought us to the house of the Cady , who was [ IL i . 283. ] made then to understand of the 20 Turks that we had aboard , which were to go to Constantinople , being redeemed out of captivi tie , by sir Francis Drake in the West Indies , and brought with him into England , and by order of the Queens Majesty sent now into their Country . Whereupon the Cady commanded them to be brought before him , that he might see them : and when he had talked with them , and understood how strangely they were delivered , he marveiled much , and admired the Queens Majesty of England , who being but a woman , is notwithstanding of such power and renown among all the princes of Christendome , with many other honourable words of commending her Majesty . So he took the names of those 20. Turkes , and recorded them in their great books , to remain in perpetuali memory . After this , our foresaid countrymen brought me to the Chapel of S. Andrew where his tomb or sepulchre is , and the board upon which he was beheaded , which board is now so rotten , that if any man offer to cut it , it falls to powder , yet I brought some of it away with me . 
 Upon Tuesday in Easter week , we set out towards Zante again , and the 24. of April with much ado , we 40 
 •were all permitted to come on shore , and I was carried to the English house in Zante , where I was very well entertained . The commodities of Zante are Currans and oil : the situation of the Town is under a very great hill , upon which stands a very strong Castle , which commandeth the Town . At Zante we took in a Captain and 16. soldiers , with other passengers . we departed from Zante upon Tuesday the 15. of April , and the next day we anchored at a small Island , called Strivalia , which is desolate of people , saving a few religious men , who entertained us well , without taking any money : but of courtesy we bestowed somewhat upon them for their maintenance , and then they gave us a couple of lean sheep , which we carried aboard . The last day of Aprill , we arrived at Candie , at a Castle , called Sowday , where we set the Captain , Soldiers , and Mariners ashore , which we took in at Zante , with all their carriage . 
 The second day of May we set sail again , and the fourth day came to the Islands of Milo , where we anchored , and found the people there very courteous , and took in such necessaries as we wanted . The Islands are in my judgement a hundred in number , and all within the compass of a hundred miles . 
 The 11. day , the Chaus , which is the greatest man there in authority , for certain offences done in a little Chapel by the water side , which they said one of our ship had done , and imputed it to me , because I was seen go into it three days before , came to us , and made much a do , so that we were feign to come out of our ship armed : but by three pieces of gold the brabbling was ended , and we came to our ship . This day we also set sail , and the next day passed by the Castle of Serpeto , which is and old ruinated thing , and stands under a hills side . 
 The 13. day we passed by the Island of Paris , and the Island of the banks of Helicon , and the Island called Ditter , where are many boars , and the women be 
 41 
 A.D. 
 1586. 
 Strivalia . 
 Candie . 
 May . 
 The Islands of Milo , in old time called Sporades . 
 witches . The same day also we passed by the Castle of Tino , standing upon a very high mountain , and near unto it is the Island of Diana . 
 The 15. of May , we came to Sio , where I stayed thirtie and three days . In it is a very proper Town , after the building of that Country , and the people are civil : and while we were here , there came in sixe Galleys , which had be at Alexandria , and one of them which was the Admiral , had a Prince of the Moors prisoner , whom they took about Alexandria , and they meant to present him to the Turke . The town stands in a valley , and a long the water side pleasantly . There are about 26. windmills about it , and the commodities of it are cotton wool , cotton yarn , mastike , and some other drugs . 
 As we remained at Sio , there grew a great controversy between the mariners of the Hercules , and the Greeks of the Town of Sio , about the bringing home of the Turkes , which the Greeks took in ill part , and the boys cried out , Vive el Re Philippe : whereupon our men beat the boys , and threw stones , and so a broil began , and some of our men were hurt : but the Greeks were fetched out of their houses , and manacled together with irons , and threatened to the Galleys : about fourtie of them were sent to the prison , and what became of them , when we were gone , we know not , for we went thence within two days after , which was the 19. of June . 
 The 20. day we passed by the Island of Singonina , . and Island risen by the casting of stones in that place : the substance of the ground there is brimstone , and burns sometime so much that it blows up the rocks . 
 The 24. of June we came to Cyprus , and had sighed in the way of the aforesaid sixe Galleys , that came from Alexandria , one whereof came unto us , and required a present for himself , and for two of the other Galleys , which we for quietness sake gave them . 
 The 27. of June , we came to Tripolie , where I stayed [ II i . 284. ] till the fift of July , and then took passage in a small bark called a Caramusalin , which was a passage boat , and was bound for Bichieri , thirteene miles on this side Alexandria , which boat was freighted with Turkes , Moors , and Jewes . 
 The 20. day of July , this bark which I passed in ran upon a rock , and was in very great danger , so that we all began some to be ready to swim , some to leap into the ship boat , but it pleased God to set us quickly off the rock , and without much harm . 
 The 28. of July I came to Bichieri , where I was well Bichieri . entertained of a Jewe which was the Customer there , giving me Muscadine , and drinking water himself : having broken my fast with him , he provided me a Carnell for my carriage , and a Mule for me to ride upon , and a More to run by me to the City of Alexandria , English who had charge to see me safe in the English house , whither I came , but found no Englishmen there : but then my guide brought me aboard a ship of Aiderman Martins , called the Tiger of London , where I was well received of the Master of the said ship , whose name was Thomas Rickman , and of all the company . 
 The said Master having made me good cheer , and made me also to drink of the water of Nilus , having the keys of the English house , went thither with me himself , & appointed me a fair chamber , and left a man with me to provide me all things that I needed , and every day came himself to me , and carried me into the City , and showed me the monuments thereof , which be these . 
 He brought me first to Pompey his pillar , which is T& a mighty thing of grey marble , and all of one stone , eX in height by estimation above 52. yards , and the compass about sixe fathom . 
 The City hath three gates , one called the gate of Barbaria , the other of Merina , and the thirde of Rossetto . 
 He brought me to a stone in the street of the City , whereupon S. Mark was beheaded : to the place where S. Katherine died , having there hid herself , because she would not marry : also to the Bath of S. Katherine . 
 I saw there also Pharaos needle , which is a thing in height almost equal with Pompeys pillar , and is in compass five fathom , and a half , and all of one stone . 
 I was brought also to a most brave and dainty Bath , where we washed our selves : the Bath being of marble , and of very curious workmanship . 
 The City stands upon great arches , or vaults , like unto Churches , with mighty pillars of marble , to hold up the foundation : which arches are built to receive the water of the river of Nilus , which is for the use of the City . It hath three Castles , and a hundred Churches : but the part that is destroyed of it , is sixe times more then that part which stands . 
 The last day of July , I departed from Alexandria towards Cayro in a passage boat , wherein first I went Rossetti . to Rossetto , standing by the river side , having 13. or 14. great churches in it , their building there is of stone and brick , but as for lodging , there is little , except we bring it with us . 
 From Rossetto we passed along the river of Nilus , which is so famous in the world , twice as broad as the Thames at London : on both sides grow date trees in great abundance . The people be rude , insomuch that a man cannot travel without a Janizary to conduct him . The Turkes The time that I stayed in jEgypt was the Turkes Lent‘ and Moores Lent , in all which time they burn lamps in their churches , as many as may hang in them : their Lent endureth 40. days , and they have three Lents in the year : during which time they neither eat nor drink in the day time , but all the night they do nothing else . 
 Betwixt Rossetto and Cayro there are along the water side three hundred cities and towns , and the length of the way is not above three hundred miles . 
 To this famous City of Cayro I came the fift day of Cayro . August , where I found M. William Alday , and William Caesar , who entertained me in very good sort . M. 
 Caesar brought me to see the Pyramids which are three in number , one whereof king Pharao made for his own tomb , the tomb it self is almost in the top of it : the monuments be high and in form 4. square , and every of the squares is as long as a man may shoot a roving arrow , and as high as a Church , I saw also the ruins of the City of Memphis hard by those Pyramids . 
 The house of Joseph is yet standing in Cayro , which is a sumptuous thing , having a place to walk in of 56. mighty pillars , all gilded with gold , but I saw it not , being then lame . 
 The 11. day of August the land was cut at Cayro , to let in the water of the river of Nilus , which was done with great joy and triumph . 
 The 12. of August I set from Cayro towards Alexandria again , and came thither the 14. of August . The 26. day there was kept a great feast of the Turkes and Moors , which lasted two days , and for a day they never ceased shooting off of great Ordinance . 
 From Alexandria I sailed to Argier , where I lay with The English M. Typton Consuli of the English nation , who used £°n ™ 1at me most kindly , and at his own charge . He brought me to the kings Court , and into the presence of the [ II i . 285. ] King , to see him , and the manners of the Court : the King doth only bear the name of a King , but the greatest government is in the hands of the soldiers . 
 The king of Potanca is prisoner in Argier , who coming to Constantinople , to acknowledge a duty to the great Turke , was betrayed by his own nephew , who wrote to the Turke , that he went only as a spy , by that means to get his kingdom . I herd at Argier of seven Galleys that were at that time cast away at a town called Formentera : three of them were of Argier , the other foure were the Christians . 
 We found here also 13. Englishmen , which were by force of weather put into the bay of Tunis , where they were very ill used by the Moors , who forced them to leave their bark : whereupon they went to the Council of Argier , to require a redress and remedy for the injury . They were all belonging to the ship , called the Golden Noble of London , whereof Master Bird is owner . The Master was Stephen Haselwood , and the Captain Edmond Bence . 
 The thirde day of December , the pinnace called the Moonshine of London , came to Argier with a prize , which they took upon the coast of Spaine , laden with sugar , hides , and ginger : the pinnace also belonging to the Golden Noble : and at Argier they made sale both of ship and goods , where we left them at our coming away , which was the seventh day of Januarie , and the first day of February , I landed at Dartmouth , and the seventh day came to London , with humble thanks to Almighty God , for my safe arrival . 
 