The voyage of M. John Eldred to Trypolis in Syria by sea , and from thence by land and river to Babylon and Balsara . 1583. 
 Departed out of London in the ship called the Tiger , in the company of M. John Newbery , M. Ralph Fitch , and sixe or seven other honest merchants upon Shrove munday 1583 , and arrived in Tripolis of Syria the first day of May next ensuing : at our landing we went 
 on Maying upon S. Georges Hand , a place where Christians dying aboard the ships , are wont to be buried . In this city our English merchants have a Consuli , and our nation abide together in one house with him , called Fondeghi Ingles , built of stone , square , in manner like a Cloister , & every man hath his several chamber , as it is the use of all other Christians of several nations . This town stands under a part of the mountain of Libanus two English miles distant from the port : on the side of which port , trending in form of and half Moon , stand five block houses or small forts , wherein is some very good artillery , and the forts are kept with about and hundred Janissaries . Right before this town from the seaward is a bank of moving sand , which gathereth and increases with the Western winds , in such sort , that , according to and old prophesy among them , this bank is like to swallow up & overwhelm the town : for every year it increases and eateth up many gardens , although they use all policy to diminish the same , and t© make it firm ground . The city is about the bigness vi 1 a 
 The description of Tripolis in Syria . 
 Cotton wool . 
 Gall trees . 
 . Aleppo . 
 [ IL i . 269. ] 
 of Bristow , and walled about , though the walls be of no great force . The chief strength of the place is in a Citadel , which stands on the South side within the walls , and overlooketh the whole town , and is strongly kept with two hundred Janissaries and good artillery . A river passes thorough the midst of the city , wherewith they water their gardens and mulberry trees , on which there grow abundance of silk woimes , wherewith they make great quantity of very white silk , which is the chiefest natural commodity to be found in and about this place . This road is more frequented with Christian merchants , to wit , Venetians , Genouois , Florentines , Marsilians , Sicilians , Raguses , and lately with English men , then any other port of the Turks dominions . From Tripolis I departed the 14 of May with a caravan , passing three days over the ridge of mount Libanus , at the end whereof we arrived in a city called Hammah , which stands on a goodly plain replenished with corn & cotton wool . On these mountains which we passed grow great quantity of gall trees , which are somewhat like our oaks , but lesser and more crooked : on the best tree a man shall not find above a pound of galls . This town of Hammah is fallen and falls more and more to decay , and at this day there is scarce one half of the wall standing , which hath be very strong and fair : but because it cost many men's lives to win it , the Turke will not have it repaired ; and hath written in the Arabian tongue over the castle gate , which stands in the midst of the town , these words : Cursed be the father and the son that shall lay their hands to the repairing hereof . Refreshing our selves one day here , we passed forward with camels three days more until we came to Aleppo , where we arrived the 21 of May . This is the greatest place of traffic for a dry town that is in all those parts : for hither resort Jewes , Tartarians , Persians , Armenians , Egyptians , Indians , and many sorts of Christians , and enjoy freedom's of their consciences , and bring thither many kinds 
 of rich merchandises . In the midst of this town also stands a goodly castle raised on high , with a garrison of foure or five hundred Janissaries . Within foure miles round about are goodly gardens and vineyards and trees , which bear goodly fruit near unto the rivers side , which is but small ; the walls are about three English miles in compass , but the suburbs are almost as much more . The town is greatly peopled . We departed from thence with our camels the last of May with M. John Newbery and his company , and came to Birrah in three days , being a small town situated upon Birrah . the river Euphrates , where it begins first to take his name , being here gathered into one channel , whereas before it comes down in manifold branches , and therefore is called by the people of the country by a name which signifies a thousand heads . Here is plenty of victuals , whereof we all furnished our selves for a long journey down the aforesaid river . And according to the manner of those that travel down by water , we prepared a small bark for the conveyance of our selves and of our goods . These boats are flat bottomed , because the river is shallow in many places : and when Euphrates men travel in the month of July , August , and Septem - shallow-ber , the water being then at the lowest , they are constrained to carry with them a spare boat or two to lighten their own boats , if they chance to fallen on the sholds . 
 We were eight and twenty days upon the water be - EiSht & tween Birrah and Felugia , where we disimbarked our ^es selves and our goods . Every night after the Sun sets , nver , we tie our bark to a stake , go on land to gather sticks , and set on our pot with rice or bruised wheat , and having supped , the merchants lie aboard the bark , and the mariners upon the shores side as never as they can unto the same . In many places upon the rivers side we met with troops of Arabians , of whom we bought Arabians upon milk , butter , eggs , and lambs , and gave them in barter , ( for they care not for money ) glasses , combes , coral , ' amber , to hang about their arms and necks , and for 
 The Arabian women wear gold rings in their nostrils . 
 Euphrates described . 
 Felugia . 
 The ruins of aid Babylon . 
 churned milk we gave them bred and pomegranate peels , wherewith they use to tanne their goats skins which they churn withal . Their hair , apparel , and colour are altogether like to those vagabond Egyptians , which heretofore have gone about in England . Their women all without exception wear a great round ring in one of their nostrils , of gold , silver , or iron , according to their ability , and about their arms and smalles of their legs they have hoops of gold , silver or iron . All of them aswell women and children as men , are very great swimmers , and often times swimming they brought us milk to our bark in vessels upon their heads . These people are very thievish , which I proved to my cost : for they stole a casket of mine , with things of good valve in the same , from under my men head as he was asleep : and therefore travellers keep good watch as they pass down the river . Euphrates at Birrah is about the breadth of the Thames at Lambeth , and in some places narrower , in some broader : it runneth very swiftly , almost as fast as the river of Trent : it hath diverse sorts of fish in it , but all are scaled , some as big as salmons , like barbils . We landed at Felugia the eight and twentieth of June , where we made our abided seven days , for lack of camels to carry our goods to Babylon : the heat at that time of the year is such in those parts , that men are loath to let out their camels to travel . This Felugia is a village of some hundred houses , and a place appointed for discharging of such goods as come down the river : the inhabitants are Arabians . Not finding camels here , we were constrained to unladen our goods , and hired and hundred asses to carry our English merchandises only to New Babylon over a short desert , in crossing whereof we spent eighteene hours traveling by night , and part of the morning , to avoid the great heat . 
 In this place which we crossed over , stood the old mighty city of Babylon , many old ruins whereof are easily to be seen by daylight , which I John Eldred 
 have often beheld at my good leisure , having made three voyages between the new city of Babylon and Aleppo over this desert . Here also are yet standing the ruins of the old tower of Babel , which being upon a plain ground seems a far off very great , but the nearer you come to it , the lesser and lesser it appears ; sundry times I have gone thither to see it , and found the remnants yet standing above a quarter of a mile in compass , and almost as high as the stonework of Pauls steeple in London , but it shows much bigger . The bricks remaining in this most ancient monument be half a yard thick , and three quarters of a yard long , being dried in the Sun only , and between every course of bricks there lies a course of mats made of canes , which remain found and not perished , as though they had be laid within one year . The city of New Babylon joineth upon New Babylon . the aforesaid small desert where the Old city was , and the river of Tigris runneth close under the wall , and nuum they may if they will open a sluice , and let the water Tig ™ - of the same run round about the town . It is above 
 two English miles in compass , and the inhabitants generally speak three languages , to wit , the Persian , Arabian and Turkish tongues : the people are of the Spaniards complexion : and the women generally wear 
 in one of the gristles of their noses a ring like a wed - [ II i . 270. ] ding ring , but somewhat greater , with a pearl and a Turkish stone set therein : and this they do be they never so poor . 
 This is a place of very great traffic , and a very great thorowfare from the East Indies to Aleppo . The town is very well furnished with victuals which come down the river of Tigris from Mosul which was called Ninive in old time . They bring these victuals and diverse sorts of merchandises upon rafts born upon Bafts born goats skins blown up full of wind in manner of bladders . And when they have discharged their goods , they sei the rafts for fire , and let the wind out of their goats 
 skins , and carry them home again upon their asses by land , to make other voyages down the river . The building here is most of brick dried in the Sun , and very little or no stone is to be found : their houses . are Seidome rain . all flat-roofed and low . They have no rain for eight months together , nor almost any clouds in the sky , night nor day . Their Winter is in November , December , January and February , which is as warm as our Summer in England in a manner . This I know by good experience , because my abided at several times in this city of Babylon hath be at the least the space of two years . As we come to the city , we pass over the river of Tigris on a great bridge made with boats chained together with two mighty chains of iron . From thence we departed in flat bottomed barks more strong Bite & Si greater then those of Euphrates , and were eight and twenty days twenty days also in passing down this river to Balsara , Jfy^ver " from ^ut we m'ght have done it in eighteene or less , if the Babylon to water had be higher . Upon the waters side stand by 
 Balsara . the way diverse towns resembling much the names of 
 the old prophets : the first town they call Ozeah , & another Zecchiah . Before we come to Balsara by one days journey , the two rivers of Tigris and Euphrates CurnaGastle . meet , and there stands a castle called Curna , kept by 
 the Turks , where all merchants pay a small custom . Here the two rivers joined together begin to be eight or nine miles broad : here also it begins to ebb and flow , and the water overflowing makes the country all about very fertile of corn , rice , pulse , and dates . Balsara . The town of Balsara is a mile and and half in circuit : all the buildings , castle and walls , are made of brick dried in the Sun. The Turke hath here five hundred Janissaries , beside other soldiers continually in garrison and pay , but his chief strength is of galleys which are about five and twenty or thirty very fair and furnished with goodly ordinance . To this port of Balsara come monthly diverse ships from Ormuz , laden with all sorts of Indian merchandise , as spices , drugs , Indico and 
 Calecut cloth . These ships are usually from forty to threescore tons , having their planks sowed together with cord made of the bark of Date trees , and in stead of Occam they use the shiverings of the bark of the said trees , and of the same they also make their tackling . They have no kind of iron work belonging to these vessels , save only their anchors . From this place six days sailing down the gulf , they go to a place called Baharem in the mid way to Ormus : there they fish for pearls foure months in the year , to wit , in June , July , August , and September . My abided in Balsara was just sixe months , during which time I received diverse letters from M. John Newbery from Ormus , who as he passed that way with her Majesties letters to Zelabdim Echebar king of Cambaia , & unto the mighty emperor of China , was traitorously there arrested , and all his company , by the Portugals , and afterwards sent prisoner to Goa : where after a long and cruel imprisonment he and his companions were delivered upon sureties , not to depart the town without leave , at the suit of one father Thomas Stevens and English religious man , which they found there : but shortly after three of them escaped , whereof one , to wit , M. Ralph Fitch , is since come into England . The fourth , which was a painter called John Story , became religious in the college of S. Paul in Goa , as we understood by their letters . I and my companion William Shales having dispatched our business at Balsara , embarked our selves in company of seventy barks all laden with merchandise , having every bark 14 men to draw them , like our Western bargemen on the Thames , and we were forty foure days coming up against the stream to Babylon , where arriving and paying our custom , we with all other sorts of merchants bought us camels , hired us men to lade and drive them , furnished our selves with rice , butter , blsket , honey made of dates , onions and dates : and every merchant bought a proportion of live muttons , and hired certain shepherds to drive them with us : we 
 7 
 A.D. 
 1584. 
 Ships made •without iron in the Persian gulf . 
 ' Zelabdim Echebar king of Cambaia . 
 Their provision of victuals . 
 He returns from Balsara to Aleppo . 
 also bought us tents to lie in , and to put our goods A Caravan of under : and in this our caravan were foure thousand C^meh . USaB4 Camels laden with SPiceS and °ther rich marchandi . SeS‘ S‘ These camels will live very well two or three days without water : their feeding is on thistles , wormwood , magdalene , and other strong weeds which they find upon the way . The government and deciding of all quarrels and duties to be paid , the whole caravan committeth to one speciali rich merchant of the company , of whose honesty they conceive best . In passing from Babylon to Aleppo , we spent forty days , traveling twenty , or foure and twenty miles a day , resting ourselves commonly from two of the clock in the afternoon , until three in the morning , at which time we begin to take our journey . Eight days journey from Babylon towards Aleppo , near [ II i . 271. ] unto a town called Heit , as we cross the river Euphrates by boats , about 3. miles from the town there is a valley wherein are many springs throwing out abundantly at great mouths , a kind of black substance like unto tar , which serves all the country to make staunch their barks and boats : every one of these springs makes a noise like unto a Smiths forge in the blowing & puffing out of this matter , which never ceases night nor day , and the noise may be herd a mile off continually . This vale swalloweth up all heavy things that come upon it . The people of the country call it in their language Babil gehenham , that is to say , Hell door . As we passed through these deserts , we saw certain wild beasts , as wild asses all white , Roebucks , wolves , leopards , foxes , and many hares , whereof we chased and killed many . Aborise the king of the wandering Arabians in these deserts , hath a duty of 40. S. sterling , upon every Camels load , which he sends his officers to receive of the Caravans , and in consideration hereof , he takes upon him to conduct the said Caravans if they need his help , and to defend them against certain prowling thieves . I and my companion William Shales came to Aleppo with the Caravan the eleventh of June , 1584. where we 
 were joyfully received 20. miles distant from the town by M. William Barret our Consuli , accompanied with his people and Janissaries , who fell sick immediately and departed this life within 8. days after , and elected before his death M. Anthonie Bore Consul of our English nation in his place , who laudably supplied the same room 3. years . In which mean time , I made two voyages more unto Babylon , and returned by the way aforesaid , over the deserts of Arabia . And afterwards , as one desirous to see other parts of the country , I went from Aleppo to Antioch , which is thence 60. English miles , and from thence went down to Tripolis , where going aboard a small vessel , I arrived at Joppe , and traveled to Rama , Lycia , Gaza , Jerusalem , Bethleem , to the river of Jordan , and the sea or lake of Zodome , and returned back to Joppe , & from thence by sea to Tripolis , of which places because many others have published large discourses , I surcease to write . Within few days after embarking my self at Tripolis the 22. of December , I arrived ( God be thanked ) in safety here in the river of Thames with diverse English merchants , the 26. of March , 1588 , in the Hercules of London , which was the richest ship of English merchants goods that ever was known to come into this realm . 
 A.D. 
 I588 . 
 William Barret Consul in Aleppo . 
 M. Wil. Barret . 
 Two voyages more made to Babylon . 
 