A description of a Voyage to Constantinople and Syria , begun the 21. of March 1593. and ended the 9. of August , 1595. wherein is showed the order of delivering the second Present by Master Edward Barton her majesties Ambassador , which was sent from her Majesty to Sultan Murad Can , Emperor of Turkey . 
 [ ii . i . 304. ] 
 E set sail in the Ascension of London , a new ship very well appointed , of two hundred and three score tons ( whereof was master one William Broadbanke , a provident and skilful man in his faculty ) from Gravesend the one and twentie of March 1593. 
 And upon the eight of Aprill following we passed the straights of Gibraltar , and with a small Western gale , the 24. of the same , we arrived at Zante and Hand under the Venetians . The fourth of May we departed , and the one and twentie we arrived at Alexandretta in Cilicia in the very bottom of the Mediterrane sea , a road some 25. miles distant from Antioch , where our merchants land their goods to be sent for Aleppo . From thence we set sail the fift of June , and by contrary winds were driven upon the coast of Caramania into a road near a little Hand where a castle stands , called Castle Rosso , some thirtie leagues to the Eastwards of the Rhodes , where after long search for fresh water , we could find none , until certain poor Greeks of the Hand brought us to a well where we had 5 or 6 tons . That part of the country next the sea is very barren & full of mountains , yet found we there and old tomb of marble , with and epitaph of and ancient Greek character , by antiquity near worn out and past reading ; which to the beholders seemed a monument of the greatness of the Grecian monarchy . 
 From thence we went to the Rhodes , and by contrary winds were driven into a port of Candy , called Sittia : Candle . this Hand is under the Venetians , who have there 600 soldiers , beside certain Greeks , continually in pay . Here with contrary winds we stayed six weeks , and in the end , having the wind prosperous , we sailed by Nicaria , Pharos , Delos , and Andros , with sighed of many other Hands in the Archipelago , and arrived at the two castles in Hellespont the 24 of August . Within few days after we came to Galipoli some thirty miles from this place , where foure of us took a Parma or boat of that place , with two watermen , which rowed us along the Thracian shore to Constantinople , which sometime sailing and sometime rowing , in foure days they performed . The first of September we arrived at the famous port of the Grand Signior , where we were not a little welcome to M. Edward Barton until then her Majesties Agent , who ( with many other great persons ) had for many days expected the present . Five or sixe days after the ship arrived near the Seven The Ascension towers , which is a very strong hold , and so called of arr ' , - have < i at the so many turrets , which it hath , standing near the sea ‘ side , being the first part of the city that we came unto . 
 Here the Agent appointed the master of the Ascension to stay with the ship until a fit wind and opportunity served to bring her about the Seraglio to salute the Grand Signior in his moskyta or church : for you shall understand that he hath built one near the wall of his Seraglio or palace adjoining to the Sea side ; whereunto twice or thrice a week he resorteth to perform such religious rites as their law requires : where he being within few days after , our ship set out in their best manner with flags , streamers and pendants of diverse coloured silk , with all the mariners , together with most of the Ambassadors men , having the wind fair , and came within two cables length of this his moskita , where ( he to his great content beholding the ship in such bravery ) they discharged 95 
 1593-The ship salutes the grand Signior . 
 The cause of staying the present . 
 And Arz to the grand Signior . 
 first two volies of small shot , and then all the great ordinance twice over , there being seven and twentie or eight and twentie pieces in the ship . Which performed , he appointed the Bustangi-Bassa or captain of the great and spacious garden or park , to give our men thanks , with request that some other day they would show him the like sport when he would have the Sultana or Empress a beholder thereof which few days after at the ships going to the Customhouse they performed . 
 The grand Signiors salutation thus ended , the master brought the ship to and anchor at Rapamat near the ambassadors house , where he likewise saluted him with all his great ordinance once over , and where he landed the Present , the delivery whereof for a time was stayed : the cause of which stay it shall neither be dishonourable for our nation , or that worthy man the ambassador to show you . At the departure of Sinan Bassa the chief Vizir , and our ambassadors great friend towards the wars of Hungarie there was another Bassa appointed in his place , a churlish and harsh natured man , who upon occasion of certain Genouezes , escaping out of the castles standing towards the Euxine Sea , now called the black Sea , there imprisoned , apprehended and threatened to execute one of our Englishmen called John Field , for that he was taken thereabouts , and known not many days before to have brought a letter to one of them : upon the soliciting of whose liberty there fell a jar between the Bassa ( being now chief Vizir ) and our ambassador , and in choler he gave her majesties ambassador such words , as without sustaining some great indignity he could not put up . Whereupon after the arrival of the Present , he made and Arz , that is , a bill of Complaint to the grand Signior against him , the manner in exhibiting whereof is thus performed . 
 The plaintiffs expect the grand Signiors going abroad from his palace , either to Santa Sophia or to his 96 
 church by the sea side , whither , with a Perma ( that is one of their usual whirries ) they approach within some two or three score yards , where the plaintiff stands up , and holds his petition over his forehead in sighed of the grand Signior ( for his church is open to the Sea side ) the rest sitting still in the boat , who appoints one of his Dwarves to receive them , and to bring them to him . A Dwarf , one of the Ambassadors favorites , so soon as he was discerned , beckoned him to the shore side , took his Arz , and with speed carried it to the grand Signior . Now the effect of it was this ; that except his highness would redress this so great and indignity , which the Vizir his slave had offered him and her majesty in his person , he was purposed to detain the Present until such time as he might by letters overland from her majesty be certified , whither she would put up so great and injury as it was . Whereupon he presently returned answer , requesting the ambassador within and hour after to go to the Dovan of the Vizir , unto whom himself of his charge would send a gown of cloth of gold , and command him publicly to put it upon him , and with kind entertainment to embrace him in sign of reconciliation . Whereupon our ambassador returning home , took his horse , accompanied with his men , and came to the Viziers court , where , according to the grand Signiors command , he with all show of kindness embraced the ambassador , and with courteous speeches reconciled himself , and with his own hands put the gown of cloth of gold upon his back . Which done , he with his attendants returned home , to the no small admiration of all Christians that herd of it , especially of the French and Venetian ambassadors , who never in the like case against the second person of the Turkish Empire durst have attempted so bold and enterprise with hope of so friendly audience , and with so speedy redress . This reconciliation with the great Vizir thus made , the ambassador prepared himself for the delivery of the vi 97 c 
 A.D. 
 1593 - 
 [ II - i - 3O5 - ] 
 The great hall of Justice . 
 Reconciliation with the Vizir made . 
 Present , which upon the 7 of October 1593* in “ “ s manner he performed . 
 The ambassa - The Ascension with her flags and streamers , as afore-dor goes to said , repaired nigh unto the place where the ambassador 
 tepwent . ^ should land to go up to the Seraglio : for you must 
 understand that all Christian ambassadors have their dwelling in Pera where most Christians abide , from 
 which place , except you would go 4 or 5 miles about , 
 you cannot by land go to Constantinople , whereas by Sea it is little brother then the Thames . Our Ambassador likewise appareled in a suit of cloth of silver , with and upper gown of cloth of gold , accompanied with 7 gentlemen in costly suits of Satin , with 30 other of his men very well appareled , and all in one livery of sad French russet cloth gowns , at his house took boat : at whose landing the ship discharged all her ordinance , where likewise attended 2 Bassas , with 40 or 50 Chauses to accompany you ambassador to the court , & also horses for the ambassador & his gentlemen , very richly furnished , with Turkish servants attendant to take the horses when they should light . The ambassador thus honorably accompanied , the Chauses foremost , next his men on foot all going by two and two , himself last with his Chause and Drugaman or Interpreter , and 4 Janissaries , which he doth usually entertain in his house to accompany him The Ambass . continually abroad , came to the Seraglio about and came to the English mile from the water side , where first he passed Zeraglto . a great gate into a ] arge court Hke the space 
 before White hall gate ) where he with his gentlemen alighted and left their horses . From hence they passed into and other stately court , being about 6 score in breadth , and some 10 score yards long , with many trees in it : where all the court was with great pomp set in order to entertain our ambassador . Upon the right captLTof " hand a11 the lenSth of the court was a gallery arched hundreds and ove5 and born UP with stone pillars , much like the of fifties . Royal Exchange , where stood* most of his guard in 
 98 & 
 ranks from the one end to the other in costly array , with round head pieces on their heads of mettle and gilded over , with a great plume of feathers somewhat like a long brush standing up before . On the left hand stood the Cappagies or porters , and the Chauses . All these courtiers being about the number of 2000. ( as I might well guess ) most of them appareled in cloth of gold , silver , velvet , satin and scarlet , did together with bowing their bodies , laying their hands upon their breasts in courteous manner of salutation , entertain the Ambassador : who likewise passing between them , & turning himself sometime to the right hand and sometime to the left , answered them with the like . As he thus passed along , certain Chauses conducted him to the Dovan , which is the seat of Justice , where certain days of the week the grand Vizir , with the other Viziers , the Cadi-lesker or lord chief Justice , & the Mufti or high priest do fit to determine upon such causes as be brought before them , which place is upon the left side of this great court , whither the ambassador with ambassa-his gentlemen came , where he found the Vizir thus accompanied as aforesaid , who with great show of kind - au1 1 nes received him : and after receipt of her majesties letters , kindness . 
 & conference had of the Present , of her majesties health , of the state of England , and such other matters as concerned our peaceable traffic in those parts : dinner being prepared was by many of you Courtiers brought Dinner brought into another inner room next adjoining , which consisted tn-of and hundred dishes or thereabouts , most boiled & roasted , where the ambassador accompanied w‘ the Viziers went to dinner , his gentlemen likewise with the rest of his men having a dinner with the like variety prepared upon you same side of the court , by themselves sat down to their meat , 40 or 50 Chauses standing at the upper end attending upon the gentlemen to see them served in good order ; their drink was water mingled with rose water & sugar brought in a Luthro ( that is a goats skin ) which a man carrieth at his back , and under his arm lets it run out at a spout into cups as men will call for 
 [ II i . 306. ] 
 Gowns of cloth of gold for the ambassador and his gentlemen . 
 The Present . 
 The Present viewed . 
 it . The dinner thus with good order brought in , and for half and hour with great sobriety and silence performed , was not so orderly taken up ; for certain Moglans officers of the kitchen ( like her majesties black guard ) came in disordered manner and took away the dishes , and he whose hungry eye one dish could not satisfy , turned two or three one into the other , and thus of a sudden was a clean riddance made of all . The ambassador after dinner with his gentlemen , by certain officers were placed at the upper end upon the left side of the court , never unto a great gate which gave entrance to a third court being but little , paved with stone . In the midst whereof was a little house built of marble , as I take it , within which sat the grand Signor , according to whose commandment given there were gowns of cloth of gold brought out of Sie wardrobe , and put upon the ambassador and 7 of his gentlemen , the ambassador himself having 2 , one of gold , and the other of crimosin velvet , all the rest one a piece . Then certain Cappagies had the Present , which was in trunks there ready , delivered them by the ambassadors men , it being 12 goodly pieces of gilded plate , 36 garments of fine English cloth of all colours , 20 garments of cloth of gold , 10 garments of satin , 6 pieces of fine Holland , and certain other things of good valve ; all which were carried round about the court , each man taking a piece , being in number very near 100 parcels , and so 2 and 2 going round that all might see it , to the greater glory of the present , and of him to whom it was given : they went into the innermost court passing by the window of that room , where the grand Signior sat , who , as it went by to be laid up in certain rooms adjoining , took view of all . Presently after the present followed the ambassador with his gentlemen ; at the gate of which court stood 20 or 30 Agaus which be eunuchs . Within the court yard were the Turkes Dwarves and Dumb men , being most of them youths . At the door of his room stood the Bustangi-bassa , with another Bassa to led the ambassador and his 
 100 
 followers to the grand Signior who sat in a chair of estate , appareled in a gown of cloth of silver . The floor under his feet , which part was a foot higher then the rest , was covered with a carpet of green satin embroidered most richly with silver , orient pearls & great Turkeses ; the other part of the house was covered with a carpet of Carnation satin embroidered wl gold , none were in the room with him , but a Bassa who stood next the wall over against him hanging down his head , & looking submissly upon the ground as all his subject's do in his presence . The ambassador thus betwixt two fmbassa - 
 which stood at the door being led in , either of them taking and arm , kissed his hand , and so backward with hand . 
 his face to the Turke they brought him nigh the door again , where he stood until they had likewise done so with all the rest of his gentlemen . Which ended , the ambassador , according as it is the custom when any present is delivered , made his three demands , such as he thought most expedient for her majesties honour , 8c the peaceable traffic of our nation into his dominions : whereunto he answered in one word , Nolo , which is in Turkish as much as , it shall be done : for it is not the manner of the Turkish emperor familiarly to confer with any Christian ambassador , but he appoints his Vizir in his The ambassa-person to grant their demands if they be to his liking ; dQrs demands as to our ambassador he granted all his demands , 8c gave e ' order that his daily allowance for his house of money , flesh , wood , 8c hay , should be augmented with half as much more as it had be before . Hereupon the ambassador taking his leave , departed with his gentlemen the same way he came , the whole court saluting him as they did at his coming in ; 8c coming to the second court to take our horses , after we were mounted , we stayed half and hour , until the captain of the guard with 2000 horsemen at the least passed before , after whom followed 40 or 50 Chauses next before the ambassador to accompany him to his house . And as before at his landing , so now at his taking boat , the ship discharged 
 IOI 
 The Sultanas present to the Queen . 
 Letters sent for England . 
 The others Viziers presented . 
 [ II i . 3°7 - ] 
 all her great ordinance , where arriving , he likewise had a great banquet prepared to entertain those which came to bring him home . The pomp & solemnity of the Present , with the day thus ended , he shortly after presented the Sultana or empress who ( by reason that she is mother to him which was heir to the crown Imperial ) is had in far greater reverence then any of his other Queen's or concubines . The Present sent her in her majesties name was a jewel of her majesties picture , set with some rubies and diamonds , 3 great pieces of gilded plate , 10 garments of cloth of gold , a very fine case of glass botdes silver & gilded , with 2 pieces of fine Holland , which so gratefully she accepted , as that she sent to know of the ambassador what present he thought she might return ill would most delight her majesty : who sent word that a suit of princely attire being after the Turkish fashion would for the rareness thereof be acceptable in England . Whereupon she sent and upper gown of cloth of gold very rich , and under gown of cloth of silver , and a girdle of Turkey work , rich and fair , with a letter of gratification , which for the rareness of the style , because you may be acquainted with it , I have at the end of this discourse hereunto annexed , which letter and present , with one from the grand Signor , was sent by M. Edward Bushell , and M. William Aldridge overland the 20 of March , who passed through Valachia and Moldavia , & so through Poland , where Michael prince of Valachia , and Aron Voivoda prince of Moldavia receiving letters from the ambassador , entertained them with all courtesy , through whose means by the great favour which his lordship had with the grand Signior , they had not long before both of them be advanced to their princely dignities . He likewise presented Sigala the Admiral of the Seas , with Abrim Bassa , who married the great Turkes daughter , and all the other Viziers with diverse pieces of plate , fine English cloth & other costly things : the particulars whereof , to avoid tediousness , I omit . All the presents thus ended , the ship 
 102 
 shooting ten pieces of ordinance at the Seraglio point , as a last farewell , departed on her journey for England the Ascension first of November , my self continuing in Constantinople < tyarUik . until the last of July after . This year in the spring there was great preparation for the Hungarian wars ; and Great pre-the great Turke threatened to go himself in person : but like Heliogabalus , his affections being more service - narres . able to Venus then to Mars , he stayed at home . Yet a great army was dispatched this year ; who , as they came out of Asia to go for Hungary , did so pester the streets of Constantinople for the space of two months in the spring time , as scarce either . Christian or Jew could without danger of losing his money pass up and down the city . What insolences , murders and robberies were committed not only upon Christians but also upon Turks I omit to write , and I pray God in England the like may never be seen : and yet I could wish , that such among us as have enjoyed the Gospel with such great and admirable peace and prosperity under her Majesties government this forty years , and have not all this time brought forth better fruits of obedience to God , and thankfulness to her Majesty , were there but a short time to behold the miserable condition both of Christians and others living under such and infideli prince , who not only are wrapped in most palpable & gross ignorance of mind , but are clean without the means of the true knowledge of God : I doubt not but the sighed hereof ( if they be not clean void of grace ) would stir them up to more thankfulness to God , that ever they were born in so happy a time , and under so wise and godly a prince professing the true religion of Christ . 
 The number of soldiers which went to the wars of Hungary this year were 470000 , as by the particulars given by the Admiral to the Ambassador hereunder do appear . Although all these were appointed and supposed to go , yet the victories which the Christians in the spring had against the Turks struck such a 103 
 terror in many of the Turkish soldiers , as by report diverse upon the way thither left their Captains and stole away . 
 The number of Turkish soldiers which were appointed to go into Hungary against the Christian Emperor . May 1594* 
 Sinan Bassa generail , with the Sanjacke masould , that is , out of office , with the other Sanjacks in office 
 or of degree , 40000. 
 Achmigi , that is , Adventurers , 50000. 
 The Agha or Captain with his Janissaries , and his Giebegies , 20000. 
 The Beglerbeg of Graecia , with all his Sanjacks , 40000. 
 The company of Spaheis or horsemen , 10000. 
 The company of Silitari , 6000. 
 The company of Sagbulve and of Solbulve both to - 
 gether , 8000. The Bassa of Belgrad , The Bassa of Temiswar . The Bassa of Bosna . The Bassa of Buda . 
 ► 80000. 
 The Sanjack of Gersech . 
 Out of Asia . 
 The Bassa of Caramania . ' The Bassa of Laras . 
 The Bassa of Damasco . 
 The Bassa of Suas . 
 The Bassa of Van or Nan . 
 The Bassa of Usdrum . 
 Of Tartars there be about 100000. 
 120000. 
 Thus you may see that the great Turke makes war with no small numbers . And in anno 1597 , when Sultan Mahomet himself went in person into Hungary , if a man may believe reports , he had and army of 600000. 
 104 
 For the city of Constantinople you shall understand that it is matchable with any city in Europe , aswell in bigness as for the pleasant situation thereof , and commodious traffic and bringing of all manner of necessary provision of victuals , and whatsoever else men life for the sustentation thereof shall require , being seated upon a promontory , looking towards Pontus Euxinus upon the Northeast , and to Propontis on the Southwest , by which two seas by shipping is brought great store of all manner [ II i . 308. ] of victuals . The city it self in form representeth a triangular figure , the sea washing the walls upon two sides thereof , the other side faceth the continent of Thracia ; the grand Signiors seraglio stands upon that point which looks into the sea , being cut off " from the city by a wall ; so that you wall of his palace containeth in circuit about two English miles : the seven towers spoken of before stand at another corner , & Constantines old palace to the North at the third corner . 
 The city hath a threefold wall about it ; the innermost very high , the next lower then that , and the third a countermure , and is in circuit about ten English miles : it hath foure and twenty gates : and when the empire was removed out of the West into the East , it was enriched with many spoils of old Room by Vespasian and other emperors , having many monuments and pillars in it worthy the observation ; among the rest in the midst of Constantinople stands one of white marble called Vespasians pillar , of 38 or 40 yards high , which hath from the base to the top proportions of men in armour fighting on horseback : it is likewise adorned with diverse goodly buildings & stately Mesquitas , whereof the biggest is Sultan Solimans a great warrior , which lived in the time of Charles the fifth ; but the fairest is Santa Sophia , Santa Sophia . which in the time of the Christian emperors was the chief cathedral church , and is still in greatest account with the great Turke : it is built round like other Greekish churches , the pavements and walls be all of marble , it hath beneath 44 pillars of diverse coloured 
 105 
 marble of admirable heighth and bigness , which stand upon great round feet of brass , much greater then the pillars , and of a great heighth , some ten yards distant from the wall : from which unto these pillars is a great gallery built , which goes round about the church ; and upon the outside of the gallery stand 66 marble pillars which bear up the round roof being the top of the church : it hath three pulpits or preaching places , and about 2000 lamps brought in by the Turke . Likewise upon one side in the top is the picture of Christ with the 12 Apostles , but their faces are defaced , with two or three ancient tombs of Christians : to the West sticketh and arrow in the top of the church , which , as the Turks report , Sultan Mahomet shot when he first took the city . Near adjoining be two chapels of marble , where lie buried most of the emperors with their children & sultanas . The 16 of July , accompanied with some other of our nation we went by water to the Black sea , being 16 miles distant from Constantinople , the sea all the way thither being little broader then the Thames ; both sides of the shore are beautified with fair & goodly buildings . At the mouth of this Bosphorus lies a rock some foure-score yards from the main land , whereupon stands a white marble pillar called Pompeys pillar , the shadow whereof was 23 foot long at nine of the clock in the forenoon : over against it is a turret of stone upon the main land 120 steps high , having a great glass-lanthorn in the top foure yards in diamiter and three in heighth , with a great copper pan in the midst to hold oil , with twenty lights in it , and it serves to give passage into this straight in the night to such ships as come from all parts of those seas to Constantinople : it is continually kept by a Turke , who to y‘ end hath pay of the grand Signior . And thus having spent eleven months in Constantinople , accompanied with a chause , & carrying certain mandates from the grand Signior to the Bassa of Aleppo for the kind usage of our nation in those parts , the 30 of July I took passage in a Turkish car-106 
 mosale or ship bound for Sidon ; and passing thorough Propontis , having Salimbria with Heraclia most pleasantly situated on the right hand , and Proconesus now called Marmora on the left , we came to Gallipoly , and so by Gallfly . Hellespont , between the two castles before nam called Sestos and Abydos , famous for the passages made there both by Xerxes and great Alexander , the one into Thracia , the other into Asia , and so by the Sigean Promontory , now called Cape Janitzary , at the mouth of Hellespont upon Asia side , where Troy stood , where are yet ruins Troy . of old walls to be seen , with two hills rising in a pira-midall form , not unlikely to be the tombs of Achilles and Ajax . From thence we sailed along , having Tenedos and Lemnos on the right hand , and the Trojan fields on the left : at length we came to M itylen and Sio long Zw . time inhabited by the Genoueses , but now under the Turke . The Hand is beautified with goodly buildings and pleasant gardens , and aboundeth with fruits , wine , and the gum mastic . From thence sailing alongst the gulf of Ephesus with Nicaria on the right hand , Samos and Smirna on the left , we came to Patmos , where S. Patmos . John wrote the Revelation . The Hand is but small , not above five miles in compass : the chief thing it yields is corn : it hath a port for shipping , and in it is a monastery of Greekish Caloieros . From thence by Cos Cos. ( now called Lango ) where Hipocrates was born : & passing many other Hands and rocks , we arrived at Rhodes , Rhodes . one of the strongest and fairest cities of the East : here we stayed three or foure days ; and by reason of a By which went in the ship to Paphos in Cyprus , who used me with all kindness , I went about the city , and took the view of all : which city is still with all the houses and walls thereof maintained in the same order as they took it from the Rhodian knights . Over the doors of many of the houses , which be strongly built of stone , do remain undefaced , the arms of England , [ II i . 309. ] France , Spaine , and many other Christian knights , as though the Turkes in the view thereof gloried in the 
 107 
 Antioch . 
 Aleppo . 
 taking of all Christendome , whose arms there they behold . From thence we sailed to Paphos and old ruinous town standing upon the Western part of Cyprus , where S. Paul in the Acts converted the governor . Departing hence , we came to Sidon , by the Turks called Saytosa , within tenne or twelve miles of the place where Tirus stood , which now being eaten in by the sea , is , as Ezekiel prophesied , a place for the spreading out of a net . Sidon is situated in a small bay at the foot of mount Libanus , upon the side of and hill looking to the North : it is walled about , with a castle nigh to the sea , and one towards the land which is ruinated , but the wall thereof stands . Some half mile up towards the mountain be certain ruins of buildings , with marble , pillars , remaining : here for three days we were kindly entertained of the captain of the castle : and in a small bark we sailed from hence along the shore to Tripoli , & so to Alexandretta , where the 24 of August we arrived . From thence with a Venetian caravan we went by land to Aleppo , passing by Antioch , which is seated upon the side of and hill , whose walls still stand with 360 turrets upon them , and near a very great plain which bears the name of the city , thorough which runneth the river Orontes , in Scripture called Farfar . In Aleppo I stayed until February following ; in this city , as at a mars , meet many nations out of Asia with the people of Europe , having continual traffic and interchangeable course of merchandise one with another : the state and trade of which place , because it is so well known to most of our nation I omit to write of . The 27 of February I departed from Aleppo , and the fifth of March embarked my self at Alexandretta in a great ship of Venice called the Nana Ferra , to come for England . The 14 we put into Salino in Cyprus , where the ship staying many days to lade cotton wool , and other commodities , in the mean time accompanied with M. William Barret my country man , the master of the ship a Greek , 
 108 
 and others we took occasion to see Nicosia , the chief city of this Hand , which was some twenty miles from this place , which is situated at the foot of and hill : to the East is a great plain , extending it self ill a great length from the North to the South : it is walled about , but of no such strength as Famagusta ( another city in this Hand near the Sea side ) whose walls are cut out of the main rock . In this city be many sumptuous and goodly buildings of stone , but uninhabited ; the cause whereof does give me just occasion to show you of a rare judgement of God upon the owners sometime of these houses , as I was credibly informed by a Cipriot a merchant of good wealth in this city . Before it came in subjection to the Turks , while it was under the Venetians , there were many barons and noble men of the Cipriots , who partly by usurping more superiority over the common people then they ought , and partly through their great revenues which yearly came in by their cotton wool and wines , grew so insolent and proud , and withal so impiously wicked , as that they would at their pleasure command both the wives and children of their poor tenants to serve their unclean lustest , 8c holding them in such slavery as though they had been no better then dogs , would wage them against a grayhound or spaniel , and he who won the wager should ever after hold them as his proper goods and chattels , to do with them as he listed , being Christians aswell as themselves , if they may deserve so good a name . As they behaved themselves most unchristianly towards their brothers , so and much more ungodly ( which I should have put in the first place ) did they towards God : for as though they were too great , standing on foot or kneeling to serve God , they would come riding on horseback into the church to hear their mass : which church now is made a public basistane or market place for the Turkes to fell commodities in : but behold the judgement of the righteous God , who payeth the sinner measure for measure . The 
 109 
 A.D. 
 » 595-Nicosia . 
 A great judgement of God upon the noble men of Cyprus . 
 Turkes the year before the overthrow given them at Lepanto by DONE John took Cyprus . These mighty Nimrods fled some into holes & some into mountains to hide themselves ; whereupon the Turkes made generail proclamation , that if they would all come in and yield themselves , they would restore them to their former revenues and dignities : who not mistrusting the mischievous pretense of the Turkes , assembled together to make themselves known ; whom after the Turkes had in possession , they ( as the Lords executioners ) put them with their wives and children all to the sword , pretending thereby to cut of all future rebellion , so that at this day is not one of the noble raze known alive in the Hand , only two or three remain in Venice but of little wealth , which in the time of the wars escaped . After we had stayed in this Hand some thirty days , we set sail in the foresaid ship being about the burden of 900 tons , having in her passengers of diverse nations , as Tartars , Persians , Jewes , and sundry Christians . among all which I had often conference with a Jew , who by reason of his many years education at Safet a place in Judea near Jerusalem , where they study the Rabbines with some other arts as they think good , as also for his travels into Persia and Ormus , he seemed to be of good experience in matters abroad , who related unto me such conference as he had with a Baniane at Ormus , being one of the Indians inhabiting the country of Cambaia . This Baniane being a Gentile had skill in Astronomic , as many of that nation have , who by his books written in his own tongue and Characters , could tell the time of Eclipses both of Sun and Moon , with the Change and Full , and by judgement in Astrology gave answer to any question demanded . Being asked concerning his opinion in religion , what he thought of God ? He made answer , that they held no other god but the sun , ( to which planet they pray both at the rising and setting ) as I have seen sundry doe in Aleppo : his reason 
 IIO 
 was drawn from the effects which it works in giving light to the moon & other stars , and causing all things to grow and increase upon the earth : answer was made , that it did move with the rest as the wheels of a clock , and therefore of force must have a mover . Likewise in the Eclipse being darkened it is manifestly proved that it is not god , for God is altogether goodness and brightness , which can neither be darkened nor receive detriment or hurt : but the Sun receives both in the Eclipse , as it is apparent : to which he could not answer ; but so they had received from their ancestors , that it was without beginning or end , as in any Orbicular or round body neither beginning or end could be found . He likewise said , that there were other Gentiles in the Indies which worship the moon as chief , and their reason is . The moon when she riseth goes with thousands of stars accompanied like a king , and therefore is chief : but the Sun goes alone , and therefore not so great . Against whom the Banians reason , that it is not true , because the Moon and stars receive their light from the Sun , neither does the Sun vouchsafe them his company but when he list , and therefore like a mighty prince goes alone , yet they acknowledge the Moon as Queen or Viceroy . Law they hold none , but only seven precepts which they say were given them from their father Noe , not knowing Abraham or any other . aman s ’ First , to honour father and mother ; secondly , not to steal ; thirdly not to commit adultery ; fourthly not to kill any thing living ; fiftly , not to eat any thing living ; sixthly , not to cut their hair ; seventhly , to go barefoot in their churches . These they hold most strictly , & by no means will break them : but he that breaks one is punished with twenty stripes ; but for the greatest fault they will kill none , neither by a short death nor a long , only he is kept some time in prison with very litde meat , and hath at the most not above twenty or five & twenty stripes . In the year 
 ITI 
 they have 16 feasts , and then they go to their church , where is pictured in a broad table the Sun , as we use to paint it , the face of a man with beams round about , not having any thing else in it . At their feast they spot their faces in diverse parts with saffron all yellow , and so walk up and down the streets ; and this they do as a custom . They hold , there shall a resurrection , and all shall come to judgement , but the account shall most straight , insomuch that but one of ioooo shall received to favour , and those shall live again in this world in great happiness : the rest shall tormented . And because they will escape this judgement , when any man dieth , he and his wife be both burned together even to ashes , and then they are thrown into a river , and so dispersed as though they had never be . If the wife will not burn with her dead husband , she is held ever after as a whore . And by this means they hope to escape the judgement to come . As for the soul , that goes to the place from whence it came , but where the place is they know not . That the body should not be made again they reason w‘ the philosophers , saying , that of nothing nothing can be made ( not knowing that God made the whole world and their god the Sun of nothing ) but beholding the course of nature , that nothing is made but by a means , as by the seed of a man is made another , and by corn cast into the ground there comes up new corn : so , say they , man cannot be made except some part of him be left , and therefore they burn the whole : for if he were buried in the earth , they say there is a small bone in the neck which would never be consumed : or if he were eaten by a beast , that bone would not consume , but of that bone would come another man ; and then the soul being restored again , he should come into judgement , whereas now , the body being destroyed , the soul shall not be judged : for their opinion is , that both body and soul must be united together , as they have sinned together , to receive 
 112 
 judgement ; and therefore the soul alone cannot . Their seven precepts which they keep so strictly are not for any hope of reward they have after this life , but only that they may be blessed in this world , for they think that he which breaks them shall have ill success in all his business . 
 They say , the three chief religions in the world be of the Christians , Jewes , & Turks , & yet but one of them true : but being in doubt which is the truest of the three , they will be of none : for they hold that all these three shall be judged , and but few of them which be of the true shall be saved , the examination shall be so straight ; and therefore , as I have said before , to prevent this judgement , they burn their bodies to ashes . They say , these three religions have too many precepts to keep them all well , & therefore wondered hard it will be to make account , because so few do observe all their religion aright . And thus passing the time for the space of three months in this sea voyage , [ II i . 311. ] we arrived at Venice the tenth of June : and after I had seen Padua , with other English men , I came the ordinary way over the Alpes , by Augusta , Noremberg , and so for England ; where to the praise of God I safely arrived the ninth of August 1595. 
 VI 
 “ 3 
 