A letter written by the most high and mighty Empress the wife of the Grand Signior Sultan Murad Can to the Queens Majesty of England , in the year of our Lord , 1594. 
 114 
 The same in English . 
 LEt the beginning of our discourse be a perfect writing in the foure parts of the world , in the name of him which hath indifferently created such infinite numbers of creatures , which had neither soul nor body , and of him which moveth the nine heavens , and stablisheth the earth seven times one above another , which is Lord and king without any deputy , who hath no comparison to his creation and work , and is one inestimable , worshipped without all comparison , the most high God , the creator , which hath nothing like unto him , according as he is described by the Prophets , to whose power no man can attain , and whose absolute perfection no man may control ; and that omnipotent creator and fellow-worker , to whose Majesty all the Prophets submit themselves , among whom the greatest , and which hath obtained greatest favour , the garden of Paradise , the beam of the Sun , the beloved of the most high God is Mahomet Mustaffa , to whom and to his adherents and followers be perpetuali peace , to whose fragrant sepulture all honour is performed . He which is emperor of the seven climates and of the foure parts of the world , the invincible king of Graecia , Agiamia , Hungaria , Tartaria , Valachia , Rossia , Turchia , Arabia , Bagdet , Caramania , Abessis , Giouasir , Sirvan , Barbaria , Alger , Franchia , Corvacia , Belgrade , etc. always most happy , and possessor of the crown from twelve of his ancestors ; and of the seed of Adam , at this present emperor , the son of and emperor , preserved by the divine providence , a king worthy of all glory and honour , Sultan Murad , whose forces the Lord God always increase , and father of him to whom the imperiali crown is to descend , the paradise and wondered tall cypress , worthy of the royal throne , and true heir of the imperiali authority , most worthy Mehemet 
 116 
 Can , the son of Sultan Murad Can , whose enterprises God vouchsafe to accomplish , and to prolong his happy days : on the behalf of whose mother this present letter is written to the most gracious and most glorious , the wisest among women , and chosen among those which triumph under the standard of Jesus Christ , the most mighty and most rich governor , and most rare among womankind in the world , the most gracious Queen of England , which follow the steps of the virgin Marry , whose end be prosperous and perfect , according to your hearts desire . I send your Majesty so honourable and sweet a salutation of peace , that all the flock of Nightingales with their melody Cannot attain to you like , much less this simple letter of mine . The singular love which we have conceived one towards the other is like to a garden of pleasant birds : and the Lord God vouchsafe to save and keep you , and send your Majesty and happy end both in this world and in the world to come . After the arrival of your honourable presents from the Court of your Majesty , your Highness shall understand that they came in such a season that every minute ministered occasion of long consolation by reason of the coming of your Majesties Ambassador to the triumphant Court of the Emperor , to our so great contentment as we could possibly wish , who brought a letter from your Majesty , which with great honour was presented unto us by our eunuks , the paper whereof did smell most fragrantly of camfor and ambargriese , and the ink of perfect musk ; the contents whereof we have herd very attentively from point to point . I think it therefore expedient , that , according to our mutual affection , in any thing whatsoever may concern the countries' which are subject to your Majesty , I never fail , having information given unto me , in whatsoever occasion shall be ministered , to gratify your Majesty to my power in any reasonable and convenient matter , that all your subject's businesses and affairs may have a wished and happy end . For I will always be a solicitor to the most mighty Emperor “ 7 
 This Sultana is mother to Mehemet which now reigneth as Emperor . 
 A.D. 
 * 594 - 
 > 594 - 
 for your Majesties affairs , that your Majesty at all times may be folly satisfied . Peace be to your Majesty , and to all such as follow rightly the way of God . Written the first day of the Moon of Rabie Livol in the 
 year of the Prophet , 
 1002. 
 