A brief extract specifying the certain daily payments , answered quarterly in time of peace , by the Grand Signior , out of his Treasury , to the Officers of his Seraglio or Court , successively in degrees : collected in a yearly totali sum , as follows . 
 Or his own diet every day , one thousand and one aspers , according to a former custom received from his ancestors : notwithstanding that otherwise his diurnal expense is very much , and not certainly known , which sum makes sterling money by the year , two thousand , one hundred , 92. pounds , three shillings , eight pence . 
 The five and fourtie thousand Janizaries dispersed in sundry places of his dominions , at sixe aspers the day , amounteth by the year to five hundreth , fourescore and eleven thousand , and three hundreth pounds . 
 The Azamoglans , tribute children , far surmount that number , for that they are collected from among the Christians , from whom between the years of sixe and twelve , they are pulled away yearly perforce : whereof I suppose those in service may be equal in number with the Janizaries abovesaid , at three aspers a day , one with another , which is two hundred fourescore and fifteene thousand , sixe hundred and fiftie pounds . 
 The five Bassas , whereof the Viceroy is supreme , at one thousand aspers the day , beside their yearly revenues , amounteth sterling by the year to ten thousand , nine hundred and fiftie pounds . 
 The five Beglerbegs , chief presidents of Greece , Hungary and Sclavonia , being in Europe , in Natolia , and Caramania of Asia , at one thousande aspers the day : as also to eighteene other go verno urs of Provinces , at five hundred aspers the day , amounteth by the year , to thirtie thousand sixe hundred , and threescore pounds . 
 The Bassa , Admiral of the Sea , one thousand aspers the day , two thousand , one hundred , foure score and ten thousand pounds . 
 The Agam of the Janizaries , general of the footmen , five hundred aspers the day , and makes by the year in sterling money , one thousand , fourescore and fifteene pounds . 
 The Imbrahur Bassa , Master of his horse , one hundred and fiftie aspers the day , is sterling money , three hundred and eight and twenty pounds . 
 The chief Esquire under him , one hundred and fiftie aspers , is three hundred and eight and twenty pounds . 
 The Agas of the Spahi , Captains of the horsemen , sixe , at one hundred and fiftie aspers to either of them , makes sterling , one thousand , nine hundred , three score and eleven pounds . 
 The Capagi Bassas head porters foure , one hundred and fiftie aspers to each , and makes out in sterling money by the year , one thousand , three hundred , and fourteen pounds . 
 The Sisinghir Bassa , Controller of the household , one hundred and twentie aspers the day , and makes out in sterling money by the year , two hundred , threescore and two pounds , sixteene shillings . 
 The Chaus Bassa , Captain of the Pensioners , one hundred and twentie aspers the day , and amounteth to by the year in sterling money , two hundred , threescore and two pounds , sixteene shillings . 
 The Capigilar Caiasi , Captain of his Barge , one hundredth and twentie aspers the day , and makes out by the year in sterling money , two hundred , threescore and two pounds , sixteene shillings . 
 The Solach Bassi , Captain of his guard , one hundred and twentie aspers , two hundred , three score and two pounds , sixteene shillings . 
 The Giebrigi Bassi , master of the armoury , one hundred and twenty aspers , two hundred , three score and two pounds , sixteene shillings . 
 The Topagi Bassi , Master of the artillery , one hundred and twentie aspers , two hundred , three score and two pounds , sixteene shillings . 
 The Echim Bassi , Physician to his person , one hundred and twentie aspers , two hundred , three score and two pounds , sixteene shillings . 
 To fourtie Physicians under him , to each fourtie aspers , is three thousand , eight hundred , three score and sixe pounds , sixteene shillings . 
 The Mustafaracas spearmen , attending on his person , in number five hundred , to either three score aspers , and makes sterling , threescore and five thousand , and seven hundred pounds . 
 The Cisingeri gentlemen , attending upon his diet , fourtie , at fourtie aspers each of them , and amounteth to sterling by the year , three thousand , five hundred and foure pounds . 
 The Chausi Pensioners , foure hundred and fourtie , at thirtie aspers , twenty eight thousand , nine hundred , and eight pounds . 
 The Capagi porters of the Court and City , foure hundred , at eight aspers , and makes sterling money by the year , seven thousand , and eight pounds . 
 The Solachi , archers of his guard , three hundreth and twenty , at nine aspers , and comes unto in English money , the sum of sixe thousand , three hundred and sixe pounds . 
 The Spahi , men of Arms of the Court and the City , ten thousand , at twenty five aspers , and makes of English money , five hundred , forty and seven thousand , and five hundred pounds . 
 The Janizaires sixteene thousand , at six aspers , is two hundred and ten thousand , and two hundred and forty pounds . 
 The Giebegi furbu shers of armour , one thousand , five hundred , at sixe aspers , and amounteth to sterling 63 
 money , nineteene thousand , seven hundred , and fourescore pounds . 
 The Seiesir , servitors in his Equier or stable , five hundred , at two aspers , and makes sterling money , two thousand , one hundred , fourescore and ten pounds . 
 The Saesi , Sadlers and bit makers , five hundred , at seven aspers , seven thousand , six hundred , threescore and five pounds . 
 The Catergi , Carriers upon Mules , two hundred , at five aspers , two thousand , one hundred , fourescore and ten pounds . 
 The Cinegi , Carriers upon Camels , one thousand , five hundred , at eight aspers , and amounteth in sterling money , to twenty sixe thousand , two hundred , and fourescore pounds . 
 The Reiz , or Captains of the Galleys , three hundred , at ten aspers , and amounteth in English money by the year , the sum of sixe thousand , five hundred , threescore and ten pounds . 
 The Alechingi , Master's of the said Galleys , three hundred , at seven aspers , foure thousand , five hundred , fourescore and nineteene pounds . 
 The Getti , Boatswain thereof , three hundred , at sixe aspers , is three thousande , nine hundred , fourty and two pounds . 
 The Oda Bassi , Pursers , three hundred , at five aspers , makes three thousand , two hundred , and fourescore pounds . 
 The Azappi soldiers two thousand sixe hundred at foure Aspers , whereof the six hundred do continually keep the galleys , two and twentie thousand , seven hundred fourscore and six pounds . 
 The Mariers Bassi master's over the shipwrights and kalkers of the navy , nine , at 20. Aspers the piece , amounteth to three thousand fourescore and foure pound , foure shillings . 
 The Master Dassi shipwrights & kalkers , one thousand 
 at fourteene aspers , which amounteth by the year , to thirtie thousand , sixe hundred threescore pound . 
 Summa totalis of daily payments amounteth by the year sterling , one million , nine hundred threescore eight thousand , seven hundred thirty five pounds , nineteene shillings eight pence , answered quarterly without default , with the sum of foure hundred fourescore twelve thousand , one hundred fourescore and foure pounds foure shillings eleven pence , and is for every day five thousand three hundred fourescore and thirteene pounds , fifteene shillings ten pence . 
 Annuities of lands never improved , five times more in valve then their sums mentioned , given by the said Grand Signior , as follows . 
 TO the Viceroy for his Timar or annuity 60. thousand gold ducats . 
 To the second Bassa for his annuity 50. thousand ducats . 
 To the third Bassa for his annuity 40. thousand ducats . To the fourth Bassa for his annuity 30. thousand ducats . To the fifth Bassa for his annuity 20. thousand ducats . To the Captain of the Janizaries 20. thousand ducats . To the Jeu Merhorbassi master of his horse 15. thousand ducats . 
 To the Captain of the pensioners 10. thousand ducats . 
 To the Captain of his guard 5. thousand ducats . 
 Summa totalis 90. thousand li . sterling . 
 Beside these above specified , be sundry other annuities given to diverse others of his aforesaid officers , as also to certain called Sahims , diminishing from three thousand to two hundreth ducats , esteemed triple to surmount the annuity abovesaid . 
 The Turkes chief officers . 
 THe Viceroy is high Treasurer , notwithstanding that under him be three subtreasurers called Teftadars , which be accountable to him of the receipts out of vi 65 E 
 Europe , Asia and Africa , save their yearly annuity of lands . 
 The Lord Chancellor is called Nissangi Bassa , who sealeth with a certain proper character such licences , safe conducts , passports , especial grants , etc. as proceed from the Grand Signior : notwithstanding all letters to foreign princes so firmed be after enclosed in a bag , and sealed by the Grand Signior , with a signet which he ordinarily weareth about his neck , credited of them to have be of ancient aPPERTAINING to king Salomon the wise . 
 The Admiral gives his voice in the election of all Begs , Captains of Islands , to whom he gives their charge , as also appoints the Subbassas , Bailiffs or Constables over Cities and Towns upon the Sea coasts about Constantinople , and in the Archipelago , whereof he reapeth great profit . 
 The Subbassi of Pera payeth him yearly fifteene thousande ducats , and so likewise either of the others according as they are placed . 
 The Ressistop serves in office to the Viceroy and Chancellor , as Secretary , and so likewise doth the Cogie Master of the Rolls , before which two , pass all writings presented to , or granted by the said Viceroy and Chancellor , offices of especial credit and like profit , moreover rewarded with annuities of lands . 
 There are also two chief Judges nam Cadi Lesker , the one over Europe , and the other over Asia and Africa , which in Court do fit on the Bench at the left hand of the Bassas . These fell all offices to the under Judges of the land called Cadies , whereof is one in every City or town , before whom all matters in controversy are by judgement decided , as also penalties and corrections for crimes ordained to be executed upon the offenders by the Subbassi . 
 