A brief note concerning and ancient trade of the 
 English Merchants to the Canary-lands , gathered out of and old ligier book of M. Nicolas Thorne the elder a worshipful merchant of the city of Bristoll . 
 RF3 | | 1T appears evidently out of a certain note or ■ Si letter °f remembrance , in the custody of me ™ ■ " ! Richard Hakluyt , written by M. Nicolas Thorne the elder a principali merchant of Bristoll , to his friend and factor Thomas Midnail and his own servant William Ballard at that time resident at S. Lucar in 
 Andaluzia ; that in the year of our Lord 1526 ( and ary trade to ' circumstances and probabilities long before ) cer-the Canaries taine English merchants , and among the rest himself 
 1526. 
 with one Thomas Spacheford exercised usual and ordi - 
 nary trade of merchandise unto the Canary Hands . For by the said letter notice was given to Thomas Midnail and William Ballard aforesaid , that a certain ship called The Christopher of Cadiz bound for the West Indies had taken in certain farthels of cloth both course and fine , broad and narrow of diverse sorts and colours , some arovas of packthreed , sixe cerons or bags of soap with other goods of M. Nicolas Thorne , to be delivered at Santa Cruz the chief town in Tenerifa one of the seven Canary-lands . All which commodities the said Thomas and William were authorised by the owner in the letter 124 
 before mentioned to barter & fell away at Santa Cruz. And in lieu of such money as should arise of the sale of those goods they were appointed to return back into England good store of Orchell ( which is a certain kind of moss growing upon high rocks , in those days much used to die withal ) some quantity of sugar , and certain hundreds of kid-skinnes . For the procuring of which and of other commodities at the best and first hand the said Thomas and William were to make their abided at Santa Cruz , and to remain there as factors for the abovesaid M. Nicolas Thorne . 
 And here also I thought good to signify , that in the said letters mention is made of one Thomas Tison and English man , who before the foresaid year 1526 had found the way to the West Indies , and was there resident , unto whom the said M. Nicolas Thorne sent certain armour and other commodities specified in the letter , aforesaid . 
 A.D. c . 1550. 
 