The first voyage made by Master William Towrson Merchant of London , to the coast of Guinea , with two Ships , in the year 1555. 
 Pon Munday the thirtieth day of Sep - September . tember we departed from the Isle of Wight , out of the haven of Neuport with two good ships , the one called the Heart , the other the Hind , both of London , and the Master's of them were John Ralph , and William Carter , for 
 a voyage to be made unto the River de Sestos in Guinea , and to other havens thereabouts . 
 It fell out by the variety of winds , that it was the foureteenth day of October before we could fetch October . Dartmouth : and being there arrived we continued in that road sixe days , and the 20. of October we warped out of the haven , and set sail , directing our course towards the Southwest , and the next morning we were run by estimation thirty leagues . 
 The first of November we found ourselves to be in November . 31. degrees of latitude by the reckoning of our Master . 
 This day we ran about 40. leagues also . 
 The second day we ran 36. leagues . 
 The third day we had sighed of Porto Santo , which is Porto Santo . a small Island lying in the sea , about three leagues long , and a league & a half broad , & is possessed by Portugals . It riseth as we came from the Northnorthwest like two small hills near together . The East end of the same Island is a high land like a saddle with a valley , which makes it to bear that form . 
 The West end of it is lower with certain small round hillocks . This Island lies in thirty and three degrees . 
 vi 177 m 
 The same day at n . of the clock we raised the Isle Madera , of Madera , which lies 12. leagues from Porto Santo , towards the Southwest : that Island is a fair Island and fruitful , and is inhabited by Portugals , it riseth afar off like a great whole land and high . By three of the clock this day at after noon we were thwart of Porto Santo , and we set our course Southwest , to leave the Isle of Madera to the Eastward , as we did Porto Santo . These two Islands were the first land that we saw since we left the coast of England . About three of the clock after midnight we were thwart of Madera , within three leagues of the West end of it , and by means of the high hills there , we were becalmed : We suppose we ran this day and night 30. leagues . 
 The fourth day we lay becalmed under the Isle of Madera , until one of the clock at afternoon , and then , the wind coming into the East , we went our course , and ran that day fifteene leagues . 
 The 5. day we ran 15. leagues more . 
 The 6. day in the morning we raised the Isle of Tenerif . Tenerif , otherwise called the Pike , because it is a very high Island , with a pike upon the top like a loaf of Palma , sugar . The same night we raised the Isle of Palma , which is a high land also , and to the Westward of the Isle of Tenerif . 
 Gomera . The 7. day we perceived the Isle of Gomera , which is and Island standing betwixt Tenerif and Palma , about 12. leagues Eastward from Palma , and 8. leagues Westward from Tenerif : and for fear of being becalmed with the Isle of Tenerif , we left both it , and Gomera to the Eastward of us , and went betwixt Palma and Gomera . We ran this day and night 30. leagues . 
 Note that these Islands be 60. leagues from Madera , and that there are 3. Islands more to the Westward of Tenerif , nam the Grand Canaria , Forteventura , & Lancerot , of which Islands we came not in sighed : they be inhabited by Spaniards . 
 178 
 This day also we had sighed of the Isle of Ferro , Ferro . which is to the Southwards 13. leagues from the other Islands , and is possessed by Spaniards . All this day and night by reason of the wind we could not double [ H. ii . 24. ] the point or the Isle of Ferro , except we would have gone to the Westward of it , which had be much out of our course : therefore we kept about , and ran back five hours Eastnortheast to the end we might double it upon the next board , the wind continuing Southeast , which hath not be often seen upon that coast by any travelers : for the wind continueth there for the most part Northeast , & East Northeast : so upon the other board by the next morning we were in a manner with the Island , and had room enough to double the same . 
 The 8. day we kept our course as near the wind as we could , because that our due course to fetch the coast of Barbary was Southeast and by East , but by the scant wind we could not go our due course , but went as near it as we could , and ran this day and night 25. leagues . 
 The 9. day we ran 30. leagues , the 10. 25. leagues , the 12. 24. 
 The 12. day we saw a sail under our Lee , which was as we thought a fisherman , so that we went room to have spoken with him , but within one hour there fell such a fog , that we could not see the ship nor one of us the other : we shot ofF diverse pieces to the Hind , but she herd them not : at after noon she shot ofF a piece which we herd , and made her answer with another : and within one half hour after the fog brake up , and we were within 4. leagues of the shore upon the coast of Barbary , and we sounded and had 14. fathom water . The Bark also came room with us and there anchored by reason of the contrary wind . When we fell with the land , we could not judge justly what part of the land it was , because the most part of that coast is low land , and no part to be judged of it 
 T79 
 but the forepart of the shore , which is white like chalk or sand , and very deep unto the hard shore : there immediately we began to fish , and found great store of a kind of fish which the Portugals commonly fish for upon that coast , which they call Pergosses , the Frenchmen call them Saders , and our men salt-water breams . Before the clearing up of the fog , the ship which we followed shaped us such a course that we could see her no more , by reason of our shooting ofF to find the Hind again . This part of the coast of Barbary , by our Pilots reckoning , is about 16. leagues to the Eastwards of the river deal Oro. 
 The 13. day in the afternoon we spied a sail coming towards us , which we judged to be the sail that we saw the day before , and as soon as we spied him , we caused the Hind to weigh her anchor and to go towards him , and manned out our SkifFe in like case to lay him aboard , or to discern what he was , and we our selves within half and hour after weighed also : but after the sail had espied us , he kept about , and turned back again , and shortly after there fell such another fog , that we could not see him : which fogs continued all that night , so that we were constrained to leave the chase . This afternoon the wind came about , and we went our course Southwest and by West , to go clear ofF the coast , we ran that night sixteene leagues . 
 The foureteenth day in the morning was very foggy : but about twelve a clock we espied a Carvell of 60. tun which was fishing , and we sent our Skiff to him with five men , and all without any weapon saving their Oars . The Carvell for haste let slip her anchor , and set sail ; and they seeing that , fearing that they should not fetch her , would tarry for no weapons , and in the end overtook the Carvell , and made her to strike sail , and brought her away , although they had foureteene or fifteene men aboard , & every man his weapon , but they had not the hearts to resist our men . 
 180 
 After they were come to us , they let fallen their anchor , for we had cast anchor because the wind was not good : I caused then the Skiff to come for me , and I went aboard of them to see that no harm should be done to them , nor to take any thing but that which they might spare us for our money . So we took of them 3. Tapnets of figs , two small pots of oil , two pipes of water , foure hogsheads of saltfish which they had taken upon the coast , and certain fresh fish which they did not esteem , because there is such store upon that coast , that in and hour and sometime less , a man may take as much fish as will serve Great store °f twentie men a day . For these things , and for some wine which we drank aboard or them , and three or Barbary , foure great Cannae which they sent aboard of our ships , I paid them twentie and seven Pistolets , which was twice as much as they willingly would have taken : and so let them go to their anchor and cable which they had let slip , and god it again by our help . After this we set sail , but the wind caused us to anchor again about twelve leagues off the river del Oro , as the Portugals told us . There were five Carvels more in this place , but when they saw us , they made all away for fear of us . 
 The 15. day we rid still because of the wind . 
 The 16. day we set sail and ran our course 40. leagues . This day , by the reckoning of our Pilots , we were right under the Tropike of Cancer . The 17. day TheTropike we ran 2C . leagues within sighed for the most part of °fGancerin the coast of Barbary . 
 The 18. day we ran thirtie leagues , and at twelve of the clock by the reckoning of our Pilots we were thwart of Cape Blank . Cape Blank . 
 The 22. day our Pilots reckoned us to be thwart [ H. ii . 25. J Cape Verde . CaPe er^ - 
 The 12. day of December we had sighed of land of The coast of Guinea , which as soon as we saw we hailed into the land Northeast , and about 12. of the clock at night 
 181 
 we were near the shore within less then 2. leagues : and then we kept about and sounded , and found 18. fathom water . Afterwards we saw a light towards the shore , which we thought to have be a ship , and thereby judged it to be the river de Sestos , which light as soon as we espied , we came to and anchor & armed our tops , and made all things ready to fight , because we doubted that it might be some Portugal or French man : this night we remained at and anchor , but in the morning we saw no man , only we espied 4. rocks about 2. English miles from us , one great rock , and the 3. other small ones , which when we saw , we supposed that the light came from the shore , and so weighed and set sail East Southeast along the shore , because the Master did not well know the place , but thought that we were not so far to the East as the river de Sestos . 
 This land all a long is a low land , and full of very high trees all along the shore , so that it is not possible to know the place that a man does fallen withal , except it be by the latitude : In these 24. hours I think we ran 16. leagues , for all the night we had a great gale as we were under sail , and had withal store of thunder and lightnings . 
 The 13. day for the most part we ran East Southeast all along the shore , within two leagues always of the same , and found the land all as at the first , fill of woods and great rocks hard aboard the shore , and the billow beating so soar , that the seas brake upon the shore as white as snow , and the water mounted so high that a man might easily discern it 4. leagues off , in such wise that no boat could land there . Thus we ran until 12. of the clock , and then they took the Sun and after judged themselves to be 24. leagues passed the river de Sestos to the Eastwards , by reason whereof we hailed into the shore within two English miles , and there anchored and found fifteene fathom water , and all off from the shore the sea so 182 
 » 555-smooth , that we might well have rid by and Hawser . All that afternoon we trimmed our boat and made her a sail , to the end that she might go along by the shore to seek some place to water in : for we could not go back again to the river de Sestos , because the wind blows always contrary , and the Currant run - Currant 
 neth always to the Eastwards , which was also against ast~ us . ’ 
 The 14. day we set sail St went back again along the coast , and sent our boats hard aboard the shore to seek a watering place , which they found about 12. of the clock , and we being far into the sea , met with diverse boats of the Country , small , long and narrow , & in every boat one man and no more : we gave them bred which they did eat , & were very glad of it . About 4 of the clock our boats came to us with fresh water : and this night we anchored against a River . 
 The 15. day we weighed and set sail to go near the shore , and with our lead we sounded all the way , and found sometime rocks , and sometime fair ground , and at the shallowest found 7. fathoms always at the least . So in fine we found 7. fathom and a half within and English mile of the shore , and there we anchored in a manner before the mouth of the River , and then we sent our boats into the River for water , which went about a mile within the River , where they had very good water . River This River lies by estimation 8. leagues beyond the cent‘ River de Sestos , and is called in the Card River S. Vincent , but it is so hard to find , that a boat being within half a mile of it shall not be able to discern that it is a River : by reason that directly before the mouth of it there lies a ledge of rocks , which is much broader then the River , so that a boat must run in along the shore a good way betwixt the rocks and the shore before it come to the mouth of the River , and being within it , it is a great River and diverse other Rivers fallen into it : The going into it is somewhat ill , because that at the entering the seas do 
 183 
 Grains of Guinea . Elephants teeth . 
 [ IL ii . 26. ] 
 go somewhat high , but being once within it , it is as calm as the Thames .. 
 There are near to the Sea upon this River diverse inhabitants , which are mighty big men and go all naked except some thing before their privy parts , which is like a clout about a quarter of a yard long made of the bark of trees , and yet it is like a cloth : for the bark is of that nature , that it will spin small after the manner of linen . Some of them also wear the like upon their heads being painted with diverse colours , but the most part of them go bore headed , and their heads are clipped and shorn of diverse sorts , and the most part of them have their skin of their bodies razed with diverse works , in manner of a leather Jerkin . The men and women go so alike , that one cannot know a man from a woman but by their breasts , which in the most part be very foul and long , hanging down low like the udder of a goat . 
 The same morning we went into the River with our Skiff , and carried certain basons , manels , etc. And there we took that day one hogshead and 100. li . weight of Grains , and two Elephants teeth at a reasonable good reckoning . we sold them both basons , and Manelios , and Margarits , but they desired most to have basons : For the most part of our basons we had by estimation about 30. li . for a piece , and for and Elephants tooth of 30. li . weight , we gave them 6. 
 The 16. day in the morning we went into the river with our Skiff , and took some of every sort of our merchandise with us , and showed it to the Negroes , but they esteemed it not , but made light of it , and also of the basons , Manellios and Margarits , which yesterday they did buy : howbeit for the basons they would have given us some grains , but to no purpose , so that this day we took not by estimation above one hundreth pound weight of Grains , by means of their Captain , who would suffer no man to fell any thing but through his hands , and at his price : he was so subtle , that for 184 
 a basin he would not give 15. pound weight of Grains , and sometime would offer us small dishfuls , whereas before we had baskets full , and when he saw that we would not take them in contentment , the Captain departed , and caused all the rest of the boats to depart , thinking belike that we would have followed them , and have given them their own askings . But after that we perceived their fetch , we weighed our Grapnel and went away , and then we went on land into a small Town to see the fashions of the Country , and there came a threescore of them about us , and at the first they were afraid of us , but in the end perceiving that we did not hurt , they would come to us and take us by the hand and be familiar with us , and then we went into their Towns , The descrip-which were like to twentie small hovels , all covered over oftheir^ with great leaves and baggage , and all the sides open , and a scaffold under the house about a yard high , where they work many pretty things of the barks of trees , and there they lie also . In some of their houses they work iron and make fair darts , and diverse other things to work their boats , and other things withal , and the women work as well as the men . But when we were there diverse of the women to show us pleasure danced and sung after their manner , full ill to our ears . 
 Their song was thus : 
 Sakere , sakere , ho , ho . Sakere , sakere , ho , ho . 
 And with these words they leap and dance and clap their hands . Beasts we could see none that they had , but two goats , small dogs , and small hens : other beasts we saw none . After that we had well marked all things we departed and went aboard our ships : which thing the Captain of the other town perceiving , sent two of his servants in a boat with a basket of Grains , and made us signs that if when we had slept we would come again into their river , we should have store of Grains , and so showed us his Grains and departed . 
 The 17. day in the morning because we thought that the Negroes would have done something because the 
 Captain sent for us , I required the Master to go on shore , and sent the rest of our Merchants with him , and tarried aboard my self by reason that the last day he esteemed our things so little : so when the Master and the rest came into the river , the captain with diverse others came to them , and brought Grains with them , & after that he saw that I was not there , he made signs to know where I was , and they made signs to him again that I was in the ships : and then he made signs to know Diago the who was Captain by the name of Diago , for so they call name of a their Captain , & they pointed to the master of the ship : 
 Captain . began to bis GraineS ) but he held them 
 so unreasonably , that there was no profit to be made of them : which things the Master perceiving , and seeing that they had no store of Grains , came away , and took not above 50. pound weight of Grains . Then he went a shore to the little Town where we were the day before , & one of them plucked a Gourd , wherewith the Negroes were offended , & came many of them to our men with their darts and great targets , and made signs to them to depart : which our men did , having but one bow and two or three swords , and went aboard the boat and came away from them : and assoon as they were come aboard we weighed and set sail , but the wind was ofF the Sea , so that we could not get out clear of certain rocks , and therefore we came to and anchor again . 
 The latitude This river is called River S. Vincent , standing in 4. ofS . Vincent degrees anc [ a half , and it ebbeth and flows there ' Agrees and a everX I2 - hours , but not much water when it ebbeth half . the most : while we were there , it ebbed one fathom and a half water . 
 This country as far as we could perceive is altogether woody , and all strange trees , whereof we knew Leaves of ex - none , and they were of many sorts , with great leaves like ceeding length , great docks , which bee higher then any man is able to reach the top of them . 
 Long peas There are certain peason by the Sea side , which grow 
 stalks . upon great and very long stalks , one of the stalks I 186 
 1555-measured and found it 27. paces long , and they grow upon the sand like to trees , and that so near the Sea , that sometime the Sea flows into the woods as we might perceive by the water marks . The trees and all things in this place grow continually green . Diverse of the women have such exceeding long breasts , that some Long women's of them will lay the same upon the ground and lie down breasts . by them , but all the women have not such breasts . 
 At this place all the day the wind blows off the [ II ii . 27. ] Sea , and all the night off the land , but we found it to differ sometime , which our Master marveiled at . 
 This night at 9. of the clock the wind came up at the East , which ordinarily about that time was wont to come out of the North Northwest off the shore : yet we weighed and hailed off South with that wind all night into the Sea , but the next morning we hailed in again to the land , and took in 6. Tons of water for our ship , and I think the Hind took in as much . 
 I could not perceive that here was any gold , or any other good thing : for the people be so wild and idle , that they give themselves to seek out nothing : if they would takes pains they might gather great store of grains , but in this place I could not perceive two Tun . 
 There are many fowls in the Country , but the people will not take the pains to take them . 
 I observed some of their words of speech , which I 
 thought good here to set down . 
 Bezow , bezow , ' Manegete afoye , Crocow afoye , Zeramme afoye , Beg sack , Beg come , > - ‘ Is their salutation . Grains enough . Hens enough . Have you enough ? Give me a knife . Give me bred . 
 Borke , Coutrecke , Veede , Brekeke , Diago , 185 Hold your peace . the lie . Put forth , or empty . Rowe . Their Captain , and some 
 The language about the River of 8. Vincent . 
 call him Dabo . These and other words they speak very thick , and oftentimes recite one word three times together , and at the last time longer then at the two first . 
 The 18. day towards night , as we were sailing along the coast , we met with certain boats in the sea , & the men showed us that there was a river thwart of us , where there were Grains to be sold , but we thought it not good to tarry there , lest the other ships should get before us . This river hath lying before it three great rocks , and 5. small rocks , one great tree , and a little tree right by the river , which in height exceeded all the rest : we hailed this night along the coast 10. leagues . 
 The 19. day as we coasted the shore , about twelve of the clock there came out to us 3. boats to tell us that they had grains , & brought some with them for a show , but we could not tarry there . We proceeded along the coast , & anchored by the shore all the night , and ran this day 10. leagues . 
 The 20. day the Hind having anchored by us among rocks , and foul ground , lost a small anchor . At noon , as we passed along the coast , there came forth a Negro to us , making signs , that if we would go a shore , we should have Grains , and where we anchored at night , there came another to us , and brought Grains , and showed us them , and made signs that we should tarry , and made a fire upon the land in the night , meaning thereby to tell us where we should land , and so they did in diverse other places upon the coast , where they saw us to anchor . 
 The tides and In all the places where we have anchored , since we came Shore rome our watr‘nS placei we have found the tide always ' running to the Westwards , and all along the coast many rocks hard aboard the shore , and many of them a league ofF the shore or more , we ran this day 12. leagues . 
 The 21. day , although we ran all day with a good gale of wind , yet the tides came so soar out of the coast , 188 
 that we were not able to run above sixe leagues : and this day there came some Negroes to us , as there had done other times . 
 The 22. we ran all day and night to double a point , called Das palmas , and ran sixteene leagues . 
 The 23. day about 3. of the clock we were thwart of the point , & before we came to the Westermost part of it , we saw a great ledge of rocks , which lie West from the Cape about 3. leagues and a league or more from the land . Shortly after we had sighed of the Eastermost part of the Cape , which lies 4. leagues from the Westermost part , and upon the very corner thereof lie two green places , as it were closes , and to the Westwards of the Cape the land parted from the Cape , as it were a Bay , whereby it may well be known . Foure leagues more beyond that there lies a headland in the sea , and about two leagues beyond the headland there goes in a great Bay , as it were a river , before which place we anchored all that night , which we did , lest in the night we should overrun a river , where the * last year they had all their Elephants teeth . 
 This Cape Das palmas lies under foure degrees and a half , and betwixt the said Cape , and the river de Sestos is the greatest store of Grains to be had , and being passed the said Cape , there is no great store else where . 
 Where we anchored this night , we found that the tide , which before ran always to the Westward , from this Cape runneth all to the Eastward : this day we ran some 16. leagues . 
 The 24. day running our course , about eight of the clock there came forth to us certain boats , which brought with them small eggs , which were soft without shells , and they made us signs , that there was within the land fresh water , and Goats : and the Master thinking that it was the river which we sought , cast anchor and sent the boat on shore , with one that knew the river , and coming near the shore , he perceived that it was not the river , and so came back again , and went along the 189 
 A.D. 
 1555 - 
 The point oj Palmas , 
 * That was they ere 1554. 
 The tides running Eastward . [ II ii . 28. ] 
 shore , with their oars and sail , and we weighed and ran along the shore also : and being thirteene leagues beyond the Cape , the Master perceived a place which he judged to be the river , when we were in deed two miles shot passed it : yet the boat came from the shore , and they that were in her said , that there was no river : notwithstanding we came to and anchor , and the Master and I took five men with us in the boat , and when he came near the shore , he perceived that it was the same river which he did seek : so we rowed in , and found the entrance very ill , by reason that the sea goes so high : and being entered , diverse boats came to us , and showed us that they had Elephants teeth , and they brought us one of about eight pound , & a little one of a pound , which we bought : then they brought certain teeth to the river side , making signs , that if the next day we would come again , they would fell us them : so we gave unto two Captains , to either of them a manillio , and so we departed , and came aboard , and sent out the other boat to another place , where certain boats that came into the sea , made us signs that there was fresh A Town , water : and being come thither , they found a town , but no river , yet the people brought them fresh water , and showed them and Elephants tooth , making signs that the next day they would sei them teeth , and so they came aboard . 
 This river lies by the Card thirteene leagues from the Cape Das palmas , and there lies to the Westwards of the same a rock about a league in the sea , and the river it self hath a point of land coming out into the Sea , whereupon grow five trees , which may well be discerned two or three leagues off , coming from the Westward , but the river cannot be perceived until such time as a man be hard by it , and then a man may perceive a little Town on each side the river , and to each Town there belongeth a Captain . The river is but small , but the water is good and fresh . 
 Two miles beyond the river , where the other town is , 190 
 there lies another point into the Sea , which is green like a close , and not above sixe trees upon it , which grow one of them from the other , whereby the coast may well be known : for along all the coast that we have hitherto sailed by , I have not seen so much bore land . 
 In this place , and three or foure leagues to the Westward of it , all along the shore , there grow many Palm trees , whereof they make their wine de Palma . These trees may easily be known almost two leagues off , for they be very high and white bodied , and straight , and be biggest in the midst : they have no boughs , but only a round bush in the top of them : and at the top of the same trees they boar a hold , and there they hang a bottle , and the juice of the tree runneth out of the said hold into the bottle , and that is their wine . 
 From the Cape das Palmas , to the Cape Tres puntas , there are 100. leagues : and to the port where we purpose to make sales of our cloth beyond the Cape Tres puntas 40. leagues . 
 Note , that betwixt the river De Sestos , and the Cape Das palmas , is the place where all the grains be gathered . 
 The language of the people of this place , as far as I could perceive , differeth not much from the language of those which dwell where we watered before : but the people of this place be more gentle in nature then the other , and goodlier men : their building & apparel is all one with the others . 
 Their desire in this place was most of all to have Manillios and Margarites : as for the rest of our things , they did little esteem them . 
 About nine of the clock there came boats to us forth , from both of the places aforesaid , and brought with them certain teeth , and after they had caused me to swear by the water of the Sea that I would not hurt them , they came aboard our ship three or foure of them , and we gave them to eat of all such things 191 
 Many Palm trees . 
 Cape Tres puntas . 
 Their manner of swearing by the water of the Sea. 
 as we had , and they did eat and drink of all things , as well as we our selves . Afterwards we bought all their teeth , which were in number 14. and of those 14. there were 10. small : afterwards they departed , making us signs that the next day we should come to their Towns . 
 The 26. day because we would not trifle long at this place I required the Master to go unto one of the towns , and to take two of our merchants with him , & I my self went to the other , and took one with me , because these two towns stand three miles asunder . To these places we carried somewhat of every kind of merchandise that we had : and he had at the one Town , nine teeth , which were but small , and at the other town where I was , I had eleven , which were also not big , and we left aboard with the Master certain Manillios , wherewith he bought 12. teeth aboard the ship , in our absence : and having bought these of them , we perceived that they had no more teeth : so in that place where I was one brought to me a small goat , which I bought , and to the Master at the other place they brought five small hens , which he bought also , and after that we saw there was nothing else to be had , we departed , and by one of the clock we met aboard , and then weighed , and went East our course 18. leagues still within sighed of land . 
 The 28. the wind varied , and we ran into the sea , and the wind coming again off the sea , we fell with the land again , and the first of the land which we raised showed as a great read cliff round , but not very high , and to the Eastward of that another smaller read cliff , and right above that into the land a round hummoke and green , which we took to be trees . We ran in these 24. hours , not above foure leagues . 
 The 29. day coming near to the shore , we perceived the read . cliff aforesaid to have right upon the top of it a great heap of trees , and all to the Westwards of it full of read cliffs as far as we could see , and all 192 
 along the shore , as well upon the cliffs , as otherwise , full of wood : within a mile of the said great clifFe there is a river to the Eastwards , and no cliffs that we could see , except one small clifFe , which is hard by it . We ran this day and night 12. leagues . 
 The winds that we had in this place by the reports of the people and of those that have be there , have not be usual , but in the night , at North off the land , and in the day South ofF the sea , and most commonly Northwest , and Southwest . 
 The 31. day we went our course by the shore Northwards : this land is all along a low shore , and full of wood , as all the coast is for the most part , and no rocks . This morning came out many boats which went a fishing , which bee greater boats then those which we saw before , so that in some of them there sat 5. men , but the fashion of the boats is all one . In the afternoon about three of the clock we had sighed of a Town by the sea side , which our Pilots judged to be 25. leagues to the Westwards of the Cape Tres puntas . 
 The third of January in the morning we fell with the Cape Tres puntas , and in the night passed , as our Cape Tres Pilots said , by one of the Portugals castles , which is 8. leagues to the Westwards of the Cape : upon the first sighed of the Cape we discerned it a very high land , and all grown over with trees , and coming near to it , we perceived two head lands , as it were two Baize betwixt them , which opened right to the Westward , and the uttermost of them is the Eastern Cape , there we perceived the middle Cape , and the Eastermost Cape : the middle Cape stands not above a league from the West Cape , although the Carded shows them to be 3. leagues one from the other : and that middle Cape hath right before the point of it a small rock so near to it , that it cannot be discerned from the Cape , except a man be near to the shore , and upon the same Cape stands a great heap of trees , and when a man is thwart 
 vi 193 N 
 the same Cape to the Eastward , there riseth hard by it a round green hommoke , which comes out of the main .. 
 The thirde Cape is about a league beyond the middle Cape , and is a high land like to the other Capes , and betwixt the middle , and the thirde comes out a little head or point of a land out of the main , and diverse rocks hard aboard the shore . 
 Before we came to the Capes , being about 8. leagues off them , we had the land Southeast , and by East , and being passed the Capes , the land runneth in again East Northeast . 
 About two leagues beyond the farthest Cape there is a low glade about two miles long , and then the land riseth high again , and diverse headlands rise one beyond another , and diverse rocks lie at the point of the first headland . The midst of these Capes is the nearest to the Southwards , I mean , further into the sea then any of the other , so that being to the Eastward of it , it may be discerned far off , and being so to the Eastward it riseth with two small rocks . 
 This day we anchored for fear of overshooting a town called S. Johns . we ran this day not above 8. leagues . In the afternoon this day there came a boat of the country from the shore , with five men in her , and went along by us , as we thought , to discern our flags , but they would not come near us , and when they had well looked upon us , they departed . 
 The fourth day in the morning , sailing by the coast , we espied a ledge of rocks by the shore , and to the Westwards of them two great green hills joining together , so that between them it was hollow like a saddle : and within the said rocks the Master thought the aforenamed Town had stood , and therefore we manned our boats , and took with us cloth , and other merchandise , and rowed ashore , but going along by the coast , we saw that there was no town , therefore we went aboard again . 
 194 
 From these two hills aforesaid , about two leagues to the Eastward , lie out into the Sea almost two miles a ledge of rocks , and beyond that a great Bay , which runneth into the North Northwestward , and the land in this place lies North Northeast along the shore : but the uttermost point of land in that place that we could see , lay Northeast , and by East from us . 
 After that we were with a small gale of wind run passed that uttermost headland , we saw a great read cliff , which the Master again judged to be the town of S. Johns , and then we took our boat with merchandise , and went thither , and when we came thither , we perceived that there was a town upon the top of the hill , and so we went towards it , and when we were hard by it , the people of the town came together a great sort of them , and waved us to come in , with a piece of cloth , and so we went into a very fair Bay , which lies to the Eastward of the cliff , whereupon the town stands , and being within the cliff , we let fallen our grapnell , and after that we had tarried there a good space , they sent a boat aboard of us , to show us that they had gold , and they showed us a piece about half a crown weight , and required to know our measure , & our weight , that they might show their Captain thereof : and we gave them a measure of two else , and a weight of two Angels to show unto him , which they took , and went on shore , and showed it unto their Captain , and then they brought us a measure of two else , one quarter and a half , and one Crusado-weight of gold , making us signs that so much they would give for the like measure , and less they would not have . After this , we tarried there about and hour , and when we saw that they would do no otherwise , and withal understood , that all the best places were before us , we departed to our ships and weighed , and ran along the shore , and went before with our boat , and having sailed about a league , we came to a point where there lay forth a ledge of rocks , like to the others before spoken of , 195 
 [ II ii . 30. ] 
 and being passed that people , the Master spied a place which he said plainly was the town of DONE John : and the night was come upon us , so that we could not well discern it , but we anchored as near unto the place as we could . 
 The town of The fift day in the morning we perceived it to be DONE John. same town jn deed , and we manned our boats and went thither , and because that the last year the Portugals at that place took away a man from them , and after shot at them with great bases , and did beat them from the place , we let fallen our grapnel almost a base shot off the shore , and there we lay about two hours , and no boats came to us . Then certain of our men with the Hinds boat went into the Bay which lies to the Eastward of the town , and within that Bay they found a goodly fresh river , and afterwards they came and waved to us also to come in , because they perceived the Negroes to come down to that place , which we did : and immediately the Negroes came to us , and made us signs that they had gold , but none of them would come aboard our boats , neither could we perceive any boats that they had to come withal , so that we judged that the Portugals had spoiled their boats , because we saw half of their town destroyed . 
 we having stayed there a good space , and seeing that they would not come to us , thrust our boats heads a shore , being both well appointed , and then the Captain of the Town came down being a grave man : and he came with his dart in his hand , and sixe tall men after him , every one with his dart & his target , and their darts were all of iron , fair and sharp , and there came another after them which carried the Captains stool : we saluted him , and put off our caps , and bowed our selves , and he like one that thought well of himself , did not move his cap , nor scant bowed his body , and sat him down very solemnly upon his stool : but all his men put off their caps to us , and bowed down themselves . 
 196 
 He was clothed from the loins down with a cloth of that Country making , wrapped about him , and made fast about his loins with a girdle , and his cap of a certain cloth of the Country also , and bore legged , and bore footed , and all bore above the loins , except his head . 
 His servants , some of them had cloth about their loins , and some nothing but a cloth betwixt their legs , and made fast before , and behind to their girdles , and caps of their own making , some like a basket , and some like a great wide purse of beasts skins . 
 All their cloth , cords , girdles , fishing lines , and all such like things which they have , they make of the bark of certain trees , and thereof they can work things very prettily , and iron work they can make very fine , of all such things as they do occupy , as darts , fishhooks , Their hooking irons , iron heads , and great daggers , some of weaPons-them as long as a woodknife , which be on both sides exceeding sharp , and bent after the manner of Turkey blades , and the most part of them have hanging at their left side one of those great daggers . 
 Their targets be made of such pills as their cloth is made of , and very closely wrought , and they be in form foure square , and very great , and somewhat longer then they be broad , so that kneeling down , they make their targets to cover their whole body . Their bows be short , and of a pretty strength , as much as a man is able to draw with one of his fingers , and the string is of the bark of a tree , made flat , and about a quarter of and inch broad : as for their arrows , I have not as yet seen any of them , for they had wrapped them up close , and because I was busy I could not stand about it , to have them open them . Their gold also they work very well . 
 When the Captain was set , I sent him two else of [ II ii . 31. ] cloth , and two basons , and gave them unto him , and he sent again for a weight of the same measure , and I sent him a weight of two Angels , which he would not take , 
 197 
 neither would he suffer the town to buy any thing , but the basons of brass : so that we sold that day 74. basons unto the men of the town , for about half and Angel weight , one with another , and nine white basons , which we sold for a quarter of and Angel a piece , or thereabouts . 
 We showed them all our other things which we had , but they did not esteem them . 
 About two of the clock , the Captain who did depart in the morning from us , came again , and brought with him to present me withal , a hen , and two great roots , which I received , and after made me signs that the country would come to his town that night , and bring great store of gold , which in deed about 4. of the clock they did : for there came about 100. men under 3. Captains , well appointed with their darts and bows , and when they came to us , every man sticked down his dart upon the shore , and the Captains had stools brought them , and they sat down , and sent a young man aboard of us , which brought a measure with him of and ell , and one fourth part , and one sixteenth part , and he would have that foure times for a weight of one Angel and twelve grains : I offered him two else , as I had done before for two Angels weight , which he esteemed nothing , but still stuck at his foure measures aforesaid : yet in the end , when it grew very late , and I made him signs that I would depart , he came to foure else for the weight abovesaid , and otherwise he would not deal , and so we departed . This day we took for basons sixe ounces and a half and one eight part . 
 The sixt day in the morning we manned our boats and the skiff well , for fear of the Portugals which the last year had taken away a man from the other ships , and went on shore , and landed , because they had no boats to come to us , and so the young man which was with us the night before was sent aboard , who seemed to have dealt and bargained before with the Portugals for he could speak a little Portuguise , and was perfect in 198 
 weights and measures : at his coming he offered us , as he had done before , one Angel , and twelve grains for foure else , and more he would not give , and made signs , that if we would not take that , we should depart , which we did : but before we did indeed depart , I offered him of some rotten cloth three else for his weight of and Angel and twelve grains , which he would not take , and then we departed making signs to him that we would go away , as indeed we would have done , rather then have given that measure , although the cloth was ill , seeing we were so near to the places , which we judged to be better for sale . Then we went aboard our ships , which lay about a league off , and came back again to the shore for sand and balaste : and then the Captain perceiving that the boats had brought no merchandise but came only for water and sand , and seeing that we would depart , came unto them , making signs again to know whither we would not give the foure eUes , and they made signs again , that we would give them but three , and when they saw that the boats were ready to depart , they came unto them and gave them the weight of our Angel and twelve grains , which we required before and made signs , that if we would come again , they would take three else . So when the boats came aboard , we laid wares in them both , and for the speedier dispatch I and John Savill went in one boat , and the Master John Makeworth , and Richard Curligin , in the other , and went on shore , and that night I took for my part fiftie and two ounces , and in the other boat they took eight ounces and a quarter , all by one weight and measure , and so being very late , we departed and went aboard , and took in all this day three pound . 
 The seventh day we went a shore again , and that day I took in our boat three pound 19 ounces , so that we dispatched almost all the cloth that we carried with us before noon , and then many of the people were departed & those that remained had little gold , yet they made us signs to fetch them some latten basons , which 199 
 I would , not because I purposed not to trine out you time , but go thence with speed to DONE Johns town . But John Savill and John Makeworth were desirous to go again : and I , loath to hinder them of any . profit , consented , but went not my self : so they took eighteene ounces of gold and came away , seeing that the people at a certain cry made , were departed . 
 While they were at the shore , there came a young fellow which could speak a little Portuguise , with three more with him , and to him I sold 39 hasons and two small white saucers , for three ounces , etc. which was the best reckoning that we did make of any basons : and in the forenoon when I was at the shore , the Master sold five basons unto the same fellow , for half and ounce of gold . 
 This fellow , as far as we could perceive , had be taken into the Castle by the Portugales , and was got away from them , for he told us that the Portugales were [ II ii . 32. ] bad men , and that they made them slaves if they could take them , and would put irons upon their legs , and beside he told us , that as many Frenchmen or Englishmen , as they could take ( for he could name these two very well ) they would hang them : he told us further , 60. Portugales that there were 60 men in the castle , and that every year ^htaCaStle there came thither two ships , one great , and one small ‘ carveil , and further , that DONE John had wars with the Portugals , which gave me the better courage to go to his town , which lies but foure leagues from the Castle , wherehence our men were beaten the last year . 
 This fellow came aboard our ship without fear , and assoon as he came , he demanded , why we had not The English brought again their men , which the last year we took * took ™ ™ away , and could tell us that there were five taken away 
 Negroes ? high Englishmen : we made him answer , that they were 
 in England well used , and were there kept till they could speak the language , and then they should be brought again to be a help to Englishmen in this Country : and then he spoke no more of that matter . 
 200 
 Our boats being come aboard , we weighed and set sail and a Title after spied a great fire upon the shore , and by the light of the fire we might discern a white thing , which they took to be the Castle , and for fear of overshooting the town of DONE John we there anchored two leagues off the shore , for it is hard to fetch up a town here , if a ship overshoot it . This day we took seven pound , and five ounces of gold . 
 This town lies in a great Bay , which is very deep . 
 The people in this place desired most to have basons and cloth . They would buy some of them also many trifles , as knives , horsetailes , homes : and some of our 
 men going a shore , sold a cap , a dagger , a hat , etc. 
 They showed us a certain course cloth , which I think to be made in France , for it was course wool , and a 
 small thread , and as thick as wosted , and striped with 
 stripes of green , white , yellow etc. 
 Diverse of the 
 people did wear about their necks great beads of ' ’ " ' . Here also I learned 
 glass of diverse colours . Here also of their language , as follows : 
 some 
 Mattea , mattea , Dassee , dassee , Sheke , Cowrte , Cracca , Bassina , Foco , foco , Molta , 
 ' Is their 
 salutation . 
 I thank you . 
 Gold . 
 Cut . 
 Knives . 
 Basons . 
 Cloth . 
 Much , or great store . 
 This language seems partly to be corrupt . 
 The eight day in the morning we had sighed of the Castle , but by reason of a mist that then fell we could not have the perfect sighed of it , till we were almost at the town of DONE John , and then it cleared 
 Sighed of the castleofMina . 
 up , and we saw it and a white house , as it were a Chapel , upon the hill about it : then we hailed into the shore , within two English miles of DONE Johns town , and there anchored in seven fathom water . Here , as in many other places before , we perceived that the currant went with the wind . 
 201 
 The land here is in some places low and in some high , and full of wood altogether . 
 DONE Johns yhe town of DONE John is but little , of about Scribed twentie houses , and the most part of the town is 
 ' walled in with a wall of a men height , made with reed or sedge , or some such thing . Here we stayed two or three hours after we had anchored , to see if any man would come unto us : and seeing that none did come , we manned our boats and put in merchandise , and went and anchored with our boats near to the shore : then they sent out a man to us who made us signs that that was the town of DONE John , and that he himself was in the Country , and would be at home at the going down of the Sun , and when he had done , he required a reward , as the most part of them will do which come first aboard , and I gave him one ell of cloth and he departed , and that night we herd no more of him . 
 The ninth day in the morning we went again with our boats to the shore , and there came forth a boat to us , who made signs that DONE John was not come home , but would be at home this day : and to that place also came another boat from the other town a mile from this , which is called DONE Devis , and brought with him gold to show us , making signs that we should come thither . I then left in this place John Savill , and John Makeworth , and took the Hind , and went to the other town and there anchored , and took cloth and went to shore with the boat , and by and by the boats came to us and brought a measure of foure yards long & a half , and showed us a weight of and angel and twelve grains , which they would give for so much , and not otherwise : so I stayed and made no bargain . And [ II ii . 33. ] all this day the bark lay at DONE Johns town , and did nothing , having answer that he was not come home . 
 The tenth day we went again to the shore , and there came out a boat with good store of gold , and having driven the matter off a long time , and having 202 
 brought the measure to a nail less then three else , and their weight to and angel and twentie grains , and could not bring them to more , I did conclude with them and sold , and within one quarter of and hour I took one pound and a quarter of and ounce of gold : and then they made me signs to tarry , till they had parted their cloth upon the shore as their manner is , and they would come again , and so they went away , and laid the cloth all abroad upon the sand piece by piece , and by and by one came running down from the town to them , and spoke unto them , and forthwith every man made as much haste as he could away , and went into the woods to hide his gold and his cloth : we mistrusted some knavery , and being waved by them to come a shore , yet we would not , but went aboard the Hind , and perceived upon the hill 30 men which we judged to be Portugals : and they went up to the top of the hill and there mustered and showed themselves , having a flag with them . Then I being desirous to know what the Heart did , took the Hinds boat and went towards her , and when I came near to them they shot off two pieces of ordinance which I marveiled at : I made as much haste as I could to her , and met her boat and skiff coming from the shore in all haste , and we met aboard together . They showed me that they had been a shore all that day , and had given to the two sons of DONE John , to either of them three yards and a half of cloth , and three basons betwixt them , and had delivered him 3 yards of cloth more and the weight of and angel and 12 grains , and being on land did tarry for his answer , and in the mean time the Portugals came running from the hill upon them , whereof the Negroes a little before had given them warning , and bade them to go away but they per - invaded our ceived it not . The son of DONE John conspired with men . 
 the Portugales against them , so that they were almost upon them , but yet they recovered their boat and set off from the shore , and the Portugales shot their 
 203 
 calivers at them , but hurt no man , and then the ship perceiving it , shot off the two pieces aforesaid among them . Hereupon we laid bases in both the boats , and in the Skiff and manned them well , and went a shore again , but because of the wind we could not land , but lay off in the sea about ten score and shot at them , but the hill succoured them , and they from the rocks and from the hills shot at us with their half hakes , and the Negroes more for fear then for love stood by them to help them , and when we saw that the Negroes were in such subjection unto them that they durst not fell us any thing for fear of them we went aboard , and that night the wind kept at the East , so that we could not with our ship fetch the Hind , but I took the boat in the night and went aboard the bark to see what was there to be done , and in the morning we perceived the town to be in like case laid with Portugales , so we weighed and went along the coast . This town of John de Viso stands upon and hill like the town of DONE John , but it hath been burned , so that there are not passing sixe houses in it : the most part of the gold that comes thither comes out of the country , and no doubt if the people durst for fear of the Portugals bring forth their gold , there would be had good store : but they dare not fell any thing , their subjection is so great to the Portugales . The 11 day running by the shore we had sighed of a little town foure leagues from the last town that we came from , and about half a league from that , of another town upon a hill , and half a league from that also of another great town upon the shore : whither we went to see what could there be done : if we could do nothing , then to return to the other town , because we thought that the Portugales would leave the town upon our departure . Along from the castle unto this place are very high hills which may be seen above all other hills , but they are full of wood , and great read cliffs by the sea side . 
 204 
 The boats of these places are somewhat large and big , for one of them will carry twelve men , but their form is alike with the former boats of the coast . There are about these towns few rivers : their language differeth not from the language used at DONE Johns town : but every one can speak three or foure words of Portuguise , which they used altogether to us . 
 We saw this night about 5 of the clock 22 boats running along the shore to the Westward , whereupon we suspected some knavery intended against us . The 12 day therefore we set sail and went further along the coast , and descried more towns wherein were greater houses then in the other towns , and the people came out of the towns to look upon us , but we could see no boats . Two mile beyond the Eastermost town are black rocks , which black rocks continue to the uttermost cape of the land , which is about a league off , and then the land runs in Eastnortheast , and a sandy shore again : upon these black rocks came down certain Negroes , which waved us with a white flag , but we perceiving the principali place to be near , would not stay , but bore still along the shore : and as soon as we had opened the point of the land , we raised another headland about a league off the point , which had a rock lying off it into the sea , and that they thought to be the [ II ii . 34. ] place which we sought . When we came thwart the place they knew it , and we put wares into our boat , and the ship being within half a mile of the place anchored in five fathom water and fair ground . We went on shore with our boat , and anchored about ten of the clock in the forenoon : we saw many boats lying upon the shore , and diverse came by us , but none of them would come near us , being as we judged afraid of us : because that foure men were taken perforce the last year from this Foure men place , so that no man came to us , whereupon we went aboard again , and thought here to have made no sail : to nsts ’ yet towards night a great sort came down to the water side , and waved us on shore with a white flag , and 
 205 
 The like they do in the country of Prete Janni . 
 afterward their Captain came down and many men with him , and sat him down by the shore under a tree : which when I perceived , I took things with me to give him : at last he sent a boat to call to us , which would not come near us , but made us signs to come again the next day : but in fine , I god them to come aboard in offering them things to give to their captain , which were two elles of cloth , one latten basin , one white basin , a bottle , a great piece of beef , and sixe biscuit cakes , which they received making us signs to come again the next day , saying , that their Captain was Grand Captain as appeared by those that attended upon him with their darts and targets , and other weapons . 
 This town is very great and stands upon a hill among trees , so that it cannot well be seen except a man be near it : to the Eastward of it upon the hill hard by the town stand 2. high trees , which is a good mark to know the town . And under the town lies another hill lower then it , whereupon the sea beats : and that end next the sea is all great black rocks , and beyond the town in a bay lies another small town . 
 The 13 day in the morning we took our boat and went to shore , and stayed till ten a clock and no man came to us : we went about therefore to return aboard , and when the Negroes saw that , they came running down with a flag to wave us again , so we anchored again , and then one showed us that the Captain would come down by and by : we saw a sail in the mean time pass by us but it was small , and we regarded it not . Being on shore we made a tilt with our oars and sail , and then there came a boat to us with five men in her , who brought us again our bottle , and brought me a hen , making signs by the sun , that within two hours the merchants of the country would come down and buy all that we had : so I gave them sixe Manillios to carry to their Captain , and they made signs to have a pledge of us , and they would leave us another man : and we willing to do so , put one of our men in their 206 
 boat , but they would not give us one of theirs , so we took our man again , and there tarried for the merchants : and shortly after one came down arrayed like their Captain with a great train after him , who saluted us friendly , and one of the chiefest of them went and sat down under a tree , where the last year the Captain was wont to fit : and at last we perceived a great many of them to stand at the end of a hollow way , and behind them the Portugales had planted a base , who suddenly shot at us but overshot us , and yet we were in a manner hard by them , and they shot at us again before we could ship our oars to get away but did no hurt . Then the Negroes came to the rocks hard by us , and discharged calivers at us , and again the Portugales shot off their base twice more , and then our ship shot at them , but the rocks and hills defended them . 
 Then we went aboard to go from this place , seeing Master Robert the Negroes bent against us , because that the last year Gains^ * < 9-M . Gainsh did take away the Captains son and three others from this place with their gold , and all that they had about them : which was the cause that they became friends with the Portugales , whom before they hated , as did appear the last year by the courteous entertainment which the Trinitie had there , when the Captain came The English aboard the ship , and brought them to his town , and offered them ground to built a Castle in , and there c , ^wne they had good sales . 
 The 14 day we weighed and plied back again to seek the Hind , which in the morning we met , and so we turned both back to the Eastwardes to see what we could do at that place where the Trinitie did fell her eight frises the last year . The Hind had taken eighteene ounces and a half more of gold of other Negroes , the day after that we left them . This day about one of the clock we espied certain boats upon the sand and men by them and went to them with merchandizes , and took three ounces of gold for 18 fuffs of cloth , every fuffe three yards and a half after one angel and 12 
 207 
 grains the fuffe , and then they made me signs that the next day I should have gold enough : so the Master took the Hind with John Savill and John Makeworth , and went to seek the place aforesaid , & I with Richard Pakeman remained in this place to see what we could do the next day : and when the Negroes perceived our ship to go away , they feared that the other would follow , & so sent forth 2 boats to us with 4 men in them , requiring us to tarry & to give them one man for a pledge , and 2 of them should tarry with us for him , so Edward M. Morleis [ II ii . 35. ] servant seeing these men so earnest therein offered himself to be pledge , and we let him go for two of them , one whereof had his weights and scales , and a chain of gold about his neck , and another about his arm . They did eat of such things as we had and were well contented . In the night the Negroes kept a light upon the shore thwart of us , and about one of the clock we herd and saw the light of a base which shot off twice at the said light , and by and by discharged two calivers , A Portugals which in the end we perceived to be the Portugals Brigantine . brigandine which followed us from place to place , to give warning to the people of the country , that they should not deal with us . 
 The 15 day in the morning the Captain came down with 100 men with him , and brought his wife , and many others brought their wives also , because their town was 8 miles up in the country , and they determined to lie by the sea side till they had bought what they would . When he was come he sent our man aboard , and required to have two men pledges , and he himself would come aboard , and I sent him two , of whom he took but one , and so came aboard us , he and his wife with diverse of his friends , and brought me a goat and two great roots , and I gave him again a latten basin , a white basin , 6 manillios , and a bottle of Malmesy , and to his wife a small casket . After this we began to make our measure and weight : and he had a weight of his own which held one angel and 14 grains , and required a measure of 4 208 
 elles and a half . In fine we concluded the 8 part for one angel and 20 grains , and before we had done , they took mine own weight and measure . 
 The 16 day I took 8 li . 1 ounce of gold : and since the departure of the Hind I herd not of her , but when our pledge went into the country the first night , he said he saw her cast anchor about five leagues from this place . The 17 day I sold about 17 pieces of cloth , & took 4. li . 4 ounces and a half of gold . The 18 day the captain desired to have some of our wine , and offered half a ducat of gold for a bottle : but I gave it him freely , and made him and his train drink beside . And this day also I took 5 li . 5 ounces of gold . The 19 day we sold about 18 clothes , and took 4 li . 4. ounces and one quarter of gold . 
 The 20 day we took 3 li . sixe ounces and a quarter of gold . The 21 we took 8. li . 7. ounces and a quarter . The 22. 3. li . 8. ounces and a quarter . And this night about 4 of the clock the Captain who had lain all this while upon the shore , went away with all the rest of the people with him . 
 The 23 day we were waved a shore by other Negroes , and sold them cloth , caskets , knives , and a dosen of bells , and took 1. li . 10. ounces of gold . The 24 likewise we sold bells , sheets , and thimbles , and took two li . one ounce and a quarter of gold . The 25 day we sold 7 dosen of small bells and other things , and then perceiving their gold to be done , we weighed and set sail & went to leeward to seek the Hind , and about $ of the clock at night we had sighed of her , and bore with her , and understood that she had made some sales . The 26 day we received out of the Hind 48 li . 3 ounces and one eight part of gold , which they had taken in the time that we were from them . And this day upon the request of a Negro that came unto us from a captain , we went to shore with our merchandise , and took 7 li . and one ounce of gold . At this place they required no gages of us , but at night they sent a man aboard us , which lay vi 209 oh 
 [ II ii . 36. ] 
 with us all night , because we might know that they would also come to us the next day . The 27 day in both our ships we took 8. li . one ounce , three quarters and half a quarter of gold . The 28 we made sales for the company , and took one pound and half and ounce of gold . The 29 day in the morning we herd two calivers shot ofF upon the shore , which we judged to be either by the Portugales or by the Negroes of the Portugales : we manned our boats and armed our selves and went to shore , but could find nothing : for they were gone . The 30 day we made more sales for the company and for the Master's . 
 The 31 we sent our boat to shore to take in sand for ballast , and there our men met the Negroes , with whom they had made sale the day before a fishing which did help them to fill sand , and having no gold , sold fish to our men for their handkerchiefs and nightker-chiefes . 
 The 1. day of February we weighed and went to another place , and took 1. li . 9. ounces 3 quarters of gold . The 2 day we made more sales : but having viewed our victuals , we determined to tarry no long time upon the coast , because the most part of our drink was spent , & that which remained grew sour . The 3 and 4 days we made some sales , though not great , and finding the wind this 4. day to come ofF the shore , we set sail and ran along the shore to the Westwards : upon this coast we found by experience that ordinarily about 2 of the clock in the night the wind comes off the shore at Northnortheast , and so continueth until eight of the clock in the morning : and all the rest of the day and night it comes out of the Southwest : and as for the tide or currant upon this shore , it goes continually with the wind . The 5 day we continued sailing and thought to have met with some English ships , but found none . 
 The sixt day we went our course Southwest to fetch under the line , and ran by estimation 24 leagues . 
 The 13 day we thought our selves by our reckoning 210 
 to be clear off the Cape das Palmas , and ran 12 leagues . 
 The 22 day we were thwart of the Cape de Monte , Cape de which is to the Westward of the River de Sestos , about Monte . 30 leagues . 
 The first day of March in a Ternado we lost the March . 
 Hind , whereupon we set up a light and shot off a piece but could not hear of her , so that then we struck our sail and tarried for her , and in the morning had sighed of her again three leagues a stern off us . 
 Upon the 22 day we found our selves to be in the Cape Verde height of Cape Verde , which stands in 14. degrees and m latitude r4 a half . y a 
 From this day till the 29 day we continued our course , ' and then we found our selves to be in 22 degrees . This day one of our men called William King , who had be long sick , died in his sleep , his apparel was distributed to those that lacked it , and his money was kept for his friends to be delivered them at his coming home . 
 The 30 day we found our selves to be under the Tropike . 
 The 31 day we went our course , and made way 18 leagues . 
 From the first day of Aprill to the 20 we went our Aprill . course , and then found our selves to be in the height of the Asores . 
 The seventh day of May we fell with the South part May . of Ireland , and going on shore with our boat had fresh drink , and two sheep of the country people , which were wild Kerns , and we gave them gold for them , and bought further such other victuals as we had need of , and thought would serve us till we arrived in England . 
 The 14 day with the afternoon tide we went into Their arrival the Port of Bristoll called Hungrode , and there anchored at Bnst°U-in safety and gave thanks to God for our safe arrival . 
 