A voyage made out of England unto Guinea and Benin in Affrike , at the charges of certain merchants Adventurers of the City of London , in the year of our Lord 1553. 
 Was desired by certain of my friends to make some mention of this Voyage , that some memory thereof might remain to our posterity , if either iniquity of time consuming all things , or ignorance creeping in by barbarousness and contempt of knowledge should hereafter bury in obli 
 vion so worthy attempts , so much the greatlier to be esteemed , as before never enterprised by Englishmen , or at the least so frequented , as at this present they are , , and may be , to the great commodity of our merchants , if the same be not hindered by the ambition of such , as for the conquering of fortie or fiftie miles here and there , and erecting of certain fortresses , think to be Lords of half the world , envying that other should enjoy the commodities , which they themselves cannot wholly possess . And although such as have be at charges in the discovering and conquering of such lands ought by good reason to have certain privileges , preeminences , and tributes for the same , yet ( to speak under correction ) it may seem somewhat rigorous , and against good reason and conscience , or rather against the charity that ought to be among Christian men , that such as invade the dominions of other should not permit other friendly to use the trade of merchandise in places nearer , or seidome frequented of them , whereby their trade is not hindered in such places , where they themselves have at their own election appointed the Marts of their traffic . But forasmuch as at this present it is not my intent to accuse or defend , approve or improve , I will cease to speak any further hereof , and proceed to the description of the first voyage , as briefly and faithfully as I 
 141 
 Tunis . Buga . Tripoli . 
 Numidia . 
 was advertised of the same , by the information of such credible persons , as made diligent inquisition to know the truth thereof , as much as shall be requisite , omitting to speak of many particular things , not greatly necessary to be known : which nevertheless , with also the exact course of the navigation , shall be more fully declared in the second voyage . And if herein favour or friendship shall perhaps cause some to think that some have be sharply touched , let them lay apart favour and friendship , and give place to truth , that honest men may receive praise for well doing , and lewd persons reproach , as the just stipend of their evil deserts , whereby other may be deterred to do the like , and virtuous men encouraged to proceed in honest attempts . 
 But that these voyages may be more plainly understood of all men , I have thought good for this purpose , before I entreat hereof , to make a brief description of Africa , being that great part of the world , on whose West side begins the coast of Guinea at Cabo Verde , about twelve degrees in latitude , on this side the Equinoctial line , and two degrees in longitude from the measuring line , so running from the North to the South , and by East in some places , within 5 , 4 , and 3 degrees and a half unto the Equinoctial , and so forth in manner directly East and by North , for the space of 36 degrees or thereabouts , in longitude from the West to the East , as shall more plainly appear in the description of the second voyage . 
 A brief description of Afrike gathered by Richard Eden . 
 N Africa the less are these kingdoms : the kingdom of Tunis and Constantina , which is at this day under Tunis , and also the region of Bugia , Tripoli , and Ezzah . This part of Afrike is very barren by reason of the great deserts , as the deserts of Numidia and Barca . The principali ports 142 
 of the kingdom of Tunis are these : Goletta , Bizerta , Potofarnia , Bona , and Stora . The chief cities of Tunis are Constantina and Bona , with diverse other . 
 Under this kingdom are many Hands , as Zerbi , Lam - Hand* of padola , Pantalarea , Limoso , Beit , Gamelaro , and Malta , where at this present is the great master of the ' Rhodes . Under the South of this kingdom are the great deserts of Lybia . All the nations in this Africa The deserts of 
 the less are of the sect of Mahomet , and a rustical 
 people , living scattered in villages . The best of this part 
 of Afrike is Barbaria lying on the coast of the sea Barbarie . 
 Mediterraneum . 
 Mauritania ( now called Barbaria ) is divided into two Mauritania . parts , as Mauritania Tingitana , and Caesariensis . Mauritania Tingitana is now called the kingdom of Fes , and 2% kingdom the kingdom of Marocco . The principali city of Fes is called Fessa : and the chief city of Marocco is nam ’ Marocco . 
 Mauritania Caesariensis is at this day called the kingdom of Tremisen , with also the city called Tremisen or Tremisen . Telensin . This region is full of deserts , and reaches to the Sea Mediterraneum , to the city of Oram , with the Oram . port of Mersalquiber . The kingdom of Fes reaches Mersalquiber . unto the Ocean Sea , from the West to the city of Argilla : and the port of the said kingdom is called Sala . Sala . 
 The kingdom of Marocco is also extended above the Ocean Sea , unto the city of Azamor and Azafi , which Azamor . are upon the Ocean Sea , towards the West of the said kingdom . Near Mauritania Tingitana ( that is to say , by the two kingdoms of Fes , and Marocco ) are in the Sea , the Hands of Canarie , called in old time , The fortunate Hands of Hands . Towards the South of this region is the kingdom Canana-of Guinea , with Senega , Jalofo , Gambra , and many other Guinea . regions of the Black Moors , called Aethiopians or Aethiopians . Negros , all which are watered with the river Negro called in old time Niger . In the said regions are no cities , but only certain low cottages made of boughs 
 ’43 
 of trees , plastered with chalk , and covered with straw . In these regions are also very great deserts . 
 Marot counterfeit . The kingdom of Marocco hath under it these seven 
 kingdoms : Hea , Sus , Guzula , the territory of Marrocco , Fes . Duccala , Hazchora , and Tedle . The kingdom of Fes hath as many : as Fes , Temesne , Azgar , Elabath , Errif , Tremisen . Garet , and Elcair . The kingdom of Tremisen hath these regions : Tremisen , Tenez , and Elgazair , all which are Guinea . Machometists . But all the regions of Guinea are pure Gentiles , and idolatrous , without profession of any religion , or other knowledge of God , then by the law of nature . 
 Africa the Africa the great is one of the three parts of the world , & eat - known in old time , and severed from Asia , on the East by the river Nilus , on the West from Europe by the pillars of Hercules . The hither part is now called Barbarie , and the people Moores . The inner part is Africa the called Lybia and Aethiopia . Afrike the less is in this k ™ ' wise bounded . On the West it hath Numidia ; On the 
 East Cyrenaica : On the North , the sea called Mediterraneum . In this country was the noble city of Carthage . Carthage . 
 In the East side of Afrike beneath the read sea , dwells the great and mighty Emperor and Christian king Prester John. Prester John , well known to the Portugales in their voyages to Calicut . His dominions reach very far on every side : and hath under him many other Kings both Christian and heathen that pay him tribute . This mighty prince is called David the Emperor of Aethiopia . Some write that the king of Portugall sends him yearly eight ships laden with merchandise . His kingdom con-fineth with the read Sea , and reaches far into Afrike towards Aegypt and Barbarie . Southward it confineth Cape de Bona with the Sea towards the Cape de Bona Speranza : and on Speranda . the other side with the sea of sand , called Mare de Sabione , a very dangerous sea lying between you great Alcair . city of Alcair , or Cairo in Aegypt , and the country of 
 [ IL ii . ii . ] Aethiopia : In the which way are many unhabitable 
 144 
 deserts , continuing for the space of five days journey . And they affirm , that if the said Christian Emperor were not hindered by those deserts ( in the which is great lack of victuals , & especially of water ) he would or now have invaded the kingdom of Egypt , and the city of Alcair . The chief city of Ethiopia , where this great emperor is resident , is called Amacaiz , being a fair city , Amacaiz . whose inhabitants are of the colour of and Olive . There are also many other cities , as the city of Sava upon the river of Nilus , where the Emperor is accustomed to remain in the Summer season . There is likewise a great city nam Barbaregaf , and Ascon , from whence From whence it is said that the Queen of Saba came to Hierusalem to hear the wisdom of Salomon . This city is but ' little , yet very fair , and one of the chief cities in Ethiope . In this province are many exceeding high mountains , upon the which is said to be the earthly paradise : and some The say that there are the trees of the Sun and Moon , ^ ! ad*se ' . 
 ; r i .... , .. 1 he trees oj 
 whereof the antiquity makes mention : yet that none Sun and can pass thither by reason of great deserts of and hundred the Moon . days journey . Also beyond these mountains is the Cape of Bona Speranza . And to have said thus much of Afrike it may suffice . 
 The first voyage to Guinea and Benin . 
 N the year of our Lord 1553. the twelfth day of August , sailed from Portsmouth two goodly ships , the Primerose and the Lion , with a pinnace called the Moon , being all well furnished aswell with men of the lustiest sort , to the number of seven score , as also with ordinance and 
 Pinteado . 
 victuals requisite to such a voyage : having also two captains , the one a stranger called Anthonie Anes Pinteado , a Portugal ! , born in a town nam The Port of Portugal ! , a wise , discreet , and sober man , who for 
 VI 
 145 
 The castle of Mina . 
 the king of Portugall , and to whom the coasts of Brasile and Guinea were committed to be kept from the Frenchmen , to whom he was a terror on the Sea in those parts , and was furthermore a gentleman of the king his master's house . But as fortune in manner never favoureth but flattereth , never promises but deceives , never raiseth but casts down again : and as great wealth & favour have always companions , emulation and envy , he was after many adversities & quarrels made against him , enforced to come into England : where in this golden voyage he was evil matched with and unequal companion , and unlike match of most sundry qualities & conditions , with virtues few or none adorned . Thus departed these noble ships under sail on their voyage : But first captain Windam putting forth of his ship at Portsmouth a kinsman of one of the head merchants , and showing herein a muster of the tragical parts he had conceived in his brain , and with such small beginnings nourished so monstrous a birth , that more happy , yea and blessed was that young man being left behind , then if he had be taken with them , as some do wish he had done the like by theirs . Thus sailed they on their voyage , until they came to the Hand of Madera , where they took in certain wines for the store of their ships , and paid for them as they agreed of the price . ■ At these Hands they met with a great Galion of the king of Portugall , full of men and ordinance : yet such as could not have prevailed if it had attempted to withstand or resist our ships , for the which cause it was set forth , not only to let and interrupt these our ships of their purposed voyage , but all other that should attempt the like : yet chiefly to frustrate our voyage . For the king of Portugall was sinisterly informed , that our ships were armed to his castle of Mina in those parties , whereas nothing less was meant . 
 After that our ships departed from the Hand of Madera forward on their voyage , began this worthy captain Pinteados sorrow , as a man tormented with the 146 
 company of a terrible Hydra , who hitherto flattered with him , & made him a fair countenance and show of love . Then did he take upon him to command all alone , setting nought both by captain Pinteado , and the rest of the merchants factors , sometime with opprobrious words , and sometimes with threatenings most shamefully abusing them , taking from Pinteado the service of the boys and certain mariners that were assigned him by the order and direction of the worshipful merchant's , and leaving him as a common mariner , which is the greatest despite and grief that can be to a Portugale or Spaniard , to be diminished of their honour , which they esteem above all riches . Thus sailing forward on their voyage , they came to the Hands of Canarie , continuing their course Hands of from thence until they arrived at the Hand of S. Nicholas , of 
 where they victualed themselves with fresh meat , of s the flesh of wild goats , whereof is great plenty in that Hand , & in manner of nothing else . From hence following on their course and tarrying here & there at the desert Hands in the way , because they would not come too timely to the country of Guinea for the heat , and tarrying somewhat too long ( for what can be well ministered in a common wealth , where inequality with tyrannic will rule alone ) they came at the length to the first land of the country of Guinea , where they fell with the great river of The river of Sesto , where they might for their merchandizes have laden their ships with the grains of that country , which is a very hight fruit , and much like unto a fig as it grows on the tree . For as the figs are full of small seeds , so is the said fruit full of grains , which are lose within the cod , having in the mids thereof a hold on every side . 
 This kind of spice is much used in cold countries , & may there be sold for great advantage , for exchange of other wares . But our men , by the persuasion or rather enforcement of this tragical captain , not regarding and setting light by that commodity , in comparison of the fine gold The thirst of they thirsted , sailed and hundred leagues further , until they came to the golden land : where not attempting to 
 147 
 Fury admiti-eth no counsel . 
 The Rossia . 
 Rotting heat . 
 Benin . 
 Francisco . 
 Nich. 
 Lambart . 
 come near the castle pertaining to the king of Portugall , which was within the river of Mina , they made sale of their ware only on this side & beyond it , for the gold of that country , to the quantity of and hundred and fiftie pounds weight , there being in case that they might have dispatched all their ware for gold , if the untame brain of Windam had , or could have given ear to the counsel and experience of Pinteado . For when that Windam not satisfied with the gold which he had , and more might have had if he had tarried about the Mina , commanding the said Pinteado ( for so he took upon him ) to led the ships to Benin , being under the Equinoctial line , and and hundred and fifty leagues beyond the Mina , where he looked to have their ships laden with pepper : and being counseled of the said Pinteado , considering the late time of the year , for that time to go no further , but to make sale of their wares such as they had for gold , whereby they might have be great gainers : Windam not assenting hereunto , fell into a sudden rage , reviling the said Pinteado , calling him Jew , with other opprobrious words , saying , This whoreson Jew hath promised to bring us to such places as are not , or as he cannot bring us unto : but if he do not , I will cut off his ears and nail them to the mast . Pinteado gave the foresaid counsel to go no further for the safeguard of the men and their lives , which they should put in danger if they came too late , for the Rossia which is their Winter , not for cold , but for smothering heat , with close and cloudy air and storming weather , of such putrifying quality , that it rotted the coats of their backs : or else for coming to soon for the scorching heat of the sun , which caused them to linger in the way . But of force and not of will brought he the ships before the river of Benin , where riding at and Anchor , they sent their pinnace up into the river 50 or 60 leagues , from whence certain of the merchants with captain Pinteado , Francisco a Portugale , Nicholas Lambart gentleman , and other merchants were conducted to the court where the king remained , ten leagues from the 
 148 
 river side , whither when they came , they were brought with a great company to the presence of the king , who The king of being a black More ( although not so black as the rest ) Bentn is sat in a great huge hall , long and wide , the walls made of nurt ' earth without windows , the roof of thin boards , open in sundry places , like unto lovers to let in the air . 
 And here to speak of the great reverence they give to ' Reverence to-their king , it is such , that if we would give as much to ward the king . our Saviour Christ , we should remove from our heads many plagues which we daily deserve for our contempt and impiety . 
 So it is therefore , that when his noble men are in his presence , they never look him in the face , but fit cowering , as we upon our knees , so they upon their buttocks , with their elbows upon their knees , and their hands before their faces , not looking up until the king command them . And when they are coming towards the king , as far as they do see him , they do show such reverence , sitting on the ground with their faces covered as before . Likewise when they depart from him , they turn not their backs towards him , but go creeping backward with like reverence . 
 And now to speak somewhat of the communication that was between the king and our men , you shall first understand that he himself could speak the Portugall tongue , which he had learned of a child . Therefore after The communi-he had commanded our men to stand up , and demanded cati ™ ketween or them the cause or their coming into that country , Benin and our they answered by Pinteado , that they were merchants men . traveling into those parties for the commodities of his country , for exchange of wares which they had brought from their countries , being such as should be no less commodious for him and his people . The king then having of old lying in a certain storehouse 30 or 40 kintals of Pepper ( every kintail being and hundred weight ) Pepper . willed them to look upon the same , and again to bring him a sighed of such merchandizes as they had brought with them . And thereupon sent with the captain and 
 149 
 the merchants certain of his men to conduct them to the waters side , with other to bring the ware from the pinnace The kings gen - to the court . Who when they were returned and the tlenes towards wares seenj the king grew to this end with the merchant's our men . provide in 30 days the lading of all their ships with pepper . And in case their merchandizes would not extend to the valve of so much pepper , he promised to credit them to their next return , and thereupon sent the country round about to gather pepper , causing the same to be brought to the court : So that within the space of 30 days they had gathered fourescore tun of pepper . 
 In the mean season our men partly having no rule of [ II ii . 13. ] themselves , but eating without measure of the fruits of the country , and drinking the wine of the Palm trees that drops in the night from the cut of the branches of the same , and in such extreme heat running continually into the water , not used before to such sudden and vehement alterations ( then the which nothing is more dangerous ) were thereby brought into swellings and agues : insomuch that the later time of the year coming on , caused them to die sometime three & sometime 4 or 5 in a day . Then Windam perceiving the time of the 30 days to be expired , and his men dying so fast , sent to the court in post to Captain Pinteado , & the rest to come away , and to tarry no longer . But Pinteado with the rest , wrote back to him again , certifying him of the great quantity of pepper they had already gathered & looked daily for much more : desiring him furthermore to remember the great praise and name they should win , if they came home prosperously , and what shame of the contrary . With which answer Windam not satisfied , and many of their men dying daily , willed and commanded them again either to come away forthwith , or else threatened to leave them behind . When Pinteado herd this answer , thinking to persuade him with reason , he took his way from the court towards the ships , being conducted thither with men by the kings commandment . 
 i5° 
 In the mean season Windam all raging , brake up Pinteados Cabin , brake open his chests , spoiled such provision of cold stilled waters and suckets as he had provided for his health , and left him nothing , neither of his instruments to sail by , nor yet of his apparel : and in the mean time falling sick , himself died also . sleaik of Whose death Pinteado coming aboard , lamented as wintiam-much as if he had be the dearest friend he had in the world . But certain of the mariners and other officers Pinteado evil did spit in his face , some calling him Jewe , saying that he usetiofthe had brought them thither to kill them : and some drawing their swords at him , making a show to slay him . Then he perceiving that they would needs away , desired them to tarry that he might fetch the rest or the merchants that were left at the court , but they would not grant this request . Then desired he them to give him the ship-boat , with as much of and old sail as might serve for the same , promising them therewith to bring Nicholas This Lambert Lambert and the rest into England , but all was in vain . 
 Then wrote he a letter to the court to the merchants , whose father informing them of all the matter , and promising them had been Lord if God would lend him life to return with all haste to Mayor rf fetch them . And thus was Pinteado kept ashipboord against his will , thrust among the boys of the ship , not used like a man , nor yet like and honest boy , but glad to find favour at the cooks hand . Then departed they , leaving one of their ships behind - them , which they sunk for lack of men to carry her . After this , within 6 or 
 7 days sailing , died also Pinteado for very pensiveness The death of & thought that stroke him to the heart . A man worthy Pinteacio-to serve any prince , and most vilely used . And of sevenscore men came home to Plimmouth scarcely forty , and of them many died . And that no man should suspect these words which I have said in commendation of Pinteado , to be spoken upon favour otherwise then truth , 1 have thought good to add hereunto the copy of the letters which the king of Portugall and the infant his brother wrote unto him to reconcile him , at such 
 151 
 time as upon the king his master's displeasure ( and not for any other crime or offence , as may appear by the said letters ) he was only for poverty enforced to come Pinteado first into England , where he first persuaded our merchants to ^ ™ adldwir - attempt thee said voyages to Guinea . But as the king age of Guinea . of Portugall too late repented him that he had so punished Pinteado , upon malicious informations of such as envied the men good fortune : even so may it hereby appear that in some cases even Lions themselves may either be hindered by the contempt , or aided by the help of the poor mice , according unto the fable of Esope . 
 The copy of Anthonie Anes Pinteado his letters patents , whereby the king of Portugall made him knight of his house , after all his troubles and imprisonment , which , by wrong information made to the king , he had sustained of long time , being at the last delivered , his cause known and manifested to the king by a grey Friar the kings Confessor . 
 I The king do give you to understand lord Francis Desseaso , one of my counsel and overseer of my house , that in consideration of the good service which Anthony Anes Pinteado , the son of John Anes , dwelling in the town called the Port , hath done unto me , my will and pleasure is , to make him knight of my Seven hun - house , allowing to him in pension seven hundred reis dfen sWinl monthly » and every day one alcayre of barley , as long as Alca^u he keepeth a horse , & to be paid according to the halfea bushel , ordinance of my house . Providing always that he shall receive but one marriage gift . And this also in such condition , that the time which is accepted in our ordinance , forbidding such men to marry for getting such children as might succeed them in this allowance , which is 6 years after the making of this patent , shall first expired before he do marry . 1 therefore command you to cause this to be entered in the book called the 
 J52 
 Matricula of our household , under the title of knights . 
 And when it is so entered , let the clarke of the Matricula , [ II ii . 14. ] for the certainty thereof , write on the backside of this Alvala , or patent , the number of the leaf wherein this our grant is entered . Which done , let him return this writing unto the said Anthonie Anes Pinteado for his warrant . 
 I Diego Henriques have written this in Almarin the two and twentie day of September , in the year of our Lord 1551. And this benevolence the king gave unto Anthonie Anes Pinteado , the five and twentie day of July this present year . 
 Rey. 
 The Secretary's declaration written under the kings grant . 
 YOur Majesty hath vouchsafed , in respect and consideration of the good service of Anthony Anes Pinteado , dwelling in the port , and son of John Anes , to make him knight of your house , with ordinary allowance , of seven hundred reis pension by the month , and one alcaire of barley by the day , as Jong as he keepeth a horse : and to be paid according to the ordinance of your house , with condition that he shall have but one marriage gift : and that not within the space of sixe years after the making of these letters Patents . The Secretary's note . Entered in the book of the Matricula . Fol. 683. 
 Francisco de Siquera . 
 The copy of the letter of DONE Lewes the infant , and brother to the king of Portugall , sent into England to Anthonie Anes Pinteado . 
 ANthony Anes Pinteado , I the infant brother to the king , have me heartily commended unto you . Peter Gonsalves is gone to seek you , desiring to bring you home again into your country . And for that purpose he hath with him a safe conduct for you , granted by the 153 
 king , that thereby you may freely and without all fear come home . And although the weather be foul and stormy , yet fade not to come : for in the time that his Majesty hath given you , you may do many things to your contentation and gratifying the king , whereof I would be right glad : and to bring the same to pass , I will do all that lies in me for your profit . But Forasmuch as Peter Gonsalves will make further declaration hereof unto you , I say no more at this present . Written in Lisbone , the eight day of December . Anno 1552. 
 The infant DONE Lewes . 
 A LI these foresaid writings I saw under seal , in the house of my friend Nicholas Liese , with whom Pinteado left them , at his unfortunate departing to Guinea . But , notwithstanding all these friendly letters and fair promises , Pinteado durst not attempt to go home , neither to keep company with the Portugals his country men , without the - presence of other : forasmuch as he had secret admonitions that they intended to slay him , if time and place might have served their wicked intent . 
 