Certain Articles delivered to M. John Lok , by Sir William Gerard Knight , M. William Winter , M. Benjamin Gonson , M. Anthony Hickman , and M. Edward Castelin the 8 of September 1561 , touching a voyage to Guinea . 
 A remembrance for you M. Lok at your coming to the coast of Guinie . 
 tions . 
 Irst , when God shall send you thither , to procure , as you pass alongst the coast , to understand what rivers , havens , or harboroughs there be ; and to make your self a plate thereof , setting those places which you shall think materiali in your said plate , with their true eleva - 
 Also you shall learn what commodities do belong to the places where you shall touch , and what may be good for them . 
 It is thought good , that having a fort upon the coast of Mina in the king of Habaans country , it would serve to great purpose : wherefore you are especially sent to consider where the fort might be best placed , and upon what ground : wherein are to be noted these things following . 
 1. That the ground so serve , that it join to the sea on the one part , so as ships and boats may come 
 The English merchants intend to fortify in Ghinea , in the king of Habaans country . 
 to lade and unladen . 
 2. What mould of earth the ground is of . 
 3. What timber or wood may be had , and how it will be carried . 
 4. What provision of victuals may be had in the country : and what kind of our victuals will best serve to continue . 
 5. The place must be naturally strong , or such as 
 253 
 may be made strong with a small charge , and afterwards kept with a few men . 
 6. How water may be provided , if there be none to be had in the ground where the fort shall stand , or near to it . 
 7. What help is to be had from the people of the country , either for the building of it , or for the defence thereof . 
 [ II ii . 53. ] To move the king of Haban a far off , for ma^n8 a f°rtJ and to note owe he will like it ; 
 ' but use your communication so , that although there might fallen out good cause for the doing of it , yet he do not understand your meaning . 
 Search the country so far as you may , both alongst the coast , and into the land . 
 To learn what became of the merchants that were left at Benin . 
 The matters which shall be of importance to be noted we nothing doubt that you will omit , wherefore we refer the order of these aflaires to your good discretion . 
 Also we pray you as occasion shall serve that you aid and help our factors , both with your counsel ! and otherwise ; and thus God send you safely to return . 
 William Gerrard , William Winter , Benjamin Gonson , Anthony Hickman , Edward Castelin . 
 