The success of this Voyage in part appears [ U. ii . 56. ] by certain brief relations extracted out of the second voyage of Sir John Hawkins to the West Indies , made in the said year 1564. which I thought good to set down for want of further instructions , which hitherto I could not by any means come by , albeit I have used all possible endeavour for the obtaining of the same : Take them therefore in the mean season as followeth . 
 Aster John Hawkins , with the Jesus of Lubeck a ship of 700. tons , and the Salomon , a ship of 7 score , the Tiger a bark of 50 , and the Swallow of 30 tons , being all well furnished with men to the number of one hundred threescore and ten , as also with ordi 
 nance and victuali requisite for such a voyage , departed out of Plimmouth the 18 day of October in the year of our Lord 1564. with a prosperous wind : at which departing , in cutting the foresail , a marvellous misfortune happened to one of the officers in the ship , who by the pully of the sheat was slain out of hand being a sorrowful beginning to them all . And after their setting out 10 leagues to the Sea , he met the same day with the Minion a ship of the Queen's Majesties , The Minion whereof was captain David Carlet , & also her consort Qu* ™ - the John Baptist of London being bound to Guinea likewise , who hailed one the other after the custom of the sea , with certain pieces of ordinance for joy of their meeting : which done , the Minion departed from him to seek her other consort the Merline of London , which was a stern out of sighed , leaving in M. Hawkins company the John Baptist her other consort . 
 Thus sailing forward on their way with a prosperous wind until the 21 of the same month , at that time a 263 
 ne firing and sinking of the Merline bound fin - Guinea . 
 great storm arose , the wind being at Northeast about 9 of the clock at night , and continued so 23 hours together , in which storm M. Hawkins lost the company of the John Baptist aforesaid , and of his pinnace called the Swallow , the other 3 ships being soar beaten with the storm . The 23 day the Swallow , to his not small rejoicing , came to him again in the night 10 leagues to the Northward of Cape Finister , having put roomer and not being able to double the Cape , in that there rose a contrary wind at Southwest . The 25 the wind continuing contrary , he put into a place in Galicia called Ferol , where he remained 5 days and appointed all the master's of his ships and order for the keeping of good company . 
 The 26 day the Minion came in also where he was , for the rejoicing whereof he gave them certain pieces of ordinance after the courtesy of the Sea for their welcome , but the Minions men had no mirth because of their consort the Merline , whom at their departure from M. Hawkins upon the coast of England , they went to seek , and having met with her , kept company two days together , and at last by misfortune of fire ( through the negligence of one of the gunners ) the powder in the gunners room was set on fire , which with the first blast stroke out her poop , and therewithal ! lost 3 men , beside many soar burned ( which escaped by the Brigandine being at her stern ) and immediately to the great loss of the owners , and most horrible sighed of the beholders , she sunk before their eyes . The 30 day of the month M. Hawkins with his consorts and company of the Minion having now both the Brigandines at her stern , weighed anchor , and set sail on their voyage having a prosperous wind thereunto . The 4 of November they had sighed of the Hand of Madera , and the 6 day of Tenerifla , which they thought to have be the Canary , in that they supposed themselves to have be to the Eastward of Tenerifla but were not : but the Minion being 3 or 4 leagues a head of us kept on her course to Tenerifla , 264 
 having better sighed thereof then the other had , and by that means they parted company . 
 The aforesaid Sir John Hawkins passing on his voyage by Cavo Verde , and Sierra Leona , and afterwards crossing over the main Ocean coming to the town of Bur-boroata upon the coast of Terra firma in the West Indies , had further information of the evil success of this Guinean voyage , as in the same hereafter is verbatim mentioned . 
 The 29 of April , we being at anchor without the road , a French ship called the green Dragon of Newhaven , whereof was captain one Bon Temps came in , who saluted us after the manner of the sea , with certain pieces of ordinance , and we resaluted him with the like again : with whom having communication , he declared that he had be at the Mina in Guinea , and was beaten ofF by the Portugals galleys , and inforced to come thither to make sale of such wares as he had : and further that the like was happened unto the Minion : also , that captain David Carlet , & a merchant , with a dozen mariners were betrayed by the Negroes at their first arrival thither , remaining prisoners with the Portugals , beside other misadventures of the loss of their men happened through the great lack of fresh water , with great doubts of bringing home the to understand . 
 ships : which was most sorrowful for us 
 