A voyage with three tall ships , the Penelope Admiral , the Merchant royal Viceadmiral , and the Edward Bonaventure Rearadmiral , to the East Indies , by the Cape of Buona Speransa , to Quitangone near Mosambique , to the Isles of Comoro and Zanzibar on the backside of Africa , and beyond Cape Comori in India , to the Isles of Nicubar and of Gomes Polo within two leagues of Sumatra , to the Hands of Pulo Pinaom , and thence to the main land of Malacca , begun by M. George Raymond , in the year 1591 , and performed by M. James Lancaster , and written from the mouth of Edmund Barker of Ipswich , his lieutenant in the said voyage , by M. Richard Hakluyt . 
 Ur fleet of the three tall ships abovenamed departed from Plimmouth the 10 of April 1591 , and arrived at the Canary-lands the 25 of the same , from whence we departed the 29 of April . The second of May we were in the height of Cape Blanco . The fift we passed the 
 tropique of Cancer . The eight we were in the height of Cape Verde . All this time we went with a fair wind 387 
 Three occasions of slcknes near the line . 
 at Northeast , always before the wind until ! the 13 of the same month , when we came within 8 degrees of the Equinoctial ! line , where we met with a contrary wind . Here we lay off and on in the sea until the sixt of June , on which day we passed the said line . Wliile we lay thus off and on , we took a Portugal Caravel laden by merchants of Lisbon for Brasile , in which Caravel we had some 60 tons of wine , 1200 jars of oil , about 100 jartes of olives , certain barrels of capers , three fats of peason , with diverse other necessaries fit for our voyage : which wine , oil , olives and capers were better to us then gold . We had two men died before we passed the line , and diverse sick , which took their sickness in those hight climates : for they be wondered unwholesome from 8 degrees of Northerly latitude unto the line , at that time of the year : for we had nothing but Ternados , with such thunder , lightning , and rain , that we could not keep our men dry 3 hours together , which was and occasion of the infection among them , and their eating of salt victuals , with lack of clothes to shift them . After we passed the line , we had the wind still at Eastsoutheast , which carried us along the coast of Brasil 100 leagues from the main , till we came in 26 degrees to the Southward of the line , where the wind came up to the North , at which time we did account , that the Cape of Buona esperansa did bear off us East and by South , betwixt 900 and 1000 leagues . Passing this gulf from the coast of Brasil unto the Cape we had the wind often variable as it is upon our coast , but for the most part so , that we might lie our course . The 28 of July we had sighed of the foresaid Cape of Buona esperansa : until the 31 we lay off and on with the wind contrary to double the Cape , hoping to double it , & so to have gone seventie leagues further to a place called Agoada de S. Brass , before we would have sought to have put into any harbour . But our men being weak and sick in all our ships , we thought good to seek some place to refresh them . With which consent we bore up with 
 388 
 the land to the Northward of the Cape , and going along the shore , we espied a goodly Bay with and Hand lying to Seawards of it , into which we did bear , and found it very commodious for our ships to ride in . This Bay is called Agoada de Saldanha , lying 15 leagues Northward on the hither side of the Cape . The first of August being Sunday we came to and anchor in the Bay , sending our men on land , and there came unto them certain black Salvages very brutish which would not stay , but retired from them . For the space of 15 or 20 days we could find no relief but only fowls which we killed with our pieces , which were cranes and geese : there was no fish but muscles and other shellfish , which we gathered on the rocks . After 15 or 20 days being here , our Admiral went with his pinnace unto the Hand which lies off this Bay , where he found great store of Penguines & Seals , whereof he brought good plenty with him . And twice after that we sent certain of our men , which at both times brought their bots lading unto our ships . After we had be here some time , we god here a Negro , whom we compelled to march into the country with us , making signs to bring us some cattle ; but at this time we could come to the sighed of none , so we let the Negro go with some trifles . Within 8 days after , he with 30 or 40 other Negroes , brought us down some 40 bullocks and oxen , with as many sheep : at Bullocks , oxen , which time we bought but few of them . But within 8 and keep , days after they came down with as many more , & then we bought some 24 oxen with as many sheep . We bought and ox for two knives , a stirke for a knife , and a sheep for a knife , and some we bought for less valve then a knife . The oxen be very large and well fleshed , but not fat . The sheep are very big and very good meat , they have no will on their backs but hair , and have great tails like the sheep in Syria . There be diverse sorts of wild beasts , as the Antilope , ( whereof M. 
 Lancaster killed one of the bigness of a young colt ) the read & fallow Dear , with other great beasts unknown unto 389 
 Great store of Penguins and Seals . 
 Cafe de Buona Speransa doubled . Cape dos Corrientes . Here they are severed from the Penelope . 
 Foure men slain with a clap of thunder . [ II ii . 104. ] 
 us . Here are also great store of overgrown monkeis . As touching our proceeding upon our voyage , it was thought good rather to proceed with two ships well manned , then with three evil manned : for here we had of found and whole men but 198 , of which there went in the Penelope with the Admiral 101 , and in the Edward with the worshipful M. captain Lancaster 97. We left behind 50 men with the Royal merchant , whereof there were many prettily well recovered , of which ship was master and governor Abraham Kendal , which for many reasons we thought good to send home . The . disease that hath consumed our men hath be the skurvie . Our soldiers which have not be used to the Sea , have best held out , but our mariners dropped away , which ( in my judgement ) proceedeth of their evil diet at home . 
 Sixe days after our sending back for England of the Merchant Royal from Agoada de Saldanha , our Admiral M. captain Raimond in the Penelope , and M. James Lancaster in the Edward Bonaventure , set forward to double the Cape of Buona esperansa , which they did very speedily . But being passed as far as Cape dos Corrientes , the 14 of September we were encountered with a mighty storm and extreme gusts of wind , wherein we lost our Generals company , and could never hear of him nor his ship any more , though we did our best endeavour to seek him up and down a long while , and stayed for him certain days at the Hand of Comoro , where we appointed to stay one for another . Foure days after this uncomfortable separation in the morning towards ten of the clock we had a terrible clap of thunder , which slew foure of our men outright , their necks being wrung in sunder without speaking any word , and of 94 men there was not . one untouched , whereof some were stricken blind , others were bruised in their legs & arms , and others in their breasts , so that they voided blood two days after , others were drawn out at length as though they had be racked . But ( God be thanked ) they all recovered saving 39° 
 ... I591 , only the foure which were slain out right . Also with the same thunder our main mast was torn very grievously from the head to the deck , and some of the spikes that were ten inches into the timber , were melted with the extreme heat theereof . From thence we shaped our course to the Northeast , and not long after we fell upon the Northwest end of the mighty Hand of 
 S. Laurence : which one of our men espied by Gods ' Shouldt of good blessing late in the evening by Moon light , who S - Lienee . seeing afar ofF the breaking of the Sea , and calling to certain of his fellows , asked them what it was : which eftsoons told him that it was the breaking of the Sea upon the Shoulds . Whereupon in very good time we cast about to avoid the danger which we were like to have incurred . Thus passing on forward , it was our luck to overshoot Mozambique , and to fallen with a place called Quitangone two leagues to the Northward Quitangpne of it , and we took three or foure Barks of Moores , n^r^QZam-which Barks in their language they call Pangaias , laden ’ with Millio , hens , and ducks , with one Portugal ! boy , going for the provision of Mozambique . Within few days following we came to and Hand and hundred leagues to the Northeast of Mozambique called Comoro , which lle °f we found exceeding full of people , which are Moors of tawny colour and good stature , but they be very treacherous and diligently to be taken heed of . Here we desired to store our selves with water , whereof we stood in great need , and sent sixteene of our men well armed on shore in our boat : whom the people suffered quietly to land and water , and diverse of them with their king came aboard our ship in a gown of crimosine Satin pinked after the Moorish fashion down to the knee , whom we entertained in the best manner , and had some conference with him of the state of the place and merchandises , using our Portugal ! boy which we had taken before for our interpreter , and in the end licensed the king and his company to depart , and sent our men again for more water , who then also dispatched their business , & 
 39 » 
 returned quietly : the third time likewise we sent them for more , which also returned without any harm . And though we thought our selves furnished , yet our master William Mace of Radcliffe pretending that it might be long before we should find any good watering place , would needs go himself on shore with thirtie men , 32 oj our men much against the will of our captain , and he and 16 betrayed at thee is company , together with one boat which was all We of Comoro . we anj l6 that were a washing over - 
 against our ship , were betrayed of the perfidious Moors , and in our sighed for the most part slain , we being not able for want of a boat to yield them any succour . From hence with heavy hearts we shaped our course for Zanzibar Zanzibar the 7 of November , where shortly after we Hand . arrived and made us a new boat of such boards as we had within board , and rid in the road until the 15 of February , where , during our abode , we saw diverse Pangaias or boats , which are pinned with wooden pins , and sowed together with Palmito cords , and calked with the husks of Cocos shells beaten , whereof they make Occam . At length a Portugal Pangaia coming out of the harbour of Zanzibar , where they have A Portugall a small Factory , sent a Canoa with a More which had Zanzibar ene christened , who brought us a letter wherein they 
 ’ desired to know what we were , and what we sought . 
 We sent them word we were Englishmen come from DONE Antonio upon business to his friends in the Indies : with which answer they returned , and would not any more come at us . Whereupon not long after we manned out our boat and took a Pangaia of the Moors , which had a priest of theirs in it , which in their language they call a Sheriff : whom we used very courteously : which the king took in very good part , having his priests in great estimation , and for his deliverance furnished us with two months victuals , during all which the Portugal } time we detained with us . These Moores informed towards } the us the false and spiteful dealing of the Portugals Engluh . towards us , which made them believe that we were cruel 
 392 
 people and men-eaters , and willed them if they loved their safety in no case to come near us . Which they did only to cut us off from all knowledge of the state and traffic of the country . While we road from the end of November until the middle of February in this harbour , which is sufficient for a ship of 500 tons to ride in , we set upon a Portugall Pangaia with our boat , but because it was very little , & our men not able to stir in it , we were not able to take the said Pangaia , which was armed with 10 good shot like our long fouling pieces . This place for the goodness of the harbour excellent 
 and watering , and plentiful refreshing with fish , whereof re~ we took great store with our nets , and for sundry sorts J of fruits of the country , as Cocos and others , which were brought us by the Moors , as also for oxen and hens , is carefully to be sought for by such of our ships , as shall hereafter pass that way . But our men had need to take good heed of the Portugals : for while we lay here the Portugall Admiral of the coast from Melinde to Mozambique , came to view and to betray our boat if he could have taken at any time advantage , in a galley Frigate of ten tons with 8 or 9 oars on a side . Of the strength of which Frigate and their treacherous meaning we were advertised by and Arabian More which came from the king of Zanzibar diverse times unto us about the delivery of the priest aforesaid , and afterwards by another which we carried thence along with us : for wheresoever we came , our care was to get into our hands some one or two of the countries' to learn the languages and states of those parts where we touched . Moreover , here again we had another clap of thunder which did shake our foremast very much , which we fished and repaired with timber from the shore , whereof there is good store thereabouts of a kind of trees some fortie foot high , which is a read and tough wood , and as I suppose , a kind of Cedar . Here our Surgeon Arnold negligently catching a great heat in his head being on Heat in the land with the master to seek oxen , fell sick and shortly head dcadh - 
 393 
 A galley Frigate . [ II ii . 105. ] 
 Another thunderclap . 
 A Junco laden with pepper and drugs . 
 The currents set to the Northwards . 
 Zocotora . 
 died , which might have be cured by letting of blood before it had been settled . Before our departure we had in this place some thousand weight of pitch , or rather a kind of grey and white gum like unto frankincense , as clammy as turpentine , which in melting grows as black as pitch , and is very brittle of it self , but we mingled it with oil , whereof we had 30° jars in the prize which we took to the Northward of the Equinoctial , not far from Guinie , bound for Brasil . Sixe days before we departed hence , the Cape merchant of the Factory wrote a letter unto our captain in the way of friendship , as he pretended , requesting a jar of wine , and a jar of oil , and two or three pounds of gunpowder , which letter he sent by a Negro his man , and More in a Canoa : we sent him his demands by the More , but took the Negro along with us because we understood he had be in the East Indies and knew somewhat of the country . By this Negro we were advertised of a small Bark of some thirtie tons ( which the Moors call a Junco ) which was come from Goa thither laden with Pepper for the Factory and service of that kingdom . Thus having trimmed our ship as we lay in this road , in the end we set forward for the coast of the East India , the 15 of February aforesaid , intending if we could to have reached to Cape Comori , which is the headland or Promontory of the main of Malavar , and there to have lain off and on for such ships as should have passed from Zeilan , Sant Tome , Bengala , Pegu , Malacca , the Moluccos , the coast of China , and the He of Japan , which ships are of exceeding wealth and riches . But in our course we were very much deceived by the currents that set into the gulf of the Read sea along the coast of Melinde . And the winds shortening upon us to the Northeast and Easterly , kept us that we could not get off , and so with the putting in of the currents from the Westward , set us in further unto the Northward within fourescore leagues of the He of Zocotora , far from our 
 394 
 determined course and expectation . But here we never wanted abundance of Dolphins , Bonitos and flying fish . Now while we found our selves thus far to the Northward , and the time being so far spent , we determined to go for the Read sea , or for the Hand of Zocotora , both to refresh our selves , and also for some purchase . But while we were in this consultation , the wind very luckily came about to the Northwest and carried us directly towards Cape Comori . Before we should have doubled this Cape , we were determined to touch at the Hands of Mamale , of which we had ad ver - Isles of 
 tisement , that one had victuals , standing in the Northerly Mamale-latitude of twelve degrees . Howbeit it was not our good luck to find it , which fell out partly by the obstinacy of our master : for the day before we fell with part of the Hands the wind came about to the Southwest , and then shifting our course we missed it . 
 So the wind increasing Southerly , we feared we should not have be able to have doubled the Cape , which would have greatly hazarded our casting away upon the coast of India , the Winter season and Western Monsons already being come in , which Monsons continue on that coast until August . Nevertheless it pleased God to bring the wind more Westerly , & so in the month of May 1592. we happily doubled Cape Comori without Cape Comori sighed of the coast of India . From hence thus having < * « i592-doubled this Cape , we directed our course for the Hands The Ues of of Nicubar , which lie North and South with the Western N^ar . part of Sumatra , and in the latitude of 7 degrees to the Northward of the Equinoctial . From which Cape of Comori unto the aforesaid Hands we ran in sixe days with a very large wind though the weather were foul with extreme rain and gusts of winds . These Hands were missed through our master's default for want of due observation of the South star . And we fell to the Southward of them within the sighed of the Hands The Isles of of Gomes Polo , which lie hard upon the great Hand of Gomes Pol°-Sumatra the first of June , and at the Northeast side of 
 395 
 them we lay two or three days becalmed , hoping to Sumatra . have had a Pilot from Sumatra , within two leagues whereof we lay off and on . Now the Winter coming upon us with much contagious weather , we directed our The Isles of course from hence with the Hands of Pulo Pinaou , 
 PuloPinaou . ( where by the way is to be noted that Pulo in the Malaian tongue signifies and Hand ) at which Hands we arrived about the beginning of June , where we came to and anchor in a very good harbour between three Hands : at which time our men were very sick and many fallen . Here we determined to stay until the [ II ii . 106. J Winter were overpast . This place is in 6 degrees and a half to the Northward , and some five leagues from the main between Malacca and Pegu. Here we continued until the end of August . Our refreshing in this place was very small , only of oysters growing on rocks , great wilks , and some few fish which we took with our hooks . Here we landed our sick men on these uninhabited Hands for their health , nevertheless 26 of them died in this place , whereof John Hall our master was one , and M. Rainold Golding another , a merchant of great honesty and much discretion . In Trees fit for these Islands are abundance of trees of white wood , so masts . right and tall , that a man may make masts of them 
 being and hundred foot long . The winter passed and having watered our ship and fitted her to go to Sea , we had left us but 33 men and one boy , of which not passed 22 were found for labour and help , and of them not passed a third part sailors : thence we made sail to seek some place of refreshing , and went over Malacca . to the main of Malacca . The next day we came to and anchor in a Bay in six fathoms water some two leagues from the shore . Then master James Lancaster our captain , and M. Edmund Barker his lieutenant , and other of the company manning the boat , went on shore to see what inhabitants might be found . And coming on land we found the tracking of some barefooted people which were departed thence not long before : for we 
 396 
 saw their fire still burning , but people we saw none , nor any other living creature , save a certain kind of foul called ox birds , which are a grey kind of Seafowl , like a Snite in colour , but not in beak . Of these we killed some eight dozen with hailshot being very tame , and spending the day in search , returned towards night aboard . The next day about two of the clock in the afternoon we espied a Canoa which came near unto us , but would not come aboard us , having in it some sixteen naked Indians , with whom nevertheless going afterwards on land , we had friendly conference and promise of victuals . The next day in the morning we espied three ships , being all of burden 60 or 70 tons , Three ships of one of which we made to strike with our very boat : 
 . * with pcppcT , 
 and understanding that they were of the town of Mar - Martabam ' . tabam , which is the chief haven town for the great city of Pegu , and the goods belonging to certain Portugal Jesuites and a Biscuit baker a Portugal , we took that ship & did not force the other two , because they were laden for merchants of Pegu , but having this one at our command , we came together to and anchor . The night following all the men except twelve , which we took into our ship , being most of them born in Pegu , fled away in their boat , leaving their ship and goods with us . The next day we weighed our anchor and went to the Leeward of and Hand hard by , and took in her lading being pepper , which she and the other two had laden at Pera , which is a place on the main 30 leagues Pera. to the South . Beside the aforesaid three ships , we took another ship of Pegu laden with pepper , and perceiving her to be laden with merchants goods of Pegu only , we dismissed her without touching any thing . 
 Thus having stayed here 10 days and discharged her goods into the Edward , which was about the beginning of September , our sick men being somewhat refreshed and lusty , with such relief as we had found in this ship , we weighed anchor , determining to run into the Pulo straights of Malacca to the Hands called Pulo Sambilam , Sambilam . 
 397 
 The galeon of Malacca of 700 taken . 
 which are some five and fortie leagues Northward of the city of Malacca , to which Hands the Portugals must needs come from Goa or S. Thome , for the Malucos , China , and Japan . And when we were there arrived , we lay too and again for such shipping as should come that way . Thus having spent some five days , upon a Sunday we espied a sail which was a Portugall ship that came from Negapatan a town on the main of India over-against the Northeast part of the lie of Zeilan ; and that night we took her being of 250 tons : she was laden with Rice for Malacca . Captain Lancaster commanded their captain and master aboard our ship , and sent Edmund Barker his lieutenant and seven more to keep this prize , who being aboard the same , came to and anchor in thirtie fathoms water : for in that channel three or foure leagues from the shore you shall find good ankorage . Being thus at and anchor and keeping out a light for the Edward , another Portugall ship of Sant Thome of foure hundred tons , came and anchored hard by us . The Edward being put to Leeward for lack of help of men to handle her sails , was not able the next morning to fetch her up , until we which were in the prize with our boat , went to help to man our ship . Then coming aboard we went towards the ship of Sant Thome , but our ship was so foul that she escaped us . After we had taken out of our Portugall prize what we thought good , we turned her and all her men away except a Pilot and foure Moors . We continued here until the sixt of October , at which time we met with the ship of the captain of Malacca of seven hundred tons which came from Goa : we shot at her many shot , and at last shooting her mainyard through , she came to and anchor and yielded . We commanded her Captain , Master , Pilot and Purser to come aboard us . But the Captain accompanied with one soldier only came , and after certain conference with him , he made excuse to fetch the Master and Purser , which he said would not come 
 398 
 unless he went for them : but being got from us in the edge of the evening , he with all the people which pl. ii . 107. ] were to the number of about three hundred men , women and children , goat a shore with two great boats and quite abandoned the ship . At our coming aboard we found in her sixteene pieces of brass , and three hundred buts of Canary wine , and Nipar wine , which is made of the palm trees , and raisin wine which is also very strong : as also all kind of Haberdasher wares , as hats , Wares fit to read caps knit of Spanish wool , worsted stockings knit , shoes , velvets , taffataes , chamlets , and silks , abundance ’ 
 of suckets , rice , Venice glasses , certain papers full of false and counterfeit stones which and Italian brought from Venice to deceive the rude Indians withal , abundance of playing cards , two or three packs of French paper . Whatsoever became of the treasure which usually is brought in royals of plate in this gallion , we could not find it . After that the mariners had disorderedly peeled this rich ship , the Captain because they would not follow his commandment to unladen those excellent wines into the Edward , abandoned her & let her drive at Sea , taking out of her the choicest things that she had . And doubting the forces of Malaca , we departed thence to 
 a Baie in the kingdom of Junsalaom , which is between kingdom Malacca and Pegu eight degrees to the Northward , to °f^unsalaom-seeke for pitch to trim our ship . Here we sent our soldier , which the captain of the aforesaid galion had left behind him with us , because he had the Malaian language , to deal with the people for pitch , which he did faithfully , and procured us some two or three quintals with promise of more , and certain of the people came unto us . We sent commodities to their king to barter 
 for Amber-griese , and for the homes of Abath , whereof Ambergreese . the king only hath the traffic in his hands . Now Tke horns this Abath is a beast which hath one horn only in her of Abath . forehead , and is thought to be the female Unicorn , and The female is highly esteemed of all the Moors in those parts as Unicorn . a most sovereign remedy against poison . We had 
 399 
 Some small quantity hereof may be carted to pleasure those kings . 
 They arrive at the Isles of Nicubar , which are inhabited by Moores . 
 They return homeward . 
 They arrive at " ieUan . 
 Tanaseri in the kingdom of Siam . 
 Commodities of Bengala . 
 only two or three of these homes which are of the colour of a brown grey , and some reasonable quantity of Amber-griese . At last the king went about to betray our Portugall with our merchandise : but he to get aboard us , told him that we had gilded armour , shirts of mail and halberds , which things they greatly desire : for hope whereof he let him return aboard , and so he escaped the danger . Thus we left this coast and went back again in sighed of Sumatra , and thence to the Hands of Nicubar , where we arrived and found them inhabited with Moores , and after we came to and anchor , the people daily came aboard us in their Canoas , with hens , Cocos , plantans and other fruits : and within two days they brought unto us royals of plate , giving us them for Calicut cloth : which royals they find by diving for them in the Sea , which were lost not long before in two Portugall ships which were bound for China and were cast away there . They call in their language the Coco Calambe , the Plantane Pison , a Hen Jam , a Fish Iccan , a Hog Babee . From thence we returned the 21 of November to go for the Hand of Zeilan , and arrived there about the third of December 1592. and anchored upon the Southside in sixe fathoms water , where we lost our anchor , the place being rocky and foul ground . Then we ran along the Southwest part of the said Hand , to a place called Punta deal Gall , where we anchored , determining there to have remained until the coming of the Bengala Fleet of seven or eight ships , and the Fleet of Pegu of two or three sails , and the Portugall ships of Tanaseri being a great Bay to the Southward of Martabam in the kingdom of Siam : which ships , by diverse intelligences which we had , were to come that way within foureteene days to bring commodities to serve the Caracks , which commonly depart from Cochin for Portugall by the midst of Januarie . The commodities of the ships which come from Bengala be fine pavilions for beds , wrought quilts , fine Calicut cloth , Pintados and other fine works , and Rice , and they make this voyage twice 
 400 
 in the year . Those of Pegu bring the chiefest stones , Commodities as Rubies and Diamonds , but their chief fraught is Rice 
 and certain cloth . Those of Tanaseri are chiefly Commodities freighted with Rice and Nipar wine , which is very strong , °f^anasm-and in colour like unto rock water somewhat whitish , and very hight in taste like unto Aqua vitae . Being shot up to the place aforesaid , called Punta deal Gall , we came to and anchor in foul ground and lost the same , and lay all that night a drift , because we had now but two anchors left us , which were unstocked and in hold . Whereupon our men took occasion to come home , our Captain at that time lying very sick more like to die then to live . In the morning we set our foresail determining to lie up to the Northward and there to keep our selves to and again out of the current , which great cur-otherwise would have set us ofF to the Southward from all * ° known land . Thus having set our foresail , and in out war ’ hand to set all our other sails to accomplish our aforesaid determination , our men made answer that they would take their direct course for England and would stay there no longer . Now seeing they could not be persuaded by any means possible , the captain was constrained to give his consent to return , leaving all hope of so great possibilities . Thus the eight of December 1592. we set sail for the Cape of Buona Speransa , passing by the Hands of Maldiva , and leaving 
 the mighty Hand of S. Laurence on the starreboord [ II ii . 108. ] or Northward in the latitude of 26 degrees to the South . 
 In our passage over from S. Laurence to the main we 
 had exceeding great store of Bonitos and Albocores , A notable re-which are a greater kind of fish : of which our captain , being now recovered of his sickness , took with and hook as many in two or three hours as would serve fortie persons a whole day . And this skole of fish continued with our ship for the space of five or sixe weeks , . all which while we took to the quantity aforesaid , which was no small refreshing to us . In February 1593. we fell with the Eastermost land of 
 vi 401 2C 
 They double the Cape of Buona Speransa . 
 S. Helena . 
 John Segar and Englishman left 18 months alone in the He of santa Helena . 
 A miraculous effect of extreme fear or extreme joy . 
 The description of the commodities of the isle of santa Helena . 
 Africa at a place called Baia de Agoa some 100 leagues to the Northeast of the Cape of Good Hope : and finding the winds contrary , we spent a month or five weeks before we could double the Cape . After we had doubled it in March following , we directed our course for the Hand of Santa Helena , and arrived there the third day of Aprill , where we stayed to our great comfort nineteene days : in which mean space some one man of us took thirtie goodly Congers in one day , and other rocky fish and some Bonitos . After our arrival at Santa Helena , I Edmund Barker went on shore with foure or five Peguins or men of Pegu which we had taken , and our Surgeon , where in and house by the Chapel I found and Englishman one John Segar of Bury in Sufiblke , who was left there eighteene months before by Abraham Kendall , who put in there with the Royal merchant , and left him there to refresh him on the Hand , being otherwise like to have perished on shipboard : and at our coming we found him as fresh in colour and in as good plighted of body to our seeming as might be , but crazed in mind and half out of his wits , as afterwards we perceived : for whither he were put in fright of us , not knowing at first what we were , whither friends or foes , or of sudden joy when he understood we were his old consorts and countrymen , he became idleheaded , and for eight days space neither night nor day took any natural rest , and so at length died for lack of sleep . Here two of our men , whereof the one was diseased with the skurvie , and the other had be nine months sick of the flux , in short time while they were on the Hand , recovered their perfect health . We found in this place great store of very wholesome and excellent good green figs , oranges , and lemons very fair , abundance of goats and hogs , and great plenty of partridges , Guiniecocks , and other wild fowls . Our mariners somewhat discontented being now watered and haying some provision of fish , contrary to the will of the capitaine , would straight home . The capitaine because 
 402 
 he was desirous to go for Phernambuc in Brasil , granted their request . And about the 12 of Aprill 1593. we departed from S. Helena , and directed our course for the place aforesaid . The next day our capitaine calling upon the sailors to finish a foresail which they had in hand , some of them answered that unless they might go directly home , they would lay their hands to nothing ; whereupon he was constrained to follow their humour . And from thenceforth we directed our course for our country , which we kept until we came 8 degrees to the Northward of the Equinoctial , between which 8 degrees and the line , we spent some sixe weeks , with many calm and contrary winds at North , and sometimes to the Eastward , & sometimes to the Westward : which loss of time and expense of our victuals , whereof we had very small store , made us doubt to keep our course : and some of our men growing into a mutiny threatened to break up other men's chests , to the overthrow of our victuals and all our selves , for every man had his share of his victuals before in his own custody , that they might be sure what to trust to , and husband it more thriftily . Our capitaine seeking to prevent this mischief , being advertised by one of our company which had be at the He of Trinidada in M. Chidleis voyage , that there we should be sure to have refreshing , hereupon directed his course to that Hand , and not knowing the currents , we were put passed it in the night into the gulf of Paria in the beginning of June , wherein we were 8 days , finding the current continually setting in , and oftentimes we were in 3 fathoms water , and could find no going out until the current had put us over to the Westernside under the main land , where we found no current at all , and more deep water ; and so keeping by the shore , the wind off the shore every night did help us out to the Northward . Being clear , within foure or five days after we fell with the He of Mona where we anchored and road some eighteene days . In which time the Indians of Mona gave us some refreshing . 
 403 
 The gulf of Paria , or Bocca del Dragpne passed . 
 A good note . 
 The He of Mona . 
 The I'll of Savona environed with flats . 
 Cape de Ttberon . 
 [ II ii . 109. ] 
 The old channel passed . 
 And in the mean space there arrived a French ship of Cane in which was capitaine one Monsieur de Barbaterre , of whom we bought some two buts of wine and bred , and other victuals . Then we watered and fitted our ship , and stopped a great leak which broke on us as we were beating out of the gulf of Paria . And having thus made ready our ship to go to Sea , we determined to go directly for Newfoundland . But before we departed , there arose a storm the wind being Northerly , which put us from and anchor and forced us to the Southward of Santo Domingo . This night we were in danger of shipwreck upon and Hand called Savona , which is environed with flats lying 4 or 5 miles off : yet it pleased God to clear us of them , & so we directed our course Westward along the Hand of Santo Domingo , and doubled Cape Tiberon , and passed through the old channel between S. Domingo and Cuba for the cape of Florida : And here we met again with the French ship of Caen , whose Captain could spare us no more victuals , as he said , but only hides which he had taken by traffic upon those Hands , wherewith we were content and gave him for them to his good satisfaction . After this , passing the Cape of Florida , and clear of the channel of Bahama , we directed our course for the bank of Newfoundland . Thus running to the height of 36 degrees , and as far to the East as the Isle of Bermuda the 17 of September finding the winds there very variable , contrary to our expectation and all men's writings , we lay there a day or two the wind being northerly , and increasing continually more and more , it grew to be a storm and a great frete of wind : which continued with us some 24 hours , with such extremity , as it carried not only our sails away being furled , but also made much water in our ship , so that we had sixe foot water in hold , and having freed our ship thereof with baling , the wind shifted to the Northwest and became dullerd : but presently upon it the extremity of the storm was such that with 
 404 
 the labouring of the ship we lost our foremaste , and our ship grew as full of water as before . The storm once ceased , and the wind contrary to go our course , we fell to consultation which might be our best way to save our lives . Our victuals now being utterly spent , & having eaten hides 6 or 7 days , we thought it best to bear back again for Dominica , & the Islands adjoining , knowing that there we might have some relief , whereupon we turned back for the said Islands . But before we They return could get thither the wind scanted upon us , which did greatly endanger us for lack of fresh water and victuals : ' 
 so that we were constrained to bear up to the Westward to certain other Islands called the Nuebias or cloudy Hands , towards the He of S. Juan de porto Rico , where at our arrival we found land-crabs and fresh water , and tortoises , which come most on land about the full of the moon . Here having refreshed our selves some 17 or 18 days , and having got some small store of victuals into our ship , we resolved to return again for 
 Mona : upon which our determination five of our men Five English left us , remaining still on the Isles of Nuebias for all persuasions that we could use to the contrary , which ' afterwards came home in and English ship . From these Isles we departed and arrived at Mona about the twentieth of November 1593 , and there coming to and anchor towards two or three of the clock in the morning , the Captain , and Edmund Barker his Lieutenant with some few others went on land to the houses of the old Indian and his three sons , thinking to have got some food , our victuals being all spent , and we not able to proceed any further until we had obtained some new supply . We spent two or three days in seeking provision to carry aboard to relieve the whole company . And coming down to go aboard , the wind then being northerly and the sea somewhat grown , they could not come on shore with the boat , which was a thing of small succour and not able to row in any rough sea , whereupon we stayed until the next morning , think - 
 4°S 
 ing to have had less wind and safer passage . But in The ship lost the night about twelve of the clock our ship did drive by driving away that five men and a boy only in it , our carpenter awa^ ' secretly cut their own cable , leaving nineteene of us on land without boat or any thing , to our great discomfort . In the midst of these misery's reposing our trust in the goodness of God , which many times before had succoured us in our greatest extremities , we contented our selves with our poor estate , and sought means to preserve our lives . And because one place was not able to . sustain us , we took our leaves one of another , dividing our selves into several companies . The Great famine , greatest relief that we sixe which were with the Captain could find for the space of nine and twentie days was the stalks of purselaine boiled in water , and now and then a pompion , which we found in the garden of the old Indian , who upon this our second arrival with his three sons stole from us , and kept himself continually aloft in the mountains . After the end of nine and twentie days we espied a French ship , which afterward we understood to be of Diepe , called the Luisa , whose Captain was one Mounsieur Felix , unto whom we made a fire , at sighed whereof he took in his topsails , bore in with the land , and showed us his flag , whereby we judged him French : so coming along to the Western end of the Island there be anchored , we making down with all speed unto him . At this time the Indian and his three sons came done to our Captain Master James Lancaster , and went along with Two ships of him to the ship . This night he went aboard the Dupe - French man , who gave him good entertainment , and the next day fetched eleven more of us aboard entreating us all very courteously . This day came another French ship of the same town of Diepe which remained there until night expecting our other seven men's coming down : who , albeit we caused certain pieces of ordinance to be shot off to call them , yet came not down . Whereupon we departed thence , being divided sixe into 
 406 
 one ship , and sixe into another , and leaving this Island , departed for the Northside of Saint Domingo , where we remained until Aprill following 1594 , and spent some two months in traffic with the inhabitants by permission for hides and other merchandises of the Country . In this mean while there came a ship of New-haven to the place where we were , whereby we had intelligence of our seven men which we left behind us at the Isle of Mona : which was , that two of them brake their necks with venturing to take fowls upon the cliffs , other three were slain by the Spaniards , which came from Saint Domingo , upon knowledge given by our men which went away in the Edward , the other two this man of New-haven had with him in his ship , which escaped the Spaniards bloody hands . From this place Captain Lancaster and his Lieutenant Master Edmund Barker , shipped themselves in another ship of Diepe , the Captain whereof was one John La Noe , which was ready first to come away , and leaving the rest of their company in other ships , where they were well entreated , to come after him , on sunday the seventh of Aprill 1594 they set homeward , and disbocking through the Cajicos from thence arrived safely in Diepe within two and fortie days after , on the 19 of May , where after we had stayed two days to refresh our selves , and given humble thanks unto God , and unto our friendly neighbours , we took passage for Rye and landed there on Friday the 24 of May 1594 , having spent in this voyage three years , sixe weeks and two days , which the Portugales perform in half the time , chiefly because we lost our fit time and season to set forth in the beginning of our voyage . 
 We understood in the East Indies by certain Portugales which we took , that they have lately discovered the coast of China to the latitude of nine and fiftie degrees , finding the sea still open to the Northward : giving great hope of the Northeast or Northwest passage . Witness Master James Lancaster . 
 407 
 A.D. 
 1594. 
 The French trajike to S. Domingo . [ II ii . no . ] 
 M. Lancaster returns to Diepe , and so to England . 
 