The Letters patents or privileges granted by her Majesty to certain Noble men and Merchants of London , for a trade to Barbarie , in the year 1585. 
 Lizabeth by the grace of God Queen of England , France , and Ireland , defender of the faith , etc. to the Treasurer & Barons of our Exchecker , and to all Majors , sheriffs , constables , customers , collectors of our customs and subsidies , controllers , searchers , and keepers of our 
 havens and creeks , ports and passages , within this our realm of England and the dominions of the same , and to all our officers , ministers and subject's , and to all other whosoever to whom it shall or may appertain , and to every of them greeting . Whereas it is made evidently and apparently known unto us , that of late years our right trusty and right well-beloved councillors , Ambrose Earl of Warwike , and Robert Earl of Leicester , and also 
 our loving and natural subject's , Thomas Starkie of our city of London Aiderman , Jerard Gore the elder , and all his sons , Thomas Gore the elder , Arthur Atie gentleman , Alexander Avenon , Richard Staper , William Jennings , Arthur Dawbeney , William Sherington , Thomas Bramlie , Anthony Garrard , Robert How , Henry Colthirst , Edward Holmden , John Swinnerton , Robert Walkaden , Simon Lawrence , Nicholas Style , Oliver Style , William 
 Bound , Henrie Farrington , John Tedcastle , Walter Williams , William Brune , John Suzan , John Newton , Thomas Owen , Roger Afield , Robert Washborne , Reinold Guy , Thomas Hitchcocke , George Lydiat , John Cartwright , Henry Paiton , John Boldroe , Robert Bowyer , Anthonie Dassell , Augustine Lane , Robert Lion , and Thomas Dod , all of London , Merchants now trading into the Country of Barbary , in the parts of Africa , under the government of Muly Hammet Sheriff , Em - 
 [ II ii . 115. ] 
 419 
 peror of Marocco , and king of Fesse and Sus , have sustained great and grievous losses , and are like to sustain greater if it should not be prevented : In tender consideration whereof , and for that diverse Merchandise of the same Countries are very necessary and convenient for the use and defence of this our Realm of England , and for diverse other causes us specially moving , minding the relief and benefit of our said subject's , and the quiet traffic and good government to be had , and used among them in their said trade , of our speciali grace , certain knowledge , and mere motion have given and granted , and by these presents for us , our heirs and successors , do give and grant unto the said Earls of Warwike and Leicester , Thomas Starkie , Jerard Gore the elder , Arthur Atie gentleman , Alexander Avenon , Richard Staper , William Jennings , Arthur Dawbenie , William Sherington , Thomas Bramlie , Anthonie Gerrard , Robert Howe , Henry Colthirst , Edward Holmden , John Swinnerton , Robert Walkaden , Simon Lawrence , Nicholas Style , Oliver Style , William Bound , Henry Farrington , John Tedcastle , Walter Williams , William Brune , John Suzan , John Newton , Thomas Owen , Roger Afild , Robert Wash-borne , Rainold Guie , Thomas Hitchcocke , George Lidiate , John Cartwright , Henry Payton , John Baldroe , Robert Bowyer , Anthony Dassell , Augustine Lane , Robert Lion , and Thomas Dod , that they and every of them by themselves or by their factors or servants , and none others , shall and may , for , and during the space of 12. years , have and enjoy the whole freedom and liberty in the said traffic or trade , unto or from the said country of Barbary , or to or from any part thereof , for the buying and selling of all manner of wares and merchandizes whatsoever , that now or accustomably heretofore have be brought or transported , from , or to the said country of Barbary , or from or to any of the cities , towns , places , ports , roads , havens , harbors or creeks of the said country of Barbary , any law , statute , grant , matter , customs or privileges , to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding . 
 420 
 THE LETTERS PATENTS FOR BARBARY a.d. 
 1585. 
 And for the better establishing , ordering and governing of the said Earls of Warwike and Leicester , Thomas Starkie , etc. abovesaid , their factors , servants and assigns in the trade aforesaid , we for us our heirs and successors , do by these presents give and grant full licence to the said Thomas Starkie , Jerard Gore the elder , and the rest aforesaid , and to every of them from time to time , during the said term of twelve years , at their pleasures to assemble and meet together in any place or places convenient within our city of London , or elsewhere , to consult of , and for the said trade , and with the consent of the said Earl of . Leicester , to make and establish good and necessary order and ordinances , for , and touching the same , and all such order and ordinances so made , to put in ure and execute , and them or any of them with the consent of the said Earl of Leicester , to altar , change and make void , and if need be , to make new , as at any time during the said term , they or the most part of them then living and trading , shall find convenient . 
 Provided always , that the ordinances or any of them be not contrary or repugnant to the laws , statutes or customs of this our Realm of England . And to the intent that they only to whom the said liberty of traffic is granted by these our Letters patents , and none other our Subject's whatsoever , without their special consent and licence before had , should during the said term have trade or traffic for any manner of Merchandizes , to , or from the said country of Barbary , or to , or from any City , town , place , port , harbour or creek within the said country of Barbary , to , or out of our said Realms and dominions , we do by these presents straightly charge , command , and prohibit all and every our Subject's whatsoever , other then only the said Earls of Warwike and Leicester , Thomas Starkie , and the rest abovesaid , and every of them by themselves , or by their Factors or servants during the said term , to trade or traffic , for or with any merchandise , to , or from the 
 421 
 said Country of Barbary , or to , or from any the dominions of the same , as they tender our favour , and will avoid our high displeasure , and upon pajne of imprisonment of his and their bodies , at our will and pleasure , and of forfeiting all the merchandizes , or the full valve thereof , wherewith they or any of them during the said term , shall trade or traffic to or from the said country of Barbary , or to , or from the dominions of the same , contrary to this our privilege and prohibition , unless it be by and with the express licence , consent , and agreement of the said Earls of Warwike and Leicester , Thomas Starkie , Jerard Gore the elder , and all his sons , Thomas Gore the elder , Arthur Atie gentleman , Alexander Avenon , Richard Straper , William Jennings , Arthur Dawbnie , William Sherington , Thomas Bramlie , Anthonie Gerrard , Robert Howe , Henry Colthirst , Edward Holmden , John Swinnerton , Robert Walkaden , Simon Lawrence , Nicholas Style , Oliver Style , [ II ii . 116. ] William Bound , Henry Farington , John Tedcastle , Walter 
 Williams , William Brune , John Suzan , John Newton , Thomas Owen , Roger Afield , Robert Washborne , Rain-old Guy , Thomas Hitchcock , George Lidiate , etc. or by , and with the express licence and consent of the more part of them then living and trading , first had and obtained , so always , that the said Earl of Leicester be one , if he be living . 
 And we further for us our heirs and successors of our speciali grace , mere motion and certain knowledge , do grant to the said Earls of Warwike and Leicester , Thomas Starkie , and the rest abovesaid , and to every of them , that nothing shall be done , to be of force or validity touching the said trade or traffic , or the exercise thereof , without or against the consent of the said Earls , Thomas Starkie , ( and the others before nam ) during the time of these our Letters patents for 12. years as aforesaid . 
 And for that the said Earls , Thomas Starkie , etc. and every of them aforesaid should not be prevented or in-422 
 terrupted in this their said trade , we do by these presents for us , our heirs and successors , straightly prohibit and forbid all manner of person or persons , as well strangers of what nation or country soever , as our own Subject's , other then only the said Earls , Thomas Starkie , etc. and every of them as aforesaid , that they nor any of them from henceforth during the said term of 12. years , do or shall bring , or cause to be brought into this our Realm of England , or to any the dominions thereof , any manner of merchandizes whatsoever growing , or being made within the said Country of Barbary , or within any the dominions thereof , unless it be by and with the licence , consent and agreement of the said Earls , Thomas Starkie , etc. or with the consent and licence of the more part of them then living , first had and obtained , so always y* the said Earl of Leicester ( if he be living ) be one , under the pain that every one that shall offend or do against this our present prohibition here last above mentioned in these presents , shall forfeit and loose all and singular the said merchandizes to be landed in any our realms and dominions , contrary to the tenor and true meaning of this our prohibition in that behalf provided : the one moiety of all and every which said forfeitures whatsoever mentioned or specified in these our present Letters patents , shall to us our heirs & successors : And the other moiety of all and every the said forfeitures , we do by these presents of our certain knowledge and mere motion , clearly and wholly for us , our heirs and successors , give and grant unto the said Earls , Thomas Starkie , etc. And these our Letters patents , upon the only sighed thereof , without any further warrant , shall be sufficient authority to our Treasurer of England for the time being , to our Barons of the Exchequer , and to all other our officers that shall have to deal in this behalf , to make full allowance unto the said Earls , Thomas Starkie , etc. their deputies or assigns of the one moiety of all and singular the goods , merchandizes and things 
 4®3 
 whatsoever mentioned in these our present Letters patents , to be forfeited at any time or times during the said term of twelve years : which said allowance we do straightly charge and command from time to time to be made to the said Earls , Thomas Starkie , etc. and to every of them accordingly , without any manner of delay or denial of any of our officers whatsoever , as they tender our favour and the furtherance of our good pleasure . And we do straightly charge and command , and by these presents prohibit all and singular Customers and Collectors of our customs & subsidies , and comptrollers of the same , of , and within our City and port of London , and all other ports , creeks , & places within this our Realm of England , and every of them , that they ne any of them take or perceive , or cause , or suffer to be taken , received , or perceived for us & in our name , or to our use , or to the uses of our heirs or successors of any person or persons , any sum or sums of money , or other things whatsoever during the said term of 12. years , for , and in the name & lieu or place of any custom , subsidy & other thing or duties to us , our heirs or successors due or to be due for the customs & subsidies of any merchandizes whatsoever growing , being made or coming out of the said country of Barbary , or out of the dominions thereof , nor make , cause , nor suffer to be made any entry into our or their books of customs & subsidies , nor make any agreement for the subsidies and customs , of , and for any the said merchants , saving only with , & in the name of the said Earls , Thomas Starkie , See . or • the most part of them , as they and every of them will answer at their uttermost perils to the contrary . And for the better and more sure observation of this our grant , we will , and grant for us our heirs & successors by these presents , that the Treasurer & barons of our Exchequer for the time being , by force of this our grant or enrolment thereof in the said court , at all & every time & times during the said term of 12. 
 424 
 THE LETTERS PATENTS FOR BARBARY a.d. 1585. 
 years , at & upon request made unto them by the said Earls , Thomas Starkie , etc. or by the atturneis , factors , deputies or assigns of them , or the most part of them then living and trading , shall and may make & direct under the seal of the said Exchequer , one or more sufficient writ or writs , close or patents , unto every or any of our said customers , collectors or controllers of our heirs and successors in all and every , or to any port or ports , creek , haven , or other places within this our realm of England , as the said Earls , Thomas [ II ii . 117. ] Starkie , etc. or any the atturneis , factors , deputies or assigns of them or the most part of them then living and trading , shall at any time require , commanding and straightly charging them and every of them , that they nor any of them at any time or times during the said term of 12. years , make any entry of any wares or merchandizes whatsoever , growing , being made or coming out or from the said country of Barbary , or the dominions thereof , nor receive or take any custom , subsidy or other entry , or make any agreement for the same , other then with or in the name of the said Earls , Thomas Starkie , etc. the factor or factors , deputies or assigns of them or the most part of them then living and trading , according to this our grant , and the true meaning thereof , and according to our said will and pleasure before in these presents declared . In witness whereof we have caused these our Letters to be made patents . Witness our self at Westminster the 5. day of July in the 27. year of our reign . 
 