The escape of the Primrose a tall ship of London , from before the town of Bilbao in Biscay : which ship the Corrigidor of the same Province , accompanied with 97 Spaniards , offered violently to arrest , and was defeated of his purpose , and brought prisoner into England . 
 Whereunto is added the Kings Commission for a generail imbargment or arrest of all English , Netherlandish , and Easterlings ships , written in Barcelona the 19 of May 1585. 
 TO is not unknown unto the world what danger our English ships have lately escaped , how sharply they have been entreated , and how hardly they have been assaulted : so that the valiancy of those that managed them is worthy remembrance . And therefore in respect 
 of the courageous attempt and valiant enterprise of the ship called the Primrose of London , which hath obtained renown , I have taken in hand to publish the truth thereof , to the intent that it may be generally known to the rest of the English ships , that by the good example of this the rest may in time of extremity adventure to do the like : to the honour of the Realm , and the perpetuali remembrance of themselves : The manner whereof was as follows . 
 UPon Wednesday being the sixe and twentieth day of May 1585 , the ship called the Primrose being of one hundred and fiftie tons , lying without the bay of Bilbao , having been there two days , there came a Spanish pinnace to them , wherein was the Corrigidor and sixe others with him : these came aboard the Primrose , seeming to be Merchants of Biscay , or such like , bringing Cherries with them , and spoke very friendly to the Master of the ship , whose name was Foster , and 413 
 he in courteous wise bade them welcome , making them the best cheer that he could with beer , beef , and biscuit , wherewith that ship was well furnished : and while they were thus in banqueting with the Master , foure of the seven departed in the said Pinnace , and went back again to Bilbao : the other three stayed , and were very pleasant for the time . But Master Foster misdoubting some danger secretly gave speech that he was doubtful of these men what their intent was ; nevertheless he said nothing , nor seemed in any outward wise to mistrust them at all . Forthwith there came a ship-boat wherein were seventie persons being Merchants and such like of Biscay : and beside this boat , there came also the Pinnace which before had brought the other three , in which Pinnace there came foure and twentie , as the Spaniards themselves since confli . ii . 113. ] fessed . These made towards the Primrose , and being come thither , there came aboard the Corrigidor with three or foure of his men : but Master Foster seeing this great multitude desired that there might no more come aboard , but that the rest should stay in their boats , which was granted : nevertheless they took small heed of these words ; for on a sudden they came forth of the boat , entering the ship , every Spaniarde taking him to his Rapier which they brought in the boat , with other weapons , and a drum wherewith to triumph over them . Thus did the Spaniards enter the ship , plunging in fiercely upon them , some planting themselves under the deck , some entering the Cabbens , and a multitude attending their prey . Then the Corrigidor having and officer with him which bore a white wand in his hand , said to the master of the ship : Yield your self , for you are the kings prisoner : whereat the Master said to his men , We are betrayed . Then some of them set daggers to his breast , and seemed in furious manner as though they would have slain him , meaning nothing less then to do any such act , for all that they sought was to bring him and his men safe alive to shore . 
 Whereat the Master was amazed , and his men greatly discomfited to see themselves ready to be conveyed even to the slaughter : notwithstanding some of them respecting the danger of the Master , and seeing how with themselves there was no way but present death if they were once landed among the Spaniards , they resolved themselves either to defend the Master , and generally to shun that danger , or else to die and be buried in the midst of the sea , rather then to suffer themselves to come into the tormentors hands : and therefore in very bold and manly sort some took them to their javelins , lances , bore-spears , and shot , which they had set in readiness before , and having five Calivers ready charged , which was all the small shot they had , those that were under the hatches or the grate did shoot up at the Spaniards that were over their heads , which shot so amazed the Spaniards on the sudden , as they could hardly tell which way to escape the danger , fearing this their small shot to be of greater number then it was : others in very manlike sort dealt about among them , showing themselves of that courage with bore-spears and lances , that they dismayed at every stroke two or three Spaniards . Then some of them desired the Master to command his men to cease and hold their hands , but he answered that such was the courage of the English Nation in defence of their own lives , that they would slay them and him also : and therefore it lay not in him to do it . Now did their blood run about the ship in great quantity , some of them being shot in between the legs , the bullets issuing forth at their breasts , some cut in the head , some thrust into the body , and many of them very soar wounded , so that they came not so fast in on the one side , but now they tumbled as fast over board on both sides with their weapons in their hands , some falling into the sea , and some getting into their boats , making haste towards the City . And this is to be noted , that although they came very thick thither , there returned 
 415 
 A.D. 
 I585 - 
 but a small company of them , neither is it known as yet how many of them were slain or drowned , only one English man was then slain , whose name was John Tristram , and sixe other hurt . It was great pity to behold how the Spaniards lay swimming in the sea , and were not able to save their lives . Foure of them taking hold of the ship were for pities sake taken up again by Master Foster and his men , not knowing what they were : all the Spaniards bosoms were stuffed with paper , to defend them from the shot , and these foure having some wounds were dressed by the surgeon of the ship . One of them was the Corrigidor himself , who is governor of a hundred Towns and Cities in Spaine , his living by his office being better then sixe hundred pound yearly . This skirmish happened in the evening about sixe of the clock , after they had laden twentie Tun of goods and better out of the said ship : which goods were delivered by two of the same ship , whose names were John Burrell , and John Brod-banke , who being on shore were apprehended and stayed . 
 The Cor - After this valiant enterprise of eight and twentie ri&dorofBtl - English men against 97 Spaniardes , they saw it was in brought to vain tor them to stay and therefore set up sails , and by Londm . Gods providence avoided all danger , brought home the rest of their goods , and came thence with all expedition : and ( God be thanked ) arrived safely in England near London on Wednesday being the 8 day of June , 1585. In which their return to England the Spaniards that they brought with them offered five hundred crowns to be set on shore in any place : which , seeing the Master would not do , they were content to be ruled by him and his company , and craved mercy at their hands . And after Master Foster demanded why they came in such sort to betray and destroy them , the Corrigidor answered , that it was not done only of themselves , but by the commandment of the king himself ; and calling for his hose which were wet , did pluck forth the kings 416 
 Commission , by which he was authorized to do all that he did : The Copy whereof follows , being translated out of Spanish . 
 