A Letter written from Goa , the principali City [ II ii . 99. ] of all the East Indies , by one Thomas Stevens and English man , and sent to his father , M. Thomas Stevens : Anno 1579. 
 Fter most humble commendations : These shall be to crave your daily blessing , with like commendations unto my mother ; and withal , to certify you of my being : according to your will and my duty . I wrote unto you taking my journey from Italy to Portugall , which 
 letters I think are come to your hands , so that presuming thereupon , I think I have the less need at this time to tell you the cause of my departing , which nevertheless in one word I may conclude , if I do 
 but name obedience . I came to Lisbon towards the end 
 of March , eight days before the departure of the ships , so late that if they had not be stayed about some weighty matters , they had be long gone before our coming : insomuch that there were others ordained to go in our places , that the kings provision and ours also might not be in vain . Nevertheless our sudden coming took place , and the fourth of Aprill five ships departed for Goa , wherein beside shipmen 
 377 
 and soldiers , there were a great number of children which in the seas bear out better then men , and no marvel , when that many women also pass very well . The setting forth from the port I need not to tell how solemn it is with trumpets , and shooting of ordinance , you may easily imagine it , considering that they go in the manner of war . The tenth of the foresaid month we came to the sighed of Porto Santo near unto Madera , where and English ship set upon ours ( which was then also alone ) with a few shots , which did no harm , but after that our ship had laid out her greatest ordinance , they straight departed as they came . The English ship was very fair and great , which I was sorry to see so ill occupied , for she went roving about , so that we saw her again at the Canarian Isles , unto the which we came the thirteenth of the said month , and good leisure we had to wonder at the high mountain of the Hand Tenerif , for we wandered between that and great Canaria foure days by reason of contrary winds : and briefly , such evil weather we had until the foureteenth of May , that they despaired , to compass the Cape of Good hope that year . Nevertheless , taking our voyage between Guinea and the Hands of Capo Verde , without seeing of any land at all , we arrived at length unto the coast of Guinie , which the Portugals so call , chiefly that part of the burning Zone , which is from the sixt degree unto the Equinoctial ! , in which parts they suffered so many inconveniences of heats , and lack of winds , that they think themselves happy when they have passed it : for sometime the ship stands there almost by the space of many days , sometime she goes , but in such order that it were almost as good to stand still . And the greatest part of this coast not clear , but thick and cloudy , full of thunder and lightning , and rain so unwholesome , that if the water stand a little while , all is full of worms , and falling on the meat which is hanged up , it makes 
 378 
 .. I579 , it straight full of worms . Along all that coast we often times saw a thing swimming upon the water like a cocks comb ( which they call a ship of Guinea ) but the colour much fairer ; which comb stands upon a thing almost like the swimmer of a fish in colour and bigness , and bears underneath in the water , strings , which save it from turning over . This thing is so poisonous , that a man cannot touch it without great peril . In this coast , that is to say , from the sixt degree unto the Equinoctial , we spent no less then thirty days , partly with contrary winds , partly with calm . The thirtieth of May we passed the Equinoctial with contentation , directing our course aswell as we could to pass the promontory , but in all that gulf , & in all the way beside , we found so often calms , that the expertest mariners wondered at it . And in places where are always wont to be most horrible tempests , we found most quiet calms which was very troublesome to those ships which be the greatest of all other , and cannot go without good winds . Insomuch , that when it is tempest almost intolerable for other ships , and makes them main all their sails , these hoist up , and sail excellent well , unless the waters be too too furious , which seidome happened in our navigation . You shall understand , that being passed the line , they cannot straightway go the next way to the promontory : but according to the wind , they draw always as near South as they can to put themselves in the latitude of the point , which is 35 degrees and and half , and then they take their course towards the East , and so compass the point . But the wind served us so , that at 33 degrees we did direct our course towards the point or promontory of Good hope . 
 You know that it is hard to sail from East to West , or contrary , because there is no fixed point in all the sky , whereby they may direct their course , wherefore I shall tell you what helps God provided for these men . There is not a fowl that appeareth , or 
 379 
 Signs about the Cape of Bona Speransa . 
 sign in the air , or in the sea , which they have not written , which have made the voyages heretofore . Wherfote , partly by their own experience , and pondering withal what space the ship was able to make with such a wind , and such direction , and partly by the experience of others , whose books and navigations they have , they guess whereabouts they be , touching degrees of longitude , for of latitude they be always sure : but the greatest and best industry of all is to mark the variation of the needle or compass , which in the Meridian of the Hand of S. Michael , which is one of the Azores in the latitude of Lisbon , is just North , and thence swarveth towards the East so much , that betwixt the Meridian aforesaid , and the point of Africa it carrieth three or foure quarters of 32. And again in the point of Afrike , a little beyond the point that is called Cape das Agulias ( in English the needles ) it returns again unto the North , and that place passed , it swarveth again towards the West , as it did before proportionally . As touching our first signs , the nearer we came to the people of Afrike , the more strange kinds of fowls appeared , insomuch that when we came within no less then thirty leagues ( almost and hundred miles ) and sixe hundred miles as we thought from any Hand , as good as three thousand fowls of sundry kinds followed our ship : some of them so great that their wings being opened from one point to the other , contained seven spans , as the Mariners said . A marvellous thing to see how God provided , so that in so wide a sea these fowls are all fat , and nothing wants them . The Portugals have nam them all according to some propriety which they have : some they call Rushtailes , because their tails be not proportionable to their bodies , but long and small like a rush , some forked tails because they be very broad and forked , some Velvet sleeves , because they have wings of the colour of velvet , and bow them as a man boweth his elbow . This bird is always welcome , for he appears 
 380 
 nearest the Cape . I should never make and end if I should tell all particulars : but it shall suffice briefly to touch a few , which yet shall be sufficient , if you mark them , to give occasion to glorify almighty God in his wonderful works , and such variety in his creatures . And to speak somewhat of fish in all places of calrne , especially in the burning Zone , near the line ( for with - seJ^ast out we never saw any ) there waited on our ship fish as ' long as a man , which they call Tuberones , they come to eat such things as from the ship fallen into the sea , not refusing men themselves if they light upon them . 
 And if they find any meat tied in the sea , they take it for theirs . These have waiting on them six or seven small fish ( which never depart ) with guards blue and green round about their bodies , like comely serving men : and they go two or three before him , and some on every side . Moreover , they have other fish which cleave always unto their body , and seem to take such superfluities as grow about them , and they are said to enter into their bodies also to purge them if they need . The Mariners in time passed have eaten of them , but since they have seen them eat men their stomachs abhor them . Nevertheless , they draw them up with great hooks , & kill of them as many as they can , thinking that they have made a great revenge . There is another kind of fish as big almost as a herring , which hath wings and flies , and they are together in great number . These have two enemies , the one in the sea , the other in the air . In the sea the fish which is called Albocore , as big as a Salmon , follows them with great swiftness to take them . This poor fish not being able swim fast , for he hath no fins , but swimmeth with moving of his tail , shutting his wings , lifts himself above the water , and flies not very high : the Albocore seeing that , although he have no wings , yet he gives a great leap out of the water , and sometime catches him , or else he keepeth himself under the water going that way on as fast as he flies . And when the fish being weary of 381 
 the air , or thinking himself out of danger , returns into the water , the Albocore meeteth with him : but sometime his other enemy the sea-crow , catches him Note . before he falls . With these and like sights , but always making our supplications to God for good weather and salvation of the ship , we came at length unto the point , so famous & feared of all men : but we found there no tempest , only great waves , where our Pilot was a little overseen : for whereas commonly all other never come within sighed of land , but seeing signs ordinary , and finding bottom , go their way sure and safe , he thinking himself to have wind at will , shot so nigh , the land that the wind turning into the South , and the waves being exceeding great , rolled us so never the land , that the ship stood in less then 14 fathoms of water , no more then sixe miles from the Cape , which is called Das Agulias , and there we stood as utterly cast away : for under us were rocks of main stone so sharp , and cutting , that no anchor could hold the ship , the shore so evil , that nothing could take land , and the land itself so full of Tigers , and people that are savage , and killers of all strangers , that we had no hope of life nor comfort , but only in God and a good conscience . Notwithstanding , after we had lost ancres , hoisting up the sails for to get the ship a coast in some safer places or when it should please God , it pleased his mercy suddenly , where no man looked for help , to fill our sails with wind from the land , & so we escaped , thanks be to God . And the day following , being in the place where they are always wont to catch fish , we also fell a fishing , and so many they took , that they served , all the ship for that day , and part of the next . And one of them pulled Coral . up a coral of great bigness and price . For there they 
 [ II n . 101. ] say ( as we saw by experience ) that the corals do grow in 
 the manner of stalks upon the rocks in the bottom , and 
 Two ways wax hard and read ’ The da7 of Peri11 was the nine and 
 beyond you cape twentieth of July . And you shall understand that , the of Good hope . Cape passed , there be two ways to India : one within 
 382 
 the lie of S. Laurence , which they take willingly , because they refresh themselves at Mosambique a fortnight or a month , not without great need , and thence in a month more land in Goa . The other is without the He of S. Laurence , which they take when they set forth so late , and come so late to the point , that they have no time to take the foresaid Mosambique^ and then they go heavily , because in this way they take no port . And by reason of the long navigation , and want of food and water , they fallen into sundry diseases , their gums wax great , and swell , and they are feign to cut them away , their legs swell , and all the body becomes soar , and so benumbed , that they can not stir hand nor foot , and so they die for weakness , others fallen into fluxes and agues , and die thereby . And this way it was our chance to make : yet though we had more then one hundred and fifty sick , there died not passed seven and twenty ; which loss they esteemed not much in respect of other times . Though some of ours were diseased in this sort , yet , thanks be to God , I had my health all the way , contrary to the expectation of many : God send me my health so well in the land , if it may be to his honour and service . This way is full of privy rocks and quicksands , so that sometime we durst not sail by night , but by the providence of God we saw nothing , nor never found bottom until we came to the coast of India . When we had passed again the line , and were come to the third degree or somewhat more , we saw crabs swimming on the water that were read as though they had be sodden : but this was no sign of land . After , about the eleventh degree , the space of many days , more then ten thousand fish by estimation followed round about our ship , whereof we caught so many , that for fifteene days we did eat nothing else , and they served our turn very well : for at this time we had neither meat nor almost any thing else to eat , our navigation growing so long that it drew near to seven months , where as commonly they go it 
 3^3 
 A.D. 
 x579-They commonly sail from Lisbon to Goa in 5 months . 
 Running seas very dangerous . 
 Certain signs of land . 
 They arrived at Goa the 24 of October . 
 in five , I mean when they sail the inner way . But these fish were not sign of land , but rather of deep sea . At length we took a couple of birds , which were a kind of Hawks , whereof they joyed much , thinking that they had be of India , but indeed they were of Arabia , as we found afterwards . And we that thought we had be near India , were in the same latitude near Zocotoro , and He in the mouth of the Read sea . But there God sent us great winds from the Northeast or Northnortheast , whereupon unwillingly they bore up towards the East , and thus we went tenne days without seeing sign of land , whereby they perceived their error : for they had directed their course before always Northeast , coveting to multiply degrees of latitude , but partly the difference of the Needle , and most of all the running seas , which at that time ran Northwest , had drawn us to this other danger , had not God sent us this wind , which at length waxed larger , and restored us to our right course . These running seas be so perilous that they deceive the most part of the governors , and some be so little curious , contenting themselves with ordinary experience , that they care not to seek out any means to know when they swerve , neither by the compass , nor by any other trial ! . The first sign of land were certain fowls which they knew to be of India : the second , boughs of palms and sedges : the third , snakes swimming on the water , and a substance which they call by the name of a coin of money , as broad and as round as a groat , wonderfully printed and stamped of nature , like unto some coin . And these two last signs be so certain , that the next day after , if the wind serve , they see land , which we did to our great joy , when all our water ( for you know they make no beer in those parts ) and victuals began to fail us . And to Goa we came the foure and twentieth day of October , there being received with passing great charity . The people be tawny , but not disfigured in their lips 8c noses , as the Moors and Caffes of Ethiopia . They that be not of reputation , or at least the most part , go naked , saving and apron of a span long , and as much in breadth before them , and a lace two fingers broad before them , girded about with a string and no more : and thus they think them as well as we with all our trimming . Of the fruits and trees that be here I cannot now speak , for I should make another letter as long as this . For hitherto I have not seen a tree here , whose like I have seen in EurOpe ? the vine excepted , which nevertheless here is to no purpose , so that all the wines are brought out of Portugall . The drink of this country is good water , or wine of the Palm tree , or of a fruit called Cocos . And this shall suffice for this time . If God send me my health , I shall have opportunity to write to you once again . Now the length of my letter compelleth me to take my leave : and thus I wish your most prosperous health . From Goa the tenth of November , 1579. 
 our loving son Thomas Stevens . 
 