[ n . ii , 188. ] A relation sent by Melchior Petoney to Nigil de Moura at Lisbon , from the Hand and Castle of Arguin , standing a little to the Southward of Cape Blanco , in the Northerly latitude of 19 degrees , concerning the rich and secret trade from the inland of Africa 
 thither : Anno 1591. 
 Commodities fit for Arguin . 
 Wedges of gold givenfor small trifies . 
 Scarlet W fine Purple cloth greatly accepted . 
 A good harbour before the Castle of Arguin . 
 S concerning the trade to this Castle and Hand of Arguin , your worship is to understand , that if it would please the kings majesty to send hither two or three caravels once in a year with Flanders and Spanish commodities , as Bracelets of glass , Knives , Bells , 
 Linen-cloth , Looking-glasses , with other kinds of small wares , his highness might do great good here . For 50 leagues up into the land the Moors have many exceeding rich gold mines ; insomuch that they bring down their gold to this Castle to traffic with us : and for a small trifle they will give us a great wedge of gold . And because here is no trade , the said Moors carry their gold to Fez being 250 leagues distant from hence , and there do exchange the same for the foresaid kinds of commodities . By this means also his 
 majesty might stop that passage , and keep the king of Fez from so huge a mass of gold . Scarlet-clothes , and fine Purples are greatly accepted of in these parts . It is a most fertile country within the land , and yields great store of Wheat , flesh of all kinds , and abundance of fruits . Therefore , if it were possible , you should do well to deal with his majesty , either himself to send a couple of caravels , or to give your worship leave to traffic here : for here is a very good harbour where ships may ride at anchor hard by the Castle . The country where all the gold-mines are is called The kingdom of Darha . In this kingdom are great store 88 
 of cities and towns ; and in every city and town a Captain with certain soldiers ; which Captains are lords and owners of the said towns . One city there is Concerning called Couton , another Xanigeton , as also the cities of Tubguer , Azegue , Amader , Quaherque , and the town Africanus a of Faroo . The which towns and cities are very great little after thee and fairly built , being inhabited by rich Moors , and be&nningof abounding with all kind of cattle , Barley and Dates . 00 e‘ And here is such plenty of gold found upon the sands by the rivers side , that the said Moors usually carry the same Northward to Marocco , and Southward to the city of Tombuto in the land of Negroes , which city stands about 300 leagues from the kingdom of Darha ; and this kingdom is but 60 leagues from this Hand and Castle of Arguin . Wherefore I beseech your worship to put his majesty in remembrance hereof ; for the said cities and towns are but ten days journey from hence . I heartily wish that his majesty would send two or three merchants to see the state of the Country , who might travel to the aforesaid cities , to understand of their rich trade . For any man may go safe and come safe from those places . And thus without troubling of your worship any further , I humbly take my leave . From the Hand and Castle of Arguin the 20 of January 1591. 
 Your worships servant Melchior Petoney . 
 89 
 