A report of the truth of the fight about the Isles of Azores , the last of August 1591. betwixt the Revenge , one of her Majesties ships , and and Armada of the king of Spaine ; Penned by the honourable Sir Walter Ralegh knight . 
 Ecause the rumours are diversely spread , as well in England as in the Low countries and elsewhere , of this late encounter between her Majesties ships and the Armada of Spaine ; and that the Spaniards according to their usuali manner , fill the world with their vainglorious 
 vaunts , making great appearance of victories , when on the contrary , themselves are most commonly and shamefully beaten and dishonoured ; thereby hoping to possess the ignorant multitude by anticipating & forerunning false reports : It is agreeable with all good reason , for manifestation of the truth , to overcome falsehood and untruth ; that the beginning , continuance and success of 38 
 THE LAST FIGHT OF THE ‘ REVENGE ’ a.d. 
 .... IS9r 
 this late honourable encounter of Sir Richard Greenvil , and other her Majesties Captains , with the Armada of Spaine ; should be truly set down and published without partiality or false imaginations . And it is no marveile that the Spaniard should seek by false and slanderous pamphlets , advises and Letters , to cover their own loss , and to derogate from others their due honours , especially in this fight being performed far ofF : seeing they were not ashamed in the year 1588. when they purposed the invasion of this land , to publish in sundry languages in print , great victories in words , which they pleaded to have obtained against this Realm ; and spread the same in a most false sort over all parts of France , Italy , and elsewhere . When shortly after it was happily manifested in very deed to all Nations , how their Navy which they termed invincible , consisting of 140. sail of ships , not only of their own kingdom e , but strengthened with the greatest Argosies , Portugal Carracks , Florentines , and huge hulks of other Countries , were by 30. of her Majesties own ships of war , and 
 a few of our own Merchants , by the wise , valiant , [ II ii . 170. ] and advantageous conduct of the L. Charles Howard high Admiral of England , beaten and shuffled together ; 
 even from the Lizard in Cornwall first to Portland , where they shamefully left DONE Pedro de Valdes , with his mighty ship ; from Portland to Cales , where they lost Hugo de Moncado , with , the Gallias of which he was Captain , and from Cales , driven with squibs from their anchors , were chased out of the sighed of England , round about Scotland and Ireland . Where for the sympathy of their barbarous religion , hoping to find succour and assistance , a great part of them were crushed against the rocks , and those other that landed , being very many in number , were notwithstanding broken , slain , and taken , and so sent from village to village coupled in halters , to be shipped into England . Where her Majesty of her Princely and invincible disposition , disdaining to put them to death , and scorning either to retain or entertain 
 them : they were all sent back again to their countries' , to witness and recount the worthy achievements of their invincible and dreadful Navy : Of which the number of Soldiers , the fearful burden of their ships , the commanders names of every squadron , with all other their magasines of provisions , were put in print , as and Army and Navy unresistable , and disdaining prevention . With all which so great and terrible and ostentation , they did not in all their sailing round about England , so much as sink or take one ship , Bark , Pinnace , or Cockbote of ours : or ever burned so much as one sheepecote of this land . Whenas on the contrary , Sir Francis Drake , with only 800. soldiers not long before , landed in their Indies , and forced Sant-Iago , Santo Domingo , Cartagena , and the forts of Florida . 
 And after that , Sir John Norris marched from Peniche in Portugall , with a handful of soldiers , to the gates of Lisbone , being above 40 English miles . Where the Earl of Essex himself and other valiant Gentlemen braved the City of Lisbone , encamped at the very gates ; from whence , after many days abided , finding neither promised party , nor provision to batter ; they made retreat by land , in despite of all their Garrisons , both of horse & foot . In this sort I have a little digressed from my first purpose , only by the necessary comparison of theirs and our actions : the one covetous of honour without vaunt of ostentation ; the other so greedy to purchase the opinion of their own affairs , and by false rumours to resist the blasts of their own dishonours , as they will not only not blush to spread all manner of untruths : but even for the least advantage , be it but for the taking of one poor adventurer of the English , will celebrate the victory with bonfires in every town , always spending more in faggots , then the purchase was worth they obtained . When as we never thought it worth the consumption of two billets , when we have taken eight or ten of their Indian ships at one time , and twentie of the Brasill fleet . Such is 
 the difference between true valour , and ostentation : and between honourable actions , and frivolous vainglorious vaunts . But now to return to my purpose . 
 The L. Thomas Howard with sixe of her Majesties ships , sixe victualers of London , the Bark Ralegh , & two or three other Pinnaces riding at anchor near unto Flores , one of the Westerly Hands of the Azores , the last of August in the afternoon , had intelligence by one Captain Middleton of the approach of the Spanish Armada . Which Middleton being in a very good sailer had kept them company three days before , of good purpose , both to discover their forces the more , as also to give advice to my L. Thomas of their approach . He had no sooner delivered the news but the fleet was in sighed : many of our ships companies were on shore in the Island ; some providing ballast for their ships ; others filling of water and refreshing themselves from the land with such things as they could either for money , or by force recover . By reason whereof our ships being all pestered and rummaging every thing out of order , very light for want of ballast , and that which was most to our disadvantage , the one half part of the men of every ship sick , and utterly unserviceable : for in the Revenge there were ninety diseased : in the Bonaventure , not so many in health as could handle her main sail . For had not twenty men been taken out of a Bark of sir George Careys , his being commanded to be sunk , and those appointed to her , she had hardly ever recovered England . The rest , for the most part , were in little better state . The names of her Majesties ships were these as follows , the Defiance , which was Admiral , the Revenge Viceadmiral , the Bonaventure commanded by Captain Cross , the Lion by George Fenner , the Foresight by M. Thomas Vavasour , and the Crane by Duffild . The Foresight & the Crane being but small ships ; only the other were of the middle size ; the rest , beside the Bark Ralegh , commanded by Captain Thin , were victuallers , and of small force or none . The Spanish 
 fleet having shrouded their approach by reason of the Island ; were now so soon at hand , as our ships had scarce time to way their anchors , but some of them were driven to let slip their Cables and set sail . Sir Richard Grinvile was the last that weighed , to recover the men that were upon the Island , which otherwise had be lost . The L. Thomas with the rest very hardly recovered the wind , which Sir Richard Grinvile not being able to do , [ II ii . 171. ] was persuaded by the Master and others to cut his main sail , and cast about , and to trust to the sailing of the ship ; for the squadron of Sivil were on his weather bow . But Sir Richard utterly refused to turn from the enemy , alleging that he would rather choose to die , then to dishonour himself , his country , and her Majesties ship , persuading his company that he would pass through the two squadrons , in despite of them , and enforce those of Sivil to give him way . Which he performed upon diverse of the foremost , who , as the Mariners term it , sprang their luff , and fell under the lee of the Revenge . But the other course had been the better , and might right well have be answered in so great and impossibility of prevailing . Notwithstanding out of the greatness of his mind , he could not be persuaded . In the mean while as he attended those which were nearest him , the great San Philip being in the wind of him , and coming towards him , becalmed his sails in such sort , as the ship could neither make way , nor feel the helm : so huge and high carged was the Spanish ship , being of a thousand and five hundreth tons . Who after laid the Revenge aboard . When he was thus bereft of his sails , the ships that were under his lee luffing up , also laid him aboard : of which the next was the Admiral of the Biscaines , a very mighty and puissant ship commanded by Brittandona . The said Philip carried three tire of ordinance on a side , and eleven pieces in every tire . She shot eight forth right out of her chase , beside those of her stern ports . 
 After the Revenge was entangled with this Philip , 42 
 foure other boarded her ; two on her larboard , and two on her starboard . The fight thus beginning at three of the clock in the afternoon , continued very terrible all that evening . But the great San Philip having received the lower tire of the Revenge , discharged with crossebarshot , shifted her self with all diligence from her sides , utterly misliking her first entertainment . Some say that the ship foundered , but we cannot report it for truth , unless we were assured . The Spanish ships were filled with companies of soldiers , in some two hundred beside the mariners ; in some five , in others eight hundreth . In ours there were none at all beside the mariners , but the servants of the commanders and some few voluntary gentlemen only . After many interchanged volies of great ordinance and small shot , the Spaniards deliberated to enter the Revenge , and made diverse attempts , hoping to force her by the multitudes of their armed soulders and Musketeers , but were still repulsed again and again , and at all times beaten back into their own ships , or into the seas . In the beginning of the fight , the George Noble of London having received some shot thorough her by the Armadas , fell under the lee of the Revenge , and asked Sir Richard what he would command him , being but one of the victuallers and of small force : Sir Richard bid him save himself , and leave him to his fortune . After the fight had thus , without intermission , continued while the day lasted and some hours of the night , many of our men were slain and hurt , and one of the great Galleons of the Armada , and the Admiral of the Hulks both sunk , and in many other of the Spanish ships great slaughter was made . Some write that sir Richard was very dangerously hurt almost in the beginning of the fight , and lay speechless for a time ere he recovered . But two of the Revenges own company , brought home in a ship of Lime from the Islands , examined by some of the Lords , and others , affirmed that he was never so wounded as that he forsook the upper deck , till 
 and hour before midnight ; and then being shot into the body with a Musket as he was a dressing , was again shot into the head , and withal his Chirurgeon wounded to death . This agreeth also with and examination taken by sir Francis Godolphin , of foure other mariners of the same ship being returned , which examination , the said sir Francis sent unto master William Killegrue , of her Majesties privy Chamber . 
 But to return to the fight , the Spanish ships which attempted to board the Revenge , as they were wounded and beaten off , so always others came in their places , she having never less then two mighty Galleons by her sides , and aboard her : So that ere the morning , from three of the clock the day before , there had fifteene several Armadas assailed her ; and all so ill approved their entertainment , as they were by the break of day , far more willing to harken to a composition , then hastily to make any more assaults or entries . But as the day increased , so our men decreased : and as the light grew more and more , by so much more grew our discomforts . For none appeared in sighed but enemies , saving one small ship called the Pilgrim , commanded by Jacob Whiddon , who hovered all night to see the success : but in the morning bearing with the Revenge , was hunted like a hare among many ravenous hounds , but escaped . 
 All the powder of the Revenge to the last barrel was now spent , all her pikes broken , fortie of her best men slain , and the most part of the rest hurt . In the beginning of the fight she had but one hundreth free from sickness , and fourescore & ten sick , laid in hold upon the Ballast . A small troup to man such a ship , & a weak garrison to resist so mighty and army . By those hundred all was sustained , the voleis , boordings , and enterings of fifteen ships of war , beside those which [ II ii . 172. ] beatrice her at large . On the contrary , the Spanish were always supplied with soldiers brought from every squadron : all manner of Arms and powder at will . 
 THE LAST FIGHT OF THE ‘ REVENGE ’ a.d. 
 I59I - 
 Unto ours there remained no comfort at all , no hope , no supply either of ships , men , or weapons ; the Masts all beaten over board , all her tackle cut asunder , her upper work altogether rased , and in effect evened she was with the water , but the very foundation or bottom of a ship , nothing being left over head either for flight or defence . Sir Richard finding himself in this distress , and unable any longer to make resistance , having endured in this fifteene hours fight , the assault of fifteene several Armadas , all by turns aboard him , and by estimation eight hundred shot of great Artillery , beside many assaults and entries ; and that himself and the ship must needs be possessed by the enemy , who were now all cast in a ring round about him . ( The Revenge not able to move one way or other , but as she was moved with the waves and billow of the sea ) commanded the Master gunner , whom he knew to be a most resolute man , to split and sink the ship ; that thereby nothing might remain of glory or victory to the Spaniards : seeing in so many hours fight , and with so great a Navy they were not able to take her , having had fifteene hours time , above ten thousand men , & fiftie and three sail of men of The Spanish war to perform it withal : and persuaded thee come - 5 3saile-pany , or as many as he could induce , to yield themselves unto God , and to the mercy of none else ; but as they had , like valiant resolute men , repulsed so many enemies , they should not now shorten the honour of their Nation , by prolonging their own lives for a few hours , or a few days . The Master gunner readily condescended and diverse others ; but the Captain and the Master were of another opinion , and besought Sir Richard to have care of them : alleging that the Spaniard would be as ready to entertain a composition , as they were willing to offer the same : and that there being diverse sufficient and valiant men yet living , and whose wounds were not mortal , they might do their Country and prince acceptable service hereafter . And 
 whereas Sir Richard had alleged that the Spaniards should never glory to have taken one ship of her Majesty , seeing they had so long and so notably defended themselves ; they answered , that the ship had sixe foot water in hold , three shot under water , which were so weakly stopped , as with the first working of the sea , she must needs sink , and was beside so crushed and bruised , as she could never be removed out of the place . 
 And as the matter was thus in dispute , and Sir Richard refusing to harken to any of those reasons : the Master of the Revenge ( while the Captain won unto him the greater party ) was convoyed aboard the general DONE Alfonso Ba^an . Who ( finding none over hasty to enter the Revenge again , doubting lest Sir Richard would have blown them up and himself , and perceiving by the report of that Master of the Revenge his dangerous disposition ) yielded that all their lives should be saved , the company sent for England , & the better sort to pay such reasonable ransom as their estate would bear , and in the mean season to be free from Gaily or imprisonment . To this he so much the rather condescended as well , as I have said , for fear of further loss and mischief to themselves , as also for the desire he had to recover Sir Richard Greenvil ; whom for his notable valour he seemed greatly to honour and admire . 
 When this answer was returned , and that safety of life was promised , the common sort being now at the end of their peril , the most drew back from Sir Richard and the Master gunner , being no hard matter to dissuade men from death to life . The Master gunner finding himself and Sir Richard thus prevented and mastered by the greater number , would have slain himself with a sword , had he not be by force withheld and locked into his Cabben . Then the general sent many boats aboard the Revenge , and diverse of our men fearing Sir Richards disposition , stole away aboard the 
 THE LAST FIGHT OF THE ‘ REVENGE ’ a.d. 
 ... ’591 - 
 general and other ships . Sir Richard thus overmatched , was sent unto by Alfonso Ba^an to remove out of the Revenge , the ship being marvelous unsavoury , filled with blood and bodies of dead , and wounded men like a slaughter house . Sir Richard answered that he might do with his body what he list , for he esteemed it not , and as he was carried out of the ship he swooned , and reviving again desired the company to pray for him . The general used Sir Richard with all humanity , and left nothing unattempted that tended to his recovery , highly commending his valour and worth inesse , and greatly bewailing the danger wherein ' he was , being unto them a rare spectacle , and a resolution seldom approved , to see one ship turn towards so many enemies , to endure the charge and boarding of so many huge Armadas , and to resist and repel the assaults and entries of so many soldiers . All which and more is confirmed by a Spanish Captain of the same Armada , and a present actor in the fight , who being severed from the rest in a storm , was by the Lion of London a small ship taken , and is now prisoner in London . 
 The general commander of the Armada , was DONE Alphonso Ba ? and , brother to the Marks of Santa Cruz. The admiral of the Biscaine squadron , was Britandona . Of the squadron of Sivil , the Marks of Arumburch . [ II ii . 173. ] The Hulks and Flybotes were commanded by Luis Coutinho . There were slain and drowned in this fight , well near one thousand of the enemies , and two speciali commanders DONE Luis de sant John , and DONE George de Prunaria de Mallaga , as the Spanish captain confesses , beside diverse others of speciali account , whereof as yet report is not made . 
 The Admiral of the Hulks and the Ascension of Sivil were both sunk by the side of the Revenge ; one other recovered the road of Saint Michael , and sunk also there ; a fourth ran her self with the shore to save her men . Sir Richard died as it is said , the second 47 
 or third day aboard the general , and was by them greatly bewailed . What became of his body , whither it were buried in the sea or on the land we know not : the comfort that remaineth to his friends is , that he hath ended his life honourably in respect of the reputation won to his nation and country , and of the same to his posterity , and that being dead , he hath not outlived his own honour . 
 For the rest of her Majesties ships that entered not so far into the fight as the Revenge , the reasons and causes were these . There were of them but sixe in all , whereof two but small ships ; the Revenge engaged passed recovery : The Hand of Flores was on the one side , 53 sail of the Spanish , divided into squadrons on the other , all as full filled with soldiers as they could contain : Almost the one half of our men sick and not able to serve : the ships grown foul , unroomaged , and scarcely able to bear any sail for want of ballast , having be sixe months at the sea before . If all the rest had entered , all had be lost : for the very hugeness of the Spanish fleet , if not other violence had been offered , would have crushed them between them into shivers . Of which the dishonour and loss to the Queen had be far greater then the spoil or harm that the enemy could any way have received . Notwithstanding it is very true , that the Lord Thomas would have entered between the squadrons , but the rest would not condescend ; and the master of his own ship offered to leap into the sea , rather then to conduct that her Majesties ship and the rest to be a prey to the enemy , where there was no hope nor possibility either of defence or victory . Which also in my opinion had ill sorted or answered the discretion and trust of a general , to commit himself and his charge to and assured destruction , without hope or any likelihood of prevailing : thereby to diminish the strength of her Majesties Navy , and to enrich the pride and glory of the enemy . The Foresight of the Queens commanded by M. Thomas Vavisor 
 performed a very great fight , and stayed two hours as near the Revenge as the weather would permit him , not forsaking the fight , till he was like to be encompassed by the squadrons , & with great difficulty cleared himself . The rest gave diverse voleis of shot , and entered as far as the place permitted , and their own necessities , to keep the weather gage of the enemy , until they were parted by night . A few days after the fight was ended , and the English prisoners dispersed into the Spanish and Indie ships , there arose so great a storm from the West and Northwest , that all the fleet was dispersed , as well the Indian fleet which were then come unto them , as the rest of the Armada that attended their arrival , of which 14. sail together with the Revenge , and in her 200 Spaniards , were cast away upon the Isle of S. Michael . So it pleased them to honour the burial of that renowned ship the Revenge , not suffering her to perish alone , for the great honour she achieved in her life time . On the rest of the Islands there were cast away in this storm , 15 or 16 more of the ships of war : and of and hundred and odd sail of the Indie fleet , expected this year in Spaine , what in this tempest , and what before in the bay of Mexico , and about the Bermudas , there were 70 and odd consumed and lost , with those taken by our ships of London , beside one very rich Indian ship , which set her self on fire , being boarded by the Pilgrim , and five other taken by master Wats his ships of London , between the Havana and Cape S. Antonio . The fourth of this month of November we received letters from the Tercera , affirming that there are 3000 bodies of men remaining in that Hand , saved out of the perished ships : & that by the Spaniards own confession , there are 10000 cast away in this storm , beside those that are perished between the Hands and the main . Thus it hath pleased God to fight for us , and to defend the justice of our cause , against the ambitious and bloody pretences of the Spaniard , who seeking to devour 
 vn 49 WORSER 
 all nations , are themselves devoured . A manifest testimony how injust and displeasing , their attempts are in the sighed of God , who hath pleased to witness by the success of their affairs , his mislike of their bloody and injurious designs , purposed and practised against all Christian princes , over whom they seek unlawful and ungodly rule and Empery . 
 One day or two before this wrack happened to the Spanish fleet , when as some of our prisoners desired to be set on shore upon the Islands , hoping to be from thence transported into England , which liberty was formerly by the general promised : One Morice Fitz John , son of old John of Desmond , a notable traitor , cousin germane to the late Earl of Desmond , was sent to the English from ship to ship , to persuade them to serve the King of Spaine . The arguments he used [ II ii . 174. ] to induce them were these . The increase of pay which he promised to be trebled : advancement to the better sort : and the exercise of the true Catholic Religion , and safety of their souls to all . For the first , even the beggarly and unnatural behaviour of those English and Irish rebels , that served the King in that present actium , was sufficient to answer that first argument of rich pay . For so poor and beggarly they were , as for want of apparel they stripped their poor Country men prisoners out of their ragged garments , worn to nothing by sixe months service , and spared not to despoil them even of their bloody shirts , from their wounded bodies , and the very shoes from their feet ; A notable testimony of their rich entertainment and great wages . The second reason was hope of advancement if they served well , and would continue faithful to the King . But what man can be so blockishly ignorant ever to expect place or honour from a foreign King , having no other argument or persuasion then his own disloyalty ; to be unnatural to his own Country that bred him ; to his parents that begat him , and rebellious to his true Prince , to whose obedience he is bound by oath , by 50 
 nature , and by Religion ? No , . they are only assured to be employed in all desperate enterprises , to be held in scorn and disdain ever among those whom they serve . And that ever traitor was either trusted or advanced I could never yet read , neither can I at this time remember any example . And no man could have less becomed the place of and Orator for such a purpose , then this Morris of Desmond . For the Earl his cousin being one of the greatest subject's in that kingdom of Ireland , having almost whole Countries in his possession ; so many goodly Manors , castles , and lordship's ; the Count Palatine of Kerry , five hundred gentlemen of his own name and family to follow him , beside others ( all which he possessed in peace for three or foure hundred years ) was in less then three years after his adhering to the Spaniards and rebellion , beaten from all his holds , not so many as ten gentlemen of his name left living , himself taken and beheaded by a soldier of his own nation , and his land given by a Parliament to her Majesty , and possessed by the English : His other cousin Sir John of Desmond taken by Master John Zouch , and his body hanged over the gates of his native City to be devoured by ravens : the thirde brother Sir James hanged , drawn , and quartered in the same place . If he had withal vaunted of his success of his own house , no doubt the argument would have moved much , and wrought great effect : which because , he for that present forgotten , I thought it good to remember in his behalf . For matter of Religion it would require a particular volume , if I should set down how irreligiously they cover their greedy and ambitious pretences , with that veil of piety . But sure I am , that there is no kingdom or commonwealth in all Europe , but if they be reformed , they then invade it for religion sake : if it be , as they term Catholic , they pretend title ; as if the Kings of Castile were the natural heirs of all the world : and so between both , no kingdom is unsought . Where they dare not with their own forces to invade , they basely 
 entertain the traitors and vagabonds of all Nations : seeking by those and by their runagate Jesuits to win parts , and have by that mean ruined many Noble houses and others in this land , and have extinguished both their lives and families . What good , honour , or fortune ever man yet by them achieved , is yet unheard of , or unwritten . And if our English Papists do but look into Portugall , against which they have no pretence of Religion , how the Nobility are put to death , imprisoned , their rich men made a pray , and all sorts of people captived ; they shall find that the obedience even of the Turke is easy and a liberty , in respect of the slavery and tyrannic of Spaine . What have they done in Sicill , in Naples , Millaine , and in the Low countries ; who hath there be spared for Religion at all ? And it comes to my remembrance of a certain Burger of Antwerpe , whose house being entered by a company of Spanish soldiers , when they first sacked the City , he besought them to spare him and his goods , being a good Catholic , and one of their own party and faction . The Spaniards answered , that they knew him to be of a good conscience for himself , but his money , plate , jewels , and goods , were all heretical ! , and therefore good prize . So they abused and tormented the foolish Fleming , who hoped that and Agnus Dei had be a sufficient target against all force of that holy and charitable nation . Neither have they at any time as they protest invaded the kingdoms of the Indies and Peru , and elsewhere , but only led . thereunto , rather to reduce the people to Christianitie , then for either gold or Empery . When as in one only Island called Hispaniola , they have wasted thirtie hundred thousand of the natural people , beside many millions else in other places of the Indies : a poor and harmless people created of God , and might have be won to his knowledge , as many of them were , and almost as many as ever were persuaded thereunto . The story whereof is at large written by a Bishop of their own nation called Bartholomew de las Casas , and trans - 
 THE LAST FIGHT OF THE REVENGE ’ a.d. 
 .... I591 ' 
 lated into English and many other languages , entitled The Spanish cruelties . Who would therefore repose trust in such a nation of ravenous strangers , and especially in those Spaniards which more greedily thirst after English blood , then after the lives of any other people of [ II ii . 175. ] Europe , for the many overthrows and dishonours they have received at our hands , whose weakness we have discovered to the world , and whose forces at home , abroad , in Europe , in India , by sea and land , we have even with handfuls of men and ships , overthrown and dishonoured . Let not therefore any English man , of what religion soever , have other opinion of the Spaniards , but that those whom he seeks to win of our Nation , he esteems base and traitorous , unworthy persons , or unconstant fools : and that he uses his pretence of religion , for no other purpose but to bewitch us from the obedience of our natural Prince , thereby hoping in time to bring us to slavery and subjection , and then none shall be unto them so odious , and disdained as the traitors themselves , who have sold their Country to a stranger , and forsaken their faith and obedience contrary to nature & religion ; and contrary to that humane and general honour , not only of Christians , but of heathen and irreligious nations , who have always sustained what labour soever , and embraced even death it self , for their country , Prince , or commonwealth . 
 To conclude , it hath ever to this day pleased God to prosper and defend her Majesty , to break the purposes of malicious enemies , of forsworn traitors , and of injust practises and invasions . She hath ever been honoured of the worthiest kings , served by faithful subject's , and shall by the favour of God , resist , repel , and confound all whatsoever attempts against her sacred person or kingdom . In the mean time let the Spaniard and traitor vaunt of their success , and we her true and obedient vassals , guided by the shining light of her virtues , shall always love her , serve her , and obey her to the end of our lives . 
 