The voyage of the right honourable George Earl of Cumberland to the Azores , etc. Written by the excellent Mathematician and Enginier master Edward Wright . 
 He right honourable the Earl of Cumberland having at his own charges prepared his small Fleet of foure Sails only , viz. The Victory one of the Queens ships royal ; the Meg and Margaret small ships , ( one of which also he was forced soon after to send home again , 
 finding her not able to endure the Sea ) and a small Caravel , and having assembled together about 400 men ( or fewer ) of gentlemen , soldiers , and sailors , embarked himself and them , and set sail from the Found of Plimmouth in Devonshire , the 18 day of June 1589. being accompanied with these captains and gentlemen which hereafter follow . 
 Captain Christopher Lister a man of great resolution , captain Edward Careless , alias Wright , who in sir Francis Drakes West-Indian voyage to S. Domingo and Carthagena , was captain of the Hope . Captain Boswell , M. Mervin , M. Henry Long , M. Partridge , M. Norton , M. William Mounson captain of the Meg , and his viceadmiral , now sir William Mounson , M. Pigeon captain of the Caravel . 
 About 3 days after our departure from Plimmouth we met with 3 French ships , whereof one was of Newhaven , another of S. Malos , and so finding them to 
 VII I a 
 be Leaguers & lawful Prizes , we took them and sent two of them for England with all their loading , which was fish for the most part from Newfoundland , saving that there was part thereof distributed among our small Fleet , as we could find Stowage for the same : and in the third , all their men were sent home into France . The same day & the day following we met with some other ships , whom ( when after some conference had with them , we perceived plainly to be of Roterodam and Emden , bound for Rochell ) we dismissed . 
 The 28 and 29 days we met diverse of our English ships , returning from the Portugall voyage which my lord relieved with victuals . The 13 day of July being Sonday in the morning , we espied 11 ships without sighed of you coast of Spaine , in the height of 39 degrees , whom we presently prepared for , & provided to meet them , having first set forth captain Mounson in the Meg , before us , to descry whence they were . The Meg approaching near , there passed some shot betwixt them , [ II ii . 156. ] whereby , as also by their Admiral and Viceadmiral putting forth their flags , we perceived that some fight was likely to follow . Having therefore fitted our selves for them , we made what haste we could towards them with regard always to get the wind of them , and about 10 or 11 of the clock , we came up to them with the Victory . But after some few shot & some little fight passed betwixt us , they yielded themselves , & the master's of them all came aboard us , showing their several Passports from the cities of Hamburg and Lubeck , from Breme , Pomerania and Calice . 
 They had in them certain bags of Pepper & Syna-mom , which they confessed to be the goods of a Jew in Lisbon , which should have be carried by them into their country to his Factor there , and so finding it by their own confession to be lawful Prize , the same was soon after taken and divided among our whole company , the valve whereof was esteemed to be about 4500 pounds , at two shillings the pound . 
 The 17 day the foresaid ships were dismissed , but 7 of their men that were willing to go along with us for sailors , we took to help us , and so held on our course for the Azores . 
 The 1 of August being Friday in the morning , we had sighed of the Hand of S. Michael , being one of the Eastermost of the Azores towards which we sailed all that day , and at night having put forth a Spanish flag in our maintop , that so they might the less suspect us , we approached near to the chief town and road of that Hand , where we espied 3 ships riding at anchor and some other vessels : all which we determined to take in the dark of the night , and accordingly attempted about 10 or 11 of the clock , sending our boats well manned to cut their cables and hausefs , and let them drive into the sea . Our men coming to them , found y‘ one of those greatest ships was the Falcon of London being there under a Scottish Pilot who bore the name of her as his own . But 3 other small ships that lay near under the castle there , our men let lose and towed them away unto us , most of the Spaniards that were in them leaping overboard and swimming to shore with loud and lamentable outcries , which they of the town hearing were in and uproar , and answered with the like crying . The castle discharged some great shot at our boats , but shooting without mark by reason of the darkness they did us no hurt . The Scots likewise discharged 3 great pieces into the air to make . the Spaniards think they were their friends and our enemies , and shortly after the Scottish master , & some other with him , came aboard to my lord doing their duty , and ofiring their service , etc. These 3 ships were fraught with wine and Sallet-oile from Sivil . 
 The same day our Caravel chased a Spanish Caravel to shore at S. Michael , which carried letters thither , by which we learned that the Caracks were departed from Tercera 8 days before . 
 The 7 of August we had sighed of a little ship which 3 
 3 ships forcibly towed out of harbour 
 we chased towards Tercera with our pinnace ( the weather being calm ) and towards evening we overtook her , there were in her 30 tons of good Madera wine , certain woollen cloth , silk , taffeta , etc. The 14 of August we came to the Hand of Flores , where we determined to take in some fresh water and fresh victuals , such as the Hand did afford . So we manned our boats with some 120 men and rowed towards the shore ; whereto when we approached the inhabitants that were assembled at the landing place , put forth a flag of truce , whereupon we also did the like . 
 When we came to them , my Lord gave them to understand by his Portugall interpreter , that he was a friend to their king DONE Antonio , and came not any way to injury them , but that he meant only to have some fresh water and fresh victuals of them , by way of exchange for some provision that he had , as oil , wine , or pepper , to which they presently agreed willingly , & sent some of their company for beeves and sheep , and we in the mean season marched Southward about a mile to Villa de Santa Cruz , from whence all the inhabitants young and old were departed , and not any thing of valve left . We demanding of them what was the cause hereof , they answered , Fear ; as their usuali manner was when any ships came near their coast . 
 We found that part of the Hand to be full of great rocky barren hills and mountains , little inhabited by reason that it is molested with ships of war which might partly appear by this town of Santa Cruz ( being one of their chief towns ) which was all ruinous , and ( as it were ) but the relics of the ancient town which had be burned about two years before by certain English ships of war , as the inhabitants there reported . 
 At evening as we were in rowing towards the Victory , and huge fish pursued us for the space well nigh of two miles together , distant for the most part from the boats stern not a spears length , and sometime so near that the boat stroke upon him , the tips of whose fins 
 about the ghils ( appearing oft times above the water ) were by estimation 4 or 5 yards asunder , and his jaws gaping a yard and and half wide , which put us in fear of overturning the pinnace , but God be thanked ( rowing as hard as we could ) we escaped . 
 When we were about Flores a little ship called the Drake , brought us word that the Caracks were at Tercera , of which news we were very glad , & sped us thitherward with all the speed we could : and by the way we came to Fayal road the seven and twentieth day of August , [ II ii . 157. ] after sun set , where we espied certain ships riding at anchor , to whom we sent in our Skiff with Captain Lister and Captain Monson in her to discover the roaders : and lest any danger should happen to our boat , we sent in likewise the Saucy Jacke and the small Caravel ; but the wind being off the shore , the ships were not able to fetched it so nigh as the Spaniards ride , which nevertheless the boat did , and clapped a ship aboard of two hundred and fiftie tons , which carried in her fourteene cast pieces , and continued fight alone with her for the space of one hour until the coming up of other boats to the rescue of her , which were sent from the ships , and then a fresh boarding her again one boat in the quarter , another in the hause , we entered her on the one side , and all the Spaniards leapt overboard on the other , save Juan de Palma the Captain of her and two or three more , and thus we became possessors' of her . This ship was mored to the Castle which shot at us all this while : the only hurt which we received of all this shot was this , that the master of our Caravel had the calf of his leg shot away . This ship was laden with Sugar , Ginger , and hides lately come from S. Juan de Puerto Rico ; after we had towed her clear off the castle , we rowed in again with our boats , and fetched out five small ships more , one laden with hides , another with Elephants teeth , grains , coconuts , and goats skins come from Guinie , another with woad , and two with dogfish , which two last we let drive in the 
 Jn escape of 8. Englishmen from Tercera . 
 sea making none account of them . The other foure we sent for England the 30 of August . 
 At the taking of these Prizes were consorted with us some other small men of war , as Master John Davis , with his ship , Pinnace , and Boat , Captain Markesburie with his ship , whose owner was Sir Walter Ralegh , the Bark of Lime , which was also consorted with us before . 
 The last of August in the morning we came in sighed of Tercera , being about some nine or ten leagues from shore , where we espied coming towards us , a small boat under sail , which seemed somewhat strange unto us , being so far from land , and no ship in sighed , to which they might belong : but coming near , they put us out of doubt , showing they were English men ( eight in number ) that had lately been prisoners in Tercera , and finding opportunity to escape at that time , with that small boat committed themselves to the sea , under Gods providence , having no other yard for their main sail , but two pipe staves tied together by the ends , and no more provision of victuals , then they could bring in their pockets and bosoms . Having taken them all into the Victory , they gave us certain intelligence , that the Caracks were departed from thence about a week before . 
 Thus being without any further hope of those Caracks , we resolved to return for Fayall , with intent to surprise the town , but until the ninth of September , we had either the wind so contrary , or the weather so calm , that in all that time , we made scarce nine or ten leagues way , lingering up and down not far from Pico . 
 The tenth of September , being Wednesday in the afternoon , we came again to Fayal road . Whereupon immediately my Lord sent Captain Lister , with one of Graciosa ( whom Captain Munson had before taken ) and some others , towards Fayal , whom certain of the Inhabitants met in a boat , and came with Captain Lister to my Lord , to whom he gave this choice : either to 
 suffer him quietly to enter into the platform there without resistance , where he and his company would remain a space without offering any injury to them , that they ( the Inhabitants ) might come unto him and compound for the ransom of the Town ; or else to stand to the hazard of war . 
 With these words they returned to the town : but the keepers of the platform answered , that it was against their oath and allegiance tp king Philip to give over without fight . Whereupon my Lord commanded the boats of every ship , to be presently manned , and soon after landed his men on the sandy shore , under the side of and hill , about half a league to the Northwards from the platform : upon the top of which hill certain horsemen and footmen showed themselves , and other two companies also appeared , with ensigns displayed , the one before the town upon the shore by the sea side , which marched towards our landing place , as though they would encounter us ; the other in a valley to the Southwards of the platform , as if they would have come to help the Townsmen : during which time , they in the platform also played upon us with great Ordinance . Notwithstanding my L. ( having set his men in order ) marched along the sea shore , upon the sands , betwixt the sea & the town towards the platform for the space of a mile or more , & then the shore growing rocky , & permitting no further progress without much difficulty , he entered into the town & passed through the street taking of without resistance , unto the platform ; for those companies before mentioned at my Lo. approaching , were paya^ J soon dispersed , and suddenly vanished . 
 Likewise they of the platform , being all fled at my [ n . ii . 158. ] Lords coming thither , left him and his company to scale the walls , to enter and take possession without resistance . 
 In the mean time our ships ceased not to batter the foresaid Town and Platform with great shot , till such time as we saw the Redcross of England flourishing upon the Forefront thereof . 
 4 description This Fayal is the principali town in all that island , of the town of & js situate directly over against the high and mighty My mountain Pico , lying towards the West Northwest from that mountain , being divided therefrom by a narrow Sea , which at that place is by estimation about some two or three leagues in breadth between the Isles of Fayal and Pico . 
 The town contained some three hundred households , their houses were fair and strongly built of lime and stone , and double covered with hollow tiles much like our roof-tiles , but that they are less at the one end then at the other . 
 Every house almost had a cistern or well in a garden on the back side : in which gardens grew vines ( with ripe clusters of grapes ) making pleasant shadows , and Tobacco now commonly known and used in England , wherewith their women there die their faces reddish , to make them seem fresh and young : Pepper Indian and common ; figtrees bearing both white and read figs : Peach trees not growing very tall : Oranges , Limons , Quinces , Potato-roots , etc. Sweet wood ( Cedar I think ) is there very common , even for building and firing . 
 My Lord having possessed himself of the town and platform , and being careful of the preservation of the town , gave commandment , that no mariner or soldier should enter into any house , to make any spoil thereof . But especially he was careful that the Churches and houses of religion there should be kept inviolate , which was accordingly performed , through his appointment of guarders arid keepers for those places : but the rest of the town either for want of the former inhibition , or for desire of spoil & prey , was rifled , & ransacked by the soldiers & mariners , who scarcely left any house unsearched , out of which they took such things as liked them , as chests of sweet wood , chairs , cloth , coverlets , hangings , bedding , apparel : and further ranged into the country , where some of them 8 
 THE EARL OF CUMBERLAND also were hurt by the inhabitants . The Friery there containing and maintaining thirtie Franciscan Friars ( among whom we could not find any one able to speak true Latin ) was built by a Fryer of Angra in Tercera of the same order , about the year of our Lord one thousand five hundred and sixe . The tables in the hall had seats for the one side only , and were always covered , as ready at all times for dinner or supper . 
 From Wednesday in the afternoon , at which time we entered the town , till Saturday night , we continued there , until the Inhabitants had agreed and paid for the ransom of the town , two thousand ducats , most part whereof was Church-plate . 
 We found in the platform eight and fiftie iron pieces of Ordinance , whereof three and twentie ( as I remember ) or more were ready mounted upon their carriages , between Barricadoes , upon a platform towards the seaside , all which Ordinance we took , and set the platform on fire , and so departed : My Lord having invited to dinner in the Victory , on the Sunday following , so many of the Inhabitants as would willingly come ( save only Diego Gomes the Governor , who came but once only to parley about the ransom ) only foure came and were well entertained , and solemnly dismissed with found of drum and trumpets , and a peal of Ordinance : to whom my Lord delivered his letter subscribed with his own hand , importing a request to all other Englishmen to abstain from any further molesting them , save only for fresh water , and victuals necessary for their intended voyage . During our abided here ( viz. the 11 of September ) two men came out of Pico which had been prisoners there : Also at Fayal we set at liberty a prisoner translated from S. Jago who was cousin to a servant of DONE Anthonio king of Portugal ! in England : These prisoners we detained with us . 
 On Munday we sent our boats a shore for fresh water , which ( by reason of the rain that fell the former night ) came plentifully running down the hills , and would 9 
 otherwise have been hard to be got there . On Tuesday likewise having not yet sufficiently served our turns , we sent again for fresh water , which was then not so easy to be got as the day before , by reason of a great wind : which in the afternoon increased also in such sort , that we thought it not safe to ride so near the land ; whereupon we weighed anchor and so departed Northwest and by west , alongst the coast of Fayal Island . Some of the Inhabitants coming aboard to us this day , told us that always about that time of the year such winds West Southwest blew on that coast . 
 This day , as we sailed near Saint Georges Island , a huge fish lying still a little under water , or rather even therewith , appeared hard by a head of us , the sea breaking upon his back , which was black coloured , in such sort as deeming at the first it had been a rock , and the [ II ii . 159. ] ship stemming directly with him , we were put in a sudden fear for the time : till soon after we saw him move out of the way . 
 The 16 of September in the night it lightened much , whereupon there followed great winds and rain , which continued the 17 18 19 20 and 21 of the same . The 23 of September we came again into Faial road to weigh and anchor which ( for haste and fear of foul weather ) we had left there before , where we went on shore to see the town , the people ( as we thought ) having now settled themselves there again , but notwithstanding many of them through too much distrustfulness , departed and prepared to depart with their packets at the first sighed of us : until such time as they were assured by my Lord , that our coming was not any way to injury them , but especially to have fresh water , and some other things needful for us , contenting them for the same . 
 So then we viewed the Town quietly , and bought such things as we desired for our money as if we had be in England . And they helped to fill us in fresh water , receiving for their pains such satisfaction as contented them . 
 The 25 day we were forced again to depart from thence , before we had sufficiently watered , by reason of a great tempest that suddenly arose in the night , in so much , that my Lord himself soon after midnight raised our men out of their Cabins to weigh anchor , himself also together with them haling at the Capsten , and after cheering them up with wine . 
 The next day we sent our Caravel and the Sawsie-Jacke to the road of Saint Michael , to see what they could espy : we following after them upon the 27 day , plying to and from , came within sighed of S. Michael , but by contrary winds the 28 29 and 30 days we were driven to leewarde , and could not get near the Island . 
 The first of October we sailed alongst Tercera , and even against Brasill ( a promontory near to Angra the strongest Town in that Island ) we espied some boats coming to the Town , and made out towards them : but being near to the land they ran to shore and escaped us . 
 In the afternoon we came near to Graciosa , whereupon my Lord forthwith sent Captain Lister to the Handers , to let them understand that his desire was only to have water and wine of them , and some fresh victuals , and not any further to trouble them . They answered they could give no resolute answer to this demand , until the Governors of the Hand had consulted thereupon , and therefore desired him to send again to them the next day . 
 Upon the second day of October early in the morning , we sent forth our long boat and Pinnace , with empty Cask , and about some fiftie or sixty men together with the Margaret , and Captain Davis his ship : for we now wanted all the rest of our consorts . But when our men would have landed , the Handers shot at them , and would not suffer them . And troops of men appeared upon land , with ensigns displayed to resist us : So our boats rowed alongst the shore , to find some place where they might land , not with too much 11 
 disadvantage : our ships and they still shooting at the Handers : but no place could be found where they might land without great peril of losing many of their lives , and so were constrained to retire without receiving any answer , as was promised the day before . We had three men hurt in this conflict , whilst our boats were together in consulting what was best to be done : two of them were stroken with a great shot ( which the Handers drew from place to place with Oxen ) wherewith the one lost his hand , and the other his life within two or three days after : the third was shot into his neck with a small shot , without any great hurt . 
 With these news our company returned back again at night , whereupon preparation was made to go to them again the next day : but the day was far spent before we could come near them with our ship : neither could we find any good ground to anchor in , where we might lie to batter the Town , and further we could find no landing place , without great danger to lose many men : which might turn not only to the overthrow of our voyage , but also put the Queens ship in great peril for want of men to bring her home . Therefore my Lord thought it best to write to them to this effect : That he could not a little marvel at their inhumanity and cruelty which they had showed towards his men , seeing they were sent by him unto them in peaceable manner to receive their answer which they had promised to give the day before : and that were it not for DONE Antonio their lawful king his sake , he could not put up so great injury at their hands , without just revengement upon them : notwithstanding for DONE Antonio his sake , whose friend he was , he was yet content to send to them once again for their answer : At night Captain Lister returned with this answer from them . That their Gunner shot off one of their pieces , which was charged with powder only , and was stopped ; which our men thinking it had been shot at them , shot again , and so began the fight : [ ILii . 160. ] and that the next morning they would send my Lord a 12 
 resolute answer to his demand , for as yet they could not know their Governors mind herein . The next morning there came unto us a boat from the shore with a flag of truce , wherein were three of the chief men of the Island , who agreed with my Lord that he should have of them sixtie buttes of wine , and fresh victuals to refresh himself and his company withal : but as for fresh water , they could not satisfy our need therein , having themselves little or none , saving such as they saved in vessels or cisterns when it rained , and that they had rather give us two tons of wine then one of water : but they requested that our soldiers might not come on shore , for they themselves would bring all they had promised to the waterside , which request was granted , we keeping one of them aboard with us until their promise was performed , and the other we sent to shore with our empty Cask , and some of our men to help to fill , and bring them away with such other provision as was promised : so the Margaret , Captain Davis his ship , and another of Weymouth stayed riding at anchor before the Town , to take in our provision . This ship of Weymouth came to us the day before , and had taken a rich Prize ( as it was reported ) worth sixteene thousand pound , which brought us news that the West-Indian Fleet was not yet come , but would come very shortly . But we with the Victory put off to sea , and upon Saturday the fourth of October , we took a French ship of Saint Malo ( a city of the unholy league ) laden with fish from Newfoundland : which had been in so great a tempest , that she was constrained to cut her main mast overboard for her safety , and was now coming to Graciosa , to repair her self . But so hardly it befell her , that she did not only not repair her former losses , but lost all that remained unto us . The chief of her men we took into our ship , and sent some of our men , mariners , and soldiers into her to bring her into England . 
 Upon the Sunday following at night , all our pro-13 
 mised provision was brought unto us from Gratiosa : and we friendly dismissed the Handers with a peal of Ordinance . 
 Upon Munday , Tuesday , and Wednesday , we plied to and from about those Islands , being very rough weather . And upon Thursday at night , being driven some three or foure leagues from Tercera , we saw fifteene sail of the West-Indian Fleet coming into the Haven at Angra in Tercera . But the wind was such , that for the space of foure days after , though we lay as close by the wind as was possible , yet we could not come near them . In this time we lost our late French Prize , not being able to lie so near the wind as we , and herd no more of her till we came to England where she safely arrived . Upon Munday we came very near the Havens mouth , being minded to have run in among them , and to have fetched out some of them if it had been possible : But in the end this enterprise was deemed too daun-gero'us , considering the strength of the place where they road , being haled and towed in nearer the town , at the first sighed of our approaching , and lying under the protection of the Castle of Brasill , on the one side ( having in it five and twentie pieces of Ordinance ) and a fort on the other side wherein were 13 or 14 great brass pieces . Beside , when we came near land the wind proved too scant for us to attempt any such enterprise . 
 Upon Tuesday the fourteenth of October we sent our boat to the road to found the depth , to see if there were any anchoring place for us , where we might lie without shot of the Castle and Fort , and within shot of some of those ships , that we might either make them come out to us , or sink them where they lay . Our boat returned having found out such a place as we desired , but the wind would not suffer us to come near it , and again if we could have ankored there , it was thought likely that they would rather run themselves a ground to save their lives and liberties , and some of their goods , then come forth to lose their liberties 
 and goods to us their enemies . So we shot at them to see if we could reach them , but it fell far short . And thus we departed , thinking it not probable that they would come forth so long as we watched for them before the havens mouth , or within sighed of them . For the space of five days after we put off to sea , and lay without sighed of them , and sent a pinnace to lie out of sighed close by the shore , to bring us word if they should come forth . After a while the Pinnace returned and told us that those ships in the Haven had taken down their sails , and let down their top masts : so that we supposed they would never come forth , till they perceived us to be quite gone . 
 Wherefore upon the 20 of October , hearing that there were certain Scottish ships at Saint Michael , we sailed thither , and found there one Scottish reader , and two or three more at Villam Franca , the next road a league or two from the town of S. Michael , to the Eastwards : of whom we had for our relief some small quantity of wine ( viz. some five or sixe buttes of them all ) and some fresh water , but nothing sufficient to serve our turn . 
 Upon Tuesday the one and twentieth of October , we sent our long boat to shore for fresh water at a brook a little to the Westwards from Villam Franca . 
 But the Inhabitants espying us came down with two [ II ii . 161. ] Ensigns displayed , and about some hundred and fiftie men armed , to withstand our landing . So our men having spent all their powder upon them in attempting to land , and not being able to prevail at so great odds , returned frustrate . 
 From hence we departed towards Saint Maries Island , minding to water there , and then to go for the coast of Spaine . For we had intelligence that it was a place of no great force , and that we might water there very well : therefore upon Friday following , my Lord sent Captain Lister , and Captain Amias Preston now Sir Amias Preston ( who not long before came to us out 
 of his own ship , and she losing us in the night , he was forced to tarry still with us ) with our long boat and Pinnace , and some sixtie or seventie shot in them , with a friendly letter to the Handers , that they would grant us leave to water , and we would no further trouble them . 
 So we departed from the Victory for the Hand , about nine of the clock in the forenoon , and rowed freshly until about 3 a clock afternoon . At which time our men being something weary with rowing , and being within a league or two of the shore , and 4 or 5 leagues from the Victory , they espied ( to their refreshing ) two ships riding at anchor hard under the town , whereupon having shifted some 6 or 7 of our men into Captain Davis his boat , being too much pestered in our own , and retaining with us some 20 shot in the pinnace , we made way towards them with all the speed we could . 
 By the way as we rowed we saw boats passing betwixt the readers and the shore , and men in their shirts swimming and wading to shore , who as we perceived afterwards , were labouring to set those ships fast on ground , and the Inhabitants as busily preparing themselves for the defence of those roaders , their Hand , and themselves . When we came near them , Captain Lister commanded the Trumpets to be sounded , but prohibited any shot to be discharged at them , until they had direction from him : But some of the company , either not well perceiving or regarding what he said , immediately upon the found of the Trumpets discharged their pieces at the Islanders , which for the most part lay in trenches and fortified places unseen , to their own best advantage : who immediately shot likewise at us , both with small and great shot , without danger to themselves : Notwithstanding Captain Lister earnestly hastened forward the Sailors that rowed , who began to shrink at that shot , flying so fast about their ears , and himself first entering one of the ships that lay a little 
 further from shore then the other , we speedily followed after him into her , still plying them with our shot . And having cut in sunder her Cables and Hausers , towed her away with our Pinnace . In the mean time Captain Davis his boat overtook us and entered into the other ship , which also ( as the former ) was forsaken by all her men : but they were constrained to leave her & to come again into their boat ( whilst shot and stones from shore flew fast among them ) finding her to stick so fast a ground , that they could not stir her : which the Townsmen also perceiving , and seeing that they were but few in number , and us ( busied about the other ship ) not coming to aid them , were preparing to have come and taken them . But they returned unto us , and so together we came away towards the Victory , towing after us the Prize that we had now taken , which was lately come from Brasill , laden with Sugar . 
 In this fight we had two men slain and 16 wounded : and as for them , it is like they had little hurt , lying for the most part behind stone walls , which were built one above another hard by the sea side , upon the end of the hill whereupon the Town stood betwixt two valleys . Upon the top of the hill lay their great Ordinance ( such as they had ) wherewith they shot leaden bullets , whereof one pierced through our Prizes side , and lay still in the ship without doing any more harm . 
 The next day we went again for water to the same Hand , but not knowing before the inconvenience and disadvantage of the place where we attempted to land , we returned frustrate . 
 The same night the 25 of October we departed for S. Georges Hand for fresh water , whither we came on Munday following October 27 , and having espied where a spout of water came running down : the pinnace and long boat were presently manned and sent under the conduct of Captain Preston , and Captain Munson , by whom my Lord sent a letter to the Handers as before , to grant us leave to water only , and we would not vii 17 b 
 further trouble them : notwithstanding our men coming on shore found some of the poor Handers , which for fear of us hid themselves among the rocks . 
 And on Wednesday following our boats returned with fresh water , whereof they brought only sixe tons for the Victory , alleging they could get no more , thinking [ II ii . 162. ] ( as it was supposed ) that my Lord having no more provision of water and wine , but only 12 tons , would not go for the coast of Spaine , but straight for the coast of England , as many of our men greatly desired : notwithstanding my Lord was unwilling so to do , and was minded the next day to have taken in more water : but through roughness of the seas and wind , and unwillingness of his men it Was not done . Yet his Hon. purposed not to return with so much provision unspent , and his voyage ( as he thought ) not yet performed in such sort as might give some reasonable contentment or satisfaction to himself and others . 
 Therefore because no more water could now conveniently be got , and being uncertain when it could be got , and the time of our staying aboard also uncertain , the matter being referred to the choice of the whole company , whither they would tarry longer , till we might be more sufficiently provided of fresh water , or go by the coast of Spaine for England , with half so much allowance of drink as before , they willingly agreed that every mease should be allowed at one meal but half so much drink as they were accustomed ( except them that were sick or wounded ) and so to go for England , taking the coast of Spaine in our way , to see if we could that way make up our voyage . 
 Upon Saturday Octob. 31 we sent the Margaret ( because she leaked much ) directly for England , together with the Prize of Brasile which we took at S. Marry , and in them some of our hurt and wounded men or otherwise sick were sent home as they desired , for England : but Captain Monson was taken out of the Megge into the Victory . 
 So we held on our course for the coast of Spaine with a fair wind and a large which before we seidome had . And upon Twesday following being the 4 of Novemb. we espied a sail right before us , which we chased till about three a clock in the afternoon , at which time we overtaking her , she stroke sail , and being demanded who was her owner and from whence she was , they answered , a Portugall , and from Pernan-bucke in Brasile . She was a ship of some no tons burden , freighted with 410 chests of Sugar , and 50 Kintals of Brasill-wood , every Kintail containing one hundred pound weight : we took her in latitude nine and twentie degrees , about two hundred leagues from Lisbone westwards : Captain Preston was presently sent unto her , who brought the principali of her men aboard the Victory , and certain of our men , mariners and soldiers were sent aboard her . The Portugals of this Prize told us that they saw another ship before them that day about noon . Having therefore dispatched all things about the Prize aforesaid and left our long boat with Captain Davis , taking his lesser boat with us , we made way after this other ship with all the sails we could bear , holding on our course due East , and giving order to Captain Davis his ship and the Prize that they should follow us due East , and that if they had sighed of us the morning following they should follow us still : if not , they should go for England . 
 The next morning we espied not the sail which we chased , and Captain Davis his ship and the Prize were behind us out of sighed : but the next Thursday the sixt of November ( being in latitude 38 degrees 30 minutes , and about sixtie leagues from Lisbone westwards ) early in the morning Captain Preston descried a sail some two or three leagues a head of us , after which we presently hastened our chase , and overtook her about eight or nine of the clock before noon . She came lately from Saint Michaels road , having been before at Brasill laden with Sugar and Brasile . Having 19 
 sent our boat to them to bring some of the chief of their men aboard the Victory , in the mean time whilst they were in coming to us one out of the main top espied another sail a head some three or foure leagues from us . So immediately upon the return of our boat , having sent her back again with some of our men aboard the prize , we pursued speedily this new chase , with all the sails we could pack on , and about two a clock in the afternoon overtook her : she had made provision to fight with us , having hanged the sides of the ship so thick with hides ( wherewith especially she was laden ) that musket shot could not have pierced them : but year we had discharged two great pieces of our Ordinance at her , she stroke sail , and approaching nearer , we asking of whence they were , they answered from the West-Indies , from Mexico , and Saint John de Lowe ( truly called Ulhua . ) This ship was of some three or foure hundred tons , and had in her seven hundred hides worth tenne shillings a piece : sixe chests of Cochinell , every chest holding one hundred pound weight , and every pound worth sixe and twentie shillings and eight pence , and certain chests of Sugar and China dishes , with some plate and silver . 
 The Captain of her was and Italian , and by his behaviour seemed to be a grave , wise , and civil man : he had put and adventure in this ship five and twentie thousand Ducats . we took him with certain other of her chiefest men ( which were Spaniards ) into the Victory : and Captain Lister with so many other of the chiefest of our Mariners , soldiers , and sailors as were thought sufficient , to the number of 20. or there about , were sent into her . In the mean time ( we staying ) our other prizes which followed after , came up to us . And now we had our hands full and with joy shaped our course for England , for so it was thought meetest , having now so many Portugals , Spaniards and Frenchmen among us , that if we should have taken any more prizes afterwards , we had not be well able 
 to have manned them without endangering our selves . So about 6. of the clock in the afternoon ( when our other prize had overtaken us ) we set sail for England . But our prizes not being able to bear us company without sparing them many of our sails , which caused our ship to roll and wallow , in such sort that it was not only very troublesome to us , but , as it was thought , would also have put the main Mast in danger of falling overboard : having acquainted them with these inconveniences , we gave them direction to keep their courses together , following us , and so to come to Portsmouth . We took this last prize in the latitude of 39. degrees , and about 46. leagues to the Westwards from The Rock . 
 She was one of those 16. ships which we saw going into the haven at Angra in Ter^era , October 8. Some of the men that we took out of her told us , that whilst we were plying up and down before that haven , as before was showed , expecting the coming forth of those ships , three of the greatest and best of them , at the appointment of the Governor of Tergera , were unladen of their treasure and merchandise . And in every of them were put three hundred Soldiers , which were appointed to have come to lay the Victory aboard in the night , and take her : but when this should have be done the Victory was gone out of their sighed . 
 Now we went merrily before the wind with all the sails we could bear , insomuch that in the space of 24. hours , we sailed near 47. leagues , that is sevenscore English miles , betwixt Friday at noon and Saturday at noon ( notwithstanding the ship was very foul , and much grown with long being at Sea ) which caused some of our company to make account they would see what running at Tilt there should be at Whitehall upon the Queens day . Others were imagining what a Christmas they would keep in England with their shares of the prizes we had taken . But so it befell , that we kept a cold Christmas with the Bishop and 21 
 his clerks ( rocks that lie to the Westwards from Sylly , and the Western parts of England : ) For soon after the wind scanting came about to the Eastwards ( the worst part of the heavens for us , from which the wind could blow ) in such sort , that we could not fetch any part of England . And hereupon also our allowance of drink , which was scant enough before , was yet more more scanted , because of the scarcity thereof in the ship . So that now a man was allowed but half a pint at a meal , and that many times cold water , and scarce sweet . Notwithstanding this was and happy estate in comparison of that which followed : For from half a pint we came to a quarter , and that lasted not long neither , so that by reason of this great scarcity of drink , and contrariety of wind , we thought to put into Ireland , there to relieve our wants . But when we came near thither , lying at hull all night ( tarrying for the daylight of the next morning , whereby we might the safelyer bring our ship into some convenient harbour there ) we were driven so far to leeward , that we could fetch no part of Ireland , so as with heavy hearts and sad cheer , we were constrained to return back again , and expect till it should please God to send us a fair wind either for England or Ireland . In the mean time we were allowed every man three or foure spoons full of vinegar to drink at a meal : for other drink we had none , saving only at two or three meals , when we had in stead hereof as much wine , which was wringed out of Wine-lees that remained . With this hard fare ( for by reason of our great want of drink , we durst eat but very little ) we continued for the space of a fortnight or thereabouts : Saving that now and then we feasted for it in the mean time : And that was when there fell any hail or rain : the hailstones we gathered up and did eat them more pleasantly then if they had be the sweetest Comfits in the world ; The rain-drops were so carefully saved , that so near as we could , not one was lost in all our ship . Some hanged up sheets tied 
 with cords by the foure corners , and a weight in the midst that the water might run down thither , and so be received into some vessel set or hanged underneath : Some that wanted sheets , hanged up nakins , and clouts , and watched them till they were thorough wet , then wringing and sucking out the water . And that water which fell down and washed away the filth and soiling of the ship , trod under foot , as bad as running down the kennel many times when it rains , was not lost I warrant you , but watched and attended carefully ( yea sometime with strife and contention ) at every scupper-hole , and other place where it ran down , with dishes , pots , Cannae , and Jars , whereof some drunk hearty draughts even as it was , mud and all , without tarrying to dense or settle it : Others elensed it first , but not often , for it was so thick and went so slowly thorough , that they might ill endure to tarry so long , and were loath to lose too much of such precious stuff : some licked with their tongues ( like dogs ) the boards under feet , the sides , rails , and Masts of the ship : others that were more ingenious , fastened girdles or ropes about the Masts , daubing tallow betwixt them and the Mast ( that the rain might not run down between ) in such sort , that those ropes or girdles hanging lower on the one side then on the other , a spout of leather was fastened to the lowest part of them , that all the rain drops that came running down the Mast , might meet together at that place , and there be received . 
 He that god a can of water by these means was spoken of , sued to , and envied as a rich man . Quam pulchrum digito monstrari & dicier hic est ? Some of the poor Spaniards that we had taken ( who notwithstanding had the same allowance that our own men had ) would come and crave of us , for the love of God , but so much water as they could hold in the hollow of their hand : and they had it , notwithstanding our great extremity , to teach them some humanity in stead of their accustomed barbarity , both to us and other nations heretofore . 
 23 
 [ II ii . 164. ] 
 They put also bullets of led into their mouths to slake their thirst . 
 Now in every corner of the ship were herd the lamentable cries of sick and wounded men sounding woefully in our ears , crying out and pitifully complaining for want of drink , being ready to die , yea many dying for lack thereof , so as by reason of this great extremity we lost many more men , then we had done all the voyage before : having before this time be so well and sufficiently provided for , that we lived in manner as well and healthfully , and died as few as if we had be in England , whereas now lightly every day some were cast overboard . 
 But the second day of December 1589. was a festi vail day with us , for then it reigned a good pace , and we saved some pretty store of rain water ( though we were well wet for it , and that at midnight ) and filled our skins full beside : notwithstanding it were muddy and bitter with washing the ship , but ( with some sugar which we had to sweeten it withal ) it went merrily down , yet remembered we and wished for with all our hearts , many a Conduit , pump , spring , & stream of clear sweet running water in England : And how miserable we had accounted some poor souls whom we had seen driven for thirst to drink thereof , and how happy we would now have thought our selves if we might have had our fills of the same : yet should we have fared the better with this our poor feasting , if we might have had our meat and drink ( such and so much as it was ) stand quietly before us : but beside all the former extremities , we were so tossed and tur-moiled with such horrible stormy and tempestuous weather , that every man had best hold fast his Can , cup , and dish in his hands , yea and himself too , many times , by the ropes , rails , or sides of the ship or else he should soon find all under feet . 
 Herewith our main sail was torn from the yard and blown overboard quite away into the sea without 
 recovery , and our other sails so rend and torn ( from side to side some of them ) that hardly any of them escaped hold . The raging waves and foaming surges of the sea came rolling like mountains one after another , and overraked the waste of the ship like a mighty river running over it , whereas in fair weather it was near 20. foot above the water , that now we might cry out with the princely Prophet Psalm 107. vers . 26. They mount up to heaven , and descend to the deep , so that their soul melts away for trouble : they reel too and from , and stagger like a drunken man , and all their cunning is gone . With this extremity of foul weather the ship was so tossed and shaken , that by the craking noise it made , and by the leaking which was now much more then ordinary , we were in great fear it would have shaken in sunder , so that now also we had just cause to pray a little otherwise then the Poet , though marring the verse , yet mending the meaning . 
 Deus maris & Coeli , quid enim nisi vota supersunt , Solvere quassatae parcito membra ratis . 
 Notwithstanding it pleased God of his great goodness to deliver us out of this danger . Then forthwith a new main sail was made and fastened to the yard , and the rest repaired as time • and place would suffer : which we had no sooner done , but yet again we were troubled with as great extremity as before , so that again we were like to have lost our new main sail , had not Master William Antony the Master of the ship himself ( when none else would or durst ) ventured with danger of drowning by creeping along upon the main yard ( which was let down close to the rails ) to gather it up out of the sea , and to fasten it thereto , being in the mean while ofttimes ducked over head and ears into the sea . 
 These storms were so terrible , that there were some in our company , which confessed they had gone to seas for the space of 20. years , and had never seen the 
 like , and vowed that if ever they returned safe home , they would never come to Sea again . 
 The last of November at night we met with and English ship , out of which ( because it was too late that night ) it was agreed that we should have had the next morning two or three Tons of wine , which , as they said , was all the provision of drink they had , save only [ II ii . 165. ] a But or two , which they must needs reserve for their own use : but after that , we herd of them no more , till they were set on ground upon the coast of Ireland , where it appeared that they might have spared us much more then they pretended they could , so as they might well have relieved our great necessities , and have had sufficient for themselves beside , to bring them into England . 
 The first of December at night we spoke with another English ship , and had some beer out of her , but not sufficient to carry us into England , so that we were constrained to put into Ireland , the wind so serving . 
 The next day we came to and anchor , not far from the S. Kelmes under the land & wind , where we were somewhat more quiet , but ( that being no safe harbour to ride in ) the next morning we went about to weigh anchor , but having some of our men hurt at the Capsten , we were feign to give over and leave it behind , holding on our course to Ventrie haven , where we safely arrived the same day , that place being a very safe and convenient harbour for us , that now we might sing as we had just cause , They that go down to the Sea , etc. 
 So soon as we had anchored here my Lord went forthwith to shore , and brought presently fresh water and fresh victuals , as Muttons , pigs , hens , etc. to refresh his company withal . Notwithstanding himself had lately be very weak , and tasted of the same extremity that his Company did : For in the time of our former want , having a little fresh water left him 26 
 remaining in a pot , in the night it was broken , and the water drunk and dried up . Soon after the sick and wounded men were carried to the next principali Town , called Dingenacush , being about three miles distant from the foresaid haven , where our ship road , to the Eastwards , that there they might be the better refreshed , and had the Chirurgeons daily to attend upon them . Here we well refreshed our selves whilst the Irish harp sounded sweetly in our ears , and here we , who for the former extremities were in manner half dead , had our lives ( as it were ) restored unto us again . 
 This Dingenacush is the chief Town in all that part of Ireland , it consisteth but of one main street , from whence some smaller doe proceed on either side . It hath had gates ( as it seems ) in times passed at either end to open and shut as a Town of war , and a Castle also . The houses are very strongly built with thick stone walls , and narrow windows like unto Castles : for as they confessed , in time of trouble , by reason of the wild Irish or otherwise , they used their houses for their defence as Castles . The castle and all the houses in the Town , save foure , were wone , burned , and ruinated by the Earl of Desmond . These foure houses fortified themselves against him , and withstood him and all his power perforce , so as he could not win them . 
 There remains yet a thick stone wall that passes overthwart the midst of the street which was a part of their fortification . Notwithstanding whilst they thus defended themselves , as some of them yet alive confessed , they were driven to as great extremities as the Jewes , besieged by Titus the Roman Emperor , insomuch that they were constrained to eat dead men's carcases for hunger . The Town is now again somewhat repaired , but in effect there remain but the ruins of the former Town . Commonly they have no chim-neis in their houses , excepting them of the better sort , 27 
 so that the smoke was very troublesome to us , while we continued there . Their fuel is turfs , which they have very good , and whinnes or furs . There grows little wood thereabouts , which makes building chargeable there : as also want of lime ( as they reported ) which they are feign to fetch from far , when they have need thereof . But of stones there is store enough , so that with them they commonly make their hedges to part each men ground from other ; and the ground seems to be nothing else within but rocks and stones : Yet it is very fruitful and plentiful of grass , and grain , as may appear by the abundance of kine and cattle there : insomuch that we had good muttons ( though somewhat less then ours in England ) for two shillings or five groats a piece , good pigs and hens for 3. pence a piece . 
 The greatest want is industrious , painful , and husbandly inhabitants to till and trim the ground : for the common sort , if they can provide sufficient to serve from hand to mouth , take no further care . 
 Of money ( as it seems ) there is very small store among them , which perhaps was the cause that made them double and triple the prizes of many things we bought of them , more then they were before our coming thither . 
 Good land was here to be had for foure pence the Acre yearly rend . There are Mines of Alome , Tin , brass , and iron . Stones we saw there as clear as Crystal , naturally squared like Diamonds . 
 That part of the Country is all full of great mountains and hills , from whence came running down the pleasant streams of sweet fresh running water . The natural hardness of that Nation appears in this , that their small children run usually in the midst of Winter up and down the streets barefoot and barelegged , with no other apparel ( many times ) save only a manteli to cover their nakedness . 
 The chief Officer of their Town they call their Sovereign , who hath the same office and authority 28 
 THE EARL OF CUMBERLAND among them that our Majors have with us in England , and hath his Sergeants to attend upon him , and bear the Mace before him as our Majors . 
 We were first entertained at the Sovereigns house , which was one of those 4. that withstood the Earl of Desmond in his rebellion . They have the same form of Common prayer word for word in Latin , that we have here in England . Upon the Sunday the Sovereign comes into the Church with the Sergeant before him , and the SherifFe and others of the Town accompany him , and there they kneel down every man by himself privately to make his prayers . After this they rise and go out of the Church again to drink , which being done , they return again into the Church , and then the Minister begins prayers . 
 Their manner of baptizing differeth something from ours : part of the service belonging thereto is repeated in Latin , and part in Irish . The Minister takes the child in his hands , and first dippeth it backwards , and then forward , over head and ears into the cold water in the midst of Winter , whereby also may appear their natural hardness , ( as before was specified . ) They had neither Bell , drum , nor trumpet , to call the Parishioners together , but they expect till their Sovereign come , and then they that have any devotion follow him . 
 They make their bred all in cakes , and , for the tenth part , the bakers bake for all the town . 
 We had of them some 10. or 11. Tons of beer for the Victory , but it proved like a present purgation to them that took it , so that we chosen rather to drink water then it . 
 The 20. of December we loosed from hence , having well provided our selves of fresh water , and other things necessary , being accompanied with sir Edw. Dennie , his Lady , and two young sons . 
 This day in the morning my Lord going ashore to dispatch away speedily some fresh water that remained for the Victory , the wind being very fair for us , 29 
 brought us news that there were 60. Spanish prizes taken and brought to England . For two or three days we had a fair wind , but afterwards it scanted so , that ( as I said before ) we were feign to keep he could Christmas with The Bishop and his clerks . 
 After this we met with and English ship , that brought us joyful news of 91. Spanish prizes that were come to England : and sorrowful news withal , that the last and best prize we took , had suffered shipwreck at a place upon the coast of Cornwal which the Cornish men call Ais Efferne , that is , Hell-cliff , and that Captain Lister and all the men in the ship were drowned , save 5. or 6. the one half English , the other Spanish that saved themselves with swimming : but notwithstanding much of the goods were saved , and reserved for us , by sir Francis Godolphin , and the worshipful gentlemen of the Country there . My Lord was very sorry for Captain Listers death , wishing that he had lost his voyage to have saved his life . 
 The 29. of December we met with another ship , that told us the same news , and that sir Martin Frobisher , & Captain Reymond had taken the Admiral and vice-Admirall of the Fleet that we espied going to Tercera haven . But the Admiral was sunk with much leaking , near to the Idy Stone , a rock that lies over against Plimouth found , and the men were saved . 
 This ship also certified us that Captain Prestons ship had taken a prize laden with silver . My Lord entered presently into this ship , & went to Falmouth , and we held on our course for Plimouth . At night we came near to the Ramehead ( the next Cape Westwards from Plimouth found ) but we were afraid to double it in the night , misdoubting the scantness of the wind . So we stood off to Sea half the night , and towards morning had the wind more large , and made too little spare thereof , that partly for this cause , and partly through mistaking of the land , we were driven so much to leewards , that we could not double that Cape : Therefore 3° 
 we returned back again , and came into Falmouth haven , where we struck on ground in 17. foot water : but it was a low ebb , and ready again to flow , and the ground soft , so as no hurt was done . Here with gladness we set foot again upon the English ground ( long desired ) and refreshed our selves with keeping part of Christmas upon our native soil . 
 