The manner of the taking of two Spanish ships laden with quicksilver & the Popes bulls , bound for the West Indies , by M. Thomas White in the Amity of London . 1592. 
 He 26 of July 1592 , in my returning out of Barbary in the ship called the Amity of London , being in the height of 36 degrees or thereabouts , at foure of the clock in the morning we had sighed of two ships , being distant from us about three or foure leagues : by 
 seven of the clock we fetched them up , and were within gunshot : whose boldness , having the king of Spaines arms displayed , did make us judge them rather ships of war , then laden with merchandise . And as it appeared by their own speeches , they made full account to have taken us : it being a question among them , whither it were best to carry us to S. Lucar , or to Lisbon . We waved each other a main . They having placed themselves in warlike order one a cables length before another , we began the fight . In the which we continued , so fast as we were able to charge and discharge , the space of five hours , being never a cables length distant either of us from other . In which time we received diverse shot both in the hull of our ship , masts , and sails , to the number of 32 great , beside 500 musket shot and harquebusses a crock at the least , which we told after the fight . And because we perceived them to be stout , we thought good to board the Biscaine , which was on head the other : where lying aboard about and hour , and plying our ordinance and small shot ; in the end we stowed all his men . Now the other in the flyboat , thinking we had entered our men in their fellow , bore room with us , meaning to have laid us aboard , and so to have entrapped us betwixt them both : which we perceiving , fitted our ordinance 
 103 
 so for him , as we quit our selves of him , and he boarded his fellow : by which means they both fell from us . Then presently we kept our loof , hoist our topsails , and weathered them , and came hard aboard the flyboat with our ordinance prepared , and gave her our whole broad side , with the which we slew diverse of their men ; so as we might see the blood run out at the scupper holes . After that we cast about , and new charged all our ordinance , and came upon them again , willing them to yield , or else we would sink them : whereupon the one would have yielded , which was shot between wind and water ; but the other called him traitor . Unto whom we made answer , that if he would not yield presently also , we would sink him first . And thereupon he understanding our determination , presently put out a white flag , and yielded , and yet refused to strike their own sails , for that they were sworn never to strike to any Englishman . We then commanded their captains and master's to come aboard us ; which they did . And after examination & stowing them , we sent certain of our own men aboard them , and strook their sails , and manned their ships : finding in them both 126 persons living , & 8 dead , beside those which they themselves had cast overboard . So it pleased God to give us the victory being but 42 men and a boy , whereof 2 were killed and 3 wounded : for the which good success we give God the only praise . These two rich prizes laden with 1400 chests of quicksilver with the arms of Castile and Leon fastened upon them , and with a great quantity of bulls or indulgences , and guilded Missals or Service books , with and hundred tons of excellent wines , we brought shortly after into the river of Thames up to Black-wall . 
 By the taking of this quicksilver , about 1400 chests , the king of Spaine loses for every quintali of the same a quintail of silver , that should have been delivered him by the master's of the mines there , which amounteth to 600000 pounds . 
 104 
 THE TAKING OF THE ‘ MADRE DE DIOS ’ a.d. 
 .... I592* 
 More by taking of his bulls , to wit , two millions and 72 thousand for living and dead persons for the provinces of Nova Hispania , lucatan , Guatimala , the Honduras , and the Phillipinas , taxed at two reals the piece . And more for eighteene thousand bulls taxed at foure reals , amounteth all to 107700 pounds . Summa totalis 707700 li . 
 More there were taken ten farthels of gilded missals and breviaries sent for the kings account . 
 So the hindrance that the king receives by the loss of his bulls and quicksilver amounteth as is abovesaid : beside the lacking of his wines , about 100 tons , whereby his fleet is disappointed of a great part of their provision . 
 