The casting away of the Tobie near Cape Espartel corruptly called Cape Sprat without the Straight of Gibraltar on the coast of Barbarie . x593 - 
 He Tobie of London a ship of 250 tons manned with fiftie men , the owner whereof was the worshipful M. Richard Staper , being bound for Livorno , Zante and Patras in Morea , being laden with merchandise to the valve of 11 or 12 thousand pounds sterling , set sail 
 from Black-wall the 16 day of August 1593 , and we went thence to Portesmouth where we took in great quantity of wheat , and set sail forth of Stokes bay in the Isle of Wight , the 6. day of October , the wind being fair : and the 16 of the same month we were in the heighth of Cape S. Vincent , where on the next morning we descried a sail which lay in try right a head off us , to which we gave chase with very much wind , the sail being a Spaniard , which we found in fine so good of sail that we were feign to leave her and give her over . Two days after this we had sighed of mount Chiego , which is the first highland which we descry on the Spanish coast at the entrance of the Straight of Gibraltar , where we had very foul weather and the wind scant two days together . Here we lay off to the sea . The Master , whose name was George Goodlay , being a young man , and one which never took charge before for those parts , was very proud of that charge which he was little able to discharge , neither would take any counsel of any of his company , but did as he thought best himself , & in the end of the two days of foul weather cast about , and the wind being fair , bore in with the straights mouth . The 19 day at night he thinking that he was farther off the land then he was , bore sail all that night , & and hour and 124 
 THE CASTING AWAY OF THE ‘ TOBIE ’ a.d. 
 . * 593 - 
 and half before day had ran our ship upon the ground on the coast of Barbarie without the straight foure leagues to the South of Cape Espartel . Whereupon being all not a little astonished , the Master said unto us , I pray you forgive me ; for this is my fault and no men else . The company asked him whither they should cut off the main mast : no said the Master we will hoist out our boat . But one of our men ' coming speedily up , said , Sirs , the ship is full of water , well said the Master , then cut the maine-mast over board : which thing we did with all speed . But the after part suddenly split a sunder in such sort that no man was able to stand upon it , but all fled upon the foremast up into the shrouds thereof ; and hung there for a time : but seeing nothing but present death approach ( being so suddenly taken that we could not make a raft which we had ■ determined ) we committed our selves unto the Lord and began with doleful tune and heavy hearts to sing the 12 Psalm . Help Lord for good and godly men etc. Howbeit before we had finished foure verses the waves of the sea had stopped the breathes of most of our men . For the foremast with the weight of our men & the force of the sea fell down into the water , and upon the fallen thereof there were 38 drowned , and only 12 by Gods providence partly by swimming and other means of chests goat on shore , which was about a quarter of a mile from the wrack of the ship . The [ II ii . 202. ] master called George Goodley , and William Palmer his mate , both perished . M. Caesar also being captain and owner was likewise drowned : none of the officers were saved but the carpenter . 
 We twelve which the Lord had delivered from extreme danger of the Sea , at our coming ashore fell in a manner into as great distress . At our first coming on shore we all fell down on our knees , praying the Lord most humbly for his merciful goodness . Our prayers being done , we consulted together what course 
 I25 
 to take , seeing we were fallen into a desert place , & we traveled all that day until night , sometime one way and sometime another , and could find no kind of inhabitants ; only we saw where wild beasts had be , and places where there had be houses , which after we perceived to have be burned by the Portugals . So at night falling into certain groves of olive trees , we climbed up and sat in them to avoid the danger of lions and other wild beasts , whereof we saw many the next morning . The next day we traveled until three of the clock in the afternoon without any food , but water and wild date roots : then going over a mountain , we had sighed of Cape Espartel ; whereby we knew somewhat better which way to travel , and then we went forward until we came to and hedgerow made with great long canes ; we spied and looked over it , and beheld a number of men aswell horsemen as footmen , to the number of some five thousand in skirmish together with small shot and other weapons . And after consultation what we were best to do , we concluded to yield our selves unto them , being destitute of all means of resistance . So rising up we marched towards them , who espying us , forthwith some hundred of them with their javelins in their hands came running towards us as though they would have run us thorough : howbeit they only struck us flatling with their weapons , and said that we were Spaniards : and we told them that we were Englishmen ; which they would not believe yet . By and by the conflict being ended , and night approaching , the captain of the Moors , a man of some 56 years old , came himself unto us , and by his interpretor which spoke Italian , asked what we were , and from whence we came . One Thomas Henmer of our company which could speak Italian , declared unto him that we were merchants , and how by great misfortune our ship , merchandise , & the greatest part of our company were pitifully cast away upon their coast . But he void of humainity & all manhood , for all this , caused 126 
 THE CASTING AWAY OF THE ‘ TOBIE ’ a.d. 
 I593-his men to strip us out of our apparel even to our shirts to see what money and jewels we had about us : which when they had found to the valve of some 200 pounds in gold and pearls they gave us some of our apparel again , and bred and water only to comfort us . The next morning they carried us down to the shore where our ship was cast away , which was some sixteene miles from that place . In which journey they used us like their slaves , making us ( being extreme weak , ) to carry their stuff , and offering to beatrice us if we went not so fast as they . We asked them why they used us so , and they replied , that we were their captives : we said we were their friends , and that there was never Englishman captive to the king of Marocco . 
 So we came down to the ship , and lay there with them seven days , while they had got all the goods they could , and then they parted it among them . After the end of these seven days the captain appointed twenty of his men well armed , to bring us up into you country : and the first night we came to the side of a river called Alarach , where we lay on the grass all that night : so the next day we went over the river in a frigate of nine oars on a side , the river being in that place above a quarter of a mile broad : and that day we went to a town of thirty houses , called Totteon : there we lay foure days having nothing to feed on but bred and water ; and then we went to a town called Cassuri , and there we . were delivered by those twenty soldiers unto the Alcaide , which examined us what we were : and we told him . He gave us a good answer , and sent us to the Jewes house , where we lay seven days . In the mean while that we lay here , there were brought thither twenty Spaniards and twenty Frenchmen , which Spaniards were taken in a conflict on land , but the Frenchmen were by foul weather cast on land within the Straights about Cape de Gate , and so made captives . Thus at the seven days end we twelve Englishmen , the twelve French , 
 127 
 and the twenty Spaniards were all conducted towards Marocco with nine hundred soldiers , horsemen and fotmen , and in two days journey we came to the river of Fez , where we lodged all night , being provided of tents . The next day we went to a town called Salle , and lay without the town in tents . From thence we traveled almost and hundred miles without finding any town , but every night we came to fresh water , which was partly running water and sometime rain water . So we came at last within three miles of the city of Marocco , where we pitched our tents : and there we met with a carrier which did travel in the country for the English merchants : and by him we sent word unto them of our estate : and they returned the next day unto us a More , which brought us victuals , being at that instant very feeble and hungry ; and withal sent us a letter with pen , ink , and paper , willing us to write unto them what ship it was that was cast away , and how many and what men there were alive . For said they we would know with speed , for to morrow is the kings court : and therefore we would know , for that you should come into the city like captives . But for all that we were carried in as captives and with ropes about our necks as well English as the French and Spaniards . And so we were carried before the king : and when we came before him he did commit us all to ward , where we lay 15 days in close prison : and in the end we were cleared by the English Merchants to their great charges : for our deliverance cost them 700 ounces , every ounce in that country containing two shillings . And when we came out of prison we went to the Alfandica , where we continued eight weeks with the English merchants . At the end of which time being well appareled by the bounty of our merchants we were conveyed down by the space of eight days journey to S. Cruz , where the English ships road : where we took shipping about the 20 of March , two in the Anne Francis of London , and five more of us five 
 128 
 days after in the Expedition of London , and two more in a Flemish flyboat , and one in the Marry Edward also of London , other two of our number died in the country of the bloody-flux : the one at our first imprisonment at Marocco , whose name was George Hancock , and the other at S. Cruz , whose name was Robert Swancon , whose death was hastened by eating of roots and other unnatural things to slake their raging hunger in our travail , and by our hard and cold lodging in the open fields without tents . Thus of fiftie persons through the rashness of and unskilful Master ten only survived of us , and after a thousand misery's returned home poor , sick , and feeble into our country . 
 Richard Johnson . Thomas Henmore . 
 William Williams Carpenter . John Silvester . 
 John Durham . Thomas Whiting . 
 Abraham Rouse . William Church . 
 John Matthewes . John Fox . 
 