The large pension granted by K. Edward the 6. to Sebastian Cabota , constituting him grand 
 Pilot of England . 
 SEBASTIAN CABOT’S LARGE PENSION a.d. 
 ... x549 - 
 The same in English . 
 EDward the sixt by the grace of God , King of England , France and Ireland , defender of the faith , to all Christian people to whom these presents shall come , sends greeting . Know ye that we , in consideration of the good and acceptable service done , and to be done , unto us by our beloved servant Sebastian Cabota , of our speciali grace , certain knowledge , mere motion , and by the advice and counsel of our most honourable uncle Edward duke of Somerset governor of our person , and Protector of our kingdoms , dominions , and subject's , and of the rest of our Counsel , have given & granted , and by these presents do give and grant to the said Sebastian Cabota , a certain annuity , or yearly revenue of one hundreth , threescore & sixe pounds , thirteene shillings foure pence sterling , to have , enjoy , and yearly receive the foresaid annuity , or yearly revenue , to the foresaid Sebastian Cabota during his natural life , out of our Treasury at the receipt of our Exchequer at Westminster , at the hands of our Treasurers & paymasters , there remaining for the time being , at the feasts of the Annunciation of the blessed Virgin Marry , the Nativity of S. John Baptist , S. Michael the Archangel , & the Nativity of our Lord , to be paid by equal portions . 
 And further , of our more speciali grace , and by the advice and consent aforesaid we do give , and by these presents do grant unto the aforesaid Sebastian 
 157 
 Cabota , so many , and so great sums bf money as the said annuity or yearly revenue of and hundreth , threescore and sixe pounds , thirteene shillings 4. pence , doth amount and rise unto from the feast of S. Michael the Archangel last passed unto this present time , to be had and received by the aforesaid Sebastian Cabota , and his assigns out of our aforesaid Treasury , at the hands of our aforesaid Treasurers , and officers of our Exchequer of our free gift without account , or any thing else therefore to be yielded , paid , or made , to us , our heirs or successors , forasmuch as herein express mention is made to the contrary . 
 In witness whereof we have caused these our Letters to be made patents : Witness the King at Westminster the sixt day of Januarie , in the second year of his reign . The year of our Lord 1548. 
 