A discourse written by Sir Humphrey Gilbert Knight , to prove a passage by the Northwest to Cathaia , and the East Indies . 
 The Table of the matters in every Chapter of this discourse . 
 Capitulo 1. 
 O prove by authority a passage to be on the North side of America , to go to Cataia , China , and to the East India . 
 Capitulo 2. 
 To prove by reason a passage to be on the North side of America , to go to Cataia , Moluccas , etc. 
 Capitulo 3. 
 To prove by experience of sundry men's travails the opening of this Northwest passage , whereby good hope remains of the rest . 
 158 
 To prove by circumstance , that the Northwest passage hath be sailed throughout . 
 Capitulo 5. 
 To prove that such Indians as have be driven upon the coasts of Germanie came not thither by the Southeast , and Southwest , nor from any part of Afrike or America . 
 Capitulo 6. 
 To prove that the Indians aforenamed came not by the Northeast , and that there is no thorough passage navigable that way . 
 Capitulo 7. 
 To prove that these Indians came by the Northwest , which induceth a certainty of this passage by experience . 
 Capitulo 8. 
 What several reasons were alleged before the Queens Majesty , and certain Lords of her Highness privy Council , by M. Anth. Jenkinson a Gentleman of great travail and experience , to prove this passage by the Northeast , with my several answers then alleged to the same . 
 Capitulo 9. 
 How that this passage by the Northwest is more commodious for our traffic , then the other by the Northeast , if there were any such . 
 Capitulo 10. 
 What commodities would ensue , this passage being once discovered . 
 [ To prove 
 159 
 To prove by authority a passage to be on the Northside of America , to go to Cathaia , and the East India . 
 Chapter 1. 
 WHen I gave my self to the study of Geographic , after I had perused and diligently scanned the descriptions of Europe , Asia & Afrike , and conferred them with the Maps and Globes both Antique and Modern : I came in fine to the fourth part of the world , commonly called America , which by all descriptions I found to be and Hand environed round about with Sea , having on the Southside of it the frete or straight of Magellan , on the West side Mar deal Sur , which Sea runneth towards the North , separating it from the East parts of Asia , where the Dominions of the Cathaians are : On the East part our West Ocean , and on the North side the sea that severeth it from Groneland , thorough which Northern Seas the Passage lies , which I take now in hand to discover . 
 Plato in Timaeo , and in the Dialogue called Critias , discourseth of and incomparable great Hand then called Atlantis , being greater then all Affrike and Asia , which lay Westward from the Straights of Gibraltar , navigable round about : affirming also that the Princes of Atlantis did aswell enjoy the governance of all Affrike , and the most part of Europe , as of Atlantis it self . 
 Also to prove Platos opinion of this Hand , and the inhabiting of it in ancient time by them of Europe , to be of the more credit ; Marinseus Siculus in his Chronicle of Spaine , reporteth that there have be found by the Spaniards in the gold Mines of America , certain pieces of Money engraved with the Image of Augustus Caesar : which pieces were sent to the Pope for a testimony of the matter , by John Rufus Archbishop of Consentinum . 
 Moreover , this was not only thought of Plato , but by Marsilius Ficinus , and excellent Florentine Philosopher , 160 
 Crantor the Grecian , and Proclus , and Philo the famous Pnclut page . Jew ( as appears in his book De Mundo , and in the 24-Commentaries upon Plato ) to be overflown and swallowed up with water , by reason of a mighty earthquake , and streaming down of the heavenly Fludgates . The like whereof happened unto some part of Italy , when by the forciblenes of the Sea , called Superum , it cut off Sicilia from the Continent of Calabria , as appears in Justine , in the beginning of his fourth book . Also Justine Lib. there chanced the like in Zetland a part of Flanders . 
 And also the Cities of Pyrrha and Antissa , about Plinie . Meotis palus : and also the City Burys , in the Corynthian bosom , commonly called Sinus Corinthiacus , have be swallowed up with the Sea , and are not at this day to be discerned : By which accident America grew to be unknown of long time , unto us of the later ages , and was lately discovered again , by Americus Vespucius , in the year of our Lord 1497. which some say to have be first discovered by Christophorus Columbus a Genuois , Anno 1492. 
 The same calamity happened unto this Isle of Atlantis 600. and odd years before Plato his time , which some of the people of the Southeast parts of the world accounted as 9000. years : for the manner then was to reckon the Moon her Perjod of the Zodiak for a year , which is our usual month , depending a Luminari minori . 
 So that in these our days there can no other main or Island be found or judged to be parcel of this Atlantis , then those Western Islands , which bear now the name of America : countervailing thereby the name of Atlantis , in the knowledge of our age . 
 Then , if when no part of the said Atlantis was oppressed by water , and earthquake , the coasts round about the same were navigable : a far greater hope now remains of the same by the Northwest , seeing the most part of it was ( since that time ) swallowed up with A minore ad water , which could not utterly take away the old deeps mai^-and channels , but rather , be and occasion of the enlarging 
 VII 161 l 
 of the old , and also and enforcing of a great many new : why then should we now doubt of our Northwest passage and navigation from England to India ? etc. seeing that Atlantis now called America , was ever known to be and Island , and in those days navigable round about , which by access of more water could not be diminished . 
 Also Aristotle in his book De Mundo , and the learned Germane Simon Gryneus in his annotations upon the same , says that the whole earth ( meaning thereby , as manifestly does appear , Asia , Africk , and Europe , being all the countries' then known ) is but one Island , compassed about with the reach of the sea Atlantine : which likewise proveth America to be and Island , and in no part adjoining to Asia , or the rest . 
 Strabo lib . 15. Also many ancient writers , as Strabo and others , called both the Ocean sea , ( which lies East of India ) Atlanticum pelagus , and that sea also on the West coasts of Spaine and Africk , Mare Atlanticum : the distance between the two coasts is almost half the compass of the earth . 
 So that it is incredible , as by Plato appears manifestly , that the East Indian Sea had the name Atlanticum pelagus of the mountain Atlas in Afrik , or yet the sea adjoining to Africk , had the name Oceanus Atlanticus Valerius of the same mountain : but that those seas and the Anselmus in mOuntaine Atlas were so called of this great Island rum Orin Atlantis , and that the one and the other had their names dpium . fol. 6. tor a memorial of the mighty prince Atlas , sometime king Gen. 9. 10. thereof , who was Japhet youngest son to Noah , in whose time the whole earth was divided between the three brothers , Sem , Cam , and Japhet . 
 Wherefore I am of opinion that America by the Northwest will be found favourable to this our enterprise , and am the rather emboldened to believe the same , for that I find it not only confirmed by Plato , Aristotle , and other ancient Philosophers : but also by all the best [ II modern Geographers , as Gemma Frisius , Munsterus , Appianus , Hunterus , Gastaldus , Guyccardinus , Michael 162 
 Tramasinus , Franciscus Demongenitus , Bernardus Puteanus , Andreas Vavasor , Tramontanus , Petrus Martyr , and also Ortelius , who does coast out in his general Map set out Anno 1569 , all the countries' and Capes , on the Northwest side of America , from Hochelaga to Cape de Paramantia : describing likewise the sea coasts of Cataia and Gronland , towards any part of America , making both Gronland and America , Islands disjoined by a great sea , from any part of Asia . 
 All which learned men and painful travellers have affirmed with one consent and voice , that America was and Island : and that there lies a great Sea between it , Cataia , and Grondland , by the which any man of our country , that will give the attempt , may with small danger pass to Cataia , the Moluccas , India , and all other places in the East , in much shorter time , then either the Spaniard , or Portugal doth , or may do , from the nearest part of any of their countries' within Europe . 
 What moved these learned men to affirm thus much , wh I know not , or to what end so many and sundry travellers of both ages have allowed the same : But I reverend conjecture that they would never have so constantly opinion of affirmed , or notified their opinions therein to the world , worthy men . if they had not had great good cause , and many probable reasons , to have led them thereunto . 
 Now lest you should make small account of ancient writers or of their experiences which traveled long before our times , reckoning their authority among fables of no importance : I have for the better assurance of those proofs , set down some part of a discourse , written in the Saxon tongue , and translated into English by M. Nowel servant to Sir William Cecil , lord Burleigh , and lord high treasurer of England , wherein there is described a Navigation , which one Ochther made , in the time of A Navigation king Alfred , king of Westsaxe Anno 871. the words of ofoneQchther which discourse were these : He sailed right North , having always the desert land on the Starborde , and on the Larboard the main sea , continuing his course , until 
 163 
 A perfect description ofour Moscovia voyage - 
 By Sir Hugh Willouglibie knight , Chancellor and Borough . 
 he perceived that the coast bowed directly towards the East , or else the Sea opened into the land he could not tell how far , where he was compelled to stay until he had a western wind , or somewhat upon the North , and sailed thence directly East alongst the coast , so far as he was able in foure days , where he was again enforced to tarry until he had a North wind , because the coast there bowed directly towards the South , or at least opened he knew not how far into the land , so that he sailed thence along the coast continually full South , so far as he could travel in the space of five days , where he discovered a mighty river , which opened far into the land , and in the entry of this river he turned back again . 
 Whereby it appears that he went the very same way , that we now do yearly trade by S. Nicholas into Mos-covia , which way no man in our age knew for certainty to be by sea , until it was since discovered by our English men , in the time of King Edward the sixt ; but thought before that time that Groneland had joined to Normoria , Byarmia , etc. and therefore was accounted a new discovery , being nothing so indeed , as by this discourse of Ochther it appears . 
 Nevertheless if any man should have taken this voyage in hand by the encouragement of this only author , he should have be thought but simple : considering that this Navigation was written so many years past , in so barbarous a tongue by one only obscure author , and yet we in these our days find by our own experiences his former reports to be true . 
 How much more then ought we to believe this passage to Cataia to be , being verified by the opinions of all the best , both Antique , and Modern Geographers , and plainly set out in the best and most allowed Maps , Charts , Globes , Cosmographical tables & discourses of this our age , and by the rest not denied , but left as a matter doubtful . 
 164 
 To prove by reason , a passage to be on the Northside of America , to go to Cataia , etc. 
 Chap. 3. 
 First , all seas are maintained by the abundance of Experimented water , so that the nearer the end any River , Bay 
 or Haven is , the shallower it waxes , ( although by some ers ' accidentali bar , it is sometime found otherwise ) But the farther you sail West from Island towards the place , where this fret is thought to be , the more deep are the seas : which gives us good hope of continuance of the same Sea with Mar deal Sur , by some fret that lies between America , Groneland and Cataia . 
 2 Also if that America were not and Island , but a part of you continent adjoining to Asia , either the people which inhabit Mangia , Anian , & Quinzay , etc. being borderers upon it , would before this time have made some road into it , hoping to have found some like commodities to their own . 
 3 Or else the Scythians and Tartarians ( which often times heretofore have sought far and near for new seats , driven thereunto through the necessity of their Need makes cold and miserable countries' ) would in all this time have the old we t0 found the way to America , and entered the same , had the ’ passages be never so strait or difficult ; the country being so temperate , pleasant and fruitful , in comparison of their own . But there was never any such people found there by any of the Spaniards , Portugals , or Frenchmen , who first discovered the Inland of that country : which Spaniards , or Frenchmen must then of necessity have seen some one civil man in America , considering how full of civil people Asia is : But they never saw so much as one token or sign , that ever any man of the known part of the world had be there . 
 4 Furthermore it is to be thought , that if by reason of mountains , or other craggy places , the people neither 
 165 
 Motum fluxus y refluxus . 
 3 Motum circularem . 
 Ad coeli motum elementa omnia ( excepta terra ) moventur . 
 of Cataia or Tartarie could enter the country of America , or they of America have entered Asia if it were so joined : yet some one savage or wandering beast would in so many years have passed into it : but there hath not any time be found any of the beasts proper to Cataia , or Tartarie etc. in America : nor of those proper to America , in Tartarie , Cataia , etc. or any part of Asia . Which thing proves America , not only to be one Island , and in no part adjoining to Asia : But also that the people of those Countries' , have not had any traffic with each other . 
 5 Moreover at the least some one of those painful travellers , which of purpose have passed the confines of both countries' , with intent only to discover , would as it is most likely have gone from the one to the other : if there had be any piece of land , or Isthmos , to have joined them together , or else have declared some cause to the contrary . 
 6 But neither Paulus Venetus , who lived and dwelled a long time in Cataia , ever came into America , and yet was at the sea coasts of Mangia , over against it where he was embarked , and performed a great Navigation along those seas : Neither yet Verarzanus , or Franci scus Vasques de Coronado , who traveled the North part of America by land , ever found entry from thence by land to Cataia , or any part of Asia . 
 7 Also it appears to be and Island , insomuch as the Sea runneth by nature circularly from the East to the West , following the diurnal motion of Primum Mobile , which carrieth with it all inferior bodies movable , aswell celestial as elemental : which motion of the waters is most evidently seen in the Sea , which lies on the Southside of Afrike , where the current that runneth from the East to the West is so strong ( by reason of such motion ) that the Portugals in their voyages Eastward to Calicut , in passing by Cap. de buona Speranda are enforced to make diverse courses , the current there being so swift as it striketh from thence all along Westward 
 166 
 1576. upon the fret of Magellan , being distant from thence , near the fourth part of the longitude of the earth : and not having free passage and entrance thorough the fret towards the West , by reason of the narrowness of the said Strait of Magellan , it runneth to salve this wrong ( Nature not yielding to accidentali restraints ) all along the Eastern coasts of America , Northwards so far as Cape Fredo , being the farthest known place of the same continent towards the North : which is about 4800 leagues , reckoning therewithal ! the trending of the land . 
 8 So that this current being continually maintained with such force , as Jaques Cartier affirmeth it to be , who met with the same being at Baccalaos , as he sailed along the coasts of America , then either it must of necessity have way to pass from Cape Fredo , thorough this fret , Westward towards Cataia , being known to come so far , only to salve his former wrongs , by the authority before nam : or else it must needs strike over , upon the coast of Island , Norway , Finmarke , and Lappia , ( which are East from the said place about 360 leagues ) with greater force then it did from Cape de Posita causa , buona Speranda , upon the fret of Magellan , or from effec-the fret of Magellan to Cape Fredo , upon which coasts ' Jaques Cartier met with the same , considering the shortness of the Cut from the said Cape Fredo , to Island , Lappia , etc. And so the cause Efficient remaining , it would have continually followed along our coasts , through the narrow seas , which it does not , but is digested about the North of Labrador , by some through passage there thorough this fret . 
 The like course of the water in some respect happeneth in the Mediterrane sea ( as affirmeth Conterenus ) whereas Conterenus . the current which comes from Tanais , & Pontus Euxinus , running along all the coasts of Greece , Italy , France , and Spaine , and not finding sufficient way out through Gibraltar , by means of the straitness of the fret it runneth back again along the coasts of Barbary , by Alexandria , Natolia , etc. 
 167 
 And objection answered . The sea does evermore per-fbrme this circular motion , either in Suprema , or concava superficie aqua . 
 The ice set westward every year from Island . Auth. Jona Arngrimo . 
 It may ( peradventure ) be thought that this course of the sea does sometime surcease , and thereby impugn this principle , because it is not discerned all along the coast of America , in such sort as Jaques Cartier found it : Whereunto I answer this : that albeit , in every part of the Coast of America , or elsewhere this current is not sensibly perceived , yet it hath evermore such like motion , either in the uppermost or nethermost part of the sea : as it may be proved true , if you sink a sail by a couple of ropes , near the ground , fastening to the nethermost corners two gun chambers or other weights : by the driving whereof you shall plainly perceive , the course of the water , and current , running with such course in the bottom . 
 By the like experiment , you may find the ordinary motion of the sea , in the Ocean : how far soever you be ofF the land . 
 9 Also there comes another current from out the Northeast from the Scythian Sea ( as M. Jenkinson a man of rare virtue , great travail and experience , told me ) which runneth Westward towards Labrador , as the other did , which comes from the South : so that both these currents , must have way thorough this our fret , or else encounter together and run contrary courses , in one line , but no such conflicts of streams , or contrary courses are found about any part of Labrodor , or Terra nova , as witness our yearly fishers , and other sailors that way , but is there digested , as aforesaid , and found by experience of Barnard de la Torre , to fallen into Mar deal Sur. 
 10 Furthermore , the current in the great Ocean , could not have been maintained to run continually one way , from the beginning of the world unto this day , had there not been some thorough passage by the fret aforesaid , and so by circular motion be brought again to maintain it self : For the Tides and courses of the sea are maintained by their interchangeable motions : as fresh rivers are by springs , by ebbing and flowing , by rarefaction and condensation . 
 168 
 So that it rests not possible ( so far as my simple reason can comprehend ) that this perpetuali current can by any means be maintained , but only by continual reaccess of the same water , which passes thorough the fret , and is brought about thither again , by such circular motion as aforesaid . And the certain falling thereof by this fret into Mar deal Sur is proved by the testimony and experience , of Bernard de la Torre , who was sent from P. de la Natividad to the Moluccae , Anno domini 1542. by commandment of Anthony Mendoza , then Viceroy of Nova Hispania , which Bernard sailed 750. Leagues , on the Northside of the Aequator , and there met with a current , which came from the Northeast the which drove him back again to Tidore . 
 Wherefore , this current being proved to come from C. de buona Speranda to the fret of Magellan , and wanting sufficient entrance there , by narrowness of the strait , is by the necessity of nature's force , brought to Terra de Labrador , where Jaques Cartier met the same , and thence certainly known , not to strike over upon Island , Lappia , etc. and found by Bernard de la Torre in Mar del Sur , on the backside of America : therefore this current ( having none other passage ) must of necessity , fallen out thorough this our fret into Mar deal Sur , and so trending by the Moluccae , China , and C. de buona Speranda , maintaineth it self by circular motion , which is all one in nature , with Motus ab Orient in Occidentem . 
 A.D. 
 1576. 
 The flowing m occasioned by reason that the heat of the moon boileth , and makes the water thin by way of rarefaction . And experience to prove the falling of this current into Mar deal Sur. 
 So that it seems , we have now more occasion to doubt of our return , then whither there be a passage that way , yea or no : which doubt , hereafter shall be sufficiently removed . Wherefore , in mine opinion , reason it self , grounded upon experience , assureth us of this passage , if there were nothing else to put us in hope thereof . But least these might not suffice , I have added in this chapter following , some further proof hereof , by the experience of such as have passed some part of this discovery : and in the next adjoining to that the authority 169 
 of those , which have sailed wholly , thorough every part thereof . 
 To prove by experience of sundry men's travels , the opening of some part of this Northwest passage : whereby good hope remains of the rest . 
 Alcatrani be Pellicanes . 
 Baros lib . 9. Of his first Decas cap . 1. 
 Chap. 3. 
 PAulus Venetus , who dwelled many years in Cataia , affirmed that he sailed 1500 miles upon the coasts of Mangia , and Anian , towards the Northeast : always finding the Seas open before him , not only as far as he went , but also as far as he could discern . 
 2 Also Franciscus Vasques de Coronado passing from Mexico by Cevola , through the country of Quivira , to Siera Nevada , found there a great sea , where were certain ships laden with Merchandise , carrying on their prowess the pictures of certain birds called Alcatrarzi , part whereof were made of gold , and part of silver , who signified by signs , that they were thirty days coming thither : which likewise proves America by experience to be disjoined from Cataia , on that part by a great Sea , because they could not come from any part of America , as Natives thereof : for that , so far as is discovered , there hath not be found there any one Ship of that country . 
 3 In like manner , John Baros testifieth that the Cosmographers of China ( where he himself had be ) affirm that the Sea coast trendeth from thence Northeast , to 50 degrees of Septentrional latitude , being the furthest part that way which the Portugals had then knowledge of : And that the said Cosmographers knew no cause to the contrary , but that it might continue further . 
 By whose experiences America is proved to be separate from those parts of Asia , directly against the same . And not contented with the judgements of these learned men only , I have searched what might be further said for the confirmation hereof . 
 170 
 4 And I found that Franciscus Lopez de Gomara affirmeth America to be and Island , and likewise Gronland : and that Gronland is distant from Lappia 40 leagues , and from Terra de Labrador , 50. 
 5 Moreover , Alvarus Nunnius a Spaniard , and learned Cosmographer , and Jacobus Cartier , who made two voyages into those parts , and sailed 900 miles upon the Northeast coasts of America do in part confirm the same . 
 6 Likewise Hieronymus Fracastorius , a learned Italian , and traveler in the North parts of the same land . 
 7 Also Jaques Cartier having done the like , herd say at Hochelaga in Nova Francia , how that there was a great Sea at Saguinay , whereof the end was not known : which they presupposed to be the passage to Cataia . 
 Furthermore , Sebastian Cabota by his personal ex - Written in the perience and travel hath set forth , and described this discourses of passage in his Charts , which are yet to be seen in the 1 avl^a wn ' Queen's Majesties privy Gallery at Whitehall , who was sent to make this discovery by king Henrie the seventh , and entered the same fret : affirming that he sailed very far Westward , with a quarter of the North , on the Northside of Terra de Labrador the eleventh of June , until he came to the Septentrionali latitude of 67 degrees and a half , and finding the Seas still open , said , that he might , & would have gone to Cataia , if the mutiny of the Master and Mariners had not be . 
 Now as these men's experience hath proved some part of this passage : so the chapter following shall put you in full assurance of the rest , by their experiences which have passed through every part thereof . 
 [ To prove 
 171 
 2 Auditus . 
 3 Olfactus . 
 4 Gustus . 
 5 Tactus . Singularia sensu , universalia vero mente percipiuntur . 
 Lib. i.cap . SS . 
 [ III . 17. J 
 Page - S^o . 
 To prove by circumstance that the Northwest passage hath be sailed throughout . 
 Chap. 4. 
 THe diversity between bruit beasts and men , or between the wise and the simple is , that the one judgeth by sense only , and gathereth no surety of any thing that he hath not seen , felt , herd , tasted , or smelled : And the other not so only , but also finds the certainty of things by reason , before they happen to be tried . Wherefore I have added proofs of both sorts , that the one and the other might thereby be satisfied . 
 1 First , as Gemma Frisius reciteth , there went from Europe three brothers through this passage : whereof it took the name of Fretum trium fratrum . 
 2 Also Plinie affirmeth out of Cornelius Nepos , ( who wrote 57 years before Christ ) that there were certain Indians driven by tempest , upon the coast of Germanie which were presented by the king of Sum evia , unto Quintus Metellus Celer , the Proconsuli of France . 
 3 And Plinie upon the same say , that it is no marvel though there be Sea by the North , where there is such abundance of moisture : which argue that he doubted not of a navigable passage that way , through which those Indians came . 
 4 And for the better proof that the same authority of Cornelius Nepos is not by me wrested , to prove my opinion of thee Northwest passage : you shall find the same affirmed more plainly in that behalf , by the excellent Geographer Dominicus Marius Niger , who shows how many ways the Indian sea stretcheth it self , making in that place recital of certain Indians , that were likewise driven through the North Seas from India , upon the coasts of Germany , by great tempest , as they were sailing in trade of merchandise . 
 172 
 5 Also while Frederic Barbarossa reigned Emperor , Avouched by Anno Do. 1160. there came certain other Indians upon FranciscusLo-the coast of Germanie . pesdeGomara 
 r TO , • i . r ~ tn his histone 
 oh . Likewise Otnon in the stone of the Gothes affirmeth , of India , lib . that in the time of the Germane Emperors , there were i . cap . io . also certain Indians cast by force of weather , upon the coast of the said country , which foresaid Indians could not possibly have come by the Southeast , Southwest , nor from any part of Afrike or America , nor yet by the Northeast : therefore they came of necessity by this our Northwest passage . 
 To prove that these Indians aforenamed came not by the Southeast , Southwest , nor from any other part of Afrike , or America . 
 Cap. 5. 
 First , they could not come from the Southeast by the Cape de bona Speranda , because the roughness of the Seas there is such ( occasioned by the currents and great winds in that part ) that the greatest Armadas the king of Portugal hath , cannot without great difficulty pass that way , much less then a Canoa of India could live in those outrageous seas without shipwreck ( being a vessel of very small burden ) and have conducted themselves to the place aforesaid , being men unexpert in the Art of navigation . 
 2 Also , it appears plainly that they were not able to come from alongst the coast of Afrike aforesaid , to those parts of Europe , because the winds do ( for the most part ) blow there Easterly off from the shore , and the current running that way in like sort , should have driven them Westward upon some part of America : for such winds and tides could never have led them from thence to the said place where they were found , nor yet could they have come from any of the countries aforesaid , keeping the seas always , without skilful mariners 
 173 
 This fift reason by later experience is proved utterly untrue . 
 That the Indians could not be natives either of Africa , or of America . 
 to have conducted them such like courses as were necessary to perform such a voyage . 
 3 Presupposing also , if they had be driven to the West ( as they must have be , coming that way ) then they should have perished , wanting supply of victuals , not having any place ( once leaving the coast of Afrike ) until they came to America , nor from America until they arrived upon some part of Europe , or the Islands adjoining to it , to have refreshed themselves . 
 4 Also , if ( notwithstanding such impossibilities ) they might have recovered Germanie by coming from India by the Southeast , yet must they without all doubt have stricken upon some other part of Europe before their arrival there , as the Isles of the Azores , Portugal , Spaine , France , England , Ireland , etc. which if they had done , it is not credible that they should or would have departed undiscovered of the inhabitants : but there was never found in those days any such ship or men but only upon the coasts of Germanie , where they have be sundry times and in sundry ages cast aland : neither is it like that they would have committed themselves again to sea , if they had so arrived , not knowing where they were , nor whither to have gone . 
 5 And by the Southwest it is unpossible , because the current aforesaid which comes from the East , striketh with such force upon the fret of Magellan , and falls with such swiftness and fury into Mar deal Zur , that hardly any ship ( but not possibly a Canoa , with such unskilful mariners ) can come into our Western Ocean through that fret , from the West seas of America , as Magellans experience hath partly taught us . 
 6 And further , to prove that these people so arriving upon the coast of Germany , were Indians , & not in-habiters of any part either of Africa or America , it is manifest , because the natives both of Africa and America neither had , or have at this day ( as is reported ) other kind of boats then such as do bear neither masts nor sails , ( except only upon the coasts of Barbarie and the 
 174 
 Turkes ships ) but do carry themselves from place to place near the shore by the over only . 
 To prove that those Indians came not by the Northeast , and that there is no thorough navigable passage that way . 
 Cap. 6. 
 IT is likely that there should be no thorough passage by the Northeast , whereby to go round about the world , because all Seas ( as aforesaid ) are maintained by the abundance of water , waxing more shallow and shelffie towards the end , as we find it doth by experience in Mare Glaciali , towards the East , which breeds small hope of any great continuance of that sea , to be navigable towards the East , sufficient to sail thereby round about the world . 
 2 Also , it stands scarcely with reason , that the Indians dwelling under Torrida Zona , could endure the injury of the cold air , about the Septentrional latitude of 80. degrees , under which elevation the passage by the Northeast cannot be ( as the often experience had of all the South parts of it shows ) seeing that some of the inhabitants of this cold climate ( whose Summer is to them and extreme Winter ) have be stroken to death with the cold damps of the air about 72 degrees , by and accidental mishap , and yet the air in such like Elevation is always cold , and too cold for such as the Indians are . 
 3 Furthermore , the piercing cold of the gross thick air so near the Pole will so stiffen and fur the sails and ship tackling , that no mariner can either hoist or strike them ( as our experience far nearer the South , then this passage is presupposed to be , hath taught us ) without the use whereof no voyage can be performed . 
 4 Also , the air is so darkened with continual ! mists and fogs so near the Pole , that no man can well see , either to guide his ship , or direct his course . 
 5 Also the compass at such elevation does very 
 175 
 Quicquid ■ natural loco privatur , quam citissime corrumpitur . 
 Qualls causa talis effectus . 
 Quicquid corrumpitur a contrario corrumpitur . 
 Omne simile gignit sui simile . 
 suddenly vary , which things must of force have be their destructions , although they had be men of much more skill then the Indians are . 
 6 Moreover , all bays , gulfs , and rivers do receive their increase upon the flood , sensibly to be discerned on the one side of the shore or the other , as many ways as they be open to any main sea , as Mare Mediterraneum , Mare Rubrum , Sinus Persicus , Sinus Bodicus , Thamesis , and all other known havens or rivers in any part of the world , and each of them opening but on one part to the main sea , do likewise receive their increase upon the flood the same way , and none other , which Mare Glaciale doth , only by the West ; as M. Jenkinson affirmed unto me : and therefore it follows that this Northeast sea , receiving increase but only from the West , cannot possibly open to the main Ocean by the East . 
 7 Moreover , the farther you pass into any sea towards the end of it , on that part which is shut up from the main sea ( as in all those above mentioned ) the less and less the tides rise and fallen . The like whereof also happeneth in Mare Glaciale , which proves but small continuance of that Sea towards the East . 
 8 Also , the further ye go towards the East in Mare Glaciale , the less salt the water is : which could not happen , if it were open to the salt Sea towards the East , as it is to the West only , seeing Every thing naturally engendereth his like : and then must it be like salt throughout , as all the seas are , in such like climate and elevation . 
 And therefore it seems that this Northeast sea is maintained by the river Ob , and such like freshets , as Mare Goticum , and Mare Mediterraneum , in the uppermost parts thereof by the rivers Nilus , Danubius , Neper , Tanais , etc. 
 9 Furthermore , if there were any such sea at that elevation , of like it should be always frozen throughout ( there being no tides to hinder it ) because the extreme coldness of the air being in the uppermost part , and the extreme coldness of the earth in the bottom , the sea 176 
 SIR HUMPHREY GILBERT’S MAP OF THE WORLD , a.d. 1576 
 The material originally positioned here is too large for reproduction in this reissue . A PDF can be downloaded from the web address given on page iv 
 Downlo^dedfOmthttpsV / www . cambridge.org / core^U^ Library , on 30 Aug 2021 at 14 : 06 : 09 , subject to 
 there being but of small depth , whereby the one accidentali coldness does meet with the other , and the Sun not having his reflection so near the Pole , but at very blunt angels , it can never be dissolved after it is frozen , notwithstanding the great length of their day : for that the sun hath no heat at all in his light or beams , but proceeding only by and accidentali reflection , which there wants in effect . 
 io And yet if the Sun were of sufficient force in that elevation , to prevail against this ice , yet must it be broken before it can be dissolved , which cannot be but through the long continuance of the sun above their Horizon , and by that time the Summer would be so far spent , and so great darkness and cold ensue , that no man could be able to endure so cold , dark , and discomfortable a navigation , if it were possible for him then , and there to live . 
 11 Further , the ice being once broken , it must of force so drive with the winds and tides , that no ship can sail in those seas , seeing our Fishers of Island , and the New found land , are subject to danger through the great Islands of Ice which fleet in the Seas ( to the sailors great danger ) far to the South of that presupposed passage . 
 12 And it cannot be that this Northeast passage should be any nearer the South , then before recited , for then it should cut off Ciremissi , & Turbi Tartari , with Uzesucani , Chisani , and others from the Continent of Asia , which are known to be adjoining to Scythia , Tartaria , etc. with the other part of the same Continent . 
 And if there were any thorough passage by the Northeast , yet were it to small end and purpose for our traffic , because no ship of great burden can Navigate in so shallow a Sea : and ships of small burden [ III . 19. J are very unfit 8c unprofitable , especially towards the blustering North , to perform such a voyage . 
 [ To prove 
 VII 177 M 
 To prove that the Indians aforenamed , came only by the Northwest , which induceth a certainty of our passage by experience . 
 Cap. 7. 
 IT is as likely that they came by the Northwest , as it is unlikely that they should come either by the Southeast , Southwest , Northeast , or from any other part of Africa or America , and therefore this Northwest passage having be already so many ways proved , by disproving of the others , etc. I shall the less need in this place , to use many words otherwise then to conclude in this sort , That they came only by the Northwest from England , having these many reasons to lead me thereunto . 
 1 First , the one half of the winds of the compass might bring them by the Northwest , bearing always between two sheats , with which kind of sailing the Indians are only acquainted , not having any use of a bow line , or quarter wind , without the which no ship can possibly come either by the Southeast , Southwest or Northeast , having so many sundry Capes to double , whereunto are required such change and shift of winds . True , both in 2 And it seems likely that they should come by oblique Northwest , because the coast whereon they were oho indentis driven , lay East from this our passage , And all winds ex diametro do naturally drive a ship to and opposite point from spirantibus , whence it blows , not being otherwise guided by Art , which the Indians do utterly want , & therefore it seems that they came directly through this our fret , which they might do with one wind . 
 3 For if they had come by the Cape de buona Speranda , then must they ( as aforesaid ) have fallen upon the South parts of America . 
 4 And if by the fret of Magellan , then upon the coasts of Afrike , Spaine , Portugall , France , Ireland or England . 
 178 
 5 And if by the Northeast , then upon the coasts of Ceremissi , Tartarii , Lappia , Island , Terra de Labrador , etc. and upon these coasts ( as aforesaid ) they have never be found . 
 So that by all likelihood they could never have come without shipwreck upon the coasts of Germanie , if they had first stricken upon the coasts of so many countries , wanting both Art and shipping to make orderly discovery , and altogether ignorant both in the Art of Navigation , and also of the Rocks , Flats , Sands or Havens of those parts of the world , which in most of these places are plentiful ! . 
 6 And further it seems very likely , that the inhabitants of the most part of those countries , by which they must have come any other way beside by the Northwest , being for the most part Anthropophagi , or men eaters , would have devoured them , slain them , or ( at the least wise ) kept them as wonders for the gaze . 
 So that it plainly appears that those Indians ( which as you have herd in sundry ages were driven by tempest upon the shore of Germanie ) came only through our Northwest passage . 
 7 Moreover , the passage is certainly proved by a Navigation that a Portugall made , who passed through this fret , giving name to a Promontory far within the same , calling it after his own name , Promontorium Corterialis , near adjoining unto Polisacus fluvius . 
 8 Also one Scolmus a Dane entered and passed a great part thereof . 
 9 Also there was one Salvaterra , a Gentleman of Victoria in Spaine , that came by chance out of the West Indias into Ireland , Anno 1568. who affirmed thee Northwest passage from us to Cataia , constantly to be believed in America navigable . And further said in the presence of sir Henry Sidney ( then lord Deputie of Ireland ) in my hearing , that a Friar of Mexico , called Andrew Urdaneta , more then eight years before 
 179 
 his then coming into Ireland , told him there , that he came from Mar deal Sur into Germany through this Northwest passage , & showed Salvaterra ( at that time being then with him in Mexico ) a Sea Carded made by his own experience and travel in that voyage , wherein was plainly set down and described this Northwest passage , agreeing in all points with Ortelius map . 
 And further , this Friar told the king of Portugall ( as he returned by that country homeward ) that there was ( of certainty ) such a passage Northwest from England , and that he meant to publish the same : which done , the king most earnestly desired him not in any wise to disclose or make the passage known to any nation : For that ( said the king ) if England had know-^the kin^of kdge and experience thereof , it would greatly hinder Portugall , to both the king of Spaine and me . This Friar ( as Sal-Andro Urda - vaterra reported ) was the greatest Discoverer by sea , neta a Friar , that hath be in our age . Also Salvaterra being touching the nerswaded of this passage by the friar Urdaneta , and this Northwest the common opinion of the Spaniards inhabiting 
 passage from America , offered most willingly to accompany me in England to this Discovery , which of like he would not have done Cataia . if he stoOd in doubt thereof . 
 And now as these modern experiences cannot be impugned , so , lest it might be objected that these things ( gathered out of ancient writers , which wrote so many years past ) might serve little to prove this And objection , passage by the North of America , because both America and India were to them then utterly unknown : to Aristotle lib . remove this doubt , let this suffice : That Aristotle ( who was 300. years before Christ ) nam Mare Indi-5 cum . Also Berosus ( who lived 330 years before Christ ) hath these words , Ganges in India . Also in the first chapter of Hester be these words , In the days of Assuerus which ruled from India to Aethiopia , which Assuerus lived 580 years before Christ . Also Quintus Curtius ( where he speaks of the conquests of Alexander ) mentioneth India . Also , Arianus , Philostratus , 180 
 and Sidrach in his discourses of the wars of the king of Bactria , and of Garaab , who had the most part of India under his government . All which assureth us , that both India and Indians were known in those days . 
 These things considered , we may ( in my opinion ) not only assure our selves of this passage by the Northwest , but also that it is navigable both to come and go , as hath be proved in part and in all , by the experience of diverse , as Sebastian Cabota , Corterialis , the three brothers above nam , the Indians , and Urdaneta the Friar of Mexico , etc. 
 And yet notwithstanding all this , there be some that have a better hope of this passage to Cataia by the Northeast then by the West , whose reasons with my several answers ensue in the chapter following . 
 Certain reasons alleged for the proving of a passage by the Northeast , before the Queens Majesty , and certain Lords of the Counsel , by Master Anthonie Jenkinson , with my several answers then used to the same . 
 Cap. 8. 
 BEcause you may understand as well those things alleged against me , as what does serve for my purpose , I have here added the reasons of Master Anthony Jenkinson a worthy gentleman , and a great traveller , who conceived a better hope of the passage to Cataia from us , to be by the Northeast , then by the Northwest . 
 He first said that he thought not to the contrary , The North-but that there was a passage by the Northwest , accord - west passage ing to mine opinion : but assured he was , that there assented unt0 ' might be found a navigable passage by the Northeast from England , to go to all the East parts of the world , which he endeavoured to prove three ways . 
 The first was that he herd a Fisherman of Tartaria The first say in hunting the Morce , that he sailed very far reas°n . 
 181 
 Visus nonnun-quam fallitur in suo objecto . 
 The second reason or allegation . 
 The answer or resolution . 
 towards the Southeast , finding no end of the Sea : whereby he hoped a thorough passage to be that way . 
 Whereunto I answered , that the Tartarians were a barbarous people , and utterly ignorant in the Art of Navigation , not knowing the use of the Sea Carded , Compass or Star , which he confessed to be true : and therefore they could not ( said I ) certainly know the Southeast from the Northeast , in a wide sea , and a place unknown from the sighed of the land . 
 Or if he sailed any thing near the shore , yet he ( being ignorant ) might be deceived by the doubling of many points and Capes , and by the trending of the land , albeit he kept continually alongst the shore . 
 And further , it might be that the poor Fisherman through simplicity thought that there was nothing that way but sea , because he saw no land : which proof ( under correction ) gives small assurance of a Navigable sea by the Northeast , to go round about the world . For that he judged by the eye only , seeing we in this our clear air do account twentie miles a ken at Sea. 
 His second reason is , that there was and Unicorns horn found upon the coast of Tartaria , which could not come ( said he ) thither " by any other means then with the tides , through some fret in the Northeast of Mare Glaciale , there being no Unicorn in any part of Asia , saving in India and Cataia : which reason ( in my simple judgement ) forceth as little . 
 First , it is doubtful whither those barbarous Tartarians do know and Unicorns horn , yea , or no : and if it were one , yet it is not credible that the Sea could have driven it so far , being of such nature that it will not swim . 
 Also the tides running too and from , would have driven it as far back with the ebb , as it brought it forward with the flood . 
 There is also a beast called Asinus Indicus ( whose horn most like it was ) which hath but one horn like and Unicorn in his forehead , whereof there is great 182 
 ... isib ' plenty in all the North parts thereunto adjoining , as in Lappia , Noruegia , Finmarke , etc. as Jacobus Zieglerus writeth in his historic of Scondia . 
 And as Albertus sayeth , there is a fish which hath but one horn in his forehead like to and Unicorn , and therefore it seems very doubtful both from whence it came , and whither it were and Unicorns horn , yea , or no . 
 His third and last reason was , that there came a con - The third and tinuall stream or current through Mare Glaciale , of such swiftness ( as a Colmax told him ) that if you cast any ’ thing therein , it would presently be carried out of sighed towards the West . 
 Whereunto I answered , that there does the like from The answer or Maeotis Palus , by Pontus Euxinus , Sinus Bosphorus , resolution-and along the coast of Graecia , etc. As it is affirmed by Contarenus , and diverse others that have had experience of the same : and yet that Sea lies not open to any main Sea that way , but is maintained by freshets as by Tanais , Danubius , etc. 
 In like manner is this current in Mare Glaciale increased and maintained by the Dwina , the river Ob , etc. 
 Now as I have here briefly recited the reasons alleged , to prove a passage to Cataia by the Northeast , with my several answers thereunto : so will I leave it to your judgement , to hope or despair of either at your pleasure . 
 How that the passage by the Northwest is more commodious for our traffic , then the other by the East , if there were any such . 
 Cap. 9. 
 First , by the Northeast ( if your winds do not give you a marvelous speedy & lucky passage ) you are in danger ( being so near the Pole ) to be benighted almost the one half of the year , and what danger that were , to live so long comfortless , void of light , ( if the 183 
 cold killed you not ) each man of reason or understanding may judge . 
 Some doubt of 2 Also Mangia , Quinzai , and the Moluccae are nearer unto us by the Northwest , then by the Northeast , more then two five parts , which is almost by the half . 
 3 Also we may have by the West a yearly return , it being at all times navigable , whereas you have but 4. months in the whole year to go by the Northeast : the passage being at such elevation as it is formerly expressed , for it cannot be any nearer the South . 
 4 Furthermore , it cannot be finished without diverse wintrings by the way , having no havens in any temperate climate to harbour in there : for it is as much as we can well sail from hence to S. Nicholas , in the trade of Moscovia , and return in the navigable season of the year , & from S. Nicholas to Cerimissi Tartari , which stand at 80 degrees of the Septentrionali latitude , it is at the least 400 leagues , which amounteth scarce to the third part of the way , to the end of your voyage by the Northeast . 
 5 And yet after you have doubled this Cape , if then there might be found a navigable Sea to carry you Southeast according to your desire , yet can you not winter conveniently , until you come to 60 degrees , and to take up one degree running Southeast , you must sail 24 leagues and three foure parts , which amounteth to 495 leagues . 
 6 Furthermore , you may by the Northwest sail thither with all Easterly winds , and return with any Westerly winds , whereas you must have by the Northeast sundry winds , and those proper , according to the lying of the coast and Capes , you shall enforced to double , which winds are not always to be had , when they are looked for : whereby your journey should be greatly prolonged , and hardly endured so near the Pole . As we are taught by sir Hugh Willoughbie , who was frozen to death far nearer the South . 
 7 Moreover , it is very doubtful , whither we should 184 
 long enjoy that trade by the Northeast , if there were any such passage that way , the commodities thereof once known to the Moscovite , what privilege soever he hath granted , seeing policy with the mass of excessive gain , to the enriching ( so greatly ) of himself and all his dominions would persuade Kim to presume the same , having so great opportunity to utter the commodities of those countries by the Narve . 
 But by the Northwest , we may safely trade without danger or annoyance of any prince living , Christian or Heathen , it being out of all their trades . 
 8 Also the Queens Majesties dominions are nearer the Northwest passage then any other great princes that might pass that way , and both in their going and return , they must of necessity succour themselves and their ships upon some part of the same , if any tempestuous weather should happen . 
 Further , no princes navy of the world is able to encounter the Queens Majesties navy , as it is at this present : and yet it should be greatly increased by the traffic ensuing upon this discovery , for it is the long voyages that increase and maintain great shipping . 
 Now it seems necessary to declare what commodities would grow thereby , if all these things were , as we have heretofore presupposed , and thought them to be : which next adjoining are briefly declared . 
 What commodities would ensue , this passage once discovered . 
 Cap. 10. 
 First , it were the only way for our princes , to possess the wealth of all the East parts ( as they term them ) of the world , which is infinite : as appears by the experience of Alexander the great , in the time of his conquest of India , and other the East parts of the world , alleged by Quintus Curtius , which would be a great advancement to our country , a wonderful enriching to 
 185 
 our prince , and and unspeakable commodity to all the inhabitants of Europe . 
 2 For through the shortness of the voyage , we should be able to fell all manner of merchandise , brought from thence , far better cheap then either the Portugall or Spaniard does or may do . And further , we should share with the Portugall in the East , & the Spaniard in the West , by trading to any part of America , thorough Mar deal Sur , where they can no manner of way offend us . 
 3 Also we might sail to diverse very rich countries' , both civil and others , out of both their jurisdictions , trades and traffics , where there is to be found great abundance of gold , silver , precious stones , cloth of gold , silks , all manner of spices , grocery wares , and other kinds of merchandise of and inestimable price , which both the Spaniard and Portugall , through the length of their journeys , cannot well attain unto . 
 4 Also we might inhabit some part of those countries , and settle there such needy people of our country , which now trouble the common wealth , and through want here at home are enforced to commit outrageous offences , whereby they are daily consumed with the gallows . 
 3 Moreover , we might from all the aforesaid places have a yearly return , inhabiting for our staple some convenient place of America , about Sierra Nevada , or some other part , whereas it shall seem best for the shortening of the voyage . 
 6 Beside uttering of our country commodities , which the Indians , etc. much esteem : as appears in Hester , where the pomp is expressed of the great king of India , Assuerus , who matched the coloured clothes , wherewith his houses and tents were appareled , with gold and silver , as part of his greatest treasure : not mentioning either velvets , silks , cloth of gold , cloth of silver , or such like , being in those countries most plentiful : whereby it plainly appears in what great estimation they would have the clothes of this our country , so 
 186 
 1576. that there would be found a far better vent for them by this means , then yet this realm ever had : and that without depending either upon France , Spaine , Flanders , Portugall , Hamborow , Emden , or any other part of Europe . 
 7 Also , here we shall increase both our ships and mariners , without burdened of the state . 
 8 And also have occasion to set poor men's children to learn handy crafts , and thereby to make trifles and such like , which the Indians and those people do much esteem : by reason whereof , there should be none occasion to have our country cumbered with loiterers , vagabonds , and such like idle persons . 
 All these commodities would grow by following this our discovery , without injury done to any Christian prince , by crossing them in any of their used trades , whereby they might take any just occasion of offence . 
 Thus have I briefly showed you some part of the grounds of mine opinion , trusting that you will no longer judge me fantastic in this matter : seeing I have conceived no vain hope of this voyage , but am persuaded thereunto by the best Cosmographers of our age , the same being confirmed both by reason and certain experiences . 
 Also this discovery hath be diverse times heretofore by others both offered , attempted , and performed . 
 It hath be offered by Stephan Gomes unto Carolus 
 the fift Emperor , in the year of our Lord God 1527 , as Alphonso Ullva testifieth in the story of Carolus life : who would have set him forth in it ( as the story men-tioneth ) if the great want of money , by reason of his long wars had not caused him to surcease the same . 
 And the king of Portugall fearing least the Emperor would have persevered in this his enterprise , gave him to This discovery leave the matter unattempted , the sum of 350000 crowns : and it is to be thought that the king of Portugall would not have given to the Emperor such sums of money for eggs in moonshine . 
 187 
 The labour of this discovery shortened by other men's travel . 
 Why you kings of Spaine and Portugal would not persever in this discovery . 
 It hath be attempted by Sebastian Cabota in the time of king Henry the seventh , by Corterialis the Portugall , and Scolmus the Dane . 
 And it hath be performed by three brothers , the Indians aforesaid , and by Urdaneta the Friar of Mexico . 
 Also diverse have offered the like unto the French king , who hath sent two or three times to have discovered the same : The discoverers spending and consuming their victuals in searching the gulfs and bays between Florida and Terra de Labrador , whereby the ice is broken to the after comers . 
 So that the right way may now easily be found out in short time : and that with little jeoperdie and less expenses . 
 For America is discovered so far towards the North as Cape Frio , which is at 62 degrees , and that part of Grondland next adjoining is known to stand but at 72 degrees . So that we have but 10 degrees to sail North & South , to put the world out of doubt hereof : and it is likely that the king of Spaine , and the king of Portugall would not have fit out all this while , but that they are sure to possess to themselves all that trade they now use , and fear to deal in this discovery , lest the Queens Majesty having so good opportunity , and finding the commodity which thereby might ensue to the common wealth , would cut them off , and enjoy the whole traffic to her self , and thereby the Spaniards and Portugals , with their great charges , should beat the bush , and other men catch the birds : which thing they foreseeing , have commanded that no pilot of theirs upon pain of death , should seek to discover to the Northwest , or plate out in any Sea carded any thorough passage that way by the Northwest . 
 Now , and if you will indifferently compare the hope that remains , to animate me to this enterprise , with those likelihoods which Columbus alleged before Ferdinando the king of Castilia , to prove that there were such Islands in the West Ocean , as were after by him 188 
 and others discovered to the great commodity of Spaine and all the world : you will think then this Northwest passage to be most worthy travel therein . 
 For Columbus had none of the West Islands set forth unto him , either in globe or carded , neither yet once mentioned of any writer ( Plato excepted , and the commentaries upon the same ) from 942 years before Christ , until that day . 
 Moreover , Columbus himself had neither seen America nor any other of the Islands about it , neither , understood he of them by the report of any other that had seen them , but only comforted himself with this hope , that the land had a beginning where the Sea had and ending : for as touching that which the Spaniards do write of a Biscaine , which should have taught him the way thither , it is thought to be imagined of them , to deprive Columbus of his honour , being none of their country man , but a stranger born . 
 And if it were true of the Biscaine , yet did he but rove at the matter , or ( at the least ) gathered the knowledge of it , by conjectures only . 
 And albeit my self have not seen this passage or any part thereof , but am ignorant of it as touching experience ( as Columbus was before his attempt made ) yet have I both the report , relation , and authority of diverse most credible men , which have both seen and passed through some and every part of this discovery , beside sundry reasons for my assurance thereof : all which Columbus wanted . 
 These things considered , & indifferently weighed together , with the wonderful commodities which this discovery may bring , especially to this realm of England : I must needs conclude with learned Baptista Ramusius , and diverse other learned men , who said , that this discovery hath be reserved for some noble prince or worthy man , thereby to make himself rich , and the world happy : desiring you to accept in good part this brief and simple discourse , written in haste , which if 189 
 I may perceive that it shall not sufficiently satisfy you in this behalf , I will then impart unto you a large discourse , which I have written only of this discovery . 
 And further , because it suffices not only to know that such a thing there is , without ability to perform the same , I will at leisure make you partaker of another simple discourse of navigation , wherein I have not a little traveled , to make my self as sufficient to bring these things to effect , as I have be ready to offer my self therein . 
 And therein I have devised to amend the errors of usual sea cards , whose common fault is , to make the degrees of longitude in every latitude of one like bigness . 
 And have also devised therein a Spherical instrument , with a compass of variation for the perfect knowing of the longitude . 
 And a precise order to prick the sea carded , together with certain infallible rules for the shortening of any discovery , to know at the first entering of any fret , whither it lie open to the Ocean more ways then one , how far soever the sea stretcheth it self into the land . 
 Desiring you hereafter never to mislike with me , for the taking in hand of any laudable and honest enterprise : for if through pleasure or idleness we purchase shame , the pleasure vanishes , but the shame remains for ever . 
 And therefore to give me leave without offence , always to live and die in this mind , That he is not worthy to live at all , that for fear , or danger of death , shunneth his countries service , and his own honour : seeing death is inevitable , and the fame of virtue immortali . Wherefore in this behalf , Mutare vel timere sperno . 
 190 
 Certain other reasons , or arguments to prove a passage by the Northwest , learnedly written by M. Richard Willes Gentleman . 
 FOure famous ways there be spoken of to those fruitful and wealthy Islands , which we do usually call Moluccaes , continually haunted for gain , and daily traveled for riches therein growing . These Islands , although they stand East from the Meridian , distant almost half the length of the world , in extreme heat , under the Equinoctial line , possessed of Infidels and Barbarians : yet by our neighbours great abundance of wealth there is painfully sought in respect of the voyage . dearly bought , and from thence dangerously brought home unto us . Our neighbours I call the Portugals in comparison of the Molucchians for nearness unto us , for like situation Westward as we have , for their usual trade with us , for that the far Southeasterlings do know this part of Europe by no other name then Portugall , not greatly acquainted as yet with the other Nations thereof . Their voyage is very well understood of all men , and the Southeasterne way round about 1 By the Afrike by the Cape of Good hope more spoken of , better o^ttst . known and traveled , then that it may seem needful to discourse thereof any further . 
 The second way lies Southwest , between the West 2 A ? tJie India or South America , and the South continent , through authwest-that narrow straight where Magellan first of all men that ever we do read of , passed these latter years , leaving thereunto therefore his name . The way no doubt the Spaniardes would commodiously take , for that it lies near unto their dominions there , could the Eastern current and levant winds as easily suffer them to return , is and er ' as speedily therewith they may be carried thither : for ' the which difficulty , or rather impossibility of striving against the force both of wind and stream , this passage is little or nothing used , although it be very well known . 
 191 
 3 By the The third way by the Northeast , beyond all Europe Northeast . anj Asia , that worthy and renowned knight sir Hugh Willoughbie sought to his peril , inforced there to end his life for cold , congealed and frozen to death . And truly this way consisteth rather in the imagination of Geographers , then allowable either in reason , or approved by experience , as well it may appear by the dangerous Ortel . tab . trending of the Scythish Cape set by Ortelius under •A ™ * the 80 degree North , by the unlikely sailing in that Northern sea always clad with ice and snow , or at the least continually pestered therewith , if happily it be at any time dissolved : beside bays and shelves , the water waxing more shallow towards the East , that we say nothing of the foul mists and dark fogs in the cold climb , of the little power of the Sun to clear the air , of the uncomfortable nights , so near the Pole , five months long . 
 4 By the a fourth way to go unto these aforesaid happy Islands Northeast . Moluccas sir Humphrey Gilbert a learned and valiant knight discourseth of at large in his new passage to Cathayo . The enterprise of it self being virtuous , the fact must doubtless deserve high praise , and whensoever it shall be finished , the fruits thereof cannot be small : where virtue is guide , there is fame a follower , & fortune a companion . But the way is dangerous , the passage doubtful , the voyage not thoroughly known , and therefore gainsaid by many , after this manner . 
 Ob. 1. First , who can assure us of any passage rather by the Northwest , then by the Northeast ? do not both ways lie in equal distance from the North Pole ? Stand not the North Capes of either continent under like elevation ? Is not the Ocean sea beyond America farther distant from our Meridian by 30. or 40. degrees West , then the extreme points of Cathayo Eastward , if Ortelius InTheatro . general ! Card of the world be true ? In the Northeast that noble Knight Sir Hugh Willoughbie perished for cold : and can you then promise a passenger any better happen by the Northwest ? Who hath gone for trial sake at any time this way out of Europe to Cathayo ? 
 192 
 If you seek the advice herein of such as make profession in Cosmography , Ptolome the father of Geographic , and his eldest children , will answer by their maps with a negative , concluding most of the Sea within the land , and making and end of the world Northward , near the 63. degree . The same opinion , when learning chiefly flourished , was received in the Romans time , as by their Poets writings it may appear : tibi serviat ultima Thyle , said Virgil , being of opinion , that Island was the extreme part of the world habitable towards the North . Joseph Moletius and Italian , and Mercator a Germane , for knowledge men able to be compared with the best Geographers of our time , the one in his half Spheres of the whole world , the other in some of his great globes , have continued the West Indies land , even to the North Pole , and consequently , cut ofF all passage by sea that way . 
 The same doctors , Mercator in other of his globes and maps , Moletius in his sea Card , nevertheless doubting of so great continuance of the former continent , have opened a gulf betwixt the West Indies and the extreme Northern land : but such a one , that either is not to be traveled for the causes in the first objection alleged , or clean shut up from us in Europe by Greenland : the South end whereof Moletius makes firm land with America , the North part continent with Lappeland and Norway . 
 Thirdly , the greatest favourers of this voyage can not deny , but that if any such passage be , it lies subject unto ice and snow for the most part of the year , whereas it stands in the edge of the frosty Zone . Before the Sun hath warmed the air , and dissolved the ice , eke one well knoweth that there can be no sailing : the ice once broken through the continual abided the sun makes a certain season in those parts , how shall it be possible for so weak a vessel as a ship is , to hold out amid whole Islands , as it were of ice continually beating on eke side , and at the mouth of 
 vii 193 N 
 A.D. 
 £576 . 
 Ob. 2. 
 Ob. 3. 
 that gulf , issuing down furiously from the north , and safely to pass , when whole mountains of ice and snow shall be tumbled down upon her ? 
 Ob. 4. Well , grant the West Indies not to continue continent unto the Pole , grant there be a passage between these two lands , let the gulf lie nearer us then commonly in cards we find it set , namely , between the 61. and 64. degrees north , as Gemma Frisius in his maps and globes imagineth it , and so left by our countryman Sebastian Cabot in his table which the Earl of Bedford hath at Cheinies : Let the way be void of all difficulties , yet doth it not follow that we have free passage to Cathayo . For examples sake : You may trend all Norway , Finmarke , and Lappeland , and then bow Southward to Saint Nicholas in Moscovia : you may likewise in the Mediterranean Sea fetch Constantinople , and the mouth of Tanais : yet is there no passage by Sea through Moscovia into Pont Euxine , now called Mare Maggiore . Again , in the aforesaid Mediterranean sea , we sail to Alexandria in Egypt , the Barbarians bring their pearl and spices from the Molucca's up the Read sea or Arabian gulf to Sues , scarcely three days journey from the aforesaid haven : yet have we no way by sea from Alexandria to the Molucca's , for that Isthmos or little straight of land between the two seas . In like manner although the Northern passage be free at 61 degrees of latitude , and the West Ocean beyond America , usually called Mar deal Zur , known to be open at 40. degrees elevation from the Island Japan , yea three hundred leagues Northerly above Japan : yet may there be land to hinder the thorough passage that way by Sea , as in the examples aforesaid it falls out , Asia and America there being joined together in one continent . Ne can this opinion seem altogether frivolous unto any one that diligently peruseth our Cosmographers doings . Josephus Moletius is of that mind , not only in his plain Hemispheres of the world , but also in his Sea carded . The French Geographers in like manner be of 
 194 
 the same opinion , as by their Map cut out in form of a Heart you may perceive : as though the West Indies were part of Asia . Which sentence well agreeth with that old conclusion in the Schools : Quicquid praeter Africam & Europam est , Asia est , Whatsoever land doth neither appertain unto Afrike nor to Europe , is part of Asia . 
 Furthermore it were to small purpose to make so long , Ob. 5. so painful , so doubtful a voyage by such a new found way , if in Cathayo you should neither be suffered to land for silks and silver , nor able to fetch the Molucca spices and pearl for piracy in those Seas . Of a law denying all Aliens to enter into China , and forbidding all the inhabiters under a great penalty to let in any stranger into those countries , shall you read in the report of Galeotto Perera there imprisoned with other Portugals : as also in the Japonish letters , how for that cause the worthy traveller Xavierus bargained with a Barbarian Merchant for a great sum of pepper to be brought into Canton , a port in China . The great and dangerous piracy used in those Seas no man can be ignorant of , that lists to read the Japonish and East Indian historic . 
 Finally , all this great labour would be lost , all these Ob. 6. charges spent in vain , if in the end our travellers might not be able to return again , and bring safely home into their own native country that wealth & riches , which they in foreign regions with adventure of goods , & danger of their lives have sought for . By the Northeast there is no way , the Southeast passage the Portugals do hold as the Lords of those Seas . At you Southwest Magellans experience hath partly taught us , and partly we are persuaded by reason , how the Eastern current striketh so furiously on that straight , and falls with such force into that narrow gulf , that hardly any ship can return that way into our West Ocean out of Mar deal Zur . The which if it be true , as truly it is , then we may say that the aforesaid Eastern current or levant course of waters continually 
 * 95 
 following after the heavenly motions , lodseth not altogether his force , but is doubled rather by and other current from out the Northeast , in the passage between America and the North land , whither it is of necessity carried : having none other way to maintain it self in circular motion , & consequently the force and fury thereof to be no less in the straight of Anian , where it striketh South into Mar deal Zur , beyond America ( if any such straight of Sea there be ) then in Magellans fret , both straights being of like breadth : as in Belognine Zalterius table of new France , and in DONE Diego Hermano de Toledo his Carded for navigation in that region we do find precisely set down . 
 Nevertheless to approve that there lies a way to Cathayo at the Northwest from out of Europe , we have experience , namely of three brothers that went that journey , as Gemma Frisius recordeth , and left a name unto that straight , whereby now it is called Fretum trium fratrum . We do read again of a Portugall that passed this straight , of whom Master Frobisher speaks , that was imprisoned therefore many years in Lisbone , to verify the old Spanish proverb , I suffer for doing well . Likewise Andrew Urdaneta a Fryer of Mexico came out of Mar deal Zur this way into Germanie : his Card ( for he was a great Discoverer ) made by his own experience and travel in that voyage , hath be seen by Gentlemen of good credit . 
 Cic. 1. de Now if the observation and remembrance of things h breeds experience , and of experience proceedeth art , ea ? ' and the certain knowledge we have in all faculties , as the best Philosophers that ever were do affirm : truly the voyage of these aforesaid travellers that have gone out of Europe into Mar deal Zur , and returned thence at the Northwest , do most evidently conclude that way to be navigable , and that passage free . So much the Lib. I Geog. more we are so to think , for that the first principle Cap. 2. and chief ground in all Geographic , as Ptolome says , 196 
 is the history of travel , that is , reports made by travellers skilful in Geometric and Astronomic , of all such things in their journey as to Geographic do belong . It only then remains , that we now answer to those arguments that seemed to make against this former conclusion . 
 The first objection is of no force , that general table Sol. i . of the world set forth by Ortelius or Mercator , for it greatly skilleth not , being unskilfully drawn for that point : as manifestly it may appear unto any one that conferreth the same with Gemma Frisius his universali Map , with his round quartered card , with his globe , with Sebastian Cabota his table , and Ortelius his general map alone , worthily preferred in this case before all Mercator & Ortelius other doings : for that Cabota was not only a skilful Sea man , but a long traveller , and such a one as entered personally that straight , sent by king Henry the seventh to make this aforesaid Discovery , as in his own discourse of navigation you may read in his card drawn with his own hand , that the mouth of the North wester ne straight lies near the 318. Meridian , between 61. and 64. degrees in the elevation , continuing the same bred that about 10. degrees West , where it openeth Southerly more and more , until it come under the tropic of Cancer , and so runneth into Mar deal Zur , at the least 18. degrees more in breadth there , then it was where it first began : otherwise I could as well imagine this passage to be more unlikely then the voyage to Moscovia , and more impossible then it for the far situation and continuance thereof in the frosty climb : as now I can affirm it to be very possible and most likely in comparison thereof , for that it neither coasts so far North as the Moscovian passage doth , neither is this straight so long as that , before it bow down Southerly towards the Sun again . 
 The second argument concludeth nothing . Ptolome Sol. 2. knew not what was above sixteene degrees South 
 197 
 beyond the Equinoctial line , he was ignorant of all passages Northward from the elevation of 63. degrees : he knew no Ocean sea beyond Asia , yet have the Portugals trended the cape of Good hope at the South point of Afrike , and traveled to Japan and Island in the East Ocean , between Asia & America : our merchant's in the time of king Edward the sixt discovered the Moscovian passage farther North then Thyle , & showed Greenland not to be continent with Lappeland & Norway : the like our Northwestern travellers have done , declaring by their navigation that way , the ignorance of all Cosmographers that either do join Greenland with America , or continue the West Indies with that frosty region under the north pole . As for Virgil he sang according to the knowledge of men in his time , as and other Poet did of the hight Zone . 
 Ovid . 1. Quarum quae media est , non est habitabilis aestu . etam ' Imagining , as most men then did , Zonam torridam , the hight Zone to be altogether dishabited for heat , though presently we know many famous and worthy kingdoms and cities in that part of the earth , and the Island of S. Thomas near ^Ethiopia , & the wealthy Islands for the which chiefly all these voyages are taken in hand , to be inhabited even under the equinoctial line . 
 So / . 3. To answer the third objection , beside Cabota and all other travellers navigations , the only credit of M. Frobisher may suffice , who lately through all these Islands of ice , and mountains of snow , passed that way , even beyond the gulf that tumbleth down from the North , and in some places though he drew one inch thick ice , as he returning in August did , yet came he home safely again . 
 Sol 4. The fourth argument is altogether frivolous & vain , for neither is there any isthmos or strait of land between America and Asia , ne can these two lands jointly be one continent . The first part of my answer is manifestly allowed of by Homer , whom that excellent 198 
 Geographer Strabo follows , yielding him in this Lib. Geog. faculty the price . The author of that book likewise irepi Kotlov to Alexander , attributed unto Aristotle , is of the same opinion that Homer and Strabo be of , in two or three places . Dionisius in oiKovnevw irepuiywi hath this verse wr « ? anceavos irepiSeSpo / ae yatav airacrav . 
 So does the Ocean Sea run round about the world : speaking only of Europe , Afrike and Asia , as then Asia was traveled and known . With these Doctors may Note . you join Pomponius Mela. cap . 2. lib . I. Plinius lib . 
 2. cap . 67. and Pius 2. cap . 2. in his description of Asia . All the which writers do no less confirm the whole Eastern side of Asia to be compassed about with the sea , then Plato doth affirm in Timaeo , under the name Atlantis , the West Indies to be and Island , as in a special discourse thereof R. Eden writeth , agreeable Richard Eden . unto the sentence of Proclus , Marsilius Ficinus , and others . Out of Plato it is gathered that America is and Island . Homer , Strabo , Aristotle , Dionysius , Mela , Plinie , Pius 2. affirm the continent of Asia , Afrike , & Europe , to be environed with the Ocean . I may therefore boldly say ( though later intelligences thereof had we none at all ) that Asia & the West Indies be not tied together by any Isthmos or straight of land , contrary to the opinion of some new Cosmographers , by whom doubtfully this matter hath been brought in controversy . And thus much for the first part of my answer unto the fourth objection . 
 The second part , namely that America and Asia cannot be one continent , may thus be proved , koto Lib. 2. Me-Trjv r^s is KoikorrjTa pei km twv troTa / Mov to trX^Ooi . The ttor‘ ca ? ' 1 • most Rivers take down that way their course , where the earth is most hollow and deep , writeth Aristotle : and the Sea ( say he in the same place ) as it goes further , so is it found deeper . Into what gulf do the Moscovian rivers Onega , Duina , Ob , pour out their streams Northward out of Moscovia into the sea ? 
 Which way doth that sea strike ? The South is main 
 199 
 land , the Eastern coast waxes more and more shallow : from the North , either naturally , because that part of the earth is higher Aristot. 2 Met. cap . 1. or of necessity , for that the forcible influence of some Northern stars causeth the earth there to shake off the Sea , as some Philosophers do think : or finally for the great store of waters engendered in that frosty and cold climate , that the banks are not able to hold them . Alber , in 2. Meteor , cap . 6. From the North , I say , continually falls down great abundance of water . So that this Northeastern currant must at the length abruptly bow towards us South on the West side of Finmarke and Norway : or else strike down Southwest above Groan-land , or betwixt Groneland and Iseland , into the Northwest straight we speak of , as of congruence it doth , if you mark the situation of that Region , and by the report of M. Frobisher experience teaches us . And M. Frobisher the further he travailed in the former passage , as he told me , the deeper always he found the Sea. Lay you now the sum hereof together . The rivers run where the channels are most hollow , the sea in taking his course waxes deeper , the Sea waters fallen continually from the North Southward , the Northeastern current striketh down into the straight we speak of , and is there augmented with whole mountains of ice and snow falling down furiously out from the land under the North pole . Where store of water is , there is it a thing impossible to want Sea , where Sea not only doth not want , but waxes deeper , there can be discovered no land . Finally , whence I pray you came the contrary tide , that M. Frobisher met withal after that he had sailed no small way in that passage , if there be any Isthmos or straight of land betwixt the aforesaid Northwestern gulf , and Mar deal Zur , to join Asia and America together ? That conclusion frequented in schools Quicquid praeter , etc. was meant of the parts of the world then known , and so is it of right to be understood . 
 200 
 The fift objection requires for answer wisdom and Sol. 5. policy in the traveler , to win the Barbarians favour by some good means : and so to arm and strengthen himself , that when he shall have the repulse in one coast , he may safely travail to and other , commodiously taking his convenient times , and discreetly making choice of them with whom he will thoroughly deal . To force a violent entry , would for us Englishmen be very hard , considering the strength and valour of so great a Nation , far distant from us , and the attempt thereof might be most perilous unto the doers , unless their part were very good . 
 Touching their laws against strangers , you shall read nevertheless in the same relations of Galeotto Perera , that the Cathaian king is wont to grant free access unto all foreigners that trade into his Country for Merchandise , and a place of liberty for them to remain in : as the Moors had , until such time as they had brought the Loutea or Lieutenant of that coast to be a circumcised Saracene : wherefore some of them were put to the sword , the rest were scattered abroad : at Fuquien a great city in China , certain of them are yet this day to be seen . As for the Japans they be most desirous to be acquainted with strangers . The Portingals though they were straitly handled there at the first , yet in the end they found great favour at the Prince his hands , insomuch that the Loutea or president that misused them was therefore put to death . The rude Indian Canoa halleth those seas , the Portingals , the Saracenes , and Moors travail continually up and down that reach from Japan to China , from China to Malacca , from Malacca to the Molucca's : and shall and Englishman , better appointed then any of them all ( that I say no more of our Navy ) fear to sail in that Ocean ? What seas at all do want piracy ? what Navigation is there void of peril ? 
 To the last argument . Our travelers need not to Sol. 6. seek their return by the Northeast , neither shall they be constrained , except they list , either to attempt 
 201 
 What the 
 Eastern cut rend is . 
 Magellans straight at the Southwest , or to be in danger of the Portingals for the Southeast : they may return by the Northwest , that same way they do go forth , . as experience hath showed . 
 The reason alleged for proof of the contrary may be disproved after this manner . And first it may be called in controversy , whither any current continually be forced by the motion of Primum mobile , round about the world , or no ? For learned men do diversely handle that question . The natural course of all waters is downward , wherefore of congruence they fallen that way where they find the earth most low and deep : in respect whereof > it was erst said , the seas do strike from the Northern lands Southerly . Violently the seas are tossed and troubled diverse ways with the winds , increased and diminished by the course of the Moon , hoist up & down through the sundry operations of the Sun and the stars : finally , some be of opinion , that the seas be carried in part violently about the world , after the daily motion of the highest movable heaven , in like manner as the elements of air and fire , with the rest of the heavenly spheres , are from the East unto the West . And this they do call their Eastern current , or levant stream . Some such current may not be denied to be of great force in the hight Zone , for the nearness thereof unto the centre of the Sun , and blustering Eastern winds violently driving the seas Westward : howbeit , in the temperate climes , the Sun being further off , & the winds more diverse , blowing as much from the North , the West and South , as from the East , this rule doth not effectually withhold us from travailing Eastward , neither be we kept ever back by the aforesaid Levant winds and stream . But in Magellans straight we are violently driven back Westward : Ergo , through the Northwestern straight or Anian fret shall we not be able to return Eastward ? It follows not . The first , for that the northwestern straight hath more sea room at the least by one hundreth English miles , then 202 
 1576. Magellans fret hath , the only want whereof causeth all narrow passages generally to be most violent . So would I say in the Anian gulf , if it were so narrow as DONE Diego and Zalterius have painted it out , any return that way to be full of difficulties , in respect of such straightness thereof , not for the nearness of the Sun , or Eastern winds , violently forcing that way any levant streamer But in that place there is more sea room by many degrees , if the Cards of Cabota , and Gemma Frisius , and that which Tramezine imprinted , be true . 
 And hitherto reason see I none at all , but that I may as well give credit unto their doings , as to any of the rest . It must be Peregrinationis historia , that is , true reports of skilful travelers , as Ptolome writeth , that in Ca ? ' 2 ' such controversies of Geographic must put us out of doubt . Ortelius in his universali tables , in his particular Maps of the West Indies , of all Asia , of the Northern kingdoms , of the East Indies , Mercator in some of his globes , and generail Maps of the world , Moletius in his universali table of the Globe divided , in his sea Card , and particular tables of the East Indies , Zalterius , and DONE Diego , with Ferdinando Bertely , and others , do so much differ from Gemma Frisius and Cabota , among themselves , and in diverse places from themselves , concerning the diverse situation and sundry limits of America , that one may not so rashly , as truly surmise , these men either to be ignorant in those points touching the aforesaid region , or that the Maps they have given out unto the world , were collected only by them , and never of their own drawing . 
 