The relation of the course which the Sunshine a bark of fiftie tons , and the Northstarre a small pinnace , being two vessels of the fleet of M. John Davis , held after he had sent them from him to discover the passage between Greenland and Island , written by Henry Morgan servant to M. William Sanderson of London . 
 He seventh day of May 1586. we departed out of Dartmouth haven foure sails , to wit , the Mermaid , the Sunshine , the Moonshine , & the Northstarre . In the Sunshine were sixteene men , whose names were these : Richard Pope Master , Mark Carter Master's mate , Henry 
 Morgan Purser , George Draward , John Mandie , Hugh Broken , Philip Jane , Hugh Hempson , Richard Borden , 408 
 John Philpe , Andrew Madock , William Wolcome , Robert Wag carpenter , John Bruskome , William Ashe , Simon Ellis . 
 Our course was Westnorthwest the seventh and eight days : and the ninth day in the morning we were on head of the Tarrose of Silley . Thus coasting along the South part of Ireland the 11. day , we were on head of the Dorses : and our course was Southsouthwest until sixe of the clock the 12. day . The 13. day our course was Northwest . We remained in the company of the Mermaid and the Moonshine until we came to the latitude of 60. degrees : and there it seemed best to our general M. Davis to divide his fleet , himself sailing to ®avts ™ the Northwest , and to direct the Sunshine , wherein I was , e and the pinnace called the Northstarre , to seek a divides his passage Northward between Greenland and Island to fleet into 2. the latitude of 80. degrees , if land did not let us . So farts-the seventh day of June we departed from them : and The-j . ofJsme . the ninth of the same we came to a firm land of ice , which we coasted along the ninth , the tenth , and the eleventh days of June : and the eleventh day at sixe of the clock at night we saw land which was very high , which afterwards we knew to be Island : and the twelft Island day we harboured there , and found many people : the descr3e , in land lies East and by North in 66. degrees . 66. degrees . 
 Their commodities were grefcne fish , and Island lings , Their commo-and stockfish , and a fish which is called Scatefish : of all tities . which they had great store . They had also kine , sheep and horses , and hay for their cattle , and for their horses . 
 we saw also their dogs . Their dwelling houses were Their dwell-made on both sides with stones , and wood laid cross in& ' over them , which was covered over with turfs of earth , and they are flat on the tops , and many of these stood hard by the shore . Their boats were made with wood Their boats , and iron all along the keel like our English boats : and they had nails for to nail them withal , and fishhooks and other things for to catch fish as we have here in England . They had also brazen kettles , and girdles 
 409 
 and purses made of leather , and knoppes on them of copper , and hatchet's , and other small tools as necessary as we have . They dry their fish in the Sun , and when they are dry , they pack them up in the top of their houses . If we would go thither to fishing more then we do , we should make it a very good voyage : for we god and hundreth green fish in one morning . we found here two English men with a ship , which came out of England about Easter day of this present year 1586 , and one of them came aboard of us , and brought us two M. John Roy - lambs . The English men name was M. John Roydon dONE of Ipswich . of IpSWich merchant : he was bound for London with 
 his ship . And this is the sum of that which I They departed observed in Island . We departed from Island the ^Northwe^f sixteenth day of June in the morning , and our course ’ was Northwest , and we saw on the coast two small barks 
 going to and harbour : we went not to them , but saw them a far off . Thus we continued our course unto 
 the end of this month . 
 July . The third day of July we were in between two firm 
 lands of ice , and passed in between them all that day until it was night : and then the Master turned back again , and so away we went towards Greenland . And Gronelanddls - the seventh day of July we did see Greenland , and it was covered . high , and it looked very blue : we could not come 
 to harbour into the land , because we were hindered by a firm land as it were of ice , which was along the shores side : but we were within three leagues of the land , coasting the same diverse days together . The seventeenth day of July we saw the place which our Captain M. The land of John Davis the year before had nam The land of Desolation . Desolation , where we could not go on shore for ice . 
 The eighteenth day we were likewise troubled with ice , and went in among it at three of the clock in the Greenland morning . After we had cleared our selves thereof , we ranged all along the coast of Desolation until the end last Of July °f the aforesaid month . 
 August . The third day of August we came in sighed of Gilberts 410 
 1586. found in the latitude of 64. deg . 15. min. which was the place where we were appointed to meet our general and the rest of our Fleet . Here we came to and harbour at 6. of the clock at night . 
 The 4. day in the morning the Master went on shore with 10. of his men , and they brought us foure of the people rowing in their boats aboard of the ship . And in the afternoon I went on shore with 6. of our men , and there came to us seven of them when we were on land . We found on shore three dead people , and two of them had their staves lying by them , and their old skins wrapped about them and the other had nothing lying by , wherefore we thought it was a woman . We also saw their houses near the Sea side , which were made with The houses of pieces of wood on both sides , and crossed over with poles Gnnland-and then covered over with earth : we found Foxes running upon the hills : as for the place it is broken land all the way that we went , and full of broken Islands . 
 The 21. of August the Master sent the boat on shore for wood with sixe of his men , and there were one and thirtie of the people of the country which went on shore to them , & they went about to kill them as we thought , for they shot their darts towards them , and we that were aboard the ship , did see them go on shore to our men : whereupon the Master sent the pinnace after them , and when they saw the pinnace coming towards them , they turned back , and the Master of the pinnace did shoot off a caliver to them the same time , but hurt none of them , for his meaning was only to put them in fear . Diverse times they did wave us on shore to play with them Oh « r men play at the football , and some of our company went on shore to play with them , and our men did cast them down as gavages . soon as they did come to strike the ball . And thus much of that which we did see and do in that harbour where we arrived first . 
 The 23. day we departed from the Merchant's Isle , where we had been first , and our course from thence 
 411 
 A skirmish between the Savages and out-men . 
 was South & by West , and the wind was Northeast , and we ran that day and night about 5. or 6. leagues , until we came to another harbour . 
 The 24. about eleven of the clock in the fbrenoone we entered into the aforesaid new harbour , and as we came in , we did see dogs running upon the Islands . When we were come in , there came to us foure of the people which were with us before in the other harbour , and where we road , we had sandy ground . We saw no wood growing , but found small pieces of wood upon the Islands , & some small pieces of sweet wood among the same . We found great Hearts homes , but could see none of the Stags where we went , but we found their footing's . As for the bones which we received of the Savages I cannot tell of what beasts they be . 
 The stones that we found in the country were black , and some white , as I think they be of no valve , nevertheless I have brought examples of them to you . 
 The 30. of August we departed from this harbour towards England , & the wind took us contrary , so that we were feign to go to another harbour the same day at 11. of the clock . And there came to us 39. of the people , and brought us 13. Seal skins , and after we received these skins of them , the Master sent the carpenter to change one of our boats which we had bought of them before , and they would have taken the boat from him perforce , and when they saw they could not take it from us , they shot with their darts at us , and stroke one of our men with one of their darts , and John Filpe shot one of them into the breast with and arrow . And they came to us again , and foure of our men went into the shipboate , and they shot with their darts at our men : but our men took one of their people in his boat into the shipboate , and he hurt one of them with his knife , but we killed three of them in their boats : two of them were hurt with arrows in the breasts , 412 
 and he that was aboard our boat , was shot in with and arrow , and hurt with a sword , and beaten with staves , whom our men cast overboard , but the people caught him and carried him on shore upon their boats , and the other two also , and so departed from us . And three of them went on shore hard by us , where they had their dogs , and those three came away from their dogs , and presently one of their dogs came swimming towards us heard aboard the ship , whereupon our Master caused the Gunner to shoot off one of the great pieces towards the people , and so the dog turned back to land and within and hour after there came of the people hard aboard the ship , but they would not come to us as they did come before . 
 The 31. of August we departed from Gylberts found for England , and when we came out of the harbour there came after us 17. of the people looking which way we went . 
 The 2. of September we lost sighed of the land at 12. of September . the clock at noon . 
 The third day at night we lost sighed of the Northstarre our pinnace in a very great storm , and lay a hull tarrying for them the 4. day , but could hear no more of The pinnace them . Thus we shaped our course the 5. day South - n^^returnei southeast , and sailing until the 27. of the said month , ’ we came in sighed of Cape clear in Ireland . 
 The 30. day we entered into our own channel . 
 The 2. of October we had sighed of the Isle of Wight . 
 The 3. we coasted all along the shore , and the 4. and 5. 
 The 6. of the said month of October we came into the river of Thames as high as Ratliffe in safety God be thanked . 
 