The form of M. Martin Frobishers letter to the English captives . 
 IN the name of God , in whom we all believe , who 
 ( I trust ) hath preserved your bodies and souls among these infidels , I commend me unto you . I will be glad to seek by all means you can devise for your deliverance , either with force , or with any commodities within my ships , which I will not spare for your sakes , or any thing else I can do for you . I have aboard , of theirs , a man , a woman , and a child , which I am contented to deliver for you , but the man which I carried away from hence the last year is dead in England . Moreover you may declare unto them , that if they deliver you not , I will not leave a man alive in their country . And thus , if one of you can come to speak with me , they shall have either the man , woman , or child in pawn for you . And thus unto God whom I trust you do serve , in haste I leave you , and to him we will daily pray for you . This Tuesday morning the seventh of August . Anno 1557. 
 Yours to the uttermost of my power , Martin Frobisher . 
 I have sent you by these bearer , pen , ink , and Postscript paper , to write back unto me again , if personally you cannot come to certify me of your estate . 
 3°9 
 The cause why M , Frobisher entered no fur-therwithin the Streits this year . 
 Bests bulwark . 
 Their King calledCatchoe . 
 How he is honoured . 
 Now had the general altered his determination for going any further into the Streites at this time for any further discovery of the passage , having taken a man and a woman of that country , which he thought sufficient for the use of language : & having also met with these people here , which intercepted his men the last year , ( as the apparel and English furniture which was found in their tents , very well declared ) he knew it was but a labour lost to seek them further off , when he had found them there at hand . And considering also the short time he had in hand , he thought it best to bend his whole endeavour for the getting of Mine , and to leave the passage further to be discovered hereafter . For his commission directed him in this voyage , only for the searching of the Over , and to defer the further discovery of the passage until another time . 
 On Thursday the ninth of August we began to make a small Fort for our defence in the Countesses Island , and entrenched a corner of a cliff , which on three parts like a wall of good heighth was compassed and well fenced with the sea , and we finished the rest with casks of the earth , to good purpose , and this was called Bests bulwark , after the Lieutenants name , who first devised - the same . This was done for that we suspected more lest the desperate men might oppress us with multitude , then any fear we had of their force , weapons , or policy of battle : but as wisdom would us in such place ( so far from home ) not to be of our selves altogether careless : so the signs which our captive made unto us , of the coming down of his Governor or Prince , which he called Catchoe , gave us occasion to foresee what might ensue thereof , for he showed by signs that this Catchoe was a man of higher stature far then any of our nation is , and he is accustomed to be carried upon men's shoulders . 
 About midnight the Lieutenant caused a false Alarm to be given in the Island , to prove as well the readiness of the company there ashore , as also what help might be 310 
 hoped for upon the sudden from the ships if need so required , & every part was found in good readiness upon such a sudden . 
 Saturday the eleventh of August the people showed themselves again , & called unto us from the side of a hill over against us . The General ( with good hope to hear of his men , and to have answer of his letter ) went over unto them , where they presented themselves not above three in sighed , but were hidden indeed in greater numbers behind the rocks , and making signs of delay with us to entrap some of us to redeem their own , did only seek advantage to train our boat about a point of land from sighed of our company : whereupon our men justly suspecting them , kept aloof without their danger , and yet set one of our company ashore , which took up a great bladder which one of them offered us , and leaving a looking glass in the place , came into the boat again . In the mean while our men which stood in the Countesses Island to behold , who might better discern them , then those of the boat , by reason they were on higher ground , made a great outcry unto our men in the boat , for that they saw diverse of the Savages creeping behind the rocks towards our men , whereupon the general presently returned without tidings of his men . 
 Concerning this bladder which we received , our Captive made signs that it was given him to keep water and drink in , but we suspected rather it was given him to swim and shift away withal , for he and the woman sought diverse times to escape , having loosed our boats from astern our ships , and we never a boat left to pursue them withal , and had prevailed very far , had they not be very timely espied and prevented therein . 
 After our Generals coming away from them they mustered themselves in our sighed , upon the top of a hill , to the number of twenty in a rank , all holding hands over their heads , and dancing with great noise and songs 3 “ 
 A bladder changed fir a looking-glass . 
 No news oj the English captives . 
 To what end the bladder was delivered . 
 Those people dancing upon the hill tops . 
 A skirmish showed to those people . 
 Their flags made of bladders . 
 together : we supposed they made this dance and show for us to understand , that we might take view of their whole companies and force , meaning belike that we should do the same . And thus they continued upon the hill tops until night , when hearing a piece of our great Ordinance , which thundered in the hollowness of the high hills , it made unto them so fearful a noise , that they had no great will to tarry long after . And this was done more to make them know our force then to do them any hurt at all . 
 On Sunday the 12 of August , Captain Fenton trained the company , and made the soldiers maintain skirmish among themselves , as well for their exercise , as for the country people to behold in what readiness our men were always to be found , for it was to be thought , that they lay hid in the hills thereabouts , and observed all the manner of our proceedings . 
 On Wednesday the fourteenth of August , our general with two small boats well appointed , for that he suspected the country people to lie lurking thereabouts , went up a certain Bay within the Countesses found , to search for Over , and met again with the country people , who so soon as they saw our men made great outcries , and with a white flag made of bladders sowed together with the guts and sinews of beasts , wafted us amain unto them , but showed not above three of their company . But when we came near them , we might perceive a great multitude creeping behind the rocks , which gave us good cause to suspect their traitorous meaning : whereupon we made them signs , that if they would lay their weapons aside , and come forth , we would deal friendly with them , although their intent was manifested unto us : but for all the signs of friendship we could make them they came still creeping towards us behind the rocks to get more advantage of us , as though we had no eyes to see them , thinking belike that our single wits could not discover so bore devises and simple drifts of theirs . Their spokesman earnestly persuaded us with 
 312 
 ... I577 > many enticing shows , to come eat and sleep ashore , with great arguments of courtesy , and clapping his bore hands over his head in token of peace and innocence , willed us to do the like . But the better to allure our hungry stomachs , he brought us a trim bait of raw Great offers . flesh , which for fashion sake with a boathook we caught into our boat : but when the cunning Cater perceived his first cold morsel could nothing sharpen our stomachs , he cast about for a new train of warm flesh to procure our appetites , wherefore he caused one of his fellows in halting manner , to come forth as a lame man from behind the rocks , and the better to declare his kindness in carving , he hoist him upon his shoulders , and bringing him hard to the water side where we were , left him there limping as and easy prey to be taken of us . His hope was that we would bite at this bait , and speedily leap ashore within their danger , whereby they might have apprehended some of us , to ransom their friends home again , which before we had taken . The gentlemen and soldiers had great will to encounter them ashore , but the general more careful by process of time to win them , then wilfully at the first to spoil them , would in no wise admit that any man should put himself in hazard ashore , considering the matter he now intended was for the Over , and not for the Conquest : notwithstanding to prove this cripples footmanship , he gave liberty for one to shoot : whereupon the cripple having a parting blow , lightly recovered a rock and went away a true and no feigned cripple , and hath learned his lesson for ever halting afore such cripples again . But his fellows which lay hid before , full quickly then appeared in their likeness , and maintained the skirmish with their slings , bows and arrows very fiercely , and came as near as the water suflred them : and with as desperate mind as hath be seen in any men , without fear of shcrtte or any thing , followed us all along the coast , but all their shot fell short of us , and are of little danger . They had belayed all the coast along for us , 
 313 
 and being dispersed so , were not well to be numbered , A hundreth but we might discern of them above and hundreth perSavages . sonSj anj bad cause to suspect a greater number . And thus without loss or hurt we returned to our ships again . 
 Now our work growing to and end , and having , only with five poor Miners , and the help of a few gentlemen and soldiers , brought aboard almost two hundreth tun of Over in the space of twenty days , every man therewithal ! well comforted , determined lustily to work a fresh for a bone voyage , to bring our labour to a speedy and happy end . 
 And upon Wednesday at night being the one and twentieth of August , we fully finished the whole work . And it was now good time to leave , for as the men were well wearied , so their shoes and clothes were well worn , their baskets bottoms torn out , their tools broken , and the ships reasonably well filled . Some with overstraining themselves received hurts not a little dangerous , some having their bellies broken , and others their legs made lame . And about this time the ice began to congeal and freeze about our ships sides a night , which gave us a good argument of the Suns declining Southward , & put us in mind to make more haste homeward . 
 It is not a little worth the memory , to the commendation of the gentlemen and soldiers herein , who leaving all reputation apart , with so great willingness and with courageous stomachs , have themselves almost overcome in so short a time the difficulty of this so great a labour . And this to be true , the matter , if it be well weighed without further proof , now brought home does well witness . 
 Thursday the 22 of August , we plucked down our tents , and every man hasted homeward , and making bonfires upon the top of the highest Mount of the Island , and marching with Ensign displayed round about the Island , we gave a volley of shot for a farewell , 
 in honour of the right honourable Lady Anne , Countess of Warwicke , whose name it bearethi : and so departed aboard . 
 The 23 of August having the wind large at West , we set sail from out of the Countesses found homeward , They return . but the wind calming we came to anchor within the point of the same found again . 
 The 24 of August about three of the clock in the morning , having the wind large at West , we set sail again , and by nine of the clock at night , we left the Queens Foreland astern of us , and being clear of the Streites , we bore further into the main Ocean , keeping our course more Southerly , to bring our selves the sooner under the latitude of our own climate . 
 The wind was very great at sea , so that we lay a hull all night , & had snow half a foot deep on the snow a 
 hatches . fAuus ? e 
 From the 24 until the 28 we had very much wind , * ' but large , keeping our course Southsoutheast , and had like to have lost the Barks , but by good hap we met again . The height being taken , we were in degrees and a half . 
 The 29 of August the wind blew much at Northeast , so that we could bear but only a bunt of our foresail , and the Barks were not able to carry any sail at all . 
 The Michael lost company of us and shaped her course towards Orkney because that way was better known unto them , and arrived at Yermouth . 
 The 30 of August with the force of the wind , and a surge of the sea , the Master of the Gabriel and the The Master Boatswain were stricken both overboard , & hardly was the Boatswain recovered , having hold on a rope hanging overboard in the sea , and yet the Bark was laced before and after with ropes a breast high within board . 
 This Master was called William Smith , being but a young man and a very sufficient mariner , who being all the morning before exceeding pleasant , told his Captain he dreamed that he was cast overboard , and that the 
 315 
 Boatswain had him by the hand , and could not save him , and so immediately upon the end of his tale , his dream came right evilly to pass , and indeed the Boatswain in like sort held him by one hand , having hold on a rope with the other , until his force failed , and the Master drowned . The height being taken we found our selves to be in the latitude of degrees and a half , and reckoned our selves from the Queens Cape homeward about two hundreth leagues . 
 The last of August about midnight , we had two or three great and sudden flaws or storms . 
 The first of September the storm was grown very great , and continued almost the whole day and night , and lying a hull to tarry for the Barks our ship was much beaten with the seas , every sea almost overtaking our poop , so that we were constrained with a bunt of our sail to try it out , and ease the rolling of our ship . And so the Gabriel not able to bear any sail to keep company with us , and our ship being higher in the poop , and a tall ship , whereon the wind had more force to drive , went so fast away that we lost sighed of them , and left them to God and their good fortune of Sea. The second day of September in the morning , it pleased God of his goodness to send us a calm , whereby we perth Rudder of ceived the Rudder of our ship torn in twaine , and almost the Aid tome ready to fap away . Wherefore taking the benefit of the ’ time , we flung half a dozen couple of our best men over board , who taking great pains under water , driving planks , and binding with ropes , did well strengthen and mend the matter , who returned the most part more then half dead out of the water , and as Gods pleasure was , the sea was calm until the work was finished . How the lati - The September , the height of the Sun being tudes were taken , we found our selves to be in the latitude of always taken degrees and a half . In this voyage commonly we ' ratte-mth^^ took the latitude of the place by the height of the sun , Staff then because the long day takes away the light not only of Astrolabe . the Polar , but also of all other fixed Stars . And here 316 
 the North Star is so much elevated above the Horizon , that with the staff it is hardly to be well observed , and the degrees in the Astrolabe are too small to observe minutes . Therefore we always used the Staff and the sun as fittest instruments for this use . 
 Having spent foure or five days in traverse of the seas with contrary wind , making our Souther way good as near as we could , to raise our degrees to bring our selves with the latitude of Sylley , we took the height the tenth of September , and found our selves in the latitude of degrees and ten minutes . The eleventh of September about sixe a clock at night the wind came good Southwest , we vered sb eat and set our course Southeast . 
 And upon Thursday , the twelfth of September , taking the height , we were in the latitude of and a half , and reckoned our selves not passed one hundred and fifty leagues short of Sylley , the weather fair , the wind large at Westsouth west , we kept our course Southeast . 
 The thirteenth day the height being taken , we found our selves to be in the latitude of degrees , the wind Westsouthwest , then being in the height of Sylley , and we kept our course East , to run in with the sleeve or channel so called , being our narrow seas , and reckoned us short of Sylley twelve leagues . 
 Sonday , the 15 of September about foure of the clock , we began to found with our led , and had ground at 61 fathom depth , white small sandy ground , and reckoned us upon the back of Sylley , and set our course East and by North , Eastnortheast , and Northeast among . 
 The sixteenth of September , about eight of the clock in the morning sounding , we had 65. fathom osey sand , and thought our selves thwart of S. Georges channel a little within the banks . And bearing a small sail all night , we made many soundings , which were about fortie fathom , and so shallow , that we could not well tell where we were . 
 317 
 The seventeenth of September we sounded , and had forty fathom , and were not far off the lands end , finding branded sand with small worms and Cockle shells , and were shot between Sylley and the lands end , and being within the bay , we were not able to double the point with a South and by East way , but were feign to make another board , the wind being at Southwest and by West , and yet could not double the point to come clear of the lands end , to bear along the channel : and the weather cleared up when we were hard aboard the shore , and we made the lands end perfect , and so put up along Saint Georges channel . And the weather being very foul at sea , we coveted some harbour , because The arrival of our steerage was broken , and so came to anchor in Padstow ? road in Cornewall . But riding there a very dangerous Cornewall road , we were advised by the country , to put to Sea again , and of the two evils , to choose the less , for there was nothing but present peril where we road : whereupon we plied along the channel to get to Londy , from whence we were again driven , being but and open road , where our Anchor came home , and with force of weather put to Seas again , and about the three and twentieth Our camming of September , arrived at Milford Haven in Wales , which ^Haven^ being a very good harbour , made us happy men , that ’ we had received such long desired safety . 
 About one month after our arrival ! here , by order from the Lords of the Counsel , the ship came up to The arrival Bristow , where the Over was committed to keeping in the ^Qrhtow^1 Castle there . Here we found the Gabriel one of the ’ Barks , arrived in good safety , who having never a man within board very sufficient to bring home the ship , after the Master was lost , by good fortune , when she came upon the coast , met with a ship of Bristow at sea , who conducted her in safety thither . 
 The Michael Here we herd good tidings also of the arrival of the “ llorth ' art^ otber Bark called the Michael , in the North parts , which cr pars . as not a ttie joyful unto us , that it pleased God so to bring us to a safe meeting again , and we lost in 318 
 all the voyage only one man , beside one that died Only one man at sea , which was sick before he came aboard , and was died the so desirous to follow this enterprise , that he rather chosen to die therein , then not to be one to attempt so notable a voyage . 
 The third voyage of Captain Frobisher , pre - tended for the discovery of Cataia , by Meta Incognita , Anno Do. 1578. 
 He general being returned from the second voyage , immediately after his arrival in England , repaired with all haste to the Court being then at Windsore , to advertise her Majesty of his prosperous proceeding , and good success in this last voyage , & of the plenty of gold Over , 
 with other matters of importance which he had in these Septentrional ! parts discovered . He was courteously entertained , and heartily welcomed of many noble men , but especially for his great adventure , commended of her Majesty , at whose hands he received great thanks , and most gracious countenance , according to his deserts . Her Highness also greatly commended the rest of the Gentlemen in this service , for their great forwardness in this so dangerous and attempt : but especially she rejoiced very much , that among them there was so good order of government , so good agreement , every man so ready in his calling , to do whatsoever the General should command , which due commendation graciously of her Majesty remembered , gave so great encouragement to all the Captains and Gentlemen , that they , to continue her Highness so good and honourable opinion of them , have since neither spared labour , limb , nor life , to bring this matter ( so well begun ) to a happy and prosperous end . And finding that the matter of the gold Over had appearance & made show of great riches & profit , & the hope of the passage to Cataya , by this last voyage greatly 3X9 
 M. Frobisher commended of her Majesty . 
 The Gentlemen commended . 
 1578-Commissioners appointed to examine the goodness of the Over . 
 A name given tope place new discovered . 
 The hope of the passage to Cataya . 
 A forte to be built in Meta Incognita . 
 increased , her Majesty appointed speciali Commissioners chosen for this purpose , gentlemen of great judgement , art , and skill , to look thoroughly into the cause , for the true trial and due examination thereof , and for the full handling of all matters thereunto appertaining . And because that place and country hath never heretofore been discovered , and therefore had no speciali name , by which it might be called and known , her Majesty nam it very properly Meta Incognita , as a mark and bound utterly hitherto unknown . The commissioners after sufficient trial and proof made of the Over , and having understood by sundry reasons , and substantiali grounds , the possibility and likelihood of the passage , advertised her highness , that the cause was of importance , and the voyage greatly worthy to be advanced again . Whereupon preparation was made of ships and all other things necessary , with such expedition , as the time of the year then required . And because it was assuredly made account of , that the commodity of Mines , there already discovered , would at the least countervail in all respects the adventurers charge , and give further hope & likelihood of greater matters to follow : it was thought needful , both for the better guard of those parts already found , and for further discovery of the Inland and secrets of those countries' , & also for further search of the passage to Cataya ( whereof the hope continually more & more increases ) that certain numbers of chosen soldiers and discreet men for those purposes should be assigned to inhabit there . Whereupon there was a strong fort or house of timber , artificially framed , & cunningly devised by a notable learned man here at home , in ships to be carried thither , whereby those men that were appointed to winter & stay there the whole year , might aswell be defended from the danger of the snow and cold air , as also fortified from the force or offence of those country people , which perhaps otherwise with too great multitudes might oppress them . And to this great adventure and notable exploit many 320 
 well minded and forward young Gentlemen of our country willingly have offered themselves . And first Captain Fenton Lieutenant generail for Captain Frobisher , and in charge of the company with him there , Captain Best , and Captain Filpot , unto whose good discretions the government of that service was chiefly commended , who , as men not regarding peril in respect of the profit and common wealth of their country , were willing to abide the first brunt & adventure of those dangers among a savage and brutish kind of people , in a place hitherto ever thought for extreme could not habitable . The whole number of men which had offered , and were appointed to inhabit Meta Incognita all the year , were one hundreth persons , whereof 40 should be mariners for the use of ships , 30 Miners for gathering the gold Over together for the next year , and 30 soldiers for the better guard of the rest , within which last number are included the Gentlemen , Goldfiners , Bakers , Carpenters , & all necessary persons . To each of the Captains was assigned one ship , aswell for the further searching of the coast & country there , as for to return & bring back their companies again , if the necessity of the place so urged , or by miscarrying of the fleet the next year , they might be disappointed of their further provision . Being therefore thus furnished with all necessaries , there were ready to depart upon the said voyage 15 sail of good ships , whereof the whole number was to return again with their loading of gold Over in the end of the summer , except those 3 ships , which should be left for the use of those Captains which should inhabit there the whole year . And being in so good readiness , the general with all the Captains came to the Court , then lying at Greenwich , to take their leave of her Majesty , at whose hands they all received great encouragement , and gracious countenance . Her highness beside other good gifts , and greater promises , bestowed on the general a fair chain of gold , and the rest of the Captains kissed her hand , took un 321 x 
 A hundreth men appointed to inhabit there . 
 Fifteene sail . 
 [ HIM . 75-1 
 A chain of gold given to M. Frobisher . 
 their leave , and departed every man towards their charge . 
 The names of the ships with their several Captains . 
 i In the Aid being Amirali , was the general Captain Frobisher . 
 2 In the Thomas Allen Viceadmiral Yorke . 
 3 In the Judith Lieutenant generail Fenton . 
 4 In the Anne Francis Best . 
 5 In the Hopewell Carew . 
 6 In the Bear Filpot . 
 7 In the Thomas of Ipswich Tanfield . 
 8 In the Emmanuel of Exceter Courtney . 
 9 In the Francis of Foy Moils . 
 10 In the Moon Upcot . 
 11 In the Emmanuel of Bridgewater Newton . 
 12 In the Salomon of Weymouth Randal . 
 13 In the Bark Dennis Kendal . 
 14 In the Gabriel Harvey . 
 15 In the Michael , Kinnersley . 
 The said fifteene sail of ships arrived and met together at Harwich , the seven and twentieth day of May Anno 1578 , where the general and the other Captains made view , and mustered their companies . And every several Captain received from the general certain Articles of direction , for the better keeping of order and company together in the way , which Articles are as follows . 
 