A letter written to M. Richard Hakluyt of the middle Temple , containing a report of the true state and commodities of Newfoundland , by M. Anthonie Parkhurst Gentleman , 1578. 
 Aster Hakluyt , after most hearty commendations , with like thanks for your manifold kindness to me showed , not for any merits that hitherto have been mine , but wholly proceeding , I must needs confess , of your own good nature , which is so ready pressed to benefit 
 your country and all such poor men as have any spark in them of good desires , that you do not only become their friend , but also - humble your self as servant in their affairs : for which I would to God I were once in place where I might cause your burning zeal to be known to those that have authority , power , and ability to recompense your traveling mind and pen , wherewith you cease not day nor night to labour and travel to bring your good and godly desires to some pass , though not possibly to that happy end that you most thirst for : for such is the malice of wicked men the devils instruments in this our age , that they cannot suffer any thing ( or at least few ) to proceed and prosper that tendeth to the setting forth of Gods glory , and the amplifying of 
 the Christian faith , wherein hitherto princes have not be so diligent as their calling required . Alas , the labourers as yet are few , the harvest great , I trust God hath made you and instrument to increase the number , and to move men of power , to redeem the people of Newfoundland and those parts from out of the captivity of that spirituali Pharao , the devil . 
 Now to answer some part of your letter touching the sundry navies that come to Newfoundland , or Terra nova , for fish : you shall understand that some fish not near the other by 200. leagues , and therefore the certainty is not known ; and some years come many more English , then other some , as I see the like among us : who since my first travel being but 4. years , are increased from 30. sail to 50. which comes to pass chiefly by the imagination of the Western men , who think their neighbours have had greater gains then in very deed they have , for that they see me to take such pains yearly to go in proper person : they also suppose that I find some secret commodity by reason that I do search the harbors , creeks and havens , and also the land much more then ever any Englishman hath done . Surely I am glad that it so increases , whereof soever it springs . But to let this pass , you shall understand that I am informed that there are above 100. sail of Spaniards . Spaniards that come to take Cod ( who make all wet , and do dry it when they come home ) beside 20. or 30. more that come from Biskaie to kill Whale for Train . These be better appointed for shipping and furniture of munition , then any nation saving the Englishmen , who commonly are lords of the harbors where they fish , and do use all strangers help in fishing if need require , according to and old custom of the country , which thing they do willingly , so that you take nothing from them more then a boat or twaine of salt , in respect of your protection of them against rovers or other violent intruders , who do often put them from good harbour , etc. As touching their tunnage , I think it may be 
 A REPORT OF NEWFOUNDLAND a.d. . 1578. 
 near five or sixe thousand tun . But of Portugals Portugal ! . there are not lightly above 50. sail , and they make all wet in like sort , whose tunnage may amount to three thousand tons , and not upward . Of the French nation French . and Britons , are about one hundred and fiftie sails , Britons . the most of their shipping is very small , not passed fortie tons , among which some are great and reasonably well appointed , better then the Portugals , and not so well as the Spaniards , and the burden of them may be some 7000. tun . Their shipping is from all parts of France and Britaine , and the Spaniards from most parts of Spaine , the Portugals from Aviero and Viana , and from 2. or 3. ports more . The trade that our nation hath to Island makes , that the English are not there in such numbers as other nations . 
 Now to certify you of the fertility and goodness of The fertility the country , you shall understand that I have in sundry places sown Wheat , Barley , Rye , Oats , Beans , Pease ’ and seeds of herbs , kernels , Plumstones , nuts , all which have prospered as in England . The country yields many good trees of fruit , as Filberts in some places , but in all places Cherie trees , and a kind of Pearetree meet to graft on . As for Roses , they are as common as brambles here : Strawberries , Dewberies , and Rasps , as common as grass . The timber is most Fir , yet plenty of Pineapple trees : few of these two kinds meet to mast a ship of threescore and ten : But near Cape Briton , and to the Southward , big and sufficient for any ship . There be also Oaks & thorns , there is in all the country [ III . 133. J plenty of Birch and Alder , which be the meetest wood for coal , and also willow , which will serve for many other purposes . As touching the kinds of Fish beside Cod , Several sorts there are Herrings , Salmons , Thornebacke , Plase , or °ffish-rather we should call them Flounders , Dog fish , and another most excellent of taste called of us a Cat , Oysters , and Muscles , in which I have found pearls above 40. in one Muscle , and generally all have some , great or small . I herd of a Portugall that found one worth 
 300. ducats : There are also other kinds of Shellfish , as limpets , cockles , wilkes , lobsters , and crabs : also a fish Called by the like a * Smelled which comes on shore , and another that 
 nchwas hath the like property , called a Squid : these be the 
 and by the fish , which ( when I please to be merry with my old 
 Portugal : companions ) I say , do come on shore when I command 
 CapeRnas . them in the name of the 5. ports , and conjure them by such like words : These also be the fish which I may sweep with brooms on a heap , and never wet my foot , only pronouncing two or three words whatsoever they be appointed by any man , so they hear my voice : the virtue of the words be small , but the nature of the fish great and strange . For the Squid , whose nature is to come by night as well as by day , I tell them , I set him a candle to see his way , with which he is much delighted , or else comes to wonder at it as doe our fresh water fish , the other comes also in the night , but chiefly in the day , being forced by the Cod that would devour him , and therefore for fear coming so near the shore , is driven dry by the surge of the Sea on the pebble and sands . Of these being as good as a Smelled you may take up with a shove-net as plentifully as you do Wheat in a shovel , sufficient in three or foure hours for a whole City . There be also other fish which I tell those that are desirous of strange news , that I take as fast as one would gather up stones , and them I take with a long pole and hook . Yea marry say they , we believe so , and that you catch all the rest you bring home in that sort , from Portugals and Frenchmen . No surely , but thus I do : with three hooks stretched forth in the end of a pole , I make as it were and Eel spear , with which I prick those Flounders as fast as you would take up fritters with a sharp pointed stick , and with that tool I may take up in less then half a day Lobsters sufficient to find three hundred men for a days meat . This pastime ended , I show them that for my pleasure I take a great Mastive I have , and say no more then thus : Go fetch me this rebellious fish that obeyeth not this Gentle - 
 man that comes from Kent and Christendome , bringing them to the high water mark , and when he doubteth that any of those great Cods by reason of shelving ground be like to tumble into the Sea again , he will warily take heed and carry him up back to the heap of his fellows . This doth cause my friends to wonder , and at the first hearing to judge them notorious lies , but they laugh and are merry when they hear the means how each tale is true . 
 I told you once I do remember how in my travail into Africa and America , I found trees that bore Oysters , which was strange to you , till I told you that their boughs hung in the water , on which both Oysters and Muscles did stick fast , as their property is , to stakes and timber . 
 Now to let these merry tales pass , and to come to earnest matters again , you shall understand , that Newfoundland is in a temperate Climate , and not so cold as foolish Mariners do say , who find it cold sometime when plenty of Isles of ice lie near the shore : but up in the land they shall find it hotter then in England in many parts of the country towards the South . This cold comes by and accidentali means , as by the ice that comes fleeting from the North parts of the world , and not by the situation of the country , or nature of the Climate . The country is full of little small rivers all the year long proceeding from the mountains , engendered both of snow and rain : few springs that ever I could find or hear of , except it be towards the South : in some places or rather in most places great lake's with plenty of fish , the country most covered with woods of fir , yet in many places indifferent good grass , and plenty of Bears every where , so that you may kill of them as oft as you list : their flesh is as good as young beef , and hardly you may know the one from the other if it be powdered but two days . Of Otters we may take like store . There are Sea Gulls , Murres , Ducks , wild Geese , and many other kind of 
 birds store , too long to write , especially at one Island nam Penguin , where we may drive them on a plank into our ship as many as shall lade her . These birds are also called Penguins , and cannot fly , there is more meat in one of these then in a goose : the Frenchmen that fish near the grand bay , do bring small store of flesh with them , but victuali themselves always with these birds . Now again , for Venison plenty , especially to the North about the grand bay , and in the South near Cape Raze , and Pleasance : there are many other kinds of beasts , as Luzarnes and other mighty beasts like to Camels in greatness , and their feet cloven , I did see them far off not able to discern them perfectly , but their steps showed that their feet were cloven , and bigger then the feet of Camels , I suppose them to be a kind of Buffs which I read to be in the countries adjacent , and very many in the firm land . There be also to the Northwards , Hares and Foxes in all parts so plentifully , that at noon days they take away our flesh before our faces within less then half a pair of buts length , where foure and twentie persons were turning of dry fish , and two dogs in sighed , yet stood they not in fear till we gave shot and set the dogs upon them : the Bears also be as bold , which will not spare at midday to take your fish before your face , and I believe assuredly would not hurt any body unless they be forced . 
 Now to show you my fancy what places I suppose meetest to inhabit in those parts discovered of late by our nation : There is near about the mouth of the grand Bay , and excellent harbour called of the Frenchmen Chas-teaux , and one Island in the very entry of the straight called Bell Isle , which places if they be peopled and well fortified ( as there are stones and things meet for it throughout all Newfound land ) we shall be lords of the whole fishing in small time , if it do so please the Queens Majesty , and from thence send wood and coal with all necessaries to Labrador lately discovered : but I 
 am of opinion , and do most steadfastly believe that we shall find as rich Mines in more temperate places and Climates , and more profitable for fishing then any yet we have used , where we shall have not far from thence plenty of salt made by fire undoubtedly , and very likely by the heat of the Sun , by reason I find salt kerned on the rocks in nine and fortie and better : these places may be found for salt in three and fortie . I know more touching these two commodities last remembered then any man of our nation doth ; for that I have some knowledge in such matters , and have most desired the finding of them by painful travail , and most diligent inquiry . Now to be short , for I have be over long by Master Butlers means , who cried on me to write at large , and of as many things as I call to mind worthy of remembrance : wherefore this one thing more . I could wish the Island in the mouth of the river of Canada should be inhabited , and the river searched , for that there are many things which may rise thereof , as I will show you hereafter . I could find in my heart to make proof whither it be true or not that I have read and herd of Frenchmen and Portugals to be in that river , and about Cape Briton . I had almost forgotten to speak of the plenty of wolves , and to show you that there be foxes , black , white & grey : other beasts I know none save those before remembered . I found also certain Mines of iron and copper in S. Johns , and in the Island of Iron , which things might turn to our great benefit , if our men had desire to plant thereabouts , for proof whereof I have brought home some of the oar of both sorts . And thus I end , assuring you on my faith , that if I had not been deceived by the vile Portugals descending of the Jewes and Judas kind , I had not failed to have searched this river , and all the coast of Cape Briton , what might have be found to have benefited our country : but they breaking their bans , and falsifying their faith and promise , disappointed me of the salt they should have brought me in part of recompense of my good service in 
 defending them two years against French Rovers , that had spoiled them , if I had not defended them . 
 By means whereof they made me loose not only the searching of the country , but also forced me to come home with great loss above 600. li . For recompense whereof I have sent my man into Portugall to demand justice at the Kings hand , if not , I must put up my supplication to the Queens Majesty & her honourable council , to grant me leave to stay here so much of their goods as they have damnified me , or else that I may take of them in Newfound land , as much fish as shall be worth 600. li . or as much as the salt might have made . I pray you advertise me what way I were best to take , and what hope there will be of a recompense if I follow the suit : many there are that do comfort me , and do bid me proceed , for that her Majesty and the council do tender poor fisher men , who with me have sustained three hundred pound loss in that voyage . And to conclude , if you and your friend shall think me a man sufficient and of credit , to seek the Isle of S. John , or the river of Canada , with any part of the firm land of Cape Briton , I shall give my diligence for the true and perfect discovery , and leave some part of mine own business to further the same : and thus I end , committing you to God . From Bristow the 13. of November , 1578. 
 Yours to use and command 
 Anthony Parckhurst . 
 