To the worshipful , Master Richard Hakluit at Oxford in Christchurch Master of Arts , and Philosophic , his friend and brother . 
 I Had not purposed to write unto you , when the promise of your letters came to my mind : You thought in June last to have followed us your self , and therefore I had left order that you should be advertised of my state , by Master Doctor Humfrey : but so you would not be satisfied : I will write therefore to you almost in the same words , because I have no leisure at this time , to meditate new matters , and to vary or multiply words . 
 The ii . of June we set sail at length from England in good earnest , and departed , leaving the haven and land behind us at Plimmouth : our Fleet consisted of five ships : the greatest , which the Admirals brother had lent us , withdrew her self from us the third day , we know not upon what occasion : with the rest we sailed still together till the 23. of July : at which time our view of one another being intercepted by the great mists , some of us sailed one way , and some another : to us alone the first land appeared , the first of August , about the latitude of 50. degrees , when as before we had descended beyond 41. degrees in hope of some Southerly winds , which notwithstanding never blue to us at any fit time . v 
 It is and Island which your men call Penguin , because of the multitude of birds of the same name . Yet we neither saw any birds , nor drew near to the land , the winds serving for our course directed to another place , but we met altogether at that place a little before the Haven , whereunto by common Council we had determined to come , and that within the space of two hours by the great goodness of God , and to our great joy . The place is situate in Newfound land , between 47. and 
 vni 81 F 
 A.D. 
 .1583 . 
 48. degrees , called by the name of Saint Johns : the Admiral himself by reason of the multitude of the men , and the smallness of his ship , had his company somewhat sickly , and had already lost two of the same company , which died of the Flix : of the rest we conceive good hope . Of our company ( for I joined my self with Maurice brown , a very proper Gentleman ) two persons by a mischance were drowned , the rest are in safety , and strong , and for mine own part I was never more healthy . we arrived at this place the third of August : and the fift the Admiral took possession of the Country , for himself and the kingdom of England : having made and published certain Laws , concerning religion , and obedience to the Queen of England : at this time our fare is somewhat better , and daintier , then it was before : for in good sooth , the experience of so long time hath taught us what contrary winds we have found , and what great travel we may endure hereafter : and therefore we will take such order , that we will want nothing : for we found in this place about twenty Portugall and Spanish ships , beside the ships of the English : which being not able to match us , suffer us not to be hunger starved : the English although they were of themselves strong enough , and safe from our force , yet seeing our authority , by the Queens letters patents , they showed us all manner of duty and humanity . 
 The manner of this Country and people remain now to be spoken of . But what shall I say , my good Hakluyt , when I see nothing but a very wilderness ? Of fish here is incredible abundance , whereby great gain grows to them , that travel to these parts : the hook is no sooner thrown out , but it is eftsoons drawn up with some goodly fish : the whole land is full of hills and woods . The trees for the most part are Pynes and of them some are very old , and some young : a great part of them being fallen by reason of their age , does so hinder the sighed of the land , and stop the way of those that seek to travel , that they can go no whither : all the 82 
 grass here is long , and tall , and little differeth from ours . It seems also that the nature of this soil is fit for corn : for I found certain blades and ears in a manner bearded , so that it appears that by manuring and sowing , they may easily be framed for the use of man : here are in the woods bush berries , or rather straw berries growing up like trees , of great sweetness . Bears also appear about the fishers stages of the Country , and are sometime killed , but they seem to be white , as I conjectured by their skins , and somewhat less then ours . Whither there be any people in the Country I know not , neither have I seen any to witness it . And to say truth , who can , when as it is not possible to pass any whither ? In like sort it is unknown , whither any metals lie under the hills : the cause is all one , although the very colour and hue of the hills seem to have some Mines in them : we moved the Admiral to set the woods a fire , that so we might have space , and entrance to take view of the Country , which motion did nothing displease him , were it not for fear of great inconvenience that might thereof ensue : for it was reported and confirmed by very credible persons , that when the like happened by chance in another Port , the fish never came to the place about it , for the space of 7. whole years after , by reason of the waters made bitter by the Turpentine , and Rosen of the trees , which ran into the rivers upon the firing of them . The weather is so hight this time of the year , that except the very fish , which is laid out to be dried by the sun , be every day turned , it cannot possibly be preserved from burning : but how cold it is in the winter , the great heaps , and mountains of ice , in the midst of the Sea have taught us : some of our company report , that in May , they were sometime kept in , with such huge ice , for 16. whole days together , as that the Islands thereof were threescore fathoms thick , the sides whereof which were towards the Sun , when they were melted , the whole mass or heap was so inverted and turned in manner of balancing , that that part which 
 was before downward rose upward , to the great peril of those that are near them , as by reason we may gather . The air upon land is indifferent clear , but at Sea towards the East there is nothing else but perpetuali mists , and in the Sea it self , about the Bank ( for so they call the place where they find ground fourty leagues distant from the shore , and where they begin to fish ) there is no day without rain . When we have served , and supplied our necessity in this place , we purpose by the help of God to pass towards the South , with so much the more hope every day , by how much the greater the things are , that are reported of those Countries' , which we go to discover . Thus much touching our estate . 
 Now I desire to know somewhat concerning you , but I fear in vain , but specially I desire out of measure to know how my Patron master Henry Umpton does take my absence : my obedience , and duty shall always be ready towards him as long as I live : but in deed I hope , that this journey of ours shall profitable to his intentions . It remains that you think me to be still yours , and so yours as no men more . The son of God bless all our labors , so far , as that you your self may be partaker of our blessing . Adieu , my most friendly , most sweet , most virtuous Hakluyt : In Newfound land , at Saint Johns Port , the 6. of August . 1583. 
 STEVEN PARMENIUS of 
 Buda , yours . 
 