The voyage of the ship called the Marigold of M. Hill of Redrife unto Cape Briton and beyond to the latitude of 44 degrees and and half , 1593 Written by Richard fisher Master Hills man of Redriffe . 
 He ship called the Marigold of 70 tons in burden furnished with 20 men , whereof 10 were Mariners , the Master's name being Richard Strong of Apsham , the Master's mate Peter Langworth of Apsham , with 3 coopers , 2 butchers to flay the Morsses or sea 
 Oxen ( whereof diverse have teeth above a cubit long & skins far thicker then any bulls hide ) with other necessary people , departed out of Falmouth the 1 of June 1593 in consort of another ship of M. Drakes of Apsham , which upon some occasion was not ready so soon as she should have be by two months . The place for which these two ships were bound was and Island within the straights of Saint Peter on the back side of Newfoundland to the Southwest in the latitude of fortie seven degrees , called by the Britons of Saint Malo the Isle of Ramea , but by the Savages and naturals of the Continent next adjoining , Menquit : On which Isle are so great abundance of the huge and mighty Sea Oxen with great teeth in the months of April , May and June , that there have be fifteene hundreth killed there by one small bark , in the year 1591. The two English ships aforesaid , lost company before they came to Newfoundland : and never came after together in all their voyage . 
 The ship of M. George Drake fell first with Newfoundland , and afterwards very directly came to the Isle 157 
 The voyage of M. Drake of Apsham to Ramea . 
 The Isle of Ramea , or Menquit . 
 Ramea , though too late in the year to make her voyage : where she found a ship of Saint Malo three parts freighted with these fish : the men whereof inquiring whence our ship was and who was the Master thereof , being answered that she was belonging to Master George Drake of Apsham , fearing to be taken as good prize being of a Leaguer town , and at that time out of league with England , fled so hastily that present night that they left three and twentie men and three Shallops behind them , all which our men seized upon and brought away as good prizes home . 
 Here our men took certain Sea-oxen , but nothing such numbers as they might have had , if they had come in due season , which they had neglected . The ship called the Marigold fell with Cape Saint Francis in Newfoundland the eleventh of Julie , and from thence we went into the Bay Rogneuse , and afterwards doubled Cape Razo , and sailing towards the straight of Saint Peter ( which is the entrance between Newfoundland and Cape Briton , ) being unacquainted with the place , beat up and down a very long time , and yet missed it , and at length over shot it , and fell with Cape Briton . 
 The English Here diverse of our men went on land upon the very men land upon Qapej where , at their arrival they found the spittes of ape rtton . Savages which had roasted meat a little before . 
 And as they viewed the country they saw diverse beasts and fowls , as black Foxes , Dear , Otters , great Fowls with red legs , Pengwyns , and certain others . But having found no people here at this our first landing we went again on shipboorde , and sailed farther foure leagues to the West of Cape Briton , where we saw They go on many Seals . And here having need of fresh water tn “ n we went again on shore . And passing somewhat more ? ' into the land , we found certain round ponds artificially made by the Savages to keep fish in , with certain wears in them made to take fish . To these ponds we repaired to fill our cask with water . we had not be 158 
 long here , but there came one Savage with black long The people of hair hanging about his shoulders who called unto us , tfie trey weaving his hands downward towards his belhe , using our men these words , Calitogh Calitogh : as we drew towards him one of our men's musket unawares shot off : whereupon he fell down , and rising up suddenly again he cried thrice with a loud voice Chiogh , Chiogh , Chiogh . Thereupon nine or tenne of his fellows running right up over the bushes with great agility and swiftness came towards us with white staves in their hands like half pikes , and their dogs of colour black not so big Black dogs . as a greyhound followed them at the heals ; but we retired unto our boat without any hurt at all received . Howbeit one of them brake and hogshead which we had filled with fresh water , with a great branch of a tree which lay on the ground . Upon which occasion we bestowed half a dousen muskets shot upon them , which they avoided by falling flat to the earth , and afterward retired themselves to the woods . One of the Savages , which seemed to be their Captain , beware a long mantle of beasts skins hanging on one of his shoulders . The rest were all naked except their privities , which were covered with a skin tied behind . After they had escaped our shot they made a great fire on the shore , belike to give their fellows warning of us . 
 The kinds of trees that we noted to be here , were goodly Oaks , Fir trees of a great height , a kind of tree called of us Quickbeame , and Cherie trees , and diverse other kinds to us unknown , because we stayed not long with diligence to observe them : and there is great show of rosen , pitch , and tar . we found in both the places where we went on land abundance of Raspeses , Strawberries , Hurts , and herbs of good smell , and diverse good for the skurvie , and grass very rank and of great length . we saw five or sixe boats sailing to the Southwestwardes of Cape Briton , which we judged to be Christians , which had some trade that way . we saw also , while we were on shore , the manner of their * 59 
 A secret trade to the Southwest of Cape Briton . 
 a.d. the ENGLISH VOYAGES 
 J593 ’ .. 
 hanging up of their fish and flesh with withes to dry in the air : they also lay them upon rafts and hurdles and make a smoke under them , or a soft fire , and so dry them as the Savages use to do in Virginia . 
 Soundings to While we lay foure leagues South of Cape Briton Southwest we sounded and had sixtie fathoms black ozy ground . ward of Cape sailing thence Westward nine or ten leagues ofF Briton . the shore , we had twenty foure fathoms red sand , and small whitish stones . we continued our course so far to the Southwest , that we brought our selves into thee They sail 50 latitude of fourtie foure degrees and and half , having sailed or 60 leagues fiftie 
 or sixtie leagues to the Southwest of Cape Briton . to tO e out . we foum ( i ( he current between this Cape Briton and Cape Rey to set out towards the Eastsoutheast . In our West of Cape course to the West of Cape Briton we saw exceeding Briton . great store of seals , and abundance of Porposes , whereof 
 Seals Spor - we killed eleven . We saw Whale's also of all sorts 
 poses ' , Whale's aswell small as great : and here our men took many and Cods . bearded Cods with one teat underneath , which are like to the Northeast Cods , and better then those of Newfoundland . 
 They continue From our arrival at the haven of Saint Francis in New-on the coast foundland , ( which was as is aforesaid the eleventh of JBriton West we continued beating up and down on the coast 
 wards full of Arambec to the West and Southwest of Cape Briton 
 eleven weeks . until the twentie eight of September , fully by the space of eleven weeks : and then by the persuasion of our Master and certain others we shaped our course homeward by the Isles of the Azores , and came first to Corvo and Flores , where beating up and down , and missing of expected prey , we sailed by Tercera , and from thence to Saint Michael , where we sought to board a Portugall ship , which we found too well appointed for us to bring along with us , and so being forced to leave them behind and having wasted all our victuals , we were constrained against our wills to hasten home unto our narrow Seas : but it was the two and twentieth of December before we could 160 
 get into the Downs : where for lack of wind we kept our Christmas with dry bread only for dropping of our clothes . One thing very strange happened in this voyage : to wit , that a mighty great Whale followed our ship by the space of many days as we passed by Cape Razo , which by no means we could chase from our ship , until one of our men fell overboard and was drowned , after which time she immediately forsook us , and never afterwards appeared unto us . 
 A.D. 
 * 593* 
 And huge Whale pursued their ship by the space of many days , till one of their men fell overboard . 
 