Here follows the course from Belle Isle , Carpont , and the Grand Bay in Newfoundland up the River of Canada for the space of 230. leagues , observed by John Alphonse of Xanctoigne chief Pilot to Monsieur Roberval , 1542. 
 Else Isles are in 51 degrees and % . Bells Belle Isle . Isles and Carpont are Northnorthwest and Southsoutheast , and they are ten leagues distant . Carpont is in 52 de - Carpant In grees . Carpont and Bell Isle from the 52 - degrees . Grand Bay are Northeast and Southwest , and the distance from Bell Isle to the 
 Grand Bay is 7 leagues . The midst of the Grand Bay is The Grand in 52 degrees and a half , and on the Northside thereof there is a rock : half a league from the Isle , over against J ' Carpont towards the East there is a small flat Island , and on the side towards the Northeast there is a flat rock . A flat rock . And when thou comest out of the harbour of Carpont thou must leave this rock on the starreboord side , and also on the larboard side there are two or three small Isles : and when thou comest out on the Northeast side , ranging along the shore towards the West about two pikes length in the midway there is a should which lies on thy starboard side : and sail thou by the North coast , and leave two parts of the Grand Bay towards the South ; because there is a rock which runneth 2 or 3 leagues into the sea . And when thou art come athwart the haven of Butes , run along the North shore about one league or Butes . and half ofF , for the coast is without all danger : Bell Isle in the mouth of the Grand Bay , and the Isles of Blanc The Isle of Sablon , which are within the Grand Bay , near unto the Blanc Sablm North shore lie Northeast , West and Southwest , & the °r m lie san * distance is 30 leagues . The Grand Bay at the entrance The several is but 7 leagues broad from land to land until it come bQ^ndBa* over against the Bay des Chasteaux : and from thence you forward it hath not passed 5 leagues in breadth . And 
 275 
 Blanc Sab Ion. in 51. deg . 2. thirdparts . 
 The Isles de la Damoiselle in 50. deg . 3. fourth parts . 
 Many Isles W good harbors . 
 Cape Tienot in 50 deg . one fourth part . 
 against Blanc Sablon it is 8 leagues broad from land to land . And the land on the South shore is all low land along the sea coast . The North shore is reasonable high land , Blanc Sablon is in 5 if degrees . The Isles of Blanc Sablon & the Isles de la Damoiselle , are Northeast , Westsouthwest , and take a little of the Westsouthwest , and they are distant 36 leagues : these Isles are in 50. deg . 
 And there is a good haven : & you may enter by and high Cape which lies along towards the Northeast , and within the distance of a pike & and half , because of a rock which lies on your larrebord side , & you may anchor in 10 fathom water over against a little nook : and from the great headland unto the place where thou dost anchor there is not above the length of 2 Cables . And if thou wouldst go out by the West side , thou must sail near the Isle by the starrebord , & give room unto the Isle on the larboard at the coming forth : and when thou art not passed a cables length out thou must sail hard by the Isles on the larboard side , by reason of a sunken flat which lies on the starrebord , and thou shalt sail so on to the Southsouthwest , until thou come in sighed of a rock which shines , which is about half a league in the sea distant from the Isles , and thou shalt leave it on the larrebord : ( and from the Isles of Damoiselle unto Newfoundland the sea is not in breadth above 36. leagues , because that Newfoundland even unto Cape Briton runneth not but Northnortheast & Southsouthwest . ) Between the Isles de la Damoiselle and the Isles of Blank Sablon there be many Isles and good harbours : and on this coast there are falcons & hawks , and certain fowls which seem to be feasants . The Isles de la Damoiselle & Cape Tienot are Northeast & Westsouthwest & take a little of the Northeast and southwest , & they are distant 18 leagues . Cape Tienot is in 50. deg . and f . And there the sea is broadest . And it may be to the end of Newfoundland , which is at the entrance of Cape Briton 70 leagues , which is the greatest breadth of the sea . And there are 6 or 7 Isles between the Isles de 
 276 
 la Damoiselle & Cape Tienot . Cape Tienot hath in the sea 5 or 6 leagues distant from it a sunken Hand dangerous for ships . The Cape Tienot and the midst of the Isle of Ascension are Northeast and southsouthwest , & they are 22. leagues distant , the midst of the Isle of Ascension is The in 49 deg . & J. ‘ The said Isle lies Northwest and Southeast , the Northwest end is in 50. degrees of latitude Or Natiscotec . and the Southeast end is in 48. degrees and a half and it is about 25. leagues long and 4. or 5. leagues broad : and from the Northwest end of the Isle unto the firm land of the North side the Sea is not above seven leagues broad , but unto the firm land on the South side are about 15. leagues . Cape Tienot and the end of the Isle of Ascension towards the Southeast are Northeast and Southwest , and are distant 30. leagues . The said Cape of Tienot and the Northwest end of the Isle of Ascension are East and West , and take a little of the Northeast and Southwest , and they are distant 34. leagues . The Isle of The com-Ascension is a goodly Isle , and a goodly champion land without any hills , standing all upon white rocks and J Alabaster , all covered with trees unto the Sea shore , and there are all sorts of trees as there be in France : and there 
 be wild beasts , as bears , Luserns , Porkespicks . And From Cape from the Southeast end of the Isle of Ascension unto the t0 tJie entrance of Cape Briton is but 50. leagues . The North - 
 west end of the Isle & the Cape des Monts nostre Dame , Ascension is which is on the main land towards the South , are North - but tfileagues . east and Westsouth west , and the distance between them CaPe °f is 15. leagues . The Cape is in 49. degrees , which is a D^n‘ ! tri very high land . The Cape and end of the Isle of Ascension towards the Southeast are East and West and there is 
 15. leagues distance between them . The Bay of Molves The Bay of or Gaspay is in 48. degrees , and the coast lies North Molves or and South , and takes a quarter of the Northeast and as^ ' Southwest unto the Bay of Heat : and there are 3. Isles , one great one and two small : from the Bay of Heat The Bay de until you pass the Monts nostre Dame all the land is C^^roro^ high and good ground all covered with trees . Ognedoc * 
 277 
 Greater store and better fish then in Newfoundland . Bouls . 
 Trees . 
 The mouth of the river of Canada twenty five leases broad . The 7 Isles in 50 degrees and a hafe . 
 The nver is here but 1o leagues broad . 
 The point of Ongear in 49 degrees and a quarter . 
 The Isle of Raquelle in 48 degrees and two third parts . 
 is a good Bay and lies Northnorthwest and Southsoutheast , and it is a good Harbour : and you must sail along the shore on the Northside by reason of the low point at the entrance thereof : and when you are passed the point bring your self to and anchor in 15. or 20. fathoms of water towards the South shore , and here within this Haven are two rivers , one which goes towards the Northwest , and the other to the Southwest . And on this coast there is great fishing for Cods and other fish , where there is more store then is in Newfoundland , and better fish . And here is great store of river foul , as Malards , wild Geese , and others : And here are all sorts of trees , Rose trees , Raspesses , Filbird trees , Apple trees , Pear trees , and it is hotter here in Summer then in France . The Isle of Ascension and the 7. Isles which lie on the North shore lie Southeast and Westnorthwest , and are distant 24. leagues . The Cape of Ognedoc and the 7. Isles are Northnorthwest and Southsoutheast , & are distant 35. leagues . The Cape of Monts nostre Dame and the 7. Isles are North and South , and the cut over from the one to the other is 25. leagues : and this is the breadth of this Sea , and from thence upward it begins to wax narrower and narrower . The 7. Isles are in 50. degrees and The 7. Isles and the point of Ongear lie Northeast and Southwest and the distance between them is 15. leagues , and between them are certain small Islands : and the point of Ongear and the mountains Nostre Dame , which are on the South side of the entrance of the river , are North and South : and the cut over from the one to the other is ten leagues : and this is here the abredth of the Sea. The point of Ongear and the river of Caen lie East and West , and they are distant 12. leagues . And all the coast from the Isle of Ascension hither is very good ground , wherein grow all sorts of trees that are in France and some fruits . The point of Ongear is in 49. degrees and And the river of Caen and the Isle of Raquelle lie Northeast and Southwest , and they are distant 12. leagues . The Isle of Raquelle is 278 
 in 48. degrees and In this river of Caen there is great store of fish . And here the Sea is not passed 8. leagues The river % broad . The Isle of Raquelle is a very low Isle , which is hoad . near unto the South shore , hard by a high Cape which is called the Cape of Marble . There is no danger there at all . And between Raquelle and the Cape of Marble ships may pass . And there is not from the Isle to the South shore above one league , and from the Isle unto the North shore about foure leagues . The Isle of Raquelle and the entrance of Saguenay are Northeast Westsouthwest , and are distant 14. leagues , and there are between them two 
 small Islands near the North shore . The entrance The entrance of Saguenay is in 48. degrees and and the entrance hath not passed a quarter of a league in breadth , and it is dangerous towards the Southwest : and two or three leagues within the entrance it begins to wax wider and wider : and it seems to be as it were and arm 
 of the Sea : And I think that the same runneth into 
 the Sea of Cathay , for it sends forth there a great The sea of current , and there does run in that place a terrible raze 
 or tIED . And here the river from the North shore to The river not the South shore is not passed foure leagues in breadth , and it is a dangerous passage between both the lands , because ‘ there lie banks of rocks in the river . The Isle of Raquelle and the Isle of Hares lie Northeast and Southwest , and take J of the East and the West , and they are distant 18. leagues . The entrance of Saguenay and the Isle of Liepueres or Hares lie Northnortheast & Southsouthwest , and are distant 5. leagues . The entrance of Saguenay and the Isle of Raquelle are Northnorthwest , and Southsouthwest , and are distant three leagues . The The Isle of Isle of Hares is in 48 and A of a degree . From the Mountains of Nostre Dame unto Canada and unto fg^ port _ Hochelaga , all the land on the South coast is fair , a low land and goodly champagne , all covered with trees unto the brink of the river . And the land on the North side is higher , and in some places there are high mountains . 
 And from the Isle of Hares unto the Isle of Orleans the 
 279 
 Note . river is not passed 4 or 5 leagues broad . Between the Isle of Hares and the highland on the North side the sea is not passed a league and and half broad , and it is very deep , for it is above 100. fathoms deep in the midst . To the East of the Isle of Hares there are 2 or 3 small Isles and rocks . And from hence to the Isle Des Coudres or of Filbeards , all is nothing but Isles and rocks on the South shore : and towards the North the sea is fair and deep . The Isle of Hares and the Isle of Filbeards lie northeast , West and Southwest , and they are distant 12 leagues . And you must always run along the high land on the north shore ; for on the other shore there is nothing but rocks . And you must pass by the side of the Isle of Filbeards , and the river there is not passed a quarter of a league broad , and you must sail in the midst of the channel : and in the midst runneth the best passage either at and high or a low water , because the sea runneth there strongly , and there are great dangers of rocks , and you had need of good anchor and cable . The isle of Filbeards is a small isle , about one league long , and half a league broad , but they are all banks of sand . 
 The isle of The isle of Filberts stands in 47. deg . and f . The isle filbeards in of FUberds and the isle of Orleans lie northeast and ‘ and ‘ ^quar - southwest , and they are distant 10 leagues , and thou must ters . pass by the high land on the northside about a quarter of a league , because that in the midst of the river there is nothing but sholds and rocks . And when thou shalt be over against a round Cape , thou must take over to the South shore southwest , and a quarter towards the South ; and thou shalt sail in 5. 6 and 7 fathoms : and there the The beginning river of Canada begins to be fresh , and the salt water of the fresh endeth . And when thou shalt be athwart the point of waUr ' the isle of Orleans , where the river begins to be fresh , 
 thou shalt sail in the midst of the river , and thou shalt leave the isle on the starreboord , which is on the right The river but hand : and here the river is not passed a quarter of a league a quarter of a broad , anJ hath 2o and 30 fathoms water . And towards a^ie roa . gouth shore there is a ledge of Isles all covered with 280 
 trees , and they end over against the point of the Isle of Orleans . And the point of the isle of Orleans towards the Northeast is in 47 degrees and one terce of a degree . And the Isle of Orleans is a fair Isle , all covered with trees even unto the rivers side : and it is about 5 leagues long , and a league and and half broad . And on the North shore there is another River , which falls into the main River at the end of the Island : and Ships may very well pass there . From the midst of the Isle unto Canada the River runneth West ; and from the place of Canada unto France-Roy the river turns West Southwest : and from the West end of the Isle to Canada is but one league ; and unto France-Roy 4 leagues . And when thou art come to the end of the Isle , thou shalt see a great River which falls fifteene or twenty fathoms down from a rock , and makes a terrible noise . The Fort of France-roy stands in 47 degrees , and one sixt part of a degree . 
 The extension of all these lands , upon just occasion is called New France . For it is as good and as temperate as France , and in the same latitude . And the reason wherefore it is colder in the Winter is , because the fresh River is naturally more cold then the Sea ; and it is also broad and deep : and in some places it is half a league and above in breadth . And also because the land is not tilled , nor full of people , and is all full of Woods , which is the cause of cold , because there is not store of fire nor cattle . And the sun hath his Meridian as high as the Meridian at Rochel : and it is noon here when the Sun is at South Southwest at Rochel . And here the North star by the compass stands North northeast . And when at Rochel it is noon , it is but half and hour passed nine at France-Roy . From the said place unto the Ocean sea and the coast of New France , is not above 50 leagues distance . And from the entrance of Norumbega unto Florida are 300 leagues : and from this place of France-Roy to Hochelaga , are about 80 leagues : and unto the Isle of Rasus 30 381 
 1542. 
 The Isle of Orleans in 47 degrees and one third part . 
 Canada 1 league to the West of the Isle of Orleans . 
 The Fort of France-Roy stood in 47 degrees and one sixt part . 
 Why the country is colder in the Winter then France . 
 A second reason . 
 The variation of the compass . 
 From the fort of France Roy unto you mouth of the Grand Bay 230 leags . 
 Gold and silver like to be found in Canada . 
 A Bay in 42. degrees gyving some hope of a passage . 
 Trees . 
 Red plums . 
 Foul . 
 Corn . 
 IVhe ate to be sown in March . 
 leagues . And I doubt not but Norumbega entereth into the river of Canada , and unto the Sea of Saguenay . And from the Fort of France-Roy until a man come forth of the Grande Bay is not above 230 leagues . And the course is Northeast and West Southwest not above 5 degrees and £ difference : and reckon 16 leagues and ah half to a degree . By the nature of the climate the lands towards Hochelaga are still better and better , and more fruitful . And this land is fit for Figs and Pears . And I think that gold and silver will be found here , according as the people of the country say . These lands lie over against Tartarie , and I doubt not but that they stretch towards Asia , according to the roundness of the world . And therefore it were good to have a small Ship of 70 tons to discover the coast of New France on the back side of Florida : for I have be at a Bay as far as 42 degrees between Norumbega and Florida , and I have not searched the end thereof , and I know not whither it pass through . And in all these Countries' there are oaks , and bortz , ashes , elms , arables , trees of life , pines prussetrees , ceders , great wall nut trees , and wild nuts , hasel-trees , wild pear trees , wild grapes , and there have be found red plums . And very fair corn grows there , and peason grow of their own accord , gooseberries and strawberries . And there are goodly Forests , wherein men may hunt . And there are great store of stags , deer , porkepicks , and the Savages say there be Unicorns . Foul there are in abundance , as bustards , wild geese , cranes , turtle doves , ravens , crows , and many other birds . All things which are sown there , are not passed 2. or 3. days in coming up out of the ground . I have told in one ear of corn and hundred and twenty grains , like the corn of France . And you need not to sow your Wheat until March , and it will be ripe in the midst of August . The waters are better and perfecter then in France . And if the Country were tilled and replenished with people , it would be as hot as Rochel . And the reason why it 
 282 
 .. I54X snoweth there oftener then in France is , because it rains The cause of there but seidome : for the rain is converted into the often snow-tnetn Canada . snows . 
 All things above mentioned , are true . 
 John Alphonse made this Voyage with Monsieur Roberval . 
 There is a pardon to be seen for the pardoning of Monsieur de Saine terre , Lieutenant of the said Monsieur de Roberval , given in Canada in the presence of the said John Alphonse . 
 