And account of the particularities of the employments of the English men left in Virginia by Sir Richard Greenevill under the charge of Master Ralph Lane general of the same , from the 17. of August 1585. until the 18. of June 1586. at which time they departed the Country : sent and directed to Sir Walter Ralegh . 
 Hat I may proceed with order in this discourse , I think it requisite to divide it into two parts . The first shall declare the particularities of such parts of the Country within the main , as our weak number , and supply of things necessary did inable us to enter into the 
 2. parts of this discourse . 
 discovery of . 
 The second part shall set down the reasons generally moving us to resolve on our departure at the instant with the general Sir Francis Drake , and our common request for passage with him , when the barks , pinnaces , and boats with the Master's and Mariners meant by him to be left in the Country , for the supply of such , as for a further time meant to have stayed there , were carried away with tempest and foul weather : In the beginning whereof shall be declared the conspiracy of Pemisapan , with the Savages of the main to have cut us ofF , etc. 
 320 
 The material originally positioned here is too large for reproduction in this 
 reissue . A PDF can be downloaded from the web address given on page iv 
 the Cambridge Core . terms oh ? Usej-U-VaiabieathttpsV / www . cambridge.org / core / terms . 
 The first part declaring the particularities of the Country of Virginia . 
 Irst therefore touching the particularities of the Country , you shall understand that our discovery of the same hath been extended from the Hand of Roanoak , ( the same having be the place of our settlement or inhabitation ) into the South , into the North , into the North - 
 west , and into the West . 
 The uttermost place to the Southward of any discovery was Secotan , being by estimation fourescore miles distant from Roanoak . The passage from thence was through a broad found within the main , the same being without kenning of land , and yet full of flats and shoalds : we had but one boat with foure oars to pass through the same , which boat could not carry above fifteene men with their furniture , baggage , and victuali for seven days at the most : and as for our pinnace , beside that she drew too deep water for that shallow found , she would not stir for and oar : for these and other reasons ( winter also being at hand ) we thought good wholly to leave the discovery of those parts until our stronger supply . 
 To the Northward our furthest discovery was to the Chesepians , distant from Roanoak about 130. miles , the passage to it was very shallow and most dangerous , by reason of the breadth of the found , and the little succour that upon any flaw was there to be had . 
 But the Territory and soil of the Chesepians ( being distant fifteene miles from the shore ) was for pleasantness of seat , for temperature of Climate , for fertility of soil , and for the commodity of the Sea , beside multitude of Bears ( being and excellent good victuali ) with great woods of Sassafras , and Walnut trees , is not to be excelled by any other whatsoever . 
 There be sundry Kings , whom they call Weroances , and Countries' of great fertility adjoining to the same , as 
 The excellende of the seat of Cheseplook . 
 VIII 
 321 
 The town of Chawanook able to make 700. men of war . 
 the Mandoages , Tripanicks , and Opossians , which all came to visit the Colony of the English , which I had for a time appointed to be resident there . 
 To the Northwest the farthest place of our discovery was to Chawanook distant from Roanoak about 130. miles . Our passage thither lies through a broad found , but all fresh water , and the channel of a great depth , navigable for good shipping , but out of the channel full of shoalds . 
 The Towns about the waters side situated by the way are these following : Passaquenoke The woman's Town , Chepanoc , Weapomeiok , Muscamunge , & Metackwem : all these being under the jurisdiction of the king of Weapomeiok , called Okisco : from Muscamunge we enter into the River , and jurisdiction of Chawanook : There the River begins to straighten until it come to Chawanook , and then grows to be as narrow as the Thames betewene Westminster , and Lambeth . 
 Between Muscamunge and Chawanook upon the left hand as we pass thither , is a goodly high land , and there is a Town which we called The blind Town , but the Savages called it Ohanoak , and hath a very goodly corn field belonging unto it : it is subject to Chawanook . 
 Chawanook it self is the greatest Province & Signiory lying upon that River , and the very Town it self is able to put 700. fighting men into the field , beside the force of the Province it self . 
 The King of the said Province is called Menatonon , a man impotent in his limbs , but otherwise for a Savage , a very grave and wise man , and of a very singular good discourse in matters concerning the state , not only of his own Country , and the disposition of his own men , but also of his neighbours round about him as well far as near , and of the commodities that each Country yields . When I had him prisoner with me , for two days that we were together , he gave me more under-322 
 1585-86 . standing and light of the Country then I had received by all the searches and Savages that before I or any of my company had had conference with : it was in March last passed 1586. among other things he told me , that going three days journey in a Canoa , up his River of Chawanook , and then descending to the land , you are within foure days journey to pass over land Northeast to a certain Kings country , whose Province lies upon the Sea , but his place of greatest strength is and Island - And I^nd in situate , as he described unto me , in a Bay , the water a Ba9‘ round about the Island very deep . 
 Out of this Bay he signified unto me , that this Purksm ex~ King had so great quantity of Pearl , and doth so c ™ ding quan-ordinarily take the same , as that not only his own ’ skins that he weareth , and the better sort of his gentlemen and followers are full set with the said Pearl , but also his beds , and houses are garnished with them , and that he hath such quantity of them , that it is a wonder to see . 
 He showed me that the said King was with him at Chawanook two years before , & brought him certain Pearl , but the same of the worst sort , yet was he feign to buy them of him for copper at a deer rate , as he thought . He gave me a rope of the same pearl , but they were black , and nought , yet many of them were very great , and a few among a number very orient and round , all which I lost with other things of mine , coming aboard Sir Francis Drake his Fleet : yet he told me that the said King had great store of Pearl that were white , great , and round , and that his black Pearl his men did take out of shallow water , but the white Pearl his men fished for in very deep water . 
 It seemed to me by his speech , that the said King had traffic with white men that had clothes as we have , for these white Pearl , and that was the reason that he would not depart with other then with black Pearls , to those of the same country . 
 323 
 And enterprise of speciali importance . 
 The king of Chawanook promised to give me guides to go over land into that kings country whensoever I would : but he advised me to take good store of men with me , and good store of victuali , for he said , that king would be loath to suffer any strangers to epter into his Country , and especially to meddle with the fishing for any Pearl there , and that he was able to make a great many of men into the field , which he said would fight very well . 
 Hereupon I resolved with my self , that if your supply had come before the end of Aprill , and that you had sent any store of boats or men , to have had them made in any reasonable time , with a sufficient number of men and victuals to have found us until the new corn were come in , I would have sent a small bark . with two pinnaces about by Sea to the Northward to have found out the Bay he spoke of , and to have sounded the bar if there were any , which should have ridden there in the said Bay about that Hand , while I with all the small boats I could make , and with two hundred men would have gone up to the head of the river of Chawanook with the guides that Menatonon would have given me , which I would have be assured should have been of his best men , ( for I had his best beloved son prisoner with me ) who also should have kept me company in and handlocke with the rest , foot by foot , all the voyage over land . 
 My meaning was further at the head of the River in the place of my descent where I would have left my boats , to have raised a sconce with a small trench , and a palisado upon the top of it , in the which , and in the guard of my boats I would have left five and twentie , or thirtie men , with the rest would I have marched with as much victuali as every man could have carried , with their furniture , mattocks , spades and axes , two days journey . In the end of my march upon some convenient plot would I have raised another sconce according to the former , where I would have 324 
 left fifteene or twentie . And if it would have fallen out conveniently , in the way I would have raised my said sconce upon some Corn field , that my company might have lived upon it . 
 And so I would have held this course of insconsing Whither M. every two days march , until I had be arrived at the Bay or Port he spoke of : which finding to be move _ worth the possession , I would there have raised a main fort , both for the defence of the harbour , and our shipping also , and would have reduced our whole habitation from Roanoak and from the harbour and port there ( which by proof is very nought ) unto this other beforementioned , from whence , in the foure days march before specified , could I at all times return with my company back unto my boats riding under my sconce , very near whereunto directly from the West runneth a most notable River , and in all those parts most famous , called the River of Moratoc . This River openeth into the broad Found of Weapomeiok . And whereas the River of Chawanook , and all the other Sounds , and Baize , salt and fresh , show no current in the world in calm weather , but are moved altogether with the wind : This River of Moratoc hath so violent a current from the West and Southwest , that it made me almost of opinion that with oars it would scarce be navigable : it passes with many creeks and turnings , and for the space of thirtie miles rowing , and more , it is as broad as the Thames betwixt Greenwich and the Isle of dogs , in some place more , and in some less : the current runneth as strong , being entered so high into the River , as at London bridge upon a vale water . 
 And for that not only Menatonon , but also the Savages of Moratoc themselves do report strange things of the head of that River , and that from Moratoc it self , which is a principali Town upon that River , it is thirtie days as some of them say , and some say fourtie days voyage to the head thereof , which head 
 325 
 Cmspiracie oj the Savages against the English . 
 they say springs out of a main rock in that abundance , that forthwith it makes a most violent stream : and further , that this huge rock stands so near unto a Sea , that many times in storms ( the wind coming outwardly from the sea ) the waves thereof are beaten into the said fresh stream , so that the fresh water for a certain space , grows salt and brackish : I took a resolution with my self , having dismissed Menatonon upon a ransom agreed for , and sent his son into the Pinnace to Roanoak , to enter presently so far into that River with two double whirries , and fourtie persons one or other , as I could have victuali to carry us , until we could meet with more either of the Moratoks , or of the Mangoaks , which is another kind of Savages , dwelling more to the Westward of the said River : but the hope of recovering more victuali from the Savages made me and my company as narrowly to escape starving in that discovery before our return , as ever men did , that missed the same .. 
 For Pemisapan , who had changed his name of Win-gina upon the death of his brother Granganimo , had given both the Choanists , and Mangoaks word of my purpose touching them , I having be enforced to make him privy to the same , to be served by him of a guide to the Mangoaks , and yet he did never rest to solicit continually my going upon them , certifying me of a generail assembly even at that time made by Menatonon at Chawanook of all his Weroances , and allies to the number of three thousand bows , preparing to come upon us at Roanoak , and that the Mangoaks also were joined in the same confederacy , who were able of themselves to bring as many more to the enterprise : And true it was that at that time the assembly was held at Chawanook about us , as I found at my coming thither , which being unlooked for did so dismay them , as it made us have the better hand at them . But this confederacy against us of the Choanists and Mangoaks was altogether and wholly procured by Pemisapan him-326 
 self , as Menatonon confessed unto me , who sent them continual word , that our purpose was fully bent to destroy them : on the other side he told me , that they had the like meaning towards us . 
 He in like sort having sent word to the Mangoaks of mine intention to pass up into their River , and to kill them ( as he said ) both they and the Moratoks , with whom before we were entered into a league , and they had ever dealt kindly with us , abandoned their Towns along the River , and retired themselves with their * Crenepos , and their Corn within the main : * Then-insomuch as having passed three days voyage up the women‘ River , we could not meet a man , nor find a grain of Corn in any their Towns : whereupon considering with my self that we had but two days victuali left , and that we were then 160. miles from home , beside casualty of contrary winds or storms , and suspecting treason of our own Savages in the discovery of our voyage intended , though we had no intention to be hurtful to any of them , otherwise then for our copper to have had corn of them : I at night upon the Corpse of guard , before the putting forth of Centinels , advertised the whole company of the case we stood in for victuali , and of mine opinion that we were betrayed by our own Savages , and of purpose drawn forth by them upon vain hope to be in the end starved , seeing all the Country fled before us , and therefore while we had those two days victuali left , 1 thought it good for us to make our ■ return homeward , and that it were necessary for us to get the other side of the Found of Weopomeiok in time , where we might be relieved upon the wears of Chypanum , and the women's Town , although the people were fled . 
 Thus much I signified unto them , as the safest way : nevertheless I did refer it to the greatest number of voices , whither we should adventure the spending of our whole victuali in some further view of that most goodly River in hope to meet with some better happen , 327 
 A marvellous Mineral in the country of Chaunls Temoatan . 
 or otherwise to retire our selves back again . And for that they might be the better advised , I willed them to deliberate all night upon the matter , and in the morning at our going aboard to set our course according to the desires of the greatest part . Their resolution fully and wholly was ( and not three found to be of the contrary opinion ) that while there was left but one half pint of Corn for a man , we should not leave the search of that River , and that there were in the company two Mastiffs , upon the pottage of which with Sassafras leaves ( if the worst fell out ) the company would make shift to live two days , which time would bring them down the current to the mouth of the River , and to the entry of the Found , and in two days more at the farthest they hoped to cross the Found and to be relieved by the wears , which two days they would fast rather then be drawn back a foot till they had seen the Mangoaks , either as friends or foes . This resolution of theirs did not a little please me , since it came of themselves , although for mistrust of that which afterwards did happen , I pretended to have be rather of the contrary opinion . 
 And that which made me most desirous to have some doings with the Mangoaks either in friendship or otherwise to have had one or two of them prisoners , was , for that it is a thing most notorious to all the country , that there is a Province to the which the said Mangoaks have recourse and traffic up that River of Moratoc , which hath a marvelous and most strange Minerali . This Mine is so notorious among them , as not only to the Savages dwelling up the said river , and also to the Savages of Chawanook , and all them to the Westward , but also to all them of the main : the Countries name is of fame , and is called Chaunis Temoatan . 
 The Minerail they say is Wassador , which is copper , but they call by the name of Wassador every mettle 328 
 whatsoever : they say it is of the colour of our copper , but our copper is better then theirs : and the reason is for that it is redder and harder , whereas that of Chaunis Temoatan is very soft , and pale : they say that they take the said mettle out of a river that falls very swift from high rocks and hills , and they take it in shallow water : the manner is this . They take a great bowl by their description as great as one of our targets , and wrap a skin over the hollow part thereof , leaving one part open to receive in the minerail : that done , they watch the coming down of the current , and the change of the colour of the water , and then suddenly chop down the said bowl with the skin , and receive into the same as much oar as will come in , which is ever as much as their bowl will hold , which presently they cast into a fire , and forthwith it melts , and doth yield in five parts , at the first melting , two parts of metal for three parts of oar . Of this metal the Mangoaks have so great store , by report of all the Savages adjoining , that they beautify their houses with great plataeae of the same : and this to be true , I received by report of all the country , and particularly by young Skiko , the King of Chawanooks son my prisoner , who also himself had be prisoner with the Mangoaks , and set down all the particularities to me before mentioned : but he had not be at Chawnis Temoatan himself : for he said , it was twentie days journey overland from the Mangoaks , to the said Mineral Country , and that they passed through certain other territories between them and the Mangoaks , before they came to the said Country . 
 Upon report of the premises , which I was very inquisitive in all places where I came to take very particular information of , by all the Savages that dwelled towards those parts , and especially of Menatonon himself , who in every thing did very particularly inform me , and promised me guides of his own men , who should pass over with me , even to the said Country 
 329 
 of Chaunis Temoatan ( for overland from Chawanook to the Mangoaks is but one days journey from Sun rising to Sun setting , whereas by water it is seven days with the soonest : ) These things , I say , made me very desirous by all means possible to recover the Mangoaks , and to get some of that their copper for and assay , and therefore I willingly yielded to their resolution : But it fell out very contrary to all expectation , and likelihood : for after two days travel , and our whole victuali spent , lying on shore all night , we could never see man , only fires we might perceive made alongst the shore where we were to pass , and up into the Country , until the very last day . In the evening whereof , about three of the clock we herd certain Savages call as we thought , Manteo , who was also at that time with me in the boat , whereof we all being very glad , hoping of some friendly conference with them , and making him to answer them , they presently began a song , as we thought , in token of our welcome to them : but Manteo presently betook him to his piece , and told me that they meant to fight with us : which word was not so soon spoken by him , and the A conflict light horseman ready to put to shore , but there lighted begun by thee a vopje of their arrows among them in the boat , * s' but did no hurt ( God be thanked ) to any man . Im - 
 mediately , the other boat lying ready with their shot to skoure the place for our hand weapons to land upon , which was presently done , although the land was very high and steep , the Savages forthwith quit the shore , and betook themselves to flight : we landed , and having fair and easily followed for a small time after them , who had wooded themselves we know not where : the Sun drawing then towards the setting , and being then assured that the next day if we would pursue them , though we might happen to meet with them , yet we should be assured to meet with none of their victuali , which we then had good cause to think of : therefore choosing for the company a con - 
 330 
 venient ground in safety to lodge in for the night , making a strong Corpse of guard , and putting out good Centinels , I determined the next morning before the rising of the Sun to be going back again , if possibly we might recover the mouth of the river , into the broad found , which at my first motion I found my whole company ready to assent unto : for they were now come to their Dogs porridge , that they had bespoken for themselves if that befell them which did , and I before did mistrust we should hardly escape . The end was , we came the next day by night to the Rivers mouth within foure or five miles of the same , having rowed in one day down the current , as much as in , foure days we had done against the same : we lodged upon and Hand , where we had nothing in the world to eat but pottage of Sassafras leaves , the like whereof for a meat was never used before as I think . The broad found we had to pass the next day all fresh and fasting : that day the wind blew so strongly , and the billow so great , that there was no possibility of passage without sinking of our boats . This was upon Easter eve , which was fasted very truly . Upon Easter day in the morning the wind coming very calm , we entered the found , and by foure of the clock we were at Chipanum , whence all the Savages that we had left there were fled , but their wears did yield us some fish , as God was pleased not utterly to suffer us to be lost : for some of our company of the light horsemen were far spent . The next morning we arrived at our home Roanoak . 
 I have set down this Voyage somewhat particularly , to the end it may appear unto you ( as true it is ) that there wanted no great good will from the most to the least among us , to have perfited this discovery of the Mine : for that the discovery of a good Mine , by the goodness of God , or a passage to the Southsea , or some way to it , and nothing else can bring this Country in request to be inhabited by our nation . 
 331 
 The great current of the River of Morattico . 
 And with the discovery of either of the two above showed , it will be the most sweet and healthfullest climate , and therewithal ! the most fertile soil ( being manured ) in the world : and then will Sassafras , and many other roots and gums there found make good merchandise and lading for shipping , which otherwise of themselves will not be worth the fetching . 
 Provided also , that there be found out a better harbour then yet there is , which must be to the Northward , if any there be , which was mine intention to have spent this Summer in the search of , and of the Mine of Chawnis Temoatan : the one I would have done , if the barks that I should have had of Sir Francis Drake , by his honourable courtesy , had not be driven away by storm : the other if your supply of more men , and some other necessaries had come to us in any convenient sufficiency . For this river of Moratico promises great things , and by the opinion of M. Hariots the head of it by the description of the Country , either riseth from the bay of Mexico , or else from very near unto the same , that openeth out into the South sea . 
 And touching the Minerali , thus doth M. Youghan affirm , that though it be but copper , seeing the Savages are able to melt it , it is one of the richest Minerals in the world . 
 Wherefore a good harbour found to the Northward , as before is said , and from thence foure days overland , to the River of Choanoak sconces being raised , from whence again overland through the province of Choanoak one days voyage to the first town of the Mangoaks up the river of Moratico by the way , as also upon the said River for the defence of our boats like sconces being set , in this course of proceeding you shall clear your self from all those dangers and broad shallow sounds before mentioned , and gain within foure days travel ! into the heart of the main 200. miles at the least , and so pass your discovery into that most notable 332 
 1585-86 . country , and to the likeliest parts of the main , with far greater felicity then otherwise can be performed . 
 Thus Sir , I have though simply , yet truly set down unto you , what my labour with the rest of the gentlemen , and poor men of our company ( not without both pain and peril , which the Lord in his mercy many ways delivered us from ) could yield unto you , which might have be performed in some more perfection , if the Lord had be pleased that only that which you had provided for us had at the first be left with us , or that he had not in his eternal providence now at the last set some other course in these things , than the wisdom of man could look into , which truly the carrying away by a most strange & unlooked for storm of all our provision , with Barks , Master , Mariners , and sundry also of mine own company , all having be so courteously supplied by the generail Sir Francis Drake , the same having be most sufficient to have performed the greatest part of the premises , must ever make me to think the hand of God only ( for some his good purpose to my self yet unknown ) to have be in the matter . 
 The second part touching the conspiracy of Pemisapan , the discovery of the same , and at the last , of our request to depart with Sir Francis Drake for England . 
 Nsenore a Savage father to Pemisapan being the only friend to our nation that we had among them , and about the King , died the 20. of April 1586. He alone had before opposed himself in their consultations against all matters proposed against us , which both the 
 King and all the rest of them after Grangemoes death , were very willing to have preferred . And he was not only by the mere providence of God during his life , a mean to save us from hurt , as poisonings and such like , 333 
 This skill of making wears would he learned . 
 but also to do us very great good , and singularly in this . 
 The King was advised and of himself disposed , as a ready mean to have assuredly brought us to ruin in the month of March 1586. himself also with all his Savages to have run away from us , and to have left his ground in the Hand unsowed : which if he had done , there had be no possibility in common reason , ( but by the immediate hand of God ) that we could have be preserved from starving out of hand . For at that time we had no wears for fish , neither could our men skill of the making of them , neither had we one grain of Corn for seed to put into the ground . 
 In mine absence on my voyage that I had made against the Chaonists , and Mangoaks , they had raised a brutus among themselves , that I and my company were part slain , and part starved by the Chaonists , and Mangoaks . One part of this tale was too true , that I and mine were like to be starved , but the other false . 
 Nevertheless until my return it took such effect in Pemisapans breast , and in those against us , that they grew not only into contempt of us , but also ( contrary to their former reverend opinion in show , of the Almighty God of heaven , and Jesus Christ whom we serve and worship , whom before they would acknowledge and confess the only God ) now they began to blaspheme , and flatly to say , that our Lord God was not God , since he suffered us to sustain much hunger , and also to be killed of the Renapoaks , for so they call by that generail name all the inhabitants of the whole main , of what province soever . Insomuch as old Ensenore , neither any of his fellows , could for his sake have no more credit for us : and it came so far that the king was resolved to have presently gone away as is aforesaid . 
 But even in the beginning of this bruit I returned , which when he saw contrary to his expectation , and the advertisement that he had received : that not only my self , and my company were all safe , but also by report of 
 334 
 his own 3. Savages which had be with me beside Manteo in that voyage , that is to say , Tetepano , his sisters husband Eracano , and Cossine , that the Chanoists and Mangoaks ( whose name and multitude beside their valour is terrible to all the rest of the provinces ) durst not for the most part of them abide us , and that those that did abide us were killed , and that we had taken Menatonon prisoner , and brought his son that he best loved to Roanoak with me , it did not a little assuage all devises against us : on the other side , it made Ensenores opinions to be received again with greater respects . For he had often before told them , and then renewed those his former speeches , both to the king and the rest , that we were the servants of God , and that we were not subject to be destroyed by them : but contrary wise , that they among them that sought our destruction , should find their own , and not be able to work ours , and that we being dead men were able to do them more hurt , then now we could do being alive : and opinion very confidently at this day held by the wisest among them , and of their old men , as also , that they have be in the night , being 100. miles from any of us , in the air shot at , and stroken by some men of ours , that by sickness had died among them : and many of them hold opinion , that we be dead men returned into the world again , and that we do not remain dead but for a certain time , and that then we return again . 
 All these speeches then again grew in fui credit with them , the King , and all , touching us , when he saw the small troop returned again , and in that sort from those whose very names were terrible unto them : But that which made up the matter on our side for that time was and accident , yea rather ( as all the rest was ) the good providence of the Almighty for the saving of us , which was this . 
 Within certain days after my return from the said journey , Menatonon sent a messenger to visit his son the prisoner with me , and sent me certain pearl 
 33S 
 The beginning of their harvest in July . 
 for a present , or rather , as Pemisapan told me , for the ransom of his son , and therefore I refused them : but the greatest cause of his sending then , was to signify unto me , that he had commanded Okisko King of Weo-pomiok , to yield himself servant , and homager , to the great Weroanza of England , and after her to Sir Walter Raleigh : to perform which commandment received from Menatonon , the said Okisko joyhtly with this Menatonons messenger sent foure ' and twentie of his principallest men to Roanoak to Pemisapan , to signify that they were ready to perform the same , and so had sent those his men to let me know that from that time forward , he , and his successors were to acknowledge her Majesty their only Sovereign , and next unto her , as is aforesaid . 
 All which being done , and acknowledged by them all , in the presence of Pemisapan his father , and all his Savages in counsel then with him , it did for the time thoroughly ( as it seemed ) change him in disposition towards us : Insomuch as forthwith Ensenore won this resolution of him , that out of hand he should go about , and withal , to cause his men to set up wears forthwith for us : both which he at that present went in hand withal , and did so labour the expedition of it , that in the end of April he had sowed a good quantity of ground , so much as had be sufficient , to have fed our whole company ( God blessing the grouth ) and that by the belly , for a whole year : beside that he gave us a certain plot of ground for our selves to sow . All which put us in marvelous comfort , if we could pass from Aprill until the beginning of July , ( which was to have be the beginning of their harvest , ) that then a new supply out of England or else our own store would well enough maintain us : All our fear was of the two months betwixt , in which mean space if the Savages should not help us with Cassavi , and Chyna , arid that our wears should fail us , ( as often they did , ) we might very well starve , notwithstanding the growing corn , like the starving 336 
 The material originally positioned here is too large for reproduction in this 
 reissue . A PDF can be downloaded from the web address given on page iv 
 1585-86 . horse in the stable , with the growing grass , as the proverb is : which we very hardly had escaped but only by the hand of God , as it pleased him to try us . For within few days after , as before is said , Ensenore our friend died , who was no sooner dead , but certain of our great enemies about Pemisapan , as Osacan a Wero-ance , Tanaquiny and Wanchese most principally , were in hand again to put their old practises in ure against us , which were readily embraced , and all their former devises against us , reneued , and new brought in question . But that of starving us , by their forbearing to sow , was broken by Ensenore in his life , by having made the King all at one instant to sow his ground , not only in the Hand , but also at Dasamonquepeio in the main , within two leagues over against us . Nevertheless there wanted no store of mischievous practises among them , and of all they resolved principally of this following . 
 First that Okisko king of Weopomeiok with the Man - conspira-doages should be moved , and with great quantity of °fPemisa~ copper entertained to the number of 7. or 8. hundreth p ' bows , to enterprise the matter thus to be ordered . They of Weopomeiok should be invited to a certain kind of months mind which they do use to solemnise in their Savage manner for any great personage dead , and should have be for Ensenore . At this instant also should the Mandoaks , who were a great people , with the Chesepians & their friends to the number of 700. of them , be armed at a day appointed to the main of Dasamonquepeio , and there lying close at the sign of fierce , which should interchangeably be made on both sides , when Pemisapan with his troop above nam should have executed me , and some of our Weroances ( as they called all our principali officers , ) the main forces of the rest should have come over into the Hand , where they meant to have dispatched the rest of the company , whom they did imagine to find both dismayed and dispersed abroad in the Island , seeking of crabs and fish to live withal . The manner of their enterprise was this . 
 vni 337 Y 
 The sufficiende of our men to deal against the Savages . 10. to and hundredth . 
 The Savages Uve by fishing , and hunting , till harvest . 
 Tarraquine and Andacon two principali men about Pemisapan , and very lusty fellows , with twentie more appointed to them had the charge of my person to see and order taken for the same , which they meant should in this sort have been executed . In the dead time of the night they would have beset my house , and put fire in the redes that the same was covered with : meaning ( as it was likely ) that my self would have come running out of a sudden amazed in my shirt without arms , upon the instant whereof they would have knocked out my brains . 
 The same order was given to certain of his fellows , for M. Heriots : so for all the rest of our better sort , all our houses at one instant being set on fire as afore is said , and that as well for them of the fort , as for us at the town . Now to the end that we might be the fewer in number together , and so be the more easily dealt withal ( for in deed tenne of us with our arms prepared , were a terror to a hundred of the best sort of them , ) they agreed and did immediately put it in practice , that they should not for any copper fell us any victuals whatsoever : beside that in the night they should send to have our wears robbed , and also to cause them to be broken , and once being broken never to be repaired again by them . By this means the King stood assured , that I must be inforced for lack of sustenance there , to disband my company into sundry places to live upon shell fish , for so the Savages themselves do , going to Hatorask , Croatoan , and other places , fishing and hunting , while their grounds be in sowing , and their corn growing : which failed not his expectation . For the famine grew so extreme among us , or wears failing us of fish , that I was inforced to send Captain Stafford with 20. with him to Croatoan my Lord Admirals Hand to serve two turns in one , that is to say , to feed himself and his company , and also to keep watch if any shipping came upon the coast to warn us of the same . I sent M. Pridiox with the pinnace to Hatorask , and ten with him , with the Provost Marshal to live there , and also to wait 338 
 for shipping : also I sent every week x 6. or 20. of the rest of the company to the main over against us , to live of Casada and oysters . 
 In the mean while Pemisapan went of purpose to Dasamonquepeio for three causes : The one to see his grounds there broken up , and sowed for a second crop : the other to withdraw himself from my daily sending to him for supply of victuali for my company , for he was afraid to deny me any thing , neither durst he in my presence but by colour and with excuses , which TO was content to accept for the time , meaning in the end as I had reason , to give him the jump once for all : but in the mean while , as I had ever done before , I and mine bore all wrongs , and accepted of all excuses . 
 My purpose was to have relied my self with Menatonon , and the Chaonists , who in truth as they are more valiant people and in greater number then the rest , so are they more faithful in their promises , and since my late being there had given many tokens of earnest desire they had to join in perfect league with us , and therefore were greatly offended with Pemisapan and Weopomeiok for making him believe such tales of us . 
 The third cause of this going to Dasamonquepeio was to dispatch his messengers to Weopomeiok , and to the Mandoages as aforesaid : all which he did with great impressed of copper in hand , making large promises to them of greater spoil . 
 The answer within few days after came from Weopomeiok , which was divided into two parts . First for the King Okisko , who denied to be of the party for himself , or any of his especial followers , and therefore did immediately retire himself with his force into the main : the other was concerning the rest of the said province who accepted of it : and in like sort the Mandoags received the impressed . 
 The day of their assembly aforesaid at Roanoak was appointed the 10. of June : all which the premises were discovered by Skyco , the King Menatonon his son my 
 339 
 prisoner , who having once attempted to run away , I laid him in the bylboes , threatening to cut off his head , whom I remitted at Pemisapans request : whereupon he being persuaded that he was our enemy to the death , he did not only feed him with himself , but also made him acquainted with all his practises . On the other side , the young man finding himself as well used at my hand , as I had means to show , and that all my company made much of him , he flatly discovered all unto me , which also afterwards was revealed unto me by one of Pemisapans own men , that night before he was slain . 
 These mischiefs being all instantly upon me and my company to be put in execution , it stood me in hand to study how to prevent them , and also to save all others , which were at that time as aforesaid so far from me : whereupon I sent to Pemisapan to put suspicion out of his head , that 1 meant presently to go to Croatoan , for that I had herd of the arrival of our fleet , ( though I in truth had neither herd nor hoped for so good adventure , ) and that I meant to come by him , to borrow of his men to fish for my company , & to hunt for me at Croatoan , as also to buy some foure days provision to serve for my voyage . 
 He sent me word that he would himself come over to Roanoak , but from day to day he deferred , only to bring the Weopomeioks with him & the Mandoags , whose time appointed was within eight days after . It was the last of May 1586 when all his own Savages began to make their assembly at Roanoak , at his commandment sent abroad unto them , and I resolved not to stay longer upon his coming over , since he meant to come with so good company , but thought good to go and visit him with such as I had , which I resolved to do the next day : but that night I meant by the way to give them in the Island a canvisado , and at the instant to seize upon all the canoas about the Island , to keep him from advertisements . 
 But the town took the alarm before I meant it to 
 340 
 them : the occasion was this . I had sent the Master of the light horseman , with a few with him , to gather up all the canoas in the setting of the Sun , & to take as many as were going from us to Dasamonquepeio , but to suffer any that came from thence , to land . He met with a Canoa going from the shore , and overthrew the Canoa , and cut off slaughter two Savages heads : this was not done so secretly but he was discovered from the shore ; whereupon the cry arose : for in truth they , privy to their own villainous purposes against us , held as good espial upon us , both day and night , as we did upon them . 
 The alarm given , they took themselves to their bows , and we to our arms : some three or foure of them at the first were slain with our shot : the rest fled into the woods . The next morning with the light horseman & one Canoa taking 25 with the Colonel of the Chesepians , and the Sergeant major , I went to Dasamonquepeio : and being landed , sent Pemisapan word by one of his own Savages that met me at the shore , that I was going to Croatoan , and meant to take him in the way to complain unto him of Osocon , who the night passed was conveying away my prisoner , whom I had there present tied in and handlocke . Hereupon the king did abide my coming to him , and finding my self amid seven or eight of his principali Weroances and followers , ( not regarding any of the common sort ) I gave the watchword agreed upon , ( which was , Christ our victory ) and immediately those his chief men and himself had by the mercy of God for our deliverance , that which they had purposed for us . The king himself being shot thorough by the Colonel with a pistol , lying on the ground for dead , & I looking as watchfully for the saving of Manteos friends , as others were busy that none of the rest should escape , suddenly he started up , and ran away as though he had not be touched , insomuch as he overran all the company , being by the way shot thwart the buttocks by mine Irish boy with my petronel . In the end and 
 341 
 Irish man serving me , one Nugent , and the deputy provost , undertook him ; and Following him in the woods , overtook him : and I in some doubt lest we had lost both the king & my man by our own negligence to have been intercepted by the Savages , we met him Pemisapan returning out of the woods with Pemisapans head in slain - his hand .. 
 This fell out the first of June 1586 , and the eight of the same came advertisement to me from captain Stafford , lying at my lord Admirals Island , that he had discovered a great fleet of three and twenty sails : but whither they were friends or foes , he could not yet discern . He advised me to stand upon as good guard as I could . 
 The ninth of the said month he himself came unto me , having that night before , & that same day traveled by land twenty miles : and I must truly report of him from the first to the last ; he was the gentleman that never spared labour or peril either by land or water , fair weather or foul , to perform any service committed unto him . 
 A letter from He brought me a letter from the general Sir Francis Sir Francis Drake , with a most bountiful and honourable offer for 
 ’ the supply of our necessities to the performance of the 
 actium we were entered into ; and that not only of victuals , munition , and clothing , but also of barks , pinnaces , and boats ; they also by him to be victualed , manned , and furnished to my contentation . 
 The tenth day he arrived in the road of our bad harbour : and coming there to and anchor , the eleventh day I came to him , whom I found in deeds most honourably to perform that which in writing and message he had most courteously offered , he having aforehand propounded the matter to all the captains of his fleet , and god their liking and consent thereto . 
 With such thanks unto him and his captains for his care both of us and of our actium , not as the matter deserved , but as I could both for my company and my 342 ' 
 self , I ( being aforehand prepared what I would desire ) craved at his hands that it would please him to take with him into England a number of weak and unfit men for my good actium , which I would deliver to him ; and in place of them to supply me of his company with oare-men , artificers , and others . 
 That he would leave us so much shipping and victuali , as about August then next following would carry me and all my company into England , when we had discovered somewhat , that for lack of needful provision in time left with us as yet remained undone . 
 That it would please him withal to leave some sufficient Master's not only to carry us into England , when time should be , but also to search the coast for some better harbour , if there were any , and especially to help us to some small boats and oare-men . 
 Also for a supply of calivers , hand weapons , match and led , tools , apparel , and such like . 
 He having received these my requests , according to his usual commendable manner of government ( as it was told me ) calling his captains to counsel ; the resolution was that I should send such of my officers of my company as I used in such matters , with their notes , to go aboard with him ; which were the Master of the victuals , The Keeper of the store , and the Vicetreasurer : to whom he appointed forthwith for me The Francis , being a very proper bark of 70 tun , and took present order for bringing of victual aboard her for 100 men for foure months , with all my other demands whatsoever , to the uttermost . 
 And further , he appointed for me two pinnaces , and foure small boats : and that which was to perform all his former liberality towards us , was that he had got the full assents of two of as sufficient experimented Master's as were any in his fleet , by judgement of them that knew them , with very sufficient gings to tarry with me , and to employ themselves most earnestly in the actium , as I should appoint them , until the term which 343 
 [ III . 264. . ] 
 I promised of our return into England again . The names of one of those Master's was Abraham Kendall , the other Griffith Herne . 
 While these things were in hand , the provision aforesaid being brought , and in bringing aboard , my said Master's being also gone aboard , my said barks having accepted of their charge , and mine own officers , with others in like sort of my company with them ( all which was dispatched by the said general the 12 of the said month ) the 13 of the same there arose such and unwonted storm , and continued foure days , that had like to have driven all on shore , if the Lord had not held his holy hand over them , and the general very providently foreseen the worst himself , then about my dispatch putting himself aboard : but in the end having driven sundry of the fleet to put to Sea the Francis also with all my provisions , my two Master's , and my company aboard , she was seen to be free from the same , and to put clear to Sea. 
 This storm having continued from the 13 to the 16 of the month , and thus my bark put away as aforesaid , the general coming ashore made a new proffer unto me ; which was a ship of 170 tun , called The Bark Bonner , with a sufficient Master and guide to tarry with me the time appointed , and victualed sufficiently to carry me and my company into England , with all provisions as before : but he told me that he would not for any thing undertake to have her brought into our harbour , and therefore he was to leave her in the road , and to leave the care of the rest unto my self , and advised me to consider with my company of our case , and to deliver presently unto him in writing what I would require him to do for us : which being within his power , he did assure me aswell for his Captains as for himself , should be most willingly performed . 
 Heereupbn calling such Captains and gentlemen of my company as then were at hand , who were all as privy as my self to the Generals offer : their whole re - 
 344 
 quest was to me , that considering the case that we stood in , the weakness of our company , the small number of the same , the carrying away of our first appointed bark , with those two especial Master's , with our principali provisions in the same , by the very hand of God as it seemed , stretched out to take us from thence ; considering also , that his second offer , though most honourable of his part , yet of ours not to be taken , insomuch as there was no possibility for her with any safety to be brought into the harbour : seeing furthermore , our hope for supply with Sir Richard Greenvill , so undoubtedly promised us before Easter , not yet come , neither then likely to come this year , considering the doings in England for Flanders , and also for America , that therefore I would resolve my self with my company to go into England in that fleet , and accordingly to make request to the general in all our names , that he would be pleased to give us present passage with him . Which request of ours by my self delivered unto him , he most readily assented unto : and so he sending immediately his pinnaces unto our Island for the fetching away of a few that there were left with our baggage , the weather was so boisterous , & the pinnaces so often on ground , that the most of all we had , with all our Cards , Books and writings were by the Sailors cast overboard , the greater number of the fleet being much aggrieved with their long and dangerous abided in that miserable road . 
 ' From whence the general in the name of the Almighty , weighin his anchors ( having bestowed us among his fleet ) for the relief of whom he had in that storm sustained more peril of wrack then in all his former most honourable actions against the Spanyards , with praises unto God for all , set sail the nineteenth of June 1586 , and arrived in Portsmouth the seven and twentieth of July ’ the same year . 
 