The fourth voyage of the Frenchmen into Florida , under the conduct of Captain Gourgues , in the year , 1567. 
 Aptaine Gourgues a Gentleman born in the Country near unto Bourdeaux incited with a desire of revenge , to repair the honour of his nation , borrowed of his friends and sold part of his own goods to set forth and furnish three ships of indifferent burden with 
 all things necessary , having in them and hundred and fiftie soldiers , and fourescore chosen Mariners under Captain Cazenove his lieutenant , and Francis Bourdelois Master over the Mariners . He set forth the 22 of August 1567. And having endured contrary winds and storms for a season , at length he arrived and went 100 
 on shore in the Isle of Cuba . From thence he passed to the Cape of Saint Antony at the end of thee He of Cuba , about two hundred leagues distant from Florida , where the captain disclosed unto them his intention which hitherto he had concealed from them , praying and exhorting them not to leave him being so near the enemy , so well furnished , and in such a cause : which they all sware unto him , and that with such courage that they would not stay the full Moon to pass the channel of Bahama , but speedily discovered Florida , channel of where the Spanyards saluted them with two Canon Bahama be-shot from their fort , supposing that they had been of n^the hie* their nation , and Gourgues saluted them again to enter - ofLucayos . taine them in this error , that he might surprise them at more advantage , yet sailing by them , & making as though he went to some other place until he had sailed out of sighed of the place , so that about evening , he landed 15 leagues from the fort , at the mouth of the The TrenchRiver Tacatacouru , which the Frenchmen called Seine , because they thought it to be like Seine in France . 
 Afterwards perceiving the shore to be covered with Savages with their bows and arrows , ( beside the sign of peace and amity which he made them from his ships ) he sent his Trumpeter , to assure them , that they were come thither for none other end but to renew the amity and ancient league of the French with them . 
 The Trumpeter did his message so well ( by reason he had be there before under Laudonniere ) that he brought back from king Satourioua , the greatest of all the other kings , a kid and other meat to refresh us , beside the offer of his friendship and amity . Afterwards they retired dancing in sign of joy , to advertise all the kings Satouriouaes kinsmen to repair thither the next day to make a league of amity with the Frenchmen . Whereupon in the mean space our general went about to found the channel of the river to bring in his ships , and the better to traffic and deal with the Savages , of whom the chief the next day in the morning 
 IOI 
 Complaints of the Savages against the Spanyards . 
 Two chains of silver given to Gourgues . 
 presented themselves , namely the great king Satourioua , Tacatacourou , Halmacanir , Athore , Harpaha , Helmacape , Helicopil6 , Molloua , and others his kinsmen and allies , with their accustomed weapons . Then sent they to entreat the French general to come on shore , which he caused his men to do with their swords and harquebusies , which he made them leave behind them , in token of mutual assurance , leaving his men but their swords only , after that the Savages complaining thereof had left and likewise sent away their weapons at the request of Gourgues . This done Satourioua going to meet him , caused him to fit on his right hand in a seat of wood of lentisque covered with moss made of purpose like unto his own . Then two of the eldest of the company pulled up the brambles & other weeds which were before them , and after they had made the place Very clean , they all sat round about them on the ground . Afterwards Gourgues being about to speak , Satourioua prevented him , declaring at large unto him the incredible wrongs , and continual outrages that all the Savages , their wives and children had received of the Spanyards since their coming into the Country and massacring of the Frenchmen , with their continual desire if we would assist them thoroughly to revenge so shameful a treason , aswell as their own particular griefs , for the firm good will they always had born unto the Frenchmen . Whereupon Gourgues giving them his faith , and making a league between them and him with and other gave them certain presents of daggers , knives , looking glasses , hatchet's , rings , bells , and such other things , trifles unto us , but precious unto these kings : which moreover , seeing his great liberality , demanded eke one a shirt of him to wear only on their festival days , and to be buried in at their death . Which things after that they had received , and Satourioua had given in recompense to Captain Gourgues two chains of silver grains which hung about his neck , and each of the kings certain deer skins dressed after their manner , they retired 
 102 
 themselves dancing and very jocund , with promise to keep all things secret , and to bring unto the said place good companies of their subject's all well armed to be avenged thoroughly on the Spanyards . In the mean space Gourgues very narrowly examined Peter de Br^ Peter de Bri born in Newhaven , which being but a young stripling escaped out ot the tort into the woods while the Span - yeera yards murdered the rest of the French , & was afterwards Satourioua . brought up with Satourioua , which at that time bestowed him on our general , whose advice stood him in great stead : Whereupon he sent to discover the fort and the estate of the enemies by certain of his men , being guided by Olotacara Satouriouaes nephew which he had given him for this purpose and for assurance of Estampes a gentleman of Cominges , and others which he sent to descry the state of the enemies . Moreover he gave him Three fledges a son of his Stark naked as all of them are , and his wife which he loved best of all the rest , of eighteene satoi^ioua . years old , appareled with the moss of trees , which for 3 days space were in the ships , until our men returned from descrying the state of the enemy , and the kings had furnished their preparation at their rendezvous . Their marching being concluded , and the Savages rendezvous being appointed them beyond the river Salinacani , of our men called Somme , they all drank The river of with great solemnity their drink called Cassine , made of the juice of certain herbs ( as they are wont to do , fa French when they go to any place of danger , ) which hath such force , that it takes from them hunger and thirst for 24 hours , and Gourgues was feign to make as though he drank thereof for company . Afterwards they lift up their hands and sware all that they would never forsake him . Olotocara followed him with pike in hand . 
 Being all met at the river of Sarauahi , not without great The river of trouble , by reason of the rain and places full of water Sarauahi . which they must needs pass , which hindered their passage , they were distressed with famine finding nothing by the way to eat , their Bark of provision being not arrived , 
 103 
 The estate of the Spanyards in Florida . 
 The river of Saracary , or Sarauahi . 
 which was to come unto him from the ships , the oversight and charge whereof he had left unto Burdelois with the rest of the Mariners . Now he had learned that the Spanyards were foure hundred strong , divided into three forts built and flanked , and well fortified upon the river of May , the great fort especially begun by the French , and afterwards repaired by them : upon the most dangerous and principali landing place whereof , two leagues lower and nearer toward the Rivers mouth , they had made two smaller Forts , which were defended , the river passing between them , with sixe score soldiers , good store of artillery and other munition , which they had in the same . From Saracary unto these small forts was two leagues space , which he found very painful , because of the bad ways and continual reins . After - 
 ward he departed from the river Catacouru with 10 , shot , to view the first fort , and to assault it the next day in the morning by the break of day , which he could not do , because of the foul weather , and darkness of the night . King Helicopile seeing him out of quiet in that he had failed of his purpose there , assured him to guide him a more easy way , though it were farther about . Insomuch as leading him through the woods , he brought him within sighed of the fort , where he discerned one quarter which was but begun to be entrenched . Thus after he had sounded the small river that falls down thereby , he stayed until ten of the clock in the morning for and ebb water , that his men might pass over there , unto a place where he had seen a little grove between the river & the fort ( that he might not be seen to pass and set his soldiers in array ) causing them to fasten their flasks to their Morions , & to hold up their swords and kalivers in their hands , for fear least the water , which reached up to their girdles , should not wet them : where they found such abundance of great oysters , and shells which were so sharp , that many had their legs cut with them , and many others lost their shoes . Notwithstanding assoon as 
 104 
 they were passed over , with a French courage they prepared themselves to the assault on the sunday eve next after Easter day , in Aprill 1568. Insomuch that Gourgues to employ the ardent heat of this good affection , gave twenty shot to his Lieutenant Cazenove , and ten Mariners laden with pots and balls of wild fire to burn the gate : and then he assaulted the Fort assault on another side , after he had made a short speech unto ^ " f^ his men of the strange treasons which the Spanyards ' 
 had played their companions . But being descried as they came holding down their heads within two hundred paces from the Fort , the Gunner being upon the terrace of the Fort , after he had cried , are me , Arm , these be French men , discharged twice upon them a culverin , whereon the Arms of France were graved , which had been taken from Laudonniere . But as he went about to 
 charge it the third time , Olotocara , which had not va^ure of learned to keep his rank , or rather moved with rage , ot < , cara-lept on the platform , and thrust him through the body with his pike and slew him . Whereupon Gourgues advanced forward , and after he had herd Cazenove cry , that the Spaniards which issued out armed at the cry of the alarm , were fled , he drew to that part , and so hemmed them in between him and his Lieutenant , that of threescore there escaped not a man , saving only fifteene reserved unto the same death which they had put the French unto . The Spanyards of the other fort in the meanwhile ceased not to play with their ordinance , which much annoyed the assailants : although to answer them they had by this placed and oftentimes pointed the foure pieces found in the first Fort. Where - The assault upon Gourgues being accompanied with fourescore shot went aboard the bark which met him there to good ' 
 purpose to pass into the wood near unto the Fort , out of which he supposed the Spanyards would issue to save themselves thorough the benefit of the woods in the great fort , which was not passed one league distant from you same . 
 Afterwards the Savages not staying for the return of 
 Io5 
 The Spaniards of the second Fort allslaine . 
 Note . 
 A notable Spanish subtlety . 
 [ HIM . 359-J 
 the bark , leapt all into the water holding up their bows & arrows in one hand , & swimming with the other , so that the Spaniards sing both the shores covered with so great a number of men , thought to flee towards the woods : but being charged by the French , and afterwards repulsed by the Savages , towards whom they would have retired , they were sooner then they would bereft of their lives . To conclude they all there ended their days saving 15 of those which were reserved to be executed for the example of others . Whereupon Captain Gourgues having caused all that he found in the second fort to be transported unto the first , where he meant to strengthen himself to take resolution against the great Fort , the state whereof he did not understand : in fine a Sergeant of a band one of the prisoners assured him that they might be there very near 300 well furnished under a brave Governor , which had fortified there , attending farther succours . Thus having obtained of him the platform , the height , the fortification and passages unto it , and having prepared eight good lathers , and raised all the Country against the Spanyard , that he neither might have news , nor succours , nor retract on any side , he determined to march forward . In the mean while the Governor sent a Spanyard disguised like a Savage to spy out the state of the French . And though he were discovered by Olotocara , yet he used all the cunning he could possibly to persuade them that he was one of the second fort , out of which having escaped , and seeing none but savages on every side , he hoped more in you Frenchmens then their mercy , unto whom he came to yield himself disguised like a savage , for fear lest if he should have been known , he should have been massacred by those Barbarians : but the spy being brought face to face with the sergeant of the band , & convicted to be one of the great fort , Was reserved until and other time : after that he had assured Gourgues that the bruit was that he had 2000 Frenchmen with him for fear of whom the 200 and 
 106 
 threescore Spaniardes which remained in the great fort , were greatly astonished . Whereupon Gourgues being resolved to set upon them , while they were thus amazed , and leaving his Standardbearer and a Captain with fifteene shot to keep the Fort , and the entry of the River , he caused the Savages to depart by night to lie in ambush within the woods on both sides of the river , then he departed in the Morning , leading the Sergeant and the spy fast bound along with him , to show him that in deed , which they had only made him understand before in painting . As they marched Olotocara a resolute Savage which never left the Captain , said unto him , that he had served him faithfully , and done whatsoever he had commanded him , that he was assured to die in the conflict at the great Fort , wherein nevertheless he would not fade , though it were to save his life : but he prayed him to give that unto his wife , if he escaped not , which he had meant to bestow on him , that she might bury the same with him , that thereby he The cause why might be better welcome unto the village of the souls F^^ , ans or spirits departed . To whom Captain Gourgues swith answered , after he had commended his faithful valour , them . 
 the love towards his wife , and his noble care of immortal ! honour , that he desired rather to honour him alive then dead , and that by Gods help he would bring him home again with victory . After the discovery of the Fort , the Spanyards were not niggards of their Canon shot , nor of two double Colverines , which being mounted upon a Bulwark , commanded all along the River , which made captain Gourgues to get to the hill covered with wood , at the foot whereof the Fort begins , and Note . the forest or wood continueth and stretcheth forth beyond it : so that he had sufficient coverture to approach thereunto without offence . He purposed also to remain there until the Morning , wherein he was resolved to assault the Spaniards by scaling their walls on the side towards the hill , where the Trench seemed not sufficiently flanked for the defence of the curtains , and from 
 107 
 whence part of his men might draw them that were besieged , which should show themselves to defend the rampart while the rest were coming up . But the Governor hastened his unhappy destiny , causing threescore shot to sally forth , which passing through the Trenches , advanced forward to descry the number and valour of the French , whereof twentie under the conduct of Cazenove , getting between the Fort and them which now were issued forth , cut ofF their repassage , while Gourgues commanded the rest to charge them in the Front , but not to discharge but near at hand , and so that they might be sure to hit them , that afterwards with more ease they might cut them in pieces with their swords . So that turning their backs assoon as they were charged and compassed in by his Lieutenant , they Thee slaughter remained all slain upon the place . Whereat the rest °iardsofth at were besieged were so astonished , that they knew none hird Fort other mean to save their lives , but by fleeing into the Woods adjoining , where nevertheless being encountered again by the arrows of the Savages which lay in wait there for them ( whereof one ran through the target and body of a Spanyard , which therewithal ! fell down stark dead ) some were constrained to turn back , choosing rather to die by the hand of the French , which pursued them : assuring themselves , that none of them could find any favour neither with the one nor the other Nation , whom they had alike and so out of measure cruelly entreated , saving those which were reserved to be and example for the time to come . The taking of The Fort when it was taken , was found well provided the third Fort. of a | j necessaries ; namely of five double Colverines , and foure Minions , with diverse other small pieces of all sorts , and eighteene gross cakes of gunnepowder , all sorts of weapons , which Gourgues caused with speed to be embarked , saving the powder and other movables , by reason it was all consumed with fire through the negligence of a Savage , which in seething of his fish , set fire on a train of powder which was made and hidden by 108 
 the Spanyardes , to have feasted the French at the first assault , thus blowing up the store house , and the other houses built of Pine trees . The rest of the Spaniards being led away prisoners with the others , after that the general had showed them the wrong which they had done without occasion to all the French Nation , were all hanged on the boughs of the same trees , whereon the French hung : of which number five were hanged by one Spaniard , which perceiving himself in the like miserable estate , confessed his fault , and the just judgement which God had brought upon him . But in stead of the writing which Pedro Melendes had hanged over them , importing these words in Spanish , I do not this as unto French men , but as unto Lutherans , Gourgues caused to be imprinted with a searing iron in a table of Firrewood , I do not this as unto Spaniardes , nor as unto Mariners , but as unto Traitors , Robbers , and Murderers . Afterwards considering he had not men enough to keep his Forts which he had won , much less to store them , fearing also lest the Spaniard which hath Dominions near adjoining should renew his forces , or the Savages should prevail against the French men , unless his Majesty would send thither , he resolved to raze them . And indeed , after he had assembled , and in the end persuaded all the Savage kings so to do , they caused their subject's to run thither with such affection , that they overthrew all the three Forts flat even with the ground in one day . This done by Gourgues , that he might return to his Ships which were left in the River of Seyne called Tacatacourou , fifteene leagues distant from thence , he sent Cazenove and the artillery by water : afterwards with fourescore harquebusiers , armed with corslets , and matches light , followed with fortie Mariners bearing pikes , by reason of the small confidence he was to have in so many Savages , he marched by land always in battle ray , finding the ways covered with Savages , which came to honour him with presents and praises , as the deliverer of all the countries round about adjoining . 
 109 
 A.D. 
 1568. 
 The writings hanged over the French and Spaniards slain in Florida . 
 The three Forts razed . 
 Great honour done by the Savages to Gourgues . 
 And old woman among the rest said unto him , that now she cared not any more to die , since she had seen the Frenchmen once again in Florida , and the Spaniards chased out . Briefly being arrived , and finding his ships set in order , and every thing ready to set sail , he counseled the kings to continue in the amity and ancient league which they had made with the king of France , which would defend them against all Nations : which they all promised , shedding tears because of his departure . Olocotara especially : for appeasing of whom he promised them to return within twelve Moons , ( so they count the years ) and that his king would send Knives in them and army , and store of knives for presents , and all great estima - other things necessary . So that after he had taken his tun ’ leave of them , and assembled his men , he thanked God of all his success since his setting forth , and prayed to The third of him for and happy return . The third of May 1568 , all things were made ready , the Rendez-vous appointed , and the Anchors weighed to set sail so prosperously , that in seventeene days they ran eleven hundred The arrival leagues : continuing which course they arrived at Rochel °fG°ufg ! fsat the sixt of June , the foure and thirtieth day after their sixt of June , departure from the River or May , having lost but a small 
 Pinnace and eight men in it , with a few gentlemen and others which were slain in the assaulting of the Forts . After the cheer and good entertainment which he received of those of Rochel , he sailed to Burdeaux to inform Monsieur Monluc of the things above mentioned , albeit he was advertised of eighteene Pinnaces , and a great Ship of two hundred Tons full of Spanyardes , which being assured of the defeat in Florida , and that Che-de Bois , he was at Rochel , came as far as Che-de Bois , the same day that he departed thence , and followed him as far as Blay ( but he was got already to Bordeaux ) to make him yield another account of his voyage , then that , wherewith he made many Frenchmen right glad . The Catholic king being afterwards informed that Gourgues could not easily be taken , offered a great sum of 
 IIO 
 money to him that could bring him his head , praying moreover king Charles to do justice on him as of the author of so bloody and act contrary to their alliance and good league of friendship . In so much as coming to Paris to present himself unto the King , to signify unto him the success of his Voyage , and the means which he had to subdue this whole Country unto his obedience , ( wherein he offered to employ his life , and all his goods ) he found his entertainment and answer so contrary to his expectation , that in fine he was constrained to hide himself a long space in the Court of Roan , about the year 1570. And without the assistance of President Marigny , in whose house he remained certain days , and of the Receiver of Vacquieulx , which always was his faithful friend , he had been in great danger . Which grieved not a little Dominique de Gourgues , considering the services which he had done aswell unto him as to his predecessors kings of France . He was The birth , born in Mount Marsan in Guyenne , and employed for lifiand death the service of the most Christian Kings in all the Armies made since these twentie five or thirtie years : at last he had the charge and honour of a Captain , which in a place near unto Siene , with thirtie Soldiers sustained the brunt of a part of the Spanish Army , by which being taken in the assault , and having all his men cut in pieces , he was put into a Galley in token of the good war and singular favour which the Spanyard is wont to show us . But as the Galley was going towards Sicillie , being taken by the Turkes , led away to Rhodes , and thence to Constantinople , it was shortly afterward recovered by Romeguas , commander over the Army of Malta . By this mean returning home , he made a Voyage on the coast of Africa , whence he took his course to Bresil , and to the South Sea. At length being desirous to rapayre the honour of France , he set upon Florida with such success as you have herd . So that being become by his continual warlike actions both by Land and Sea no less valiant Captain then skilful Mariner , he hath 
 made himself feared of the Spanyard , and acceptable unto the Queen of England for the desert of his virtues . To conclude , he died in the year 1582 , to the great grief of such as knew him . 
 