169 
 170 
 171 
 172 
 173 
 175 
 Suelasdevaca . 
 ix 177 M 
 Quires . 
 179 
 180 
 7 , uni . , oh Cibola . 
 185 
 [ A brief 
 A brief relation of two notable voyages , the first made by friar Augustin Ruyz a Franciscan , in the year 1581 : the second by Antonio de Espejo in the year 1583 : who together with his company discovered a land wherein they found fifteene provinces all full of towns , containing houses of foure and five stories high , which they nam New Mexico ; for that in many respects it resembles the province of old Mexico . This land is situate to the North of Nueva Espanna , and stretcheth from 24 to 34 degrees and better : by the which & by other inhabited lands it is thought that men may travel even to Terra de Labrador . Taken out of the history of China written by Friar Juan Gonzales de Mendosa , and printed in Madrid 1586. 
 The first voyage made by FrierAngus tin Ruiz to the province de los Tiguas . 
 Have now declared in the title of this present discourse , that in the year 1583 there were discovered fifteene provinces , which the discoverers called New Mexico , situate on the firm land of Nueva Espanna , and I promised to give notice of the said discovery , which I will do 
 with as much brevity as is possible : for if I should record at large all particulars which they saw and came to the knowledge of , it would require a full history . The substance thereof is as follows . 
 In the year of our Lord 1581 a certain Franciscan friar called Augustin Ruiz which dwelled in the valley of S. Bartholomew , being informed by the report of certain Indians called Conchos , which had dealings and conversation with other of their neighbours called Pas-186 
 1581-83 . saguates ; that towards the North , traveling always by land , there were certain great towns not hitherto known nor discovered by our Spanyards : moved with a zeal of charity , and a desire to save souls , craved licence of the Cond of Corunna as then Viceroy of Nueva Espanna , and of his superiors , to go to the said towns , and to endeavour to learn their language , and having learned the same , to baptise them , and to preach the holy Gospel unto them . After he had obtained licence of the parties aforesaid , taking with him other two companions of his own order , and eight soldiers , 23 « « f who of their own good will offered to bear him company , he departed to put in execution his Christian prancisc0 and zealous intent . Who after certain days travel Sanchez come unto a country called The province de los Tiguas Xamuzcado distant from the mines of Santa Barbara , from whence they began their journey , 250 leagues towards the North : in which province the inhabitants , upon a certain occasion , slew one of the said friars two companions . The soldiers that went with him seeing this mishap , and perceiving the success , and likewise fearing , that thereof might happen some greater danger , determined with a common consent to return unto the mines from whence they departed : considering that their company was too small to resist the dangers that might happen , being so far distant from the dwellings of the Spanyards , and from all necessary succour . But the two friars which remained alive did not only refuse their determination , but rather seeing fit occasion to put their good desire in execution , and so great a harvest ripe for the Lords table , because they could not persuade the soldiers to proceed any further in that discovery , remained behind in the said province with three Indian boys , and one Mestizo , whom they had carried with them ; thinking that although they remained alone , yet should they be there in security , by reason of the great affability and love which the people of that place showed unto them . 
 187 
 which intercepted is come to our hands . 
 The province de los Tiguas distant 250 leagues Northward from the mines of Santa Barbara . 
 The mines of SantaBarbara 160 leagues distant from Mexico . 
 The second voyage . 
 Las quatro Cienegas in the province offue v a Biscaya 70 leagues from the mines of Santa Barbara . 
 The eight soldiers being returned to their wished home , immediately sent news of all that had passed to the Viceroy unto the city of Mexico , which is distant from the said mines of Santa Barbara 160 leagues . 
 The friars of Sant Francis were very much aggrieved at the staying of their brothers behind in the country , and fearing least the Savages would kill them seeing them left alone , they began to move the minds of certain soldiers to make another voyage to the said province in the company of another friar of the foresaid Order called Frier Bernardin Beltran , to deliver the aforesaid two religious men out of danger , and to prosecute their former enterprise . 
 At the same time there was at the foresaid mines upon some occasion a citizen of Mexico called Antonio de Espejo , a rich man , and of great courage and industry , and very zealous in the service of king Philip his sovereign , and was born in Cordova . Who understanding the desire of the foresaid friars , and the importance of the actium , offered himself to go on that voyage , and also to spend part of his substance , and to adventure his life therein ; conditionally that licence might be granted him to the same purpose from some person sufficiently authorised by his Majesty . Which licence at the said friars procurement was granted unto him by the governor Juan de Ontiveros the kings Alcalde may6r or chief Justice in the towns called Las quatro Cienegas situate within the jurisdiction of Nueva Biscaya seventy leagues from the said mines of Santa Barbara ; authorizing him both to take in hand the said voyage , and also to assemble such people and soldiers as he could , which might accompany and aid him in the performance of this his Christian intent . 
 The said Antonio de Espejo was so earnest in this matter , that in very few days he had gathered a company of soldiers , and made provision of things necessary for his voyage , spending therein a good part of his substance . And he departed with his whole company from the valley 188 
 of S. Bartholomew the tenth of November 1582 ; taking with him ( for whatsoever should happen ) 115 horses and mules , with great store of weapons , munition , and victuals , and some Indians to serve him in his journey . 
 Directing his course towards the North , after two days journey he met with great Store of the foresaid Indians called Conchos , which dwell in villages or hamlets of cottages covered with straw . Who , so soon as they understood of his approach , having news thereof long before , came forth to receive him with shows of great joy . The food of this people and of all the rest of that province , which is great , are conies , hares , and deer which they kill , of all which they have great abundance . Also they have great store of Maiz or Indian wheat , gourds , and melons very good and plentiful : and there are many rivers full of excellent fish of diverse sorts . They go almost naked , and the weapons that they use are bows & arrows , and live under the government and lordship of Caciques like those of Mexico : they found no idols among them , neither could they understand that they worshipped any thing , whereupon they easily consented that the Spanyards should set up crosses , and were very well content therewith , after they were informed by our friars of the signification thereof , which was done by the interpreters that they carried with them ; by whose means they understood of other towns , whither the said Conchos did conduct them , and bore them company above foure & twenty leagues , all which way was inhabited with people of their own nation : and at all places where they came they were peaceably received by advice that was sent by the Caciques from one town to another . 
 Having passed the foure and twenty leagues aforesaid , they came unto another nation of Indians called Passaguates , who live after the manner of the foresaid Conchos their borderers , and did unto them as the others had done , conducting them forward other foure days journey , with advice of the Caciques as before . The 189 
 A.D. 
 1581-83 . 
 Antonio de Espejo his setting forth from the valley of S. Bartholomew the tenth of November 1582. 
 Indians called Conchos . 
 Many rivers . 
 Spanyards found in this journey many mines of silver , which according to the judgement of skilful men , were very plentiful and rich in metal . 
 A days journey from thence they met with another nation called Tobosos , who so soon as they beheld the countenance of our people fled unto the mountains , leaving their towns and houses desolate . Afterwards we understood that certain years passed there came unto that place certain soldiers to seek mines , who carried away captive certain of the people of the country , which caused the rest of them to be so shey and fearful . The captain sent messengers to call them back again , assuring them that they should not sustain any harm , and handled the matter so discreetly , that many of them returned , whom he made much of , and gave them gifts , using them kindly , and declaring unto them by the interpreter , that their coming was not to hurt any man : whereupon they were all quieted , and were content they should set up crosses , and declare the mystery of the same , making show that they were highly pleased therewith . For proof whereof they accompanied them on their voyage , as their neighbours had done , until they had brought them to a country inhabited by another nation , which was distant from theirs some 12 leagues . They use bows and arrows and go naked . 
 The nation unto which the said Tobosos conducted them , is called Jumanos , whom the Spanyards by another name call Patarabueyes : their province is very great , containing many towns and great store of people : their houses are flat-rooffed , and built of lime and stone , and the streets of their towns are placed in good order . All the men and women have their faces , arms and legs razed and pounced : they are a people of great stature , and of better government , then the rest which they had seen in their former journeys : and are well provided of victuals , and furnished with plenty of wild beasts , fowls and fish , by reason of mighty rivers which come from the North , whereof one is as great as 190 
 Guadalquivir , which falls into the North sea or bay of Mexico . Here are also many lake's of salt water , which at a certain time of the year waxes hard , and becomes very good salt . They are a warlike people , and soon made show thereof : for the first night that our people encamped there , with their arrows they slew five horses , and wounded five other very soar , nor would not have left one of them alive , if they had not been defended by our guard . Having done this mischief , they abandoned the town , and withdrew themselves to a mountain which was hard by , whither our captain went betimes in the morning , taking with him five soldiers well armed , and and interpreter called Peter and Indian of their own nation , and with good persuasions appeased them , causing them to descend to their town and houses , and persuading them to give advice unto their neighbours , that they were men that would hurt no body , neither came they thither to take away their goods : which he obtained easily by his wisdom , and by giving unto the Caciques certain bracelets of glass beads , with hats and other trifles , which he carried with him for the same purpose : so by this means , and by the good entertainment which they gave them , many of them accompanied our Spanyards for certain days , always traveling along the bank of the great river abovesaid ; along the which kit del'Norte . there were many towns of the Indians of this nation , which continued for the space of twelve days travel , all which time the Caciques having received advice from one to another , came forth to entertain our people without their bows and arrows , and brought them plenty of victuals , with other presents and gifts , especially hides and chamois-skins very well dressed , so that those of Flanders do nothing exceed them . These people are all clothed , and seemed to have some light of our holy faith : for they made signs of God , looking up towards heaven , and call him in their language Apalito , A pall to . and acknowledge him for their Lord , from whose bountiful hand and mercy they confess that they have 
 191 
 received their life and being , and these worldly goods . Many of them with their wives and children came unto the friar ( which the captain and soldiers brought with them ) that he might cross and bless them . Who demanding of them , from whom they had received that knowledge of God , they answered , from three Christians , & one Negro which passed that way , and remained certain days among them , who by the signs which they made , were Alvaro Nunnez , Cabe ? a de Vaca , and Dorantes , and Castillo Maldonado , and a Negro ; all Pamphilo de which escaped of the company which Pamphilo the Narvaex Narvaez landed in Florida ; who after they had be 
 Florida 1527. many days captives and slaves , escaped and came to these towns , by whom God showed many miracles , and healed only by the touching of their hands many sick persons , by reason whereof they became very famous in all that country . All this province remained in great peace and security ; in token whereof , they accompanied and served our men certain days , traveling along by Rio deal Norte , the great river aforesaid . 
 Another Within few days after they came unto another great province . province of Indians , from whence they came forth to receive them , upon the news which they had herd of their neighbours , and brought them many very curious things made of feathers of diverse colours , and many mantles of cotton straked with blue and white , like those that are brought from China , to barter & truck them for other things . All of them both men , women and children were clad in chamois skins very good and well dressed . Our people could never understand what nation they were for lack of and interpreter : howbeit they dealt with them by signs ; and having showed Very great unto them certain stones of rich metal , and inquired quantity of whither there were any such in their country : they 
 stver ' answered by the same signs , that five days journey 
 Westward from thence there was great quantity thereof , and that they would conduct them thither , and show it unto them ; as afterwards they performed their 192 
 1581-83 . promise , & bore them company 22 leagues , which was all inhabited by people of the same nation . 
 Next unto the foresaid province they came unto Another pro - another further up the great river aforesaid , being mnce ' much more populous then the former , of whom they were well received , and welcomed with many presents , especially of fish , whereof they have exceeding great store , by reason of certain great lake's not far from Great lake's . thence , wherein they are bred in the foresaid plenty . They stayed among these people three days ; all which time both day and night they made before them many dances , according to their fashion , with signification of speciali joy . They could not learn the name of this nation for want of and interpreter , yet they understood that it extended very far , and was very great . Among these people they found and Indian of the foresaid nation of the Conchos , who told them , and showed them by signs , that fifteene days journey from thence towards the West there was a very broad lake , and never unto A mighty lake . it very great towns , and in them houses of three or foure stories high , and that the people were well appareled , and the country full of victuals and provision . This Concho offered himself to conduct our men thither , whereat our company rejoiced , but left off the enterprise , only to accomplish their intent for which they undertook the voyage , which was to go Northward to give aid unto the two friars aforesaid . The chief and principali thing that they noted in this province was , that it was of very good temperature , and a very rich soil , and had great store of wild beasts , and wildfowl , and abundance of rich metals , and other excellent things , and very pro - Rich metals . fitable . 
 From this province they followed their journey for the space of fifteene days without meeting any people all that while , passing thorough great woods and groves of pine tods of pine trees bearing such fruit as those of Castile : at the end trees ' whereof , having traveled , to their judgement , fourescore leagues , they came unto a small hamlet or village of few 
 ix 193 N 
 people , in whose poor cottages covered with straw they found many deeres-skinnes as well dressed as those of Flanders , with great store of excellent white salt . They gave our men good entertainment for the space of two days while they remained there , after which they bore them company about twelve leagues , unto certain great towns , always traveling by the river called Rio deal Norte abovesaid , till such time as they came unto the New Mexico , country called by them New Mexico . Here all along o°°lar°and t^le sh°re said river grew mighty woods of poplar walnut trees being in some places foure leagues broad , and great Vines . store of walnut trees , and vines like those of Castillia . 
 Having traveled two days thorough the said woods of Poplar and Walnut trees , they came to ten towns situate on both sides of the said river , beside others which they might see further out of the way , wherein there seemed to be great store of people , and those which they saw were above ten thousand persons . In this province they received them very courteously , and brought them to their towns , whereas they gave them great plenty of victuals and hens of the country , with many other things , and that with great good will . Houses of 4 Here they found houses of foure stories high , very stones high . weq with gallant lodgings , and in most of them were 
 Stooves for the Winter season . Their garments were of Cotton and of dear-skins , and the attire both of the men and women is after the manner of the Indians of the kingdom of Mexico . But the strangest thing of all was to see both men and women wear shoes and boots with good soles of neats leather , a thing which they never saw in any other part of the Indies . The women keep their hair well combed and dressed , wearing nothing else upon their heads . In all these towns they had Caciques which governed their people like the Caciques of Mexico , with Sergeants to execute their commandments , who go thorough the towns proclaiming with a loud voice the pleasure of the Caciques , commanding the same to be put in execution . In this 194 
 province our men found many idols which they worshipped , and particularly they had in every house and Oratory for the devil , whereinto they ordinarily carry him meat : and another thing they found , that as it is and use among the Christians to erect crosses upon the high ways , so have this people certain high chapels , in which they say the devil uses to take his ease , and to recreate himself as he travelleth from one town to another ; which chapels are marvellously well trimmed and painted . In all their arable grounds , whereof they have great plenty , they erect on the one side a little cottage or shed standing upon foure studs , under which the labourers do eat , and pass away the heat of the day , for they are a people much given to labour , and do continually occupy themselves therein . This country is full of These high mountains and forests of Pine trees . The weapons m°untainesa ™ that they use are strong bows and arrows headed with C ! ) ij , nes offa flints , which will pierce thorough a coat of male , and country . macanas which are clubs of half a yard long , so beset with sharp flints , that they are sufficient to cleave a man asunder in the midst : they use also a kind of targets made of raw hides . 
 Having remained foure days in this province , not The province far ofF they came to another called The province of °fTiSuas-Tiguas containing sixteene towns , in one whereof , called Poala , they understood that the inhabitants had slain the Poala . two father's aforesaid , to wit , friar Francis Lopez , and friar Augustus Ruyz , whom they went to seek , together with the three Indian boys , and the mestizo . So soon as the people of this town and their neighbours saw our men there , their own consciences accusing them , and fearing that our men came to punish them , and to be avenged of the death of the foresaid father's , they durst not abide their coming , but leaving their houses desolate they fled to the mountains next adjoining , from whence they could never cause them to descend , although our men attempted the same by diverse devises and enticements . They found in the towns and houses good store 
 J9S 
 of victuals , with infinite number of hens in the country , and many sorts of metals , whereof some seemed to be very good . They could not perfectly understand what numbers of people this province might contain , by reason they were fled into the mountains , as I have said before . 
 Having found those to be slain which they went to seek , they entered into consultation , whither they should return to Nueva Biscaya , from whence they came , or should proceed further in their journey ; whereabout there were diverse opinions : howbeit , understanding there , that towards the Orient or East parts of that province , and very far distant from thence , there were great and rich towns : and finding themselves so far on the way , the said captain Antonio de Espeio with the consent of the foresaid friar called Frier Bernardine Beltran , and the greater part of his soldiers and companions determined to proceed on the discovery , till such time as they did see to what end it would come ; to the end they might give certain and perfect knowledge thereof to his Majesty , as eyewitnesses of the same . And so with one accord they determined , that while the army lay still there , the captain and two more of his company should prosecute their desire , which they did accordingly . And within two days journey they came unto another province , where they found eleven towns , and much people in them , which in their judgement were above forty thousand persons . The country was very fertile and plentiful , whose confines bordered upon the territories of Cibola , where there are great store of kine , with whose hides and with cotton they apparel themselves , imitating in the form of their government their next neighbours . In this place are signs of very rich mines , some quantity of the metals whereof they found in the houses of the Indians ; which Indians have and do worship idols . They received our men peaceably , and gave them victuals . Having seen thus much , and the disposition of the country , they returned to the camp , from whence they 196 
 1581-83 . departed , to inform their companions of the things above mentioned . 
 Being returned to the camp they had intelligence of Quiresb°rder ' another province called Los Quires , which stood sixe uPm l0 leagues higher up the river called Rio deal Norte . And e °rte ' in their journey thitherward , being arrived within a league of the place , there came forth very many Indians to receive them in peace , requesting them to bear them company to their towns : which they did , and were marvellous well entertained and cherished . In this province they found five towns only , wherein were great store of people , and those which they saw were above 14000 
 souls , who worship idols as their neighbours do . In one of these towns they found a pie in a cage after the manner of Castile , and certain shadows or canopies like unto those which are brought from China , wherein were painted the Sun , the Moon , and many Stars . Where having taken the height of the polestar , they found themselves to be in 37 degrees and of Northerly latitude . 
 They departed out of this province , and keeping still the same Northerly course , foureteene leagues from thence they found another province called The Cunames , where they saw other five towns , the greatest whereof was called Cia , being so large , that it contained eight marketplaces , the houses whereof being plastered and painted with diverse colours , were better then any which they had seen in the provinces before mentioned : the people which they here saw , they esteemed to be above twenty thousand persons . They presented to our men many curious mantles , and victuals excellently well dressed ; so that our men deemed this nation to be more curious , and of greater civility , and better government , then any other that hitherto they had seen . They showed them rich metals , and the mountains also not far off whereout they dug them . Here our people herd of another province standing towards the Northwest , whereunto they purposed to go . 
 197 
 Seven & thirty degrees and a half . 
 Having traveled about sixe leagues , they came to the Ameies , or said province , the people whereof were called Ameies , Emexes . wherein were seven very great towns , containing , to their judgement , above thirty thousand souls . They reported that one of the seven towns was very great and fair , which our men would not go to see , both because it stood behind a mountain , and also for fear of some mishap , if in case they should be separated one from another . This people are like unto their neighbours of the former province , being as well provided of all necessaries as they , and of as good government . 
 About fifteene leagues from this province , traveling always towards the West , they found a great town called AcomaorAco - Acoma , containing above sixe thousand persons , and man a town situa^e UpOn and high rock which was above fifty paces above 6000 having no other entrance but by a ladder or pair persons . of stairs hewn into the same rock , whereat our people marveled not a little : all the water of this town was kept in cisterns . The chief men of this town came peaceably to visit the Spanyards , bringing them many mantles , and chamois-skinnes excellently dressed , and great plenty of victuals . Their cornfields are two leagues from thence , and they fetch water out of a small river never thereunto , to water the same , on the brinks whereof they saw many great banks of Roses like those of Castile . Signs of Here are many mountains that bear shows of metals , 
 metals . but they went not to see them , because the Indians 
 dwelling upon them are many in number , and very warlike . Our men remained in this place three days , upon one of the which the inhabitants made before them a very solemn dance , coming forth in the same with gallant apparel , using very witty sports , wherewith our men were exceedingly delighted . 
 Twenty foure leagues from hence towards the West , they came to a certain province called by the inhabitants ZunyorSunne . themselves Zuny , & by the Spanyards Cibola , containing great numbers of Indians ; in which province Francisco Vazquez de Coronado had be , and had erected many 198 
 crosses and other tokens of Christianity , which remained as yet standing . Here also they found three Indian Christians which had remained there ever since the said journey , whose names were Andrew the Culiacan , Gaspar de Mexico , and Antonio de Guadalajara , who had almost forgotten their own language , but could speak that country speech very well ; howbeit after some small conference with our men , they easily understood one another . By these three Indians they were informed , that threescore days journey from this place there was a very mighty lake , upon the banks whereof stood many great and good towns , and that the inhabitants of the same had plenty of gold , and evident argument whereof was their wearing of golden bracelets & earrings : and also that after the said Francis Vasquez de Coronado had perfect intelligence thereof , he departed out of this province of Cibola to go thither , and that having proceeded twelve days journey , he began to want water ; and thereupon determined to return , as he did indeed , with intention to make a second voyage thither at his better opportunity ; which afterwards he performed not , being prevented of his determined journey by death . 
 Upon the news of these riches the said Captain Antony de Espeio was desirous to go thither ; and though some of his companions were of his opinion , yet the greater part and the friar were of the contrary , saying that it was now high time to return home unto New Biscay from whence they came , to give account of that which they had seen : which the said greater part within few days put in execution , leaving the captain with 
 A mighty lake 60 dales journey from Cibola . 
 Plenty ofgolde . 
 nine companions only that willingly followed him : who after he had fully certified himself of the riches abovesaid , and of the great quantity of excellent metals that were about that lake , departed out of this province of mightiepro - 
 Another 
 Cibola with his companions ; and traveling directly towards vince w " V - 
 the West , after he had passed 28 leagues , he found 
 another very great province , which by estimation con - ^iied^Mo - 
 teined above 50000 souls : the inhabitants whereof 199 
 A witty politic to be used by the English in like cases . 
 assoon as they understood of their approach , sent them word , upon pain of death to come no nearer to their towns : whereto the captain answered , that their coming was in no wise to hurt them , as they should well perceive , and therefore requested them not to molest him in his intended voyage , and withal gave to the messenger a reward of such things as they brought with them : who thereupon made so good report of our people , and so appeased the troubled minds of the Indians , that they granted them free access unto their towns , and so they went thither with 15. Indians their friends of the province of Cibola aforesaid , and the three Mexican Indians before mentioned . When they were come within a league of the first town , there came forth to meet them above 2000. Indians laden with victuals , whom the Captain rewarded with some things of small valve , which they made great account of , and esteemed more precious then gold . As they approached near unto the town which was nam Zaguato , a great multitude of Indians came forth to meet them , and among the rest their Caciques , with so great demonstration of joy and gladness , that they cast much meal of Maiz upon the ground for the horses to tread upon : with this triumph they entered the town , where they were very well lodged and much made of , which the Captain did in part requite , giving to the chiefest among them hats , and beads of glass , with many such trifles , which he carried with him for the like purpose . The said Caciques presently gave notice to the whole province of the arrival of these new guests , whom they reported to be a courteous people , and such as offered them no harm : which was occasion sufficient to make them all come laden with presents unto our people , and to entreat them to go and make merry with them in their towns ; which they yielded unto , though always with great foresight what might follow . Whereupon the Captain used a certain policy , making the Caciques believe , that forasmuch as his horses were very fierce ( for they 
 200 
 had told the Indians that they would kill them ) therefore it was necessary to make a Fort of lime and stone to enclose them , for the avoiding of such inconveniences as otherwise might happen unto the Indians by them . This tale was so steadfastly believed by the Casques , that in five hours they assembled such store of people together , that with incredible celerity they built the said Fort which our men required . 
 Moreover , when the Captain said that he would depart , they brought unto him a present of 40000. mantles of cotton , both white and of other colours , and great store of hand-towels , with tassels at the corners , with diverse other things , and among the rest rich metals , which seemed to hold much silver . Rich metals . Among these Indians they learned very much concerning The great Lake aforesaid , whose report agreed wholly with the relation of the former , as touching the riches and great abundance of gold about that lake . Great abun - 
 The Captain reposing great confidence in this people 8c in their good disposition towards him determined after certain days , to leave there five of his companions with the rest of his Indian friends , that they might return with his carriages to the province of Zuni , while himself with the foure other which remained should ride in post to discover certain very rich Mines , whereof he had perfect information . And putting this his purpose in execution he departed with his guides , and having traveled due-west 45. leagues he came unto the said Mines , and took out of the same with his Exceedingrich own hands exceeding rich metals holding great quantity Mines of of silver : arid the mines which were of a very broad ' vein were in a mountain whereon they might easily ascend , by reason of and open way that led up to the same . Near unto these mines were certain towns of Indians dwelling upon the mountains , who showed them friendship & came forth to receive them with crosses on their heads , and other tokens of peace . Hereabout they found two rivers of a reasonable bigness , 
 201 
 upon the banks whereof grew many vines bearing excellent grapes , and great groves of walnuttrees , and much A mighty flax like that of Castile : and they showed our men by 
 River °f eight sjgneS ) that behind those mountains there was a river 
 runnings - about 8. leagues broad , but they could not learn how 
 ward the near it was : howbeit the Indians made demonstration 
 ' North sea . that it ran towards the North sea , and that upon both 
 ^River snowfall s^es thereof stood many towns of so great bigness , that into^theChese - c°mParison thereof those wherein they dwelled were but piouk bay , or small hamlets . 
 into the great After he had received all this information , the said ItAeofTadoac . Captain returned towards the province of Zuni , whither ' he had sent his said companions : and being arrived there in safety , having travailed upon a very good way , he found in the same place his 5. companions , & the said father Frier Bernardin Beltran , with the soldiers which were determined to return , as is aforesaid , but upon certain occasions were not as yet departed : whom the inhabitants had most friendly entreated , & furnished with all things necessary in abundance , as afterwards likewise they used the Captain , and those that came with him , coming forth to meet them with show of great joy , and giving them great store of victuals to serve them in their journey homeward , and requesting them to return again with speed , and to bring many Castilians with them ( for so they call the Spaniards ) to whom they promised food sufficient . For the better performance whereof they sowed that year more grain and other fruits , then they had done at any time before . 
 At this present the Friar and soldiers aforesaid resolved themselves in their former determination , & agreed to return unto the province from whence they came with intention before mentioned , to seek the two Friars that were slain , to whom also Gregorio Hernandez who had be standardbearer in the journey , joined himself . Who being departed , the Captain accompanied only with 8. soldiers , determined to prosecute his former attempt , & to pass up higher the said river 
 202 
 called Rio deal Norte , which he did accordingly . And having traveled about 60. leagues towards the province 60. Leagues . of the Quires aforesaid , 12 leagues from thence towards the Orient or East they found a province of Indians called Hubates , who received them peaceably , and gave Hubates . them great store of victuals , informing them also of very rich Mines which they found , whereout they god Very rich glistering & good metal , and therewith returned to the Mines . town from whence they came . This province contained by their estimation 25000. persons all very well appareled in coloured mantles of cotton , and Chamois-skins very well dressed . They have many mountains full of Pines and Cedars , and the houses of their towns are Houses of 4. of 4. and 5. stories high . Here they had notice of five stories another province distant about one days journey from ' thence inhabited by certain Indians called Tamos , and Tamos . containing above 40000. souls : whither being come the inhabitants would neither give them any victuals , nor admit them into their towns : for which cause , and in regard of the danger wherein they were , and because some of the soldiers were not well at ease , and for that they were so few ( as we have said ) they determined Theirretume . to depart thence , and to return towards the land of the Christians , which they put in execution in the beginning of July 1583 , being guided by and Indian that went with them , who led them another way then they went forth by , down a river , which they called Rio de las vacas ; that the las is to say , The river of oxen , in respect of the great multitudes of oxen or kine that fed upon the banks thereof , by the which they traveled for the space of 
 120. leagues , still meeting with store of the said cattle . 120. Leagues . From hence they went forward to the river of Conchos by which they entered , and thence to the valley of S. Bartholomew , from whence they first entered into their discovery . Upon their coming thither they found that the said Friar Bernardin Beltran and his company were safely arrived at the said town many days before , & were gone from thence to the town of Guadiana . In Guadiana . 
 203 
 this town the foresaid captain Antony de Espejo made most certain relation of all that is aforesaid , which relation presently he sent unto the Cond of Corunna Vizroy of Nueva Espanna , who sent the same to his Majesty , & to the Lords of his royal counsel of the Indies , to the end they might take such order as they thought best , which they have already performed with great care and circumspection . 
 Almighty God vouchsafe his assistance in this business , that such numbers of souls redeemed by his blood may not utterly perish , of whose good capacity , wherein they exceed those of Mexico and Peru ( as we be given to understand by those that have dealt with them ) we may boldly presume that they will easily embrace the Gospel , and abandon such idolatry as now the most of them do live in : which Almighty God grant for his honour and glory , and for the increase of the holy Catholic faith . 
 