The relation of Francis Vazquez de Coronado , Captain generail of the people which were sent in the name of the Emperors majesty to the Country of Cibola newly discovered , which he sent to DONE Antonio de Mendo9a Viceroy of Mexico , of such things as happened in his voyage from the 22. of Aprill in the year 1540. which departed from Culiacan forward , and of such things as he found in the Country which he passed . 
 Chap. 1. 
 Francis Vazquez departeth with his army from Culiacan , and after diverse troubles in his voyage , arriveth at the valley of the people called Los Caracones , which he finds barren of Maiz : for obtaining whereof he sends to the valley called The valley of the Lord : he is informed of the greatness of the valley of the people called Caracones , and of the nature of those people , and of certain Islands lying along that coast . 
 He 22. of the month of Aprill last passed I departed from the province of Culiacan with part of the army , and in such order as 1 mentioned unto your Lordship , and according to the success I assured my self , by all likelihood that I shall not bring all mine army together in this 
 enterprise : because the troubles have be so great and the want of victuals , that I think all this year will not be sufficient to perform this enterprise , & if it should be performed in so short a time , it would be to the great loss of our people . For as I wrote unto your Lordship , I was fourescore days in travailing to Culiacan , in all which time I and those Gentlemen my companions which were horsemen , carried on our backs , 
 IX 
 145 
 K 
 This was but 200. leagues from Mexico . 
 and on our horses , a little victuali , so that from henceforward we carried none other needful apparel with us , that was above a pound weight : and all this notwithstanding , and though we put our selves to such a small proportion of victuals which we carried , for all the order that possibly we could take , we were driven to our shifts . And no marvel , because the way is rough and long : and with the carriage of our Harquebusses down the mountains and hills , and in the passage of Rivers , the greater part of our corn was spoiled . And because I send your Lordship our voyage drawn ' in a Map , I will speak no more thereof in this my letter . 
 Thirtie leagues before we arrived at the place which the father provinciali told us so well of in his relation , I sent Melchior Diaz before with fifteene horses , giving him order to make but one days journey of two , because he might examine all things , against mine arrival : who travailed foure days journey through exceeding rough Mountains where he found neither victuals , nor people , nor information of any things , saving that he found two or three poor little villages , containing 20. or 30. cottages a piece , and by the inhabitants thereof he understood that from thence forward there were nothing but exceeding rough mountains which ran very far , utterly disinhabited and void of people . And because it was labour lost , I would not write unto your Lordship thereof . 
 It grieved the whole company , that a thing so highly commended , and whereof the father had made so great brags , should be found so contrary , and it made them suspect that all the rest would fallen out in like sort . Which when I perceived I sought to encourage them the best I could , telling them that your Lordship always was of opinion , that this voyage was a thing cast away , and that we should fix our cogitation upon those seven Cities , and other provinces , whereof we had knowledge : that there should be the end of our enterprise : and 146 
 ... I540 , with this resolution and purpose we all marched cheerfully through a very bad way which was not passable but one by one , or else we must force out with Pioneers the path which we found , wherewith the Soldiers were not a little offended , finding all that the Friar had said to be quite contrary : for among other things which the father said and affirmed , this was one , that the way was plain and good , and that there was but one small hill of half a league in length . And yet in truth there are mountains which although the way were well mended could not be passed without great danger of breaking the horses necks : and the way was such , that of the cattle which your Lordship sent us for the provision of our army we lost a great part in the voyage through the roughness of the rocks . The lambs and sheep lost their hoofes in the way : and of those which I brought from Culiacan , I left the greater part at the River of Lachimi , because they could not The river of keep company with us , and because they might come lachimi . softly after us , foure men on horseback remained with them which are now come unto us , and have brought us not passed foure and twentie lambs , and foure sheep , for all the rest were dead with travailing through that rough passage , although they travailed but two leagues a day , and rested themselves every day . 
 At length I arrived at the valley of the people called The valley of Caracones , the 26. day of the month of May : and from Culiacan until I came thither , I could not help my ara~ self , save only with a great quantity of bred of Maiz : for seeing the Maiz in the fields were not yet ripe , I was constrained to leave them all behind me . In this valley of the Caracones we found more store of people then in any other part of the Country which we had passed , and great store of tillage . But I understood that there was store thereof in another valley called The Talk deal Lords valley , which I would not disturb with force , Sennor-but sent thither Melchior Diaz with wares of exchange to procure some , and to give the said Maiz to the 
 147 
 Indians our friends which we brought with us , and to some others that had lost their cattle in the way , and were not able to carry their victuals so far which they brought from Culiacan . It pleased God that we gate some small quantity of Maiz with this traffic , whereby certain Indians were relieved and some Spanyards . 
 And by that time that we were come to this valley of the Caracones , some tenne or twelve of our horses were dead through weariness : for being overcharged with great burdens , and having but little meat , they could not endure the travail . Likewise some of our Negroes and some of our Indians died here ; which was no small want unto us for the performance of our enterprise . They The valley de told me that this valley of the Caracones is five days isumt^ve5 journey fr°m the Western Sea. I sent for the Indians davet intima of the Sea coast to understand their estate , and while I from the Wes - stayed for them the horses rested : and I stayed there teem sea . foure days , in which space the Indians of the Sea coast came unto me : which told me , that two days sailing Seven or eight from their coast of the Sea , there were seven or eight ^t^Isks s^an^s tied over against them , well inhabited with of California , people , but badly furnished with victuals , and were a rude people : And they told me , that they had seen A ship seen a Ship pass by not far from the shore : which I coast . wot not what to think whither it were one or those 
 that went to discover the Country , or else a Ship of the Portugals . 
 148 
 They come to Chichilticale : after they had rested themselves two days there , they enter into a Country very barren of victuals , and hard to travail for thirtie leagues , beyond which they found a Country very pleasant , and a river called Rio deal Lino , they fight with the Indians being assaulted by them , and with victory vanquishing their city , they relieved themselves of their pinching hunger . 
 1 Departed from the Caracones , and always kept by the Sea coast as near as I could judge , and in very deed I still found my self the farther off : in such sort that when I arrived at Chichilticale I found my self tenne days journey from the Sea : and the father provinciali said that it was only but five leagues distance , and that he had seen the same . we all conceived great grief and were not a little confounded , when we saw that we found every thing contrary to the information which he had given your Lordship . 
 The Indians of Chichilticale say , that if at any time they go to the Sea for fish , and other things that they carry , they go traversing , and are tenne days journey in going thither . And I am of opinion that the information which the Indians give me should be true . The sea returns towards the West right over against the Caracones the space of tenne or twelve leagues . Where I found that your Lordship's ships were seen , which went to discover the haven of Chichilticale , which father Marcus of Ni ? a said to be in five and thirtie degrees . God knoweth what grief of mind I have sustained : because I am in doubt that some mishap is fallen unto them : and if they follow the coast , as they said they would , as long as their victuals last which they carry with them , whereof I left them store in Culiacan , and if they be not fallen into some misfortune , I hope well in God that by this they have made some good discovery , and in this respect their long staying out may be pardoned . 
 149 
 Chichilticale ten days journey from the sea . 
 This Chichil-ticaleisindeede but in 28. deg . 
 I rested my self two days in Chichilticale , and to have done well I should have stayed longer , in respect that here we found our horses so tired : but because we wanted victuals , we had no leisure to rest any longer : I entered the confines of the desert Country on The 23. of Saint Johns eve , and to refresh our former travails , the June . first days we found no grass , but worse way of mountains and bad passages , then we had passed already : and the horses being tired , were greatly molested therewith : so that in this last desert we lost more horses then we had lost before : and some of my Indians which were our friends died , and one Spanyard whose name was Spinosa ; and two Negroes , which died with eating certain herbs for lack of victuals . From this place I sent before me one days journey the master DONE Garcia of the field DONE Garcia Lopez de Cardenas with fifteene nas^^^ ' h°rses to discover the Country , and prepare our way : ' wherein he did like himself , and according to the confidence which your Lordship reposed in him . And well I wot he failed not to do his part : for as I have informed your Lordship , it is most wicked way , at least thirtie leagues and more , because they are inaccessible mountains . 
 A godly and But after we had passed these thirtie leagues , we fruitful con - founj fresh rivers , and grass like that of Castile , and ’ specially of that sort which we call Scaramoio , many Nut trees and Mulberry trees , but the Nut trees differ from those of Spayne in the leaf : and there was Flax , but chiefly near the banks of a certain river which Rio deal Lino , therefore we called El Rio del Lino , that is say , the river of Flax : we found no Indians at all for a days travail , but afterwards foure Indians came out unto us in peaceable manner , saying that they were sent even to that desert place to signify unto us that we were welcome , and that the next day all the people would come out to meet us on the way with victuals : and the master of the field gave them a cross , willing them to signify to those of their city that they should not fear , and they should 150 
 rather let the people stay in their houses , because I came only in the name of his majesty to defend and aid them . 
 And this done , Fernando Alvarado returned to advertise me , that certain Indians were come unto them in peaceable manner , and that two of them stayed for my coming with the master of the field . Whereupon I went unto them and gave them beads and certain short cloaks , willing them to return unto their city , and bid them to stay quiet in their houses , and fear nothing . 
 And this done I sent the master of the field to search wisefore-whether there were any bad passage which the Indians cast ' might keep against us , and that he should take and defend it until the next day that I should come thither . 
 So he went , and found in the way a very bad passage , where we might have sustained very great harm : wherefore there he seated himself with his company that were with him : and that very night the Indians came to take that passage to defend it , and finding it taken , they assaulted our men there , and as they tell me , treason of they assaulted them like valiant men ; although in the the n^ans-ende they retired and fled away ; for the master of the field was watchful , and was in order with his company : the Indians in token of retreat sounded on a certain small trumpet , and did no hurt among the Spanyards . The very same night the master of the Great forecast field certified me hereof . Whereupon the next day in the best order that I could I departed in so great want master . of victuali , that I thought that if we should stay one day longer without food , we should all perish for hunger , especially the Indians , for among us all we had not two bushels of corn : wherefore it behooved me to prick forward without delay . The Indians here and their made fires , and were answered again afar ofF as orderly as we for our lives could have done , to give their fellows understanding , how we marched and where we arrived . _ . 
 Assoon as I came within sighed of this city of Granada , at city y 
 I sent DONE Garcias Lopez Campmaster , friar Daniel , Cibola . 
 151 
 The arrogande of the people of Cibola . 
 and friar Luys , and Fernando Vermizzo somewhat before with certain horsemen , to seek the Indians and to advertise them that our coming was not to hurt them , but to defend them in the name of the Emperor our Lord , according as his majesty had given us in charge : which message was delivered to the inhabitants of that country by and interpreter . But they like arrogant people made small account thereof ; because we seemed very few in their eyes , and that they might destroy us without any difficulty ; and they struck friar Luys with and arrow on the gown , which by the grace of God did him no harm . 
 In the mean space I arrived with all the rest of the horsemen , and footmen , and found in the fields a great sort of the Indians which began to shoot at us with Command - their arrows : and because I would obey your will and meant to use ^g Command of the Marks , I would not let my & thee Savaged PeoPle charge them , forbidding my company , which entreated me that they might set upon them , in any wise to provoke them , saying that that which the enemies did was nothing , and that it was not meet to set upon so few people . On the other side the Indians perceiving that we stirred not , took great stomach and courage unto them : insomuch that they came hard to our horses heals to shoot at us with their arrows . Whereupon seeing that it was now time to stay no longer , and that the friars also were of the same opinion , I set upon them without any danger : for suddenly they fled part to the city which was near and well fortified , and other into the field , which way they could shift : and some of the Indians were slain , and more had been if I would have suffered them to have be pursued . 
 But considering that hereof we might reap but small profit , because the Indians that were without , were few , There were and those which were retired into the city , with them t^towne ' which stayed within at the first were many , where the ' comara^ist . victuals were whereof we had so great need , I assembled gen . cap . w > - my people , and divided them as I thought best to assault ! 52 
 the city , and I compassed it about : and because the famine which we sustained suffered no delay , my self with certain of these gentlemen and soldiers put our selves on foot , and commanded that the crossbows and harquebusiers should give the assault , and should beat the enemies from the walls , that they might not hurt us , and I assaulted the walls on one side , where they told me there was a scaling ladder set up , and that there was one gate : but the crossebowmen suddenly brake the strings of their bows , and the harquebusiers did nothing at all : for they came thither so weak and feeble , that scarcely they could stand on their feet : and by this means the people that were aloft on the walls to defend the town were no way hindered from doing us all the mischief they could : so that twice they stroke me to the ground with infinite number of great stones , which they cast down : and if I had not been defended with and excellent good headpiece which I beware , I think it had gone hardly with me : nevertheless my company took me up with two small wounds in the face , and and arrow sticking in my foot , and many blows with stones on my arms and legs , and thus I went out of the battle very weak . I think that if DONE Garcias Lopez 
 They defend the wait with stones like those of Hochelaga . 
 de Cardenas the second time that they struck me to the ground had not succoured me with striding over me like a good knight , I had been in far greater danger then I was . But it pleased God that the Indians yielded themselves unto us , and that this city was taken : and such store of Maiz was found therein , as our necessity required . The Master of the field , and DONE Pedro de Tovar , and Fernando de Alvarado , and Paul de Melgosa Captains of the footmen escaped with certain knocks with stones : though none of them were wounded with arrows , yet Agoniez Quarez was wounded in one arm with the shot of and arrow , and one Torres a townsman of Panuco was shot into the face with another , and two footmen more had two small wounds with arrows . 
 And because my armour was gilded and glittering , they 
 153 
 Excellent houses foure or five lofts high . 
 all laid load on me , and therefore I was more wounded then the rest , not that I did more then they , or put my self forwarder then the rest , for all these Gentlemen and soldiers carried themselves as manfully as was looked for at their hands . I am now well recovered I thank God , although somewhat bruised with stones . Likewise in the skirmish which we had in the fields , two or three other soldiers were hurt , and three horses slain , one of DONE Lopez , the other of Viliega and the third of DONE Alonso Manrique , and seven or eight other horses were wounded ; but both the men and horses are whole and found . 
 Chap. 3. 
 Of the situation and state of the seven cities called the Kingdom of Cibola , and of the customs and qualities of those people , and of the beasts which are found there . 
 IT remains now to certify your Honour of the seven cities , and of the kingdom es and provinces whereof the Father provinciali made report unto your Lordship . And to be brief , I can assure your honour , he said the truth in nothing that he reported , but all was quite contrary , saving only the names of the cities , and great houses of stone : for although they be not wrought with Turqueses , nor with lime , nor bricks , yet are they very excellent good houses of three or foure or five lofts high , wherein are good lodgings and fair chambers with lathers in stead of stairs , and certain cellars under the ground very good and paved , which are made for winter , they are in manner like stooves : and the lathers which they have for their houses are all in a manner moveable and portable , which are taken away and set down when they please , and they are made of two pieces of wood with their steps , as ours be . The seven cities are seven small towns , all made with these kind of houses that I speak of : and they stand all within foure leagues together , and they 
 * 54 
 are all called the kingdom of Cibola , and every one Cibola is a of them have their particular name : and none of them is called Cibola , but altogether they are called Cibola . And this town which I call a city , I have nam Granada , as well because it is somewhat like unto it , as also in remembrance of your lordship . In this town where I now remain , there may be some two hundred houses , all compassed with walls , and I think that with the rest of the houses which are not 
 so walled , they may be together five hundred . There Five hundred is another town near this , which is one of the seven , bouses in & it is somewhat bigger then this , and another of the ’ same bigness that this is of , and the other foure are somewhat less : and I send them all painted unto your fainter ne-lordship with the voyage . And the parchment wherein [ essarl^ zn a the picture is , was found here with other parchments . new tscovery ' The people of this town seem unto me of a reasonable stature , and witty , yet they seem not to be such as they should be , of that judgement and wit to build these houses in such sort as they are . For the most part they go all naked , except their privy parts which are covered : and they have painted mantles like those Painted which I send unto your lordship . They have no cotton mantbes-wooll growing , because the country is cold , yet they wear mantels thereof as your honour may see by the show thereof : and true it is that there was found in their houses certain yarn made of cotton wool . They wear their hair on their heads like those of Mexico , and they are well nurtured and conditioned : And they Store of Tur-have Turqueses I think good quantity , which with the lueses-rest of the goods which they had , except their corn , they had conveyed away before I came thither : for I found no women there , nor no youth under fifteene years old , nor no old folks above sixtie , saving two or three old folks , who stayed behind to govern all the rest of the youth and men of war . There were found in a certain paper two points of Emralds , and Emralds . certain small stones broken which are in colour some - 
 155 
 Excellent and very great Guinie cocks . 
 Gomara hist . gen . Cap. zi$ . say that that the cold is by reason of the high mountains . 
 A wood of Cedars . Excellent grass . 
 Dear , hares , and conies . 
 what like Granates very bad , and other stones of Crystal , which I gave one of my servants to lay up to send them to your lordship , and he hath lost them as he telleth me . we found here Guinie cocks , but few . The Indians tell me in all these seven cities , that they eat them not , but that they keep them only for their feathers . I believe them not , for they are excellent good , and greater then those of Mexico . The season which is in this country , and the temperature of the air is like that of Mexico : for sometime it is hot , and sometime it rains : but hitherto I never saw it rain , but once there fell a little shower with wind , as they are wont to fallen in Spaine . 
 The snow and cold are wont to be great , for so say the inhabitants of the Country : and it is very likely so to be , both in respect to the manner of the Country , and by the fashion of their houses , and their furs and other things which this people have to defend them from cold . There is no kind of fruit nor trees of fruit . The Country is all plain , and is on no side mountainous : albeit there are some hilly and bad passages . There are small store of Fowls : the cause whereof is the cold , and because the mountains are not near . Here is no great store of wood , because they have wood for their fuel sufficient foure leaugues off from a wood of small Cedars . There is most excellent grass within a quarter of a league hence , for our horses as well to feed them in pasture , as to mow and make hay , whereof we stood in great need , because our horses came hither so weak and feeble . The victuals which the people of this country have , is Maiz , whereof they have great store , and also small white Peas : and Venison , which by all likelihood they feed upon , ( though they say no ) for we found many skins of Dear , of Hares , and Conies . They eat the best cakes that ever I saw , and every body generally eateth of them . They have the finest order and way to grind that we ever saw in any place . And one Indian woman of this country 
 will grind as much as foure women of Mexico . They have most excellent salt in kernel , which they fetch ery good from a certain lake a days journey from hence . They S^^esterne have no knowledge among them of the North Sea , nor sea within of the Western Sea , neither can I tell your lordship 150. leagues to which we be nearest : But in reason they should fnm seem to be nearest to the Western Sea : and at the Lions lest I think I am and hundred and fiftie leagues from porkesplcks , ’ thence : and the Northern Sea should be much further mlghtlesheep , off . Your lordship may see how broad the land is wild gpates . here . Here are many sorts of beasts , as Bears , Tigers , Boses . Lions , Porkespicks , and certain Sheep as big as and horse , with very great homes and little tails , I have Stags . seen their homes so big , that it is a wonder to be - Tty travalle hold their greatness . Here are also wild goats whose rd^ heads likewise I have seen , and the paws of Bears , n^e sea . and the skins of wild Boars . There is game of Dear , QXe hides Ounces , and very great Stags : and all men are of dressed and opinion that there are some bigger then that beast f°ity^very which your lordship bestowed upon me , which once belonged to John Melaz . They travel eight days journey unto certain plains lying towards the North Sea. In this country there are certain skins well dressed , and they dress them and paint them where they kill their Oxen , for so they say themselves . 
 157 
 [ Chap. 4. 
 Tadouac seems because it is a lake , and endeth in ac to have some affinity herewith . 
 Other towns near a river . 
 Chap. 4. 
 Of the state and qualities of the kingdoms of Totonteac , Marata , and Acus , quite contrary to the relation of Frier Marcus . The conference which they have with the Indians of the city of Granada which they had taken , which had fiftie years past foreseen the coming of the Christians into their country . The relation which they have of other seven cities , whereof Tucano is the principali , and how he sent to discover them . A present of diverse things had in these countries' sent unto the Viceroy Mendosa by Vasques de Coronado . 
 THe kingdom of Totonteac so much extolled by the Father provinciali , which said that there were such wonderful things there , and such great matters , and that they made cloth there , the Indians say is and hot lake , about which are five or sixe houses ; and that there were certain other , but that they are ruinated by war . The kingdom of Marata is not to be found , neither have the Indians any knowledge thereof . The kingdom of Acus is one only small city , where they gather cotton which is called Acucu . And I say that this is a town . For Acus with and aspiration nor without , is no word of the country . And because I guess that they would derive Acucu of Acus , I say that it is this town whereinto the kingdom of Acus is converted . Beyond this town they say there are other small towns which are near to a river which I have seen and have had report of by the relation of the Indians . I would to God I had better news to write unto your lordship : nevertheless I must say the truth : And as I wrote to your lordship from Culiacan , I am now to advertise your honour as well of the good as of the bad . Yet this I would have you be assured , that if all the riches and the treasures of the world were here , I could have done no more in the service of his Majesty and of your 158 
 1540. lordship , then I have done in coming hither whither you have sent me , my self and my companions carrying our victuals upon our shoulders and upon our horses three hundred leagues ; and many days going on foot travailing over hills and rough mountains , with other troubles which I cease to mention , neither purpose I to depart unto the death , if it please his Majesty and your lordship that it shall be so . 
 Three days after this city was taken , certain Indians of these people came to offer me peace , and brought me certain Turqueses and bad mantles , and I re - Turqueses . ceived them in his Majesties name with all the good Mant^es-speaches that I could devise , certifying them of the purpose of my coming into this country , which is in the name of his Majesty , and by the commandment of your Lordship , that they and all the rest of the people of this province should become Christians , and should know the true God for their Lord , and receive his Majesty for their King , and earthly Sovereign : And herewithal they returned to their houses , and suddenly Indians the next day they set in order all their goods and sub - A* / 1 ’ stance , their women and children , and fled to the hills , w-tves children leaving their towns as it were abandoned , wherein re - and goods . maimed very few of them . When I saw this , within eight or tenne days after being recovered of my wounds , 
 I went to the city , which I said to be greater then A city greater this where I am , and found there some few of them , ^Granada . to whom I said that they should not be afraid , and that they should call their governor unto me : howbeit , forasmuch as I can learn or gather , none of them hath any governor : for I saw not there any chief house , whereby any preeminence of one over another might be gathered . After this and old man came , which said that he was their lord , with a piece of a mantle made of many pieces , with whom I reasoned that small while that he stayed with me , and he said that within three days after , he and the rest of the chief of that town would come and visit me , and give order what course should 
 159 
 be taken with them . Which they did : for they brought me certain mantles and some Turqueses . I advised them to come down from their holds , and to return with their wives and children to their houses , and to become Christians , and that they would acknowledge the Emperors majesty for their King and lord . And even to this present they keep in those strong holds their women and children , and all the goods which they have . Two tables I commanded them that they should paint me out a painted by the of aq e beasts which they know in their country : beasts0 ” 6 And such bad painters as they are , forthwith they 
 another of painted me two clothes , one of their beasts , another 
 birds and of their birds and fish . They say that they will bring 
 fish . their children , that our religious men may instruct them , 
 and that they desire to know our law : And they assure ^^thatlhcM us ’ a^ove years past was prophesied among parts should be them , that a certain people like us should come , and subdued by from that part that we came from , and that they should Christians . subdue all that country . 
 They worship That which these Indians worship as far as hitherto the water . we can } earnej is the Water : for they say it causeth their corn to grow , and maintaineth their life ; and that they know none other reason , but that their ancestors did so . I have sought by all means possible to learn of the inhabitants of these towns , whither they have any knowledge of other people , countries' and cities : And Seven cities they tell me of seven cities which are far distant from ^Granada P^ace ’ i are bke unto these , though they have ' not houses like unto these , but they are of earth , and small : and that among them much cotton is gathered . The chief of these towns whereof they have knowledge , Tucana . they say is called Tucano : and they gave me no perfect knowledge of the rest . And I think they do not tell me the truth , imagining that of necessity I must speedily depart from them , and return home . But herein they shall soon find themselves deceived . I sent DONE Pedro de Tovar with his company of footmen and with certain other horsemen to see this town : And I would not 
 160 
 have dispatched this packet unto your lordship , until I had known what this town was , if I had thought that within twelve or fifteene days I might have had news from him : for he will stay in this journey thirtie days at least . And having examined that the knowledge hereof is of small importance , and that the cold and the waters approach : I thought it my duty to do according as your lordship gave me charge in your instructions , which is , that immediately upon mine arrival here , I should signify so much unto your lordship , and so I do , sending withal the bore relation of that which I have seen . I have determined to send round about the country from hence to have knowledge of all things , and rather to suffer all extremity , then to leave this enterprise to serve his majesty , if I may find any thing wherein I may perform it , and not to omit any diligence therein , until your lordship send me order what I shall do . we have great want of pasture : and your lordship also shall understand , that among all those which are here , there is not one pound of raisins , nor sugar , nor oil , nor any The Spaniards wine , save only one pint which is saved to say Mass : willing ™ for all is spent & spilled by the way . Now your lordship ’ may provide us what you think needful . And if your honour mean to send us cattle , your lordship must understand that they will be a summer in coming unto us : for they will not be able to come unto us any sooner . 
 I would have sent your lordship with this dispatch many musters of things which are in this country : but the way is so long and rough , that it is hard for me to do so : nevertheless I send you twelve small mantles , such as the people of the country are wont to wear , and a certain garment also , which seems unto me to be well 38° - ] made : I kept the same , because it seemed to me to be excellent well wrought , because I believe that no man broideredwith ever saw any needle work in these Indies , except it were needle work . since the Spaniards inhabited the same . I send your Lordship also two clothes painted with the beasts of this country , although as I have said , the picture be 
 ix 161 L 
 The death of Stephan the Negro . 
 very rudely done , because the painter spent but one day in drawing of the same . I have seen other pictures on the walls of the houses of this city with far better proportion , and better made . I send your honour one Oxhide , certain Turqueses , and two earrings of the same , and fifteene combes of the Indians , and certain tablets set with these Turqueses , and two small baskets made of wicker , whereof the Indians have great store . I send your lordship also two rolls which the women in these parts are wont to wear on their heads when they fetch water from their wells , as we use to do in Spaine . And one of these Indian women with one of these rolls on her head , will carry a pitcher of water without touching the same with her hand up a lather . I send you also a muster of the weapons wherewith these people are wont to fight , a buckler , a mace , a bow , and certain arrows , among which are two with points of bones , the like whereof , as these conquerors say , have never been seen . I can say nothing unto your lordship touching the apparel of their women . For the Indians keep them so carefully from us , that hitherto I have not seen any of them , saving only two old women , and these had two long robes down to the foot open before , and girded to them , and they are buttoned with certain cordons of cotton . I requested the Indians to give me one of these robes , which they beware , to send your honour the same , seeing they would not show me their women . And they brought me two mantles which are these , which I send you as it were painted : they have two pendents like the women of Spaine , which hang somewhat over their shoulders . The death of the Negro is most certain : for here are many of the things found which he carried with him : And the Indians tell me that they killed him here , because the Indians of Chichilticale told them that he was a wicked villain , and not like unto the Christians : because the Christians kill nowomen : and he killed women ; and also he touched their women , which the Indians love more then themselves ; therefore 
 162 
 they determined to kill him : But they did it not after such sort as was reported , for they killed none of the rest of those that came with him : neither slew they the young lad which was with him of the province of Petatlan , but they took him and kept him in safe custody until now . And when I sought to have him , they excused themselves two or three days to give him me , telling me that he was dead , and sometime that the Indians of Acucu had carried him away . But in conclusion , when Acucu . 
 I told them that I should be very angry if they did not give him me , they gave him unto me . He is and interpreter , for though he cannot well speak their language , yet he understands the same very well . In this place there is found some quantity of gold and and s^-silver , which those which are skilful in minerail matters esteem to be very good . To this hour I could never ’ learn of these people from whence they have it : And I see they refuse to tell me the truth in all things , imagining , as I have said , that in short time I would depart hence , but I hope in God they shall no longer excuse themselves . I beseech your lordship to certify his Majesty of the success of this voyage . For seeing we have no more then that which is aforesaid , and until such time as it please God that we find that which we desire , I mean not to write my self . Our Lord God keep and preserve your Excellende . 
 From the province of Cibola , and from this city of Granada the third of August 1540. Francis Vasques de Coronado kisses the hands of your Excellende . 
 The rest of this voyage to Acuco , Tiguex , Cicuic , and Quivira , and unto the Western Ocean , is thus written in the general historic of the West Indies by Francis Lopez de Gomara , Chap. 214. 
 BEcause they would not return to Mexico without doing Something , nor with empty hands , they agreed to pass further into the country , which was told them to be better and better . So they came to 163 
 The Western sea discovered . Tiguex . 
 Axa and Quivira . 
 A town burned . Another town assaulted . 
 Mantles . Turqueses . Feathers . 
 Precious things . 
 Acuco a town upon and exceeding strong hill . And from thence DONE Garcias Lopez de Cardenas with his company of horsemen went unto the Sea : and Francis Vasques went to Tiguex , which stands on the bank of a great river . There they had news of Axa and Quivira . There they said was a King whose name was Tatarrax , with a long beard , horie headed , and rich , which was girded with a Bracamart , which prayed upon a pair of beads , which worshipped a Cross of gold , and the image of a woman , the Queen of heaven . This news did greatly rejoice and cheer up the army : although some thought it to be false , and the report of the Friars . They determined to go thither , with intention to winter in so rich a country as that was reported to be . One night the Indians ran away , and in the morning they found thirtie horses dead , which put the army in fear . In their journey they burned a certain town : And in another town which they assaulted , they killed certain Spaniards , and wounded fiftie horses , and the inhabitants drew into their town Francis de Ovando wounded or dead , to eat and sacrifice him as they thought , or peradventure to see more perfectly , what manner of men the Spaniards were : for there was not found there any sign of sacrificing men . Our people laid siege unto the town , but could not take it in more then five and fortie days space . The townsmen that were besieged , drank snow in stead of water : and seeing themselves forlorn they made a fire , wherein they cast their mantles , feathers , Turqueses and precious things , that those strangers might not enjoy them . They issued out in a squadron with their women and children in the midst , to make way by force , and to save themselves , but few escaped the edge of our swords and the horses , and a certain river which was near the town . Seven Spaniards were slain in this conflict , and fourescore were wounded , and many horses : whereby a man may see of what force resolution is in necessity . 
 164 
 Many Indians returned to the town with the women and children , and defended themselves , until our men set fire on the town . In this country there are melons , Melons . and white and red cotton , whereof they make far larger mantels , then in other parts of the Indies . From fmres ' Tigues they went in foure days journey to Cicuic , which days journey is a small town , and foure leagues from thence they met from Tiguex . with a new kind of oxen wild and fierce , whereof the first day they killed fourescore , which sufficed the army with flesh . From Cicuic they went to Quivira , which after Quivira . their account , is almost three hundred leagues distant , through mighty plains , and sandy heaths so smooth , and wearisome , and bore of wood , that they made heaps of ox-dung for want of stones and trees , that they might Heaps of ox not loose themselves at their return : for three horses were mg made fir lost on that plain , and one Spaniard , which went from his n°W company on hunting . All that way & plains are as full of crookebacked oxen , as the mountain Serena in Spaine is of sheep : but there is no people but such as keep those cattle . They were a great succour for the hunger and want of bred which our people stood in . 
 One day it rained in that plain a great shower of hail , as big as Oranges , which caused many tears , weakness , and vows . At length they came to Quivira and found Tatarrax , whom they sought , and hoary headed man , naked , and with a j ewell of copper hanging at his neck , which was all his riches . The The Spaniards Spaniards seeing the false report of so famous riches , return to Ti-returned to Tiguex , without seeing either cross or ^x\an^soto show or Chnstiamtie : and from thence to Mexico . TheSpaniards In the end of March of the year 1542. Francis Vas - wouldhavein-quez fell from his horse in Tiguex , and with the fallen habited the fell out of his wits , and became mad . Which some countrey-tooke to be for grief , and others thought it to be but counterfeited : for they were much offended with him , because he peopled not the country . 
 Quivira is in fortie degrees : it is a temperate country , and hath very good waters , and much grass , i65 
 Ships seen on the sea coast of Quivira , which were 30. days in sapling thither . 
 Andrew de Campo travailed from Quivira to Panuco . 
 The cause why the Spaniards peopled not in Cibola . 
 plums , mulberries , nuts , melons and grapes , which ripen very well . There is no cotton : and they apparel themselves with ox-hides and deeres skins . They saw ships on the sea coast , which bore Alcatrarzes or Pellicanes of gold and silver in their prows , and were laden with merchandises , and they thought them to be of Cathaya , and China , because they showed our men by signs that they had sailed thirtie days . 
 Frier John de Padilla stayed behind in Tigues , with another of his companions called Friar Francis , and returned to Quivira , with some dozen Indians of Mechuacan , and with Andrew de Campo a Portugal ! , the gardener of Francis de Solis : He took with him horses and mules with provision . He took sheep and hens of Castile , and ornaments to say Mass withal . The people of Quivira slew the Friars , and the Portugall escaped with certain Indians of Mechuacan . Who albeit at that time he escaped death , yet could he not free himself out of captivity : for by and by after they caught him again . But ten months after he was taken captive , he fled away with a couple of dogs . As he travailed , he blessed the people with a cross , whereunto they offered much , and wheresoever he came , they gave him alms , lodging , and food . He came to the country of the Chichimechas , and arrived at Panuco . When he came to Mexico , he beware his hair very long , and his beard tied up in a lace , and reported strange things of the lands , rivers and mountains that he had passed . 
 It grieved DONE Antonio de Mendosa very much that the army returned home : for he had spent above threescore thousand pesos of gold in the enterprise , and ought a great part thereof still . Many sought to have dwelled there ; but Francis Vasquez de Coronado , which was rich , and lately married to a fair wife , would not consent , saying , that they could not maintain nor defend themselves in so poor a country , and so far from succour . They travailed above nine hundred leagues in this country . 
 