A Letter written by the most honourable Lord DONE Antonio de Mendosa , Viceroy of Nueva Espanna , to the Emperor's Majesty . 
 Of certain Noblemen which sought to discover the end of the firm land of Nueva Espanna towards the North . The arrival of Vazquez de Coronado with Frier Marco at S. Michael of Culiacan , with commission to the Governors of those parts , to pacific the Indians , and not to make them slaves any more . 
 N the ships that went last from hence ( whereof Michael de Usnago was Admiral ) I wrote unto your Majesty , how I had sent two Franciscan Friars to discover the end of this firm land , which stretcheth to the North . And because their journey fell out to greater purpose then was 
 looked for , I will declare the whole matter from the beginning . It may please your Majesty to call to mind how often I wrote unto your Highness , that I desired to know the end of this Province of Nueva Espanna , because it is so great a country , and that we have yet no knowledge thereof . Neither had I only this desire ; for Nunno de Guzman departed out of this city of Mexico with 400. horsemen , and 14000. Indians footmen born in these Indias , being the best men , & the best furnished , which have be seen in these parts : and he did so little with them , that the most part of them were consumed in the enterprise , & could not enter nor discover any more then already was discovered . After this the said Nunno Guzman being Governor of Nueva Galicia , sent Captains and Horsemen forth diverse times , which sped no better then he had done . Likewise the Marks de valle Hernando Cortez sent a captain with 2. ships to discover the coast : which 2. ships and the captain perished . After that he sent again 2. other ships , one of the which 
 121 
 This was the Port of Santa Cruz , in the Isle of California . 
 was divided from her consort , and the Master and certain mariners slew the captain , & usurped over the ship . After this they came to and Island , where the Master with certain mariners going on land , the Indians of the country slew them , and took their boat : and the ship with those that were in it , returned to the coast of Nueva Galicia , where it ran on ground . By the men which came home in this ship , the Marks had knowledge of the country which they had discovered : and then , either for the discontentment which he had with the bishop of Saint Domingo , and with the Judges of this royal audience in Mexico , or rather because of his so prosperous success in all things here in Nueva Espanna , without seeking any farther intelligence of the state of that Island , he set forward on that voyage with 3. Ships , and with certain footmen and horsemen , not thoroughly furnished with things necessary ; which fell out so contrary to his expectation , that the most part of the people which he carried with him , died of hunger . And although he had ships , and a Country very near him abounding with victuals , yet could he never find means to conquer it , but rather it seemed , that God miraculously did hide it from him : and so he returned home without achieving ought else of moment . After this , having here in my company Andrew Dorantez , which is one of those who were in the voyage of Panphilo Narvaez , I often was in hand with him , supposing that he was able to do your Majesty great service , to employ him with fortie or fiftie horses , to search out the secret of those parts : and having provided all things necessary for his journey , and spent much money in that behalf , the matter was broken ofF , I wot not how , and that enterprise was given over . Yet of the things which were provided for that purpose , I had left me a Negro , which returned from the foresaid voyage of Narvaez , with Dorantez , and certain slaves which I had bought , and certain Indians which I had gathered together , who were born in those North parts , whom I sent with 
 122 
 Frier Marco de Ni^a , and his companion a Franciscan Friar , because they had be long traveled , and exercised in those parts , and had great experience in the affairs of the Indies , and were men of good life and conscience , for whom I obtained leave of their superiors : and so they went with Francis Vazquez de Coronado , governor of Nueva Galicia unto the City of Saint Michael of Culiacan , which is the last Province subdued by the Spaniards toward that quarter , being two hundred leagues distant from this City of Mexico . Assoon as the governor , and the Friars were come unto that City , he sent certain of those Indians which I had given him , home into their Country , to signify , and declare to the people of the same , That they were to understand , that your Majesty had commanded they should not hereafter be made slaves , and that they should not be afraid any more , but might return unto their houses , and live peaceably in them , ( for before that time they had been greatly troubled by the evil dealings which were used towards them ) and that your Majesty would cause them to be chastened , which were the causes of their vexation . With these Indians about twentie days after returned about 400 men ; which coming before the governor said unto him , that they came on the behalf of all their Countrymen , to tell him , that they desired to see and know those men which did them so great a pleasure as to suffer them to return to their houses , and to sow Maiz for their sustenance : for by the space of many years they were driven to flee into the mountains , hiding themselves like wild beasts , for fear lest they should be made slaves , and that they and all the rest of their people were ready to do whatsoever should be commanded them . Whom the governor comforted with good words , and gave them victuals , and stayed them with him three or foure days , wherein the Friars taught them to make the sign of the Cross , and to learn the name of our Lord Jesus Christ , and they with great diligence sought to learn 
 123 
 A.D. 
 1539 - 
 Valle de lot Corazones mentioned by Vazquez de Coronado cap . i . 
 the same . After these days he sent them home again , willing them not to be afraid , but to be quiet , giving them apparel , beads , knives , and other such like things , which I had given him for such purposes . The said Indians departed very well pleased , and said , that whensoever he would send for them , they and many others would come to do whatsoever he would command them . The entrance being thus prepared , Friar Marco and his companion , with the Negro and other slaves , and Indians which I had given him , went forward on their voyage io . or 12. days after . And because I had likewise advertisement of a certain Province called Topira situate in the mountains , and had appointed the governor Vazquez de Coronado , that he should use means to learn the state thereof ; he supposing this to be a matter of great moment , determined himself to go and search it , having agreed with the said Friar , that he should return by that part of the mountain , to meet with him in a certain valley called Valle de los Corazones , being 120. leagues distant from Culiacan . The governor traveling into this province ( as I have written in my former letters ) found great scarcity of victuals there , and the mountains so craggy , that he could find no way to pass forward , and was enforced to return home to Saint Michael : so that aswell in choosing of the entrance , as in not being able to find the way , it seems unto all men , that God would shut up the gate to all those , which by strength of humane force have gone about to attempt this enterprise , and hath revealed it to a poor and barefooted Friar . And so the Friar began to enter into the Land , who because he found his entrance so well prepared , was very well received ; and because he wrote the whole success of his voyage , according to the instruction which I had given him to undertake the same , I will not write any more at large , but send your Majesty this copy of all such things as he observed in the same . 
 