A notable discourse of M. John Chilton , touching the people , manners , mines , cities , riches , forces , and other memorable things of New Spaine , and other provinces in the West Indies , seen and noted by himself in the time of his travels , continued in those parts , the space of seventeene or eighteene years . 
 N the year of our Lord 1561 , in the month of July , I John Chilton went out of this city of London into Spaine , where I remained for the space of seven years , & from thence I sailed into Nova Hispania , and so traveled there , and by the South Sea , unto Peru , the 
 space of seventeene or eighteene years : and after that time expired , I returned into Spaine , and so in the year 1586 in the month of July , I arrived at the fbresayd city of London : where perusing the notes which I had 360 
 1568. taken in the time of my travel in those years , I have set down as follows . 
 In the year 1568 , in the month of March , being 1568. desirous to see the world , I embarked my self in the bay of Cadiz in Andaluzia , in a ship bound for the Cadiz .. Isles of the Canaries , where she took in her lading , & set forth from thence for the voyage , in the month of June , the same year . Within a month after , we fell with the Isle of S. Domingo , and from thence directly to Nova Hispania , and came into the port of S. John San Juan de de Ullua , which is a little Island standing in the sea , ua-about two miles from the land , where the king maintaineth about 50 soldiers , and captains , that keep the forts , and about 150 negroes , who all the year long are occupied in carrying of stones for building , & other uses , and to help to make fast the ships that come in there , with their cables . There are built two bulwarks at each end of a wall , that stands likewise in the said Island , where the ships use to ride , made fast to the said wall with their cables , so near , that a man may leap ashore . From this port I journeyed by land to a town called Vera Cruz , standing by a rivers side , VeraCruz . where all the factors of the Spanish merchant's dwell , t111 - 4$6d which receive the goods of such ships as come thither , and also lade the same with such treasure and merchandise as they return back into Spaine . They are in number about foure hundred , who only remain there , during the time that the Spanish fleet dischargeth , and is laden again , which is from the end of August to the beginning of April following . And then for the unwholesomeness of the place they depart thence sixteene leagues further up within the country , to a town called Xalapa , a very Jalapa six-healthfull soil . There is never any woman delivered teene lea&ues-of child in this port of Vera Cruz : for so soon as they perceive themselves conceived with child , they get them into the country , to avoid the peril of the infected air , although they use every morning to drive thorough the town above two thousand head of cattle , to take away 
 361 
 Pueblo de los Angels eight leagues . 
 the ill vapours of the earth . From Xalapa seven leagues I came to another place , nam Perota , wherein are certain houses built of straw , called by the name of ventas , the inhabitants whereof are Spaniards , who accustom to harbour such travellers as are occasioned to journey that way up into the land . It stands in a great wood of Pine and Cedar trees , the soil being very cold , by reason of store of snow which lies on the mountains there all the year long . There are in that place and infinite number of deer , of bigness like unto great mules , having also homes of great length . From Perota nine leagues , I came to the Fuentes of Ozumba , which fuentes are springs of water issuing out of certain rocks into the midst of the high ways , where likewise are certain ranges , and houses , for the uses before mentioned . Eight leagues ofif from this place I came to the city of the Angels , so called by that name of the Spanyards , which inhabit there to the number of a thousand , beside a great number of Indians . This city stands in very plain fields , having near adjoining to it many sumptuous cities , as namely the city of Tlaxcalla , a city of two hundred thousand Indians , tributaries to the king , although he exacteth no other tribute of them then a handful of wheat a piece , which amounteth to thirteene thousand hanneges yearly , as hath appeared by the kings books of account . And the reason why he contents himself with this tribute , only for them , is , because they were the occasion that he took the city of Mexico , with whom the Tlaxcallians had war at the same time when the Spanyards came into the country . The governor of this city is a Spanyard , called among them The Alcalde maydr , who administereth chiefest causes of justice both unto the Christians and Indians , referring smaller and lighter vices , as drunkenness and such like , to the judgement and discretion of such of the Indians as are chosen every year to rule among them , called by the name of Alcaldes . These Indians from foureteene years old 
 362 
 upward , pay unto the king for their yearly tribute one ounce of silver , and and hannege of maiz , which is valued among them commonly at twelve reals of plate . The widows among them pay half of this . The Indians both of this city , and of the rest , lying about Mexico , go clothed with mantles of linen cloth made of cotton wool , painted throughout with works of diverse and fine colours . It is distant from the city of the Angels foure Tlaxcalla leagues to the Northward , & foureteene from Mexico . leagues There is another city a league from it , called Chetula , consisting of more then sixty thousand Indians , tributaries , Angels . and there dwell not above twelve Spanyards there . 
 From it , about two leagues , there is another , called Acassingo , of above fifty thousand Indians , and about eight or twelve Spanyards , which stands at the foot of the Vulcan of Mexico , on the East side . There are Vukan is a beside these , three other great cities , the one nam Ml that c < > n-Tepiaca , a very famous city , Waxazingo , and Tichama-chalcho : all these in times past belonged to the kingdom ' 
 of Tlaxcalla : and from these cities they bring most of their Cochinilia into Spaine . The distance from the Cochinilia . city of the Angels , to the city of Mexico is twenty Pueblo de los leagues . This city of Mexico is the city of greatest Angeles20 fame in all the Indies , having goodly and costly houses in it , built all of lime and stone , and seven streets ’ in length , and seven in breadth , with rivers running thorough every second street , by which they bring their provision in canoas . It is situated at the foot of certain hills , which contain in compass by estimation above twenty leagues , compassing the said city on the one side , and a lake which is foureteene leagues about on the other side . Upon which lake there are built many notable and sumptuous cities , as the city of Tescuco , where the Spanyards built sixe frigates , at that time when they conquered Mexico , and where also Fernando Cortes made his abided five or six months in curing of the sickness of his people , which they had taken at their coming into the country . There dwell 
 363 
 His voyage from Mexico to Nueva Biscaia . 
 New Biscay . 
 The Silver mines of Tamascaltepec . 
 The valley of S. Barthoh-mew . 
 The haven where you ships of China y thePhiUppinas arrive . 
 Guaxaca . 
 in this city about sixty thousand Indians , which pay tribute to the king . In this city the said Fernando built the finest church that ever was built in the Indies , the name whereof is S. Peters . 
 After I had continued two years in this city , being desirous to see further the countries' , I employed that which I had , and took my voyage towards the provinces of California , in the which was discovered a certain country , by a Biscaine , whose name was Diego the Guiara , and called it after the name of his country , New Biscay , where I sold my merchandise for exchange of silver , for there were there certain rich mines discovered by the aforesaid Biskaine . Going from Mexico I directed my voyage somewhat towards the Southwest , to certain mines , called Tamascaltepec , and so traveled forward the space of twenty days thorough desert places unhabited , till I came to the valley of S. Bartholomew , which joineth to the province of New Biscay . In all these places the Indians for the most part go naked , and are wild people . Their common armour is bows and arrows : they use to eat up such Christians as they come by . From hence departing , I came to another province nam Xalisco , and from thence to the port of Navidad , which is 120 leagues from Mexico , in which port arrive always in the month of April , all the ships that come out of the South sea from China , and the Philippinas , and there they lay their merchandise ashore . The most part whereof is mantles made of Cotton wool , Wax , and fine platters gilded , made of earth , and much gold . 
 The next Summer following , being in the year 1570 ( which was the first year that the Popes Buis were brought into the Indies ) I undertook another voyage towards the province of Sonsonate , which is in the kingdom of Guatimala , whither I carried diverse merchandise of Spaine , all by land on mules backs . The way thitherward from Mexico is to the city of the Angels , and from thence to another city of Christians 80 leagues off , called Guaxaca , in which there dwelled about counterfeit 3^4 
 Spanyards , and many Indians . All the Indians of this province pay their tribute in mantles of Cotton wool , and Cochinilia , whereof there grows abundance throughout this country . Near to this place there lies a port in the South sea , called Aguatulco , in the which there Agwtuko . dwell not above three or foure Spanyards , with certain Negroes , which the king maintaineth there : in which place Sir Francis Drake arrived in the year 1579 , in the month of April , where I lost with his being there above a thousand ducats , which he took away , with much other goods of other merchant's of Mexico from one Francisco Gomes Rangifa , factor there for all the Spanish merchant's that then traded in the South sea : for from this port they use to embark all their goods that go for Peru , and to the kingdom of Honduras . From Guaxaca I came to a town nam Nixapa , which stands Nixapa . upon certain very high hills in the province of Sapot - Sapotecas . ecas , wherein inhabit about the number of twenty Spanyards , by the King of Spaines commandment , to keep that country in peace : for the Indians are very rebellious : and for this purpose he bestoweth on them the towns & cities that be within that province . From hence I went to a city called Tecoantepec , which is the farthest Tecoantepec . town to the Eastward in all Nova Hispania , which some time did belong to the Marks de Valle , and because it is a very fit port , standing in the South sea , the king of Spaine , upon a rebellion made by the said Marks against him , took it from him , and does now possess it as his own . Here in the year 1572 I saw a piece of ordinance of brass , called a Demy culverin , which came out of a ship called the Jesus of Lubec , which captain Hawkins left in S. John de Ullua , being in fight with the Spanyards in the year 1568 ; which piece they afterwards carried 100 leagues by land over mighty mountains to the said city , to be embarked there for the Philippinas . 
 Leaving Tecoantepec , I went still along by the South sea about 150 leagues in the desolate province of Soconusco , Soconusco . in which province there grows cacao , which the Chris-365 
 1570. tians carry from thence into Nova Hispania , for that it will not grow in any cold country . The Indians of this country pay the king their tribute in cacao , giving him four hundred cargas , and every carga is 24000 almonds , which carga is worth in Mexico thirty pieces of reals of plate . They are men of great riches , and withal very proud : and in all this province throughout , there dwell not twenty Christians . I traveled thorough 
 Suchetepec . Guasacapan . another province called Suchetepec ; and thence to the province of Guasacapan : in both which provinces are very few people , the biggest town therein having not above two hundred Indians . The chiefest merchandise 
 Guatimala . there , is cacao . Hence I went to the city of Guatimala , which is the chief city of all this kingdom : in this city do inhabit about 80 Spanyards : and here the king hath his governors , & council , to whom all the people of the kingdom repair for justice . This city stands from the coast of the South sea 14 leagues within the land , and is very rich , by reason of the gold that they fetch out of the coast of Veragua . From this city to the Eastward 60 
 Sonsonate . leagues lies the province Sonsonate , where I sold the merchandise I carried out of Nova Hispania . The chiefest 
 San Salvador . city of this province is called S. Salvador , which lies 7 leagues from the coast of the South sea , and hath a port 
 Acaxutla . lying by the sea coast , called Acaxutla , where the ships arrive with the merchandise they bring from Nova Hispania ; and from thence lade back again the cacao : there dwell here to the number of threescore Spanyards . 
 Nicoia a port where you ships which go to thePhilippinas are built . From Sonsonate I traveled to Nicoia , which is in the kingdom of Nicaragua , in which port the king builds all the shipping that travel out of the Indies to the Malucos . I went forward from thence to Costa rica , where the Indians both men and women go all naked , and the land lies between Panama , and the kingdom of Guatimala : and for that the Indians there live as warriors , I durst not pass by land , so that here in a town called S. Salvador I bestowed that which I carried in annile ( which is a kind of thing to die blew withal ) 
 which I carried with me to the port of Cavallos , lying in Puerto the Ca-the kingdom of Honduras , which port is a mighty huge a ruh gulf , and at the coming in on the one side of it there * a : e ' lies a town of little force without ordinance or any other strength , having in it houses of straw : at which town the Spanyards use yearly in the month of August to unladen foure ships which come out of Spaine laden with rich merchandise , and receive in here again their lading of a kind of merchandise called Annile and Cochinilia ( although it be not of such valve as that of Nova Hispania ) and silver of the mines of Tomaangua , and gold of Nicaragua , and hides , and Salsa perilla , the best in all the Indies : all which merchandise they return , and depart from thence always in the month of April following , taking their course by the Island of Jamaica , in which Island there dwell on the West side of it certain Spanyards of no great number . 
 From this place they go to the cape of S. Anthony , which is the uttermost part of the Westward of the Island of Cuba , and from thence to Havana lying hard by , which is descrip-the chiefest port that the king of Spaine hath in all the countries' of the Indies , and of greatest importance : for all the ships , both from Peru , Hunduras , Porto rico , S. Domingo , Jamaica , and all other places in his Indies , arrive there in their return to Spaine , for that in this port they take in victuals and water , and the most part of their lading : here they meet from all the foresaid places always in the beginning of May by the kings commandment : at the entrance of this port it is so narrow , that there can scarce come in two ships together , although it be above sixe fathom deep in the narrowest place of it . 
 In the North side of the coming in there stands a tower , in which there watches every day a man to descry the sails of ships which he can see on the sea ; and as many as he discovereth , so many banners he sets upon the tower , that the people of the town ( which stands within the port about a mile from the tower ) may understand thereof . Under this tower there 367 
 lies a sandy shore , where men may easily go aland ; and by the tower there runneth a hill along by the waters side , which easily with small store of ordinance subdueth the town and port . The port within is so large that there may easily ride a thousand sail of ships without anchor or cable , for no wind is able to hurt them . There The smalforce inhabit within the town of Havana about three hundred of Havana . Spanyards , and about threescore soldiers , which the king 
 maintaineth there for the keeping of a certain castle which he hath of late erected , which hath planted in it about twelve pieces of small ordinance , and is compassed round with a small ditch , wherethorow at their pleasure they may let in the sea . About two leagues from Havana there lies another town called Wanabacoa , in which there is dwelling about and hundred Indians , and from this place 60 leagues there lies another town nam Bahama , situate on the North side of the Island . The chiefest city of this Island of Cuba ( which is above 200 leagues in length ) is also called Sant Iago de Cuba , where dwells a bishop & about two hundred Spanyards ; which town stands on the South side of the Island The commodi - about loo leagues from Havana . All the trade of this ties of Cuba . isiand js cattle , which they kill only for the hides that are brought thence into Spaine : for which end the Spanyards maintain there many negroes to kill their cattle , and foster a great number of hogs , which being killed , and cut into small pieces , they dry in the Sun , and so make it provision for the ships which come for Spaine . 
 Having remained in this Island two months , I took Hombre de shipping in a frigate , and went over to Number de Dios , Dws ’ and from thence by land to Panama , which stands upon 
 Panama . the South sea . From Number de Dios to Panama is 17 
 leagues distance : from which town there runneth a river which is called the river of Chagre , which runneth within 5 leagues of Panama , to a place called Cruzes , thorough which river they carry their goods , and disembark them at the said Cruzes , and from thence they are conveyed on mules backs to Panama by land ; where they again 368 
 embark them in certain small ships in the South sea for all the coast of Peru. In one of these ships I went to Potossi , and from thence by land to Cusco , and from Potosi . thence to Paita . 
 Here I remained the space of seven months , and then returned into the kingdom of Guatimala , and arrived in the province of Nicoia , and Nicaragua . From Nicaragua I traveled by land to a province called Nicamula ( which lies towards the North sea in certain high mountains ) for that I could not pass thorough the kingdom of Guatimala at that time for waters , wherewith all the Low countries' of the province of Soconusco , lying by the South sea , are drowned with the rain that falls above in the mountains , enduring always from April to September : which season for that cause they call their Winter . From this province I came into another called De Vera Paz , in which the chiefest city is also Vera Paz. called after that name , where there dwells a bishop and about forty Spanyards . Among the mountains of this country towards the North sea , there is a province called La Candona , where are Indian men of war which the king can not subdue , for that they have towns and forts in a great lake of water above in the said mountains : the most part of them go naked , and some wear mantles of cotton wool . Distant from this about 80 leagues , I came into another province called the province of Chiapa , wherein the chiefest city is called Sacatlan , Chiapa 300 where there dwells a bishop and about and hundred a£ue^fr < im Spanyards . In this country there is great store of ‘ Cotten wool , whereof the Indians make fine linen cloth , which the Christians buy and carry into Nova Hispania . The people of this province pay their tribute to the king all in Cotton wool and Feathers . Foureteene leagues from this city there is another called Chiapa , where are the finest gennets in all the Indies , which are carried hence to Mexico , 300 leagues from it . From this city I traveled still thorough hills and mountains , till I came to the end of this province , to 
 ix 369 2 A 
 Ecatepec and a hill called Ecatepec , which in English signifies The ^ka him h w*nde : f°r they say , it is the highest hill ‘ that ever was discovered : for from the top of it may be discovered both the North and the South seas ; and it is in height supposed to be nine leagues . They which travel over it , lie always at the foot of it over night , and begin their journey about midnight , to travel to the top of it before the Sun rise the next day , because the wind blows with such force afterwards , that it is impossible for any man to go up : from the foot of this 
 Tecoantepec . hill to Tecoantepec , the first town of Nova Hispania , are about fifteene leagues . And so from hence I journeyed to Mexico . 
 His journey to By and by after I came to Mexico ( which was in the Panuco . year 1572 ) in the company of another Spanyard , which was my companion in this journey , we went together towards the province of Panuco , which lies upon the coast of the North sea , and within three days journey Mestitlan . we entered a city called Mestitlan , where there dwelled twelve Spanyards : the Indian inhabitants there were about thirty thousand . This city stands upon certain high mountains , which are very thick planted with towns very wholesome and fruitful , having plentiful fountains of water running thorough them . The high ways of these hills are all set with fruits , and trees of diverse kinds , and most pleasant . In every town as we passed thorough , the Indians presented us with victuals . Within twenty Clanchinolte - leagues of this place there is another city called Clanchi-fec - noltepec , belonging to a gentleman , where there inhabit about fourty thousand Indians ; and there are among them eight or nine friars of the Order of Saint Augustine , who have there a Monastery . Within three days after we de-Guaxutla . parted from this place , and came to a city called Guaxutla , where there is another Monastery of friars of the same Order : there dwell in this town about twelve Spanyards . From this place forward begins a province called 
 Guastecan . Guastecan , which is all plain grounds without any 
 Tancuylabo . hills . The first town we came unto is called Tan-370 
 cuylabo , in which there dwell many Indians , high of stature , having all their bodies painted with blue , and wear their hair long down to their knees , tied as women use to do with their hair-laces . When they go out of their doors , they carry with them their bows and arrows , being very great archers , going for the most part naked . In those countries' they take neither gold nor silver for exchange of any thing , but only Salt , which they greatly esteem , and use it for a Saltaprind-principall medicine for certain worms which breed in 7 their lips and in their gums . After nine days travel c n 1 e ' from this place , we came to a town called Tampice , Tampice a which is a port town upon the sea , wherein there Port tmne-dwell , I think , forty Christians , of which number whilst we abided there , the Indians killed foureteene , as they were gathering of Salt , which is all the trade that they have in this place : it stands upon the entry of the river of Panuco , which is a mighty great river ; and Panuco . were it not for a sand that lies at the mouth of it , ships of five hundred tun might go up into it above three score leagues . From hence we went to Panuco , foureteene leagues from Tampice , which in times passed had be a goodly city , where the king of Spaine had his governor : but by reason that the Indians there destroyed the Christians , it lies in a manner waste , containing in it not above tenne Christians with a priest . In this town I fell sick , where I lay one and forty days , having no other sustenance then fruit and water , which water I sent for above sixe leagues ofF within the country . Here I remained till my companion came to me , which had departed from me another way , retaining in my company only a slave , which I brought with me from Mexico . And the last day in Easter week my companion came to me , finding me in a very weak state , by reason of the unholesomenesse of the place . Notwithstanding my weakness , I being set on and horse , and and Indian behind me to hold me , we went forward on our voyage all that day till night . The 
 371 
 next day in the morning we passed over the river in a canoa ; and being on the other side , I went my self before alone : and by reason there met many ways traled by the wild beasts , I lost my way , and so traveled thorough a great wood about two leagues : and at length fell into the hands of certain wild Indians , which were there in certain cottages made of straw ; who seeing me , came out to the number of twenty of them , with their bows and arrows , and spoke unto me in their language , which I understood not : and so I made signs unto them to help me from my horse ; which they did by commandment of their lord , which was there with them ; and lighted down . They carried me under one of their cottages , and laid me upon a mat on the ground : and perceiving that I could not understand them , they brought unto me a little Indian wench of Mexico , of fifteene or sixteene years of age , whom they commanded to ask me in her language from whence I came , and for what intent I was come among them : for ( say she ) dost thou not know Christian , how that these people will kill and eat thee ? To whom I answered , let them do with me what they will ; here now I am . Shee replied , saying , thou mayest thank God thou art lean ; for they fear thou hast the pocks : otherwise they would eat thee . So I presented to the king a little wine which I had with me in a bottle ; which he esteemed above any treasure : for for wine they will fell their wives and children . Afterwards the wench asked me what I would have , and whither I would eat any thing . I answered that I desired a little water to drink , for that the country is very hight : and she brought me a great Venice glass , gilded , full of water . And marvelling at the glass , I demanded how they came by it . She told Shallapa . me that the Cacique brought it from Shallapa , a great town distant 30 leagues from this place on the hills , whereas dwelled certain Christians , and certain friars of the Order of S. Augustine , which this Cacique with his people on a night slew ; and burning the friars monastery , 
 372 
 among other things reserved this glass : and from thence also brought me . Having now be conversant with them about three or foure hours , they bid her ask me if I would go my way . I answered her , that I desired nothing else . So the Cacique caused two of his Indians to lead me forward in my way ; going before me with their bows and arrows , naked , the space of three leagues , till they brought me into and high way : and then making a sign unto me , they signified that in short time I should come to a town where Christians inhabited , which was called S. Iago de los valles , standing in plain fields , walled about with a mud wall : the number of the Christians that dwelled therein , were not above foure or five and twenty , unto which the king of Spaine gives Indians and towns , to keep the countries' subject unto him . Here the Christians have their mighty mules , which they carry for all the parts of the Indies , and into Peru , for that all their merchandise are carried by this means by land . In this town aforesaid , I found my company , which I had lost before , who made no other account of me but that I had been slain : and the Christians there likewise marveled to hear that I came from those kind of Indians alive , which was a thing never seen nor herd of before : for they take a great pride in killing a Christian , and to wear any part of him where he hath any hair growing , hanging it about their necks , and so are accounted for valiant men . In this town I remained eighteene days , till I recovered my health , and in the mean space there came one DONE Francisco de Pago , whom the viceroy DONE Henrico Manriques had sent for captain general , to open and discover a certain way from the sea side to the mines of Sacatecas , which were from this place 160 leagues , for to transport their merchandise by that way , leaving the way by Mexico , which is seven or eight weeks travel . So this captain took me and my company , with the rest of his soldiers , to the number of forty , which he had brought with him , and five hundred 
 373 
 Sant Iago de los valles . 
 Mighty mules . 
 DONE Henrico Manriques viceroy of Mexico . 
 The mines of Sacatecas . 
 The valley of S. Michael . Pueblo nuevo . Mechuacan . 
 Copper mines . 
 Campeche . 
 Merida . 
 Rio de Tabasco . 
 Indians , which we took out of two towns in this province called Tanchipa , and Tamaclipa , all good archers , and naked men , and went thence to the river de las Palmas , which is of great bigness , parting the kingdom of Nova Hispania and Florida : and going still along by this river the space of three days , seeking passage to pass over ; and finding none , we were at length enforced to cut timber to make a balsam or raft , which when we had made , we sat on it , the Indians swimming in the water , and thrusting it before them to the other side . Within thirty days after , traveling thorough woods , hills , and mountains , we came to the mines of Sacatecas , which are the richest mines in all the Indies , and from thence they fetch most silver : at which mines there dwelled above three hundred Christians : and there our captain gave us leave to depart . So we came to the valley of S. Michael towards Mexico ; and from thence to Pueblo novo ; and from that place to the province of Mechuacan , after which name the chiefest city of that place is called : where there dwells a bishop , and above and hundred Spanyards in it : it aboundeth with all kind of Spanish fruits , and hath woods full of nut trees , and wild vines . Here are many mines of copper , and great store of cattle . It lies 60. leagues from Mexico , whither we came within foure days after . The Indians of this country are very mighty and big men . 
 Afterwards I returned another way to the province of Sonsonate by Vera cruz , and so to Rio Alvarado , and from thence to the province of Campeche , which lies on the South side of the bay of Mexico : the chiefs town of this province is called Merida , in which is a bishop and almost 100 Spanyards . The Indians of this province pay all their tribute in mantles of cotton wool and cacao . There is no port in all this province for a ship of 100 tun to ride in , but only in the river of Tabasco , by which river this city of Merida stands . The chiefest merchandise which they lade there in small frigates , is a certain 374 
 wood called campeche , ( wherewith they use to die ) as also hides and annile . By this there lies the province of lucatan , never the Honduras by the North sea coast , where there is also another bishop , and a town likewise nam lucatan , where there dwell a few Spanyards . They have no force at all in all this coast to defend themselves withal , save only that the land is low , and there is no port to receive any shipping , unless they be frigates , which carry from thence to the port of S. John de Ullua , wax , cacao , honey , and also mantles of cotton wool , whereof they make there great store , and of which kind of merchandise there is great trade thence to Mexico : of the same also they pay their tribute to the king . 
 The king hath tribute brought him yearly out of the Indies into Spaine between nine and ten millions of gold and silver : for he receives of every Indian which is subject unto him ( excepting those which do belong to the Incommenderos , which are the children of those Spanyards , who first conquered the land , to whom the king gave and granted the government of the cities and towns subdued for three lives ) twelve reals of plate , and a hannege of maiz , which is a wheat of the country , ( five of them making a quarter of English measure ) and of every widow woman he hath sixe reals , & half a hannege 
 lucatan . 
 The greatness of the king of Spaines tribute out of the West Indies . 
 of maiz . And so if any Indian have twenty children in his house , he payeth for every one of them , being above fifteene years old , after that rate . This Wheat being duly brought to the governor of every province and city , is sold in Mexico by the kings governors there every year ; so that the money received for it , is put into the kings Treasury there , and so is yearly carried from thence into Spaine . Of the Spanyards which are owners of the mines of gold and silver , he receives the fift part of it , which he calls his quintas , which being taken out The quinto . of the heap , there is his arms set on it ; for otherwise it may not be ' brought out of the land into Spaine , under pain of death . The mark of silver , which is eight ounces , when it comes out of the mines , not having 
 375 
 The mark of the kings seal upon it , is worth three and forty reals of silver is 64 plate , and so it is current : and when they will bring it for reals of plate . Spaine , they carry it to the kings Treasure house , where his seal is set upon it ; and so it is raised in valve thereby to threescore and foure reals of plate : and so the king hath for his custom of every mark of plate one and twentie reals . 
 From the year of 1570 , which was the year that the Popes bulls came into the Indies , as is afore mentioned , he hath received both of the Indians which are tributaries unto him , and also of all others belonging to the Incommenderos , of every one being above twelve years of age , foure reals of every bull . Also they carry other pardons with them into the Indies , for such as be dead , although and hundred years before the Spanyards came into the country : which pardons the friars in their preachings persuaded the poor Indians to take , telling them that with giving foure reals of plate for a Mass , they would deliver their souls out of purgatory . Of the Christians likewise dwelling there he hath foureteene reals for every bull : and there be certain bulls brought thither for the Christians beside the former , which serve for pardoning all such faults wherein they have trespassed either against the king , by keeping back his customs , or one against another by any other injury ; for every hundred crowns whereof a men conscience does accuse him that he hath deceived the king or any other , he must give ten for a bull , and so after that rate for every hundred which he hath any The revenue way stolen , and so is pardoned the fault . The revenue bukandpar - uls after manner yields unto his treasury dons came yearly above three millions of gold , as I have be yearly to three credibly informed , although of late both the Spanyards millions . and Indians do refuse to take the bulls ; for that they perceive he does make a yearly custom of it : only each Indian takes one pardon for all his household , ( whereas in former time every Indian used to take one for every person in his house ) and teareth the same 376 
 into small pieces , and gives to every one of his household a little piece , saying thus , they need now no more , seeing in that which they bought the year before they had above ten thousand years pardon . These pieces they stick up in the wall of the houses where they lie . Both the Christians & Indians are weary with these infinite taxes and customs , which of late he hath imposed upon them , more then in the years before : so as the people of both sorts did rebel Rebellions « twice in the time that I was among them , and would have set up another king of themselves ; for which exac-cause the king hath commanded upon pain of death , that tions . they should not plant either wine or oil there , but should always stand in need of them to be brought out of Spaine , although there would more grow there in foure years , then there grows in Spaine in twenty , it is so fertile a country . 
 And the king to keep the country always in sub - iection , and to his own use , hath streightly provided by reasons law , upon pain or death , and loss or goods , that none tke of these countries' should traffic with any other nation , tyainetofirbid although the people themselves do much now desire to firren traffic trade with any other then with them , and would undoubtedly do , if they feared not the peril ensuing ' thereupon . 
 About Mexico , and other places in Nova Hispania , there grows a certain plant called magueis , which Magueis . yields wine , vinegar , honey , and black sugar , and of the leaves of it dried they make hemp , ropes , shoes which they use , and tiles for their houses : and at the end of every leaf there grows a sharp point like and awl , wherewith they use to boar or pierce thorough any thing . 
 Thus to make and end , I have here set down the sum of all the chiefest things that I have observed and noted in my seventeene years travel in those parts . 
 