The voyage of Master Andrew Barker of Bristol , with two ships , the one called the Ragged staff , the other the Bear , to the coast of Terra firma , and the Bay of Honduras in the West Indies , in the year 1576. Wherein the reasons are premised which moved him to set forth this voyage against the Spaniards : collected out of certain notes and examinations touching this enterprise by M. Richard Hakluyt . 
 Irst of all Andrew Barker having abided in one of the Canary Islands called Tenerif for a certain time , and returning home left behind him Charles Chester ( the son of Dominic Chester merchant of Bristol ) to learn the language . Now the said Andrew Barker forthwith upon 
 his arrival in England , in November , 1574 , freighted a small ship ( nam the Speedwell of Bristol ) to go for the Canaries with cloth and other merchandise of a great valve . He sent also one John Drew of Bastable - as his Factor to make sale and dispose of the said goods , who when he arrived at Tenerif , landed the merchandise , and sent home the bark with some small quantity of wine , making account to fell the said wares to greater advantage in providing wines and sugar for the lading of another ship , which Andrew Barker had appointed to send thither . Also according to this his purpose the said Andrew in March following sent a ship called the Christopher of Dartmouth , captain whereof was one Henry Roberts of Bristol : who when he had landed in Tenerif , & was in good hope to find the lading of his ship in a readiness , contrary to his expectation , was suddenly cast into prison : the Spaniards alleging that Andrew Barker was accused to the inquisition by Charles 82 
 Chester , whereupon his goods were confiscat , his factor John Drue was attached , and he also ( the said captain Roberts ) being as they supposed Barkers partner , was in like sort to be imprisoned . In fine all the foresaid commodities appertaining to the said Andrew and his brother M. John Barker and others to the valve of 1700 pound and upward ( as it does appear by proofs of record in the Admiralty ) were utterly lost , being confiscat to the said inquisition . Howbeit captain Roberts by the means of a friar was delivered out of prison ( which cost him all the merchandise he brought with him in his ship ) and so returned with dead freight to the sum of 200 pound that afterwards Andrew Barker discharged . In recompense of which injury ( for that no suit prevails against the inquisition of Spaine ) & also to recover his loss of the Spaniards themselves , at his own charge with the help of his friends he furnished two barks for the West Indies , the greater of which barks was called the Ragged staff , himself being captain , & Philip Roche Master thereof , the other nam the Bear had one William Coxe of Limehouse for her Master and captain . And thus all our company being embarked at Plimmoth on Whitsonday in the beginning of June , we set forward , & in our course we met with a ship of London , & afterwards with another ship , but took nothing from either of them . Our first arrival was at one of the Island of Cape Verde , nam Del sal , vz . the Isle of salt , where we took certain fish Isla del sal . called Tortoises : and there we remained one night and half the day following . And from thence we came to the Isle of Maio , being distant from Isla del sal , 14 or 15 leagues , where we took in fresh water and trafficked with certain Portugals inhabiting in ' that place , of whom we had some victuals for knives and beads : and there we remained one day and one night : but our trumpeter was treacherously slain by those Portugals , in revenge of which murder we set Two villages on fire two of their small villages . From this Island urnt - 
 we shaped our course over the main Ocean towards The Isle of the West Indies , and arrived happily at the Island of Tnmdad . Trinidad , and had conference with certain Indians inhabitants thereof , who gave us very friendly and courteous entertainment : and here we set up a pinnace which we carried forth in the Ragged staff , and trafficked with the foresaid Indians for victuals . And after we had spent sixe days in this place we The Isle of departed , and arrived next at the Isle of Margarita , Margarita . where we took a small Spanish ship having in her certain pitch and 30 tons of Canary wines whereof we reserved 4 or 5 tons to our selves , dismissing them without any further damage . Thence ( having The Isle of remained there a day ) we set sail to the Island of Curazao . Curazao , where we remained a day & a night , & took in fresh water , at what time by the inhabitants of that Island ( being few of them Spaniards , & the most part Indians ) 14 of our men were treacherously hurt , but none slain . And from thence we departed for the main land Southwards , to a certain bay , and there we abided 3 days , but nothing of any reckoning was Cape de la there achieved . From thence we arrived at Cape de Vela ' la Vela , where grew a contention between our Captain 
 M. Andrew Barker , and his Master Philip Roche , upon comparisons made between them concerning the knowledge of Navigation , and about other quarrels , which quarrels afterwards were and occasion of further mischief . Tulu . Hence we sailed to the bay of Tulu ( which is about 18 leagues Southwestward from Carthagena ) where we took a Frigate and certain treasure therein to the valve of 500 pound , namely bars of gold , and lingots of silver , and some quantity of corriento or coin in rials of plate , and certain green stones called Emeralds , whereof one very great , being set in gold , was found tied secretly about the thigh of a friar . Here having stayed three days , and now being pursued by Spanish men of war , we departed with the said treasure , and left the Frigate behind us , all 84 
 ANDREW BARKER 
 which treasure at that instant was committed to the keeping of our captain Andrew Barker . From thence we passed to Number de dios , and so forth to the mouth of the river of Chagre 18 leagues distant from Number de dios towards the Northwest . There we landed io of our men , who traveled up into the woods three or foure days to seek the Simerons , ( which are certain valiant Negroes fled from their cruel master's the Spaniards , arid are become mortali enemies , ready to join with the English and French against them ) but in their search they could find none of them . And though our men returned all free from peril of the enemy , yet the most part of the said ten persons presently fell sick , and diverse other of our company : so that within 14 days 8 or 9 of our men died of a disease called there the Calentura , which is a hight and vehement fever . And passing between Chagre and Veragua , we took a Frigate , and some Veragua . quantity of gold we found therein . In this Frigate were 23 Spaniards whom we set on shore , and two Flemings , them we brought into England with us : we had therein also foure cast pieces of Ordinance , 3 harquebusses on crock , 16 Spanish calivers , and a book of Navigation : and in this Frigate some of our company came homeward into England . Thus passing forward in our course , we came to Veragua , where captain Barker , & Philip Roche his Master , fought upon the foresaid quarrel , in which combat the captain was hurt a little in the cheek . Here we sank our Admiral the Ragged staff , because of her great leakage , and embarked part of our company in the Spanish Frigate , which immediately before we had surprised . From hence ( by the direction of certain Indians ) we sailed into the gulf of the Honduras : The bay of there we took a bark wherein were rials of plate , to Honduras-the valve of 100 pound , Maiz or Indian wheat , hens , beef and other small things . In this bark also were certain Spaniards , whereof one was the Scrivano or 
 A conspiracy against the Captain . 
 M. Andrew Barker and 8 other slain by the Spaniards . 
 The town of Truxillo sacked by the English . 
 secretary of Carthagena , who ( being a man of some note ) was put to his ransom , which was paid in gold : the rest were dismissed freely . And after passing by diverse Islands , we arrived at and Island called S. Francisco , being in the mouth of the great bay , called the Honduras . And within two days next after our arrival there , William Coxe and diverse others ( which for certain causes shall nameless ) came aboard the ship wherein the captain then was , and dispossessed him as well of the said ship , as of the treasure in the same , and forthwith put our captain with violence on shore , where he arid one Germane Weiborne fought together , and were both wounded . After this our captain desirous to come on board , was resisted by the persons aforesaid , who answered him that he should not come on board till they were ready to depart . Our men had appointed ten persons of their company for the keeping of this Island of S. Francisco : but about break of the day , on a certain morning , sixtie Spaniards arriving secretly in the Island , surprised our people on the sudden , what time there were thirtie of our men on shore : in which surprise they slew our captain , M. Andrew Barker with eight others , namely , one Wild of Bristol , and Michael our Chirurgeon , Richard of Bristol , Thomas Sampoole , Thomas Freeman , Thomas Nightingale , Robert Jackson , Walter Newton ; and the captains boy and one other were hurt . Now after that William Coxe , and the rest ( which were aboard the bark ) perceived that the captain , & some others were slave , he received them that were living into the ship , having before that time refused some of them . After this misfortune they went to and Island distant from thence a league , where Coxe divided a chain of gold ( which was found in the captains chest after his death ) among the company . After this Coxe went in a pinesse ( which we took at the Isle of Sant Francisco ) with certain others of our men in a skyffe , to the town of Truxillio , in the bay of Honduras , 86 
 which town they surprised , and had therein wine and oil as much as they would , and diverse other good things , but no gold nor silver , nor any other treasure which they would confess . But before they could return to their company , those that were in the barks were had in chase by men of war , whereby they were enforced every man to shift for himself : so for haste they left those that were in the skiff ( being 8 persons ) in the bay of Honduras : what became of them afterwards God knoweth . Hereupon we determined to sail for England , and being in the main sea homeward bound , about 60 leagues from the Isle of S. Francisco , the Frigate wherein was the treasure for the adventurers , and that which pertained to the captain to the valve of 2000 pound , being overset with sail , with a flaw of wind was overthrown , and all the goods therein perished : therein also were 14 persons drowned , and nine saved , whereof William Coxe and William Gillam were two . After this Philip Roche , Master of the The death of Admiral called the Ragged stafFe , died . And thus at p , ufy length , ( by the help of God ) we arrived in the Isle 
 of Silly near Cornwall where we left our Frigate which Their arrival we built new upon the shore of the Honduras , having the Isle of in her at our landing ten botisios of oil , and the foure cast Pieces that were in John Oxnams Frigate ( which the year before was taken in the strait of Dariene ) three harquebusses on crock , certain calivers , and Certame certain treasure : Where William Cox and Andrew j^nQxnam Browne divided the treasure among their company , recovered delivering to some five pound , to some sixe pound , to from the some seven pound , to some more , as every man was Spaniards . thought to have deserved . The bark and the rest of the Ordinance was left in the Island , to the use of Andrew Browne . Diverse of our company , upon our arrival at Plimmouth were committed to prison at the suit of M. John Barker of Bristol , brother unto our Captain M. Andrew Barker , as accessaries to our captains death , and betrayers of him unto the enemy . 
 And after straight examination of many of us , by letters of direction from her Majesties privy Counsel , the chief malefactors were only chastised with long imprisonment , where indeed before God they had deserved to die : whereof some , although they escaped the rigor of men law , yet could they not avoid the heavy judgement of God , but shortly after came to miserable ends . Which may be example to others to show themselves faithful and obedient in all honest causes to their captains and governors . 
 