The voyage truly discoursed , made by sir Francis Drake , and sir John Hawkins , chiefly pretended for some speciali service on the Islands and main of the West Indies , with sixe of the Queens ships , and 21 other ships and barks , containing 2500 men and boys , in the year 1595. In which voyage both the foresaid knights died by sickness . 
 Ee brake ground out of the found of Plimmouth on Thursday the 28 of August , and that night ankored again in Causon bay , where we road till Friday . Then we set sail and stood Southwest : and about three of the clock the next morning the Hope , 
 wherein sir Thomas Baskervil went , strake upon the Edy stone , and shot oflr a piece , but after cleared herself well enough . 
 On Munday at sixe of the clock in the morning the lands end bore Northwest and by North , and 226 
 LAST VOYAGE OF DRAKE AND HAWKINS then we stood away Southwest and by South for the coast of Spaine . 
 The 8 of September we took two small Flemish fliboats bound for Barbary ; which we carried a while with us and afterwards dismissed them without doing them any harm : only we learned news of them , and stayed them from descrying our fleet to the enemy . 
 The 26 we saw Forteventura , being one of the Islands of the Canaries . 
 The 27 being Saturday by break ot day we nad overshot the chief town of Grand Canaria to the Northeast , and then stood about for it again , and by nine of the clock were at anchor fair before the fort to the Eastward of the town some league . At one of the clock we offered to land one thousand and foure hundreth men in the sandy bay betwixt the fort and the town : But by our detracting of the time they had made a bulwark in the sandy bay and planted Ordinance : so that by reason thereof , and the great breach of the sea that went then on shore we were not able to land without endangering our whole forces , which our General would not do . There were of Spaniards horsemen and footmen some 900 , which played upon us out of their trenches , most of them being shot . At the time of our landing there went by commandment of our Generals within musket shot of the shore , & road there at anchor some three hours , the Salomon , the Bonaventure , the Elizabeth Constance , the Phoenix , the Jewel , the Little John , the Delight , the Pegasus , the Exchange , the Francis , the caravel , and the two catches : But when the general sir Francis Drake gave over the landing being in his barge , the ships weighed being in some danger , and stood off again to the great ships . Then we went to the West end of the Island and there watered : where captain Grimston going up the hill with 6 or 7 in his company was set upon by the herdsmen , who with their dogs and staves killed the captain and three or foure of his company : 
 227 
 the rest were soar wounded : the Salomons Chirurgeon taken prisoner , who disclosed our pretended voyage as much as in him lay : so as the Viceroy sent a caravel of adviso into the Indies , unto all such places as we did pretend to go to . Howbeit they had intelligence from the king of all our voyage the eight of August , which was three weeks before we set forth of England : as also by a Fleming that had seen all our provision at London . 
 The 28 being Sunday at ten of the clock at night we set sail , and stood away Southwest and Southsouthwest some 200 leagues , until we came in the height of the Islands of Cape Verde , and then more Westerly for Martinino , one of the Islands of the West Indies , which we saw the 27 of October : but the night before we had a storm , in which sir Francis with foure or five other ships bearing on head of the fleet was Dominica , separated . Then we stood for Dominica , and Island full of inhabitants of the raze of the Canibals , not passed ten leagues distant from Martinino . In it grows great store of Tobacco : where most of our English and French men barter knives , hatchet's , saws , and such like iron tools in truck of Tobacco . 
 Before we came to Dominica our general Sir Francis Drake altered his course , and went for Marigalante , which we had sighed of the 28 day , and came to and anchor on the Northeast side a saker shot off the shore in 13 fathoms water fair sholding . There the general went on shore in his barge , and by chance met a Canoa of Dominicans , to the people whereof he gave a yellow waistcoat of flanell and and handkerchief ; and they gave him such fruits as they had , and the Dominicanes rowed to Dominica again . They came thither to fetch some fruits which they sow and plant in diverse places of that Island , which they keep like gardens . 
 The next morning by break of day we weighed and stood between the Todos Santos , which are 4 or 5 little Islands between Guadalupe and Dominica . There 228 
 is nothing upon these Islands but wood . We came to the Southeast side of Guadalupe and there anchored hard aboard the shore : the Southwest side of the Island is deep water and good ankorage : where that day sir John Hawkins came to us again standing up from the South side of Dominica . There we watered , washed our ships , set up our pinnaces , and refreshed our soldiers on shore . 
 The 30 captain Wignol in the Francis , a bark of 3 5 tons , being the sternmost of sir John Hawkins fleet was chased by five of the king of Spaines frigates or Zabras being ships of 200 tons a piece , which came of purpose with 3. other Zabras for the treasure of S. Juan de Puerto rico : The Francis going room with them , supposing they had be our own fleet , was by them taken in sighed of our caravel . They left the Francis driving in the sea with 3 or 4 hurt and sick men , and took the rest of our men into their ships , as the prisoners which we took at S. Juan de Puerto rico told us . 
 The 4 of November we began to unladen the Richard , one of our victuallers , which was by the next day unladen , unrigged and then sunken . Then we stood Northwest & by North : and the next morning saw the Hands of Monserrata , Redonda , Estazia , S. Christopher and Saba . The biggest of these Islands is not passed 8 leagues long . There is good ankorage in 8 , 7 , and 5 fathoms water fair white sand . Then we stood away Southwest , and on the 8 in the morning being Saturday came to and anchor some 7 or 8 leagues off within certain broken Hands called Las Virgins , which have be accounted dangerous : but we found there a very good road , had it be for a 1000 sails of ships in 14 , 12 , and 8 fathoms fair sand and good ankorage , high Islands on either side , but no fresh water that we could find : here is much fish to be taken with hooks and nets : also we stayed on shore and fowl . Here sir John Hawkins was extreme sick ; which his sickness 
 229 
 The fight at S. Juan de Puerto rico . 
 began upon news of the taking of the Francis . The 18 day we weighed and stood North and by East into a lesser found , which sir Francis in his barge discovered the night before , and ankored in 13 fathoms , having high steep hills on either side , some league distant from our first riding . 
 The 12 in the morning we weighed and set sail into the sea due South through a small strait but without danger , and then stood West and by North for S. Juan de Puerto rico , and in the after noon left the 3 small Islands called The passages to the Southward of us , and that night came up to the Eastermost end of S. John , where sir John Hawkins departed this life : upon whose decease sir Thomas Baskervil presently went into the Garland . At 2 of the clock we came to anchor at the estermost side of the chief town called Puerto rico in a sandy bay 2 miles off : where we received from their forts and places where they planted Ordinance some 28 great shot , the last of which strake the admiral through the misen , and the last but one strake through her quarter into the steerage , the general being there at supper , and strake the stool from under him , but hurt him not , but hurt at the same table sir Nicholas Clifford , M. brown , captain Stratford , with one or two more . Sir Nicholas Clifford and master brown died of their hurts . 
 Then we set sail and stood to the Eastward , and at midnight tacked about to the West , and in the morning came to and anchor before the point without the town , a little to the Westwards by the 3 Islands . 
 The 13 we road still until night , when in the beginning with twenty five pinnaces , boats and shallops manned and furnished with fireworks and small shot we went into the road within the great castles , and in despite of them fired the five Zabras of frigates , all ships of two hundreth tons the piece or more , quite burning the Rearadmiral down to the water , which was the greatest ship of them all , and also mightily spoiled 230 
 LAST VOYAGE OF DRAKE AND HAWKINS a.d. 
 ... I595 - 
 the admiral and viceadmiral , notwithstanding the castles and ships gave us a hundreth eighty and five great shot , beside small shot abundance . They had also sunk a great ship in the mouth of the channel and rafted it over with her masts almost to the very forts and castles , so as they thought it impregnable . The frigates had in each of them twenty pieces of brass , and a hundreth barrels of powder . Their chief lading that they brought thither was silk , oil , and wine . The treasure which they went to fetch , which was brought thither in a ship called the Vigonia , was conveyed into the strongest and surest castle of defence ; being , as one of the prisoners confessed , three millions of ducats or five and thirty tons of silver . Also they had sent all the women , children , and unable persons into the woods , and left none but soldiers and fighting men in the town . The fight on our side was resolute , hight , and dangerous : wherein we lost some forty or fifty men , and so many were hurt . There was also great death of the Spaniards aboard the frigates , with burning , drowning , and killing , and beside some taken prisoners . 
 The 14 we road still , being within shot of the uttermost castle : but they fearing the next night we would come in again , began to warp up the other 4 frigates , beginning first with the Admiral : which whither by chance or their own wills we saw to sink ; and as we suppose so did they with all the rest , or else by stealth god up farther within their chiefest forces . 
 The 15 also we road still , and at afternoon we espied a caravel coming from the castle point : but before our pinnaces could fetch her up , she ran on shore , where our boats could not come at her because of the breach , and also many of the Islanders came down to guard her with shot . The beginning of this night we weighed , and stood one hour to the East , and then tacked about to the West . 
 The 16 being Sunday , and the 17 also we were becalmed . 
 231 
 The 18 we anchored a little to the Southward of the Southwest point of the Island , giving the point a birth because of a shoaled of sand that lies some two cables length off : there we road in foure , five , and sixe fathoms fair white sand , where we set up more pinnaces , washed our ships , and refreshed our men on shore . Here the general took a pinnace of Hispaniola with diverse letters , signifying that two Englishmen of war had done great hurt along their Island . 
 The 20 the general rowed to the Phoenix , the Delight and the caravel , and caused them to weigh and anchor right against the mouth of a fresh river in two fathoms water in ozy sand to the Southward of the other ships some league or more . The general went into this river three or foure leagues up , and took horses in the country . Sir Thomas Baskervil rowed up the river , and stayed there all night , and went up into the land three or foure leagues . 
 The 23 we discharged a bark called the Pulpit and burned her : and at three of the clock that afternoon , when we were ready to set sail , there came aboard the Defiance our Admiral , a Spaniard with his wife , who feared some great torment for not having repaired to the town according to the Generals commandment of that Island , who had commanded that all able men of the fleet should repair to the town to defend it against us . Then we stood again West and by North because of a ledge of rocks that lie sunk 4 or 5 leagues off the Southside of the Island . 
 The 25 we stood away southwest , and saw Mona Mona , being a low flat Island between Hispaniola and S. Juan de Puerto rico . That day the Exchange of captain Winter spent her boult-sprite ; and in the beginning of the night the Phoenix was sent back to seek her : which by Gods help that night met with her , and kept her company until the next morning , then taking in a small cable from her for a tow : but by 9 that morning she spent her main mast and split her foreyard , 232 
 LAST VOYAGE OF DRAKE AND HAWKINS o . 
 . 1595 - 
 breaking also her tow : so as they were feign to save some trifles out of her and the men , and to sink the hull . Then we stood away South and South and by West after the fleet : and the 26 in the morning had sighed of the fleet again . 
 The 29 we had sighed of the Island called Curazao The Isle of within eight leagues of the main , and on the North - Curazao . west side came to and anchor in very deep water hard aboard the shore without any danger : but the general weighed presently and stood away Northwest and by West , and Northnorthwest for the main , and that night saw Aruba , being somewhat a less Island then the Aruba . other : we left it some three leagues to the Southward of us . 
 On Sunday morning being the last of November we saw three or foure little Islands called the Monjes , Monjes . betwixt Aruba and the next North point of the main . At 12 of the clock we saw the main , where we saw a great current setting to the Westward , and also the water changing very white . The Phoenix , the caravel , and one of the catches kept within , and at midnight came under Cape de la Vela , and made a fire , Cape de la whereby the rest of the fleet came to anchor under ela-the Cape , where is a very good road , fair sholding and sandy ground , fourteene , twelve , and tenne fathoms near the shore . The Cape is a bore land without trees or shrubs , and falls in eight or ten leagues Southeast and Northwest : and a saker shot ofF the point stands a little Island like Mewestone near Plimmouth , but somewhat bigger . In the morning the first of December we embarked all our soldiers for Rio de la Hacha , which is a town twenty leagues Rio de la to the Westwards , one of the ancientest in all the main , HacJia taken-although not very big : but it stands in a most fertile and pleasant soil . Our men took it by ten of the clock in the night . The ships bearing all that night and the day before in 5 and 6 fathoms , the lesser ships in two fathoms and and half water : the 
 233 
 Phoenix went so near the shore by the Generals commandment , that she strake on ground , but god off again . There lies to the Eastward of the town a A should of mile or thereabouts a should of sand : therefore give a san^‘ birth some half league or more before you come right against the town . There we came to anchor in two fathoms , but the great ships road off in five and sixe fathoms . There is a fresh river about a bowshot Afresh river . Eastward of the town ; whereinto our pin - 
 nesses could scarce enter by reason of a bar of sand in the rivers mouth , but within it is navigable for barks of twenty or thirty tons some sixe or eight leagues up . 
 The sixth day the Spaniards came in to talk about the ransom of the town , but not to the general his liking : and that night Sir Thomas Baskervil marched up into the country to overrun those parts : and the general the same night with some hundreth and fiftie men went by water sixe leagues to the Eastward , La Rancheria and took the Rancheria a fisher town , where they taken . drag for pearl . The people all fled except some sixteene or twenty soldiers , which fought a little , but some were taken prisoners , beside many Negroes , with some store of pearls and other pillage . In the houses we refreshed our selves , and were all embarked to come away , and then had sighed of a brigandine or a dredger , which the general took within one hours chase with his two barges : she had in her Indy-wheat , which we call Maiz , and some silver and pearl , but of small valve . 
 On Saturday the seventh , master Yorke captain of the Hope died of sickness , and then master Thomas Drake the Generals brother was made captain of the Hope , and master Jonas Bodenham captain of the Adventure , and master Charles Caesar captain of the Amity . 
 The tenth day the Spaniards concluded for the ransom of the town for 24000 ducats , and one prisoner promised to pay for his ransom 4000 ducats . 
 234 
 The fourteenth day they brought in the towns ransom in pearls , but rated so deer as the general after conference with them , misliking it , sent it back again , giving them foure hours respite to clear themselves with their treasure . 
 The sixteenth the governor came into the town about dinner , and upon conference with the general told him plainly , that he cared not for the town , neither would he ransom it : and that the pearl was brought in without his command or consent , and that his detracting of time so long was only to send the other towns word , that were not of force to withstand us , whereby they might convey all their goods , cattle , and wealth into the woods out of danger . So the General gave the governor leave to depart according to promise , having two hours to withdraw himself in safety . 
 The seventeenth Sir Thomas Baskervil with the Eliza 
 beth Constance , the Phoenix , the caravel with foure or five pinnaces went some five leagues to the Westward , & landing , marched some foure leagues up into the country to a place called Tapia , which he took & Tapia taken . burned certain villages and ferme houses about it . He had some resistance as he passed over a river , but had but one man hurt , which he brought aboard alive with him : he marched one league farther and burned a village called Sallamca , and so returned with some prisoners , Sallamca the soldiers having got some pillage . burned . 
 The 18 the Rancheria , and the town of Rio de la Hacha were burned clean down to the ground , the Churches and a Ladies house only excepted , which by her letters written to the general was preserved . That day we set sail and fell to leeward , to meet with Sir Thomas Baskervil . 
 The 19 we weighed and stood to leeward for Cape Cape de de Aguja , which the twentieth at sun rising we saw . Aguja . It is a Cape subject much to flaws , by reason it is a very high land : and within the cape lies and Island within 
 235 
 the mouth of the found , which hath a white cliff or spot in the Westnorthwest part of the Island . The land all about the cape riseth all in hammocks or broken steepy hills . A league Southwest within that , ( for so falls the land thereabouts ) there stands on the top of a cliff a watchhouse : and a little within that a small Island : you may go in between the main and it , or to leeward if you lust : and hard within that is Santa Martha the road and town of Santa Martha , which at 11 of taken . the clock we took , the people all being fled , except a few Spaniards , Negroes & Indians , , which in a bravado at our landing gave us some 30 or 40 shot , & so ran away . 
 That night their Lieutenant general was taken and some little pillage brought in out of the woods : for in the town nothing was left but the houses swept clean . In all the main is not a richer place for gold : for the hops were mixed with the earth in every place , and also in the sand a little to the leewards of the town . In the bay we had a bad road by reason of a small moon , for every small moon makes foul weather all the main along . 
 The 21 , the general caused the town to be burned , and all the ships to weigh , and stood out , many of the soldiers being embarked where the general had appointed , in the small ships which road nearest the shore . We lost that night the company of the Phoenix , captain Austin , Peter Lemond , and the Garlands pinnace , which stood along the shore , and being chased off by galleys out of Carthagena Peter Lemond with nine of our men was taken , the rest came safe to our fleet . 
 The 26 we saw the Hands some twelve leagues to the Eastward of Number de Dios standing in towards the shore , but towards night we stood to the oflin until the next day . 
 Number de The 27 we came into the mouth of Number de Dios , Dios taken , and by one of the clock took the town , the people 236 
 being all fled except some too Spaniards , which kept the Fort , and played upon us , having in the fort some 3 or 4 small pieces of ordinance , and one of them brake in discharging at us . They gave us also a voley of small shot : but seeing our resolution in running upon them they all fled and took the woods . 
 The town was big , having large streets , houses very high , all built of timber , but one Church very fair and large wrought all of timber likewise . Nothing was left in the town of valve : there was a show in their shops of great store of merchandises that had be there . There was a mill above the town , and upon the top of another hill in the woods stood a little watchhouse , where we took twentie sows of silver , two bars of gold , some money in coin , beside other pillage . 
 The town was situated in a watery soil , and subject much to rain , very unhealthy as any place in the Indies , having great store of Oranges , plantans , cassavy-roots , & such other fruits ; but very dangerous to be eaten for breeding of diseases . To the Eastward of the town within the bay runneth out a fresh river of excellent good water , with houses , and all about it gardens : half a league from hence due East into the country was and Indian town , whither as we marched a little before our coming away with and hundred men they had broken down a bridge to hinder our passage , where they lay in ambush with some twentie or thirtie small shot , and bows and arrows , set upon us , and killed Lieutenant Jones , hurt three or foure and so fled into the woods , ran before us and fired their own town , and then fled farther into the woods : our men fired diverse other houses in pursuing them , and so returned again : our general with Sir Thomas being in the Rivers mouth with thirtie or fortie men filling water about some mile from us . 
 The road of Number de Dios is a fair road : but on each side , as you come to ride before the town , lies a ledge of rocks , but there is no danger because they 237 
 And Indian town fired . 
 are in sighed . You may ride between them in three or foure fathom water , and without if you will in eight or ten fathoms , where neither Castle nor Fort can annoy you . The name of Number de Dios was greater then their strength . For they had no Castle nor Fort , but only the little fort aforesaid standing on the top of and hill , although they might have made it stronger if they would . 
 The 29 sir Thomas Baskervil with 750 armed men , beside Chirurgeons and provand boys , went for Panama . 
 The last of December the general burned half the town , and the first of Januarie burned the rest , with all the Frigates , Barks & Galliots , which were in the harbour and on the beach on shore , having houses built over them to keep the pitch from melting . 
 The second of January sir Thomas returned with his soldiers both weary and hungry , having marched more then half the way to the South sea . The Spaniards played diverse times upon us both outward and homeward in the woods , the way being cut out of the woods & rocks both very narrow , and full of mire and water . The march was so soar as never Englishman marched before . Having marched some ten leagues in a marvellous strait way , upon the top of and hill , through which we must needs pass , the Spaniards had set up a Fort and kept it with some 80 or 90 men , who played upon us as we came up , before we were aware of them , and so killed some twentie or more of us , among whom was Captain Marchant quartermaster general , and Ensign Sampson , Maurice Williams one of her Majesties guard , beside diverse were hurt , as M. Captain Nicholas Baskervil a valiant gentleman , with diverse others . Then sir Thomas had perfect knowledge that they must pass two such Forts more , if he god that , beside Panama to be very strong , the enemy knowing of our coming long before . 
 Also our soldiers had no victuals left , nor any means 238 
 LAST VOYAGE OF DRAKE AND HAWKINS a.d. ... * 596 - 
 to get more : which considerations caused sir Thomas to return and give over his attempt . As he marched thitherward he took and Indian and sent him to Number de Dios with letters of his return and proceeding . 
 The 5 we set sail at 12 of the clock , and stood to the Westward . 
 The 10 day we saw and Hand lying Westward some The lie of 30 leagues called Escudo , where we came to anchor Escudo . on the Southside in 12 fathoms water , fair sand and good ankorage . If you come into the Eastern point , give it a birth , because of a ledge of rocks , that lies out there from the end of the Island : coming to anchor we saw a roader , who seeing us , set sail , but that night with our Pinnaces we took him , he had nothing in him but a little maiz . The men being examined by the general confessed him to be and Advisor sent from Number de Dios to all the ports along the coast Westward . This Hand lies 9 or 10 leagues from the main , & is not passed two leagues long full of wood , and hath great store of fresh water in every part of the Hand , and that very good . It is a sickly climate also , and given to much rain : here we washed our ships , and set up the rest of our Pinnaces . 
 The 15 day Captain Plate died of sickness , and then sir Francis Drake began to keep his cabin , and to complain of a scouring or flux . 
 The 23 we set sail and stood up again for Puerto Bello , which is but 3 leagues to the Westwards of Number de Dios. 
 The 28 at 4 of the clock in the morning our general The death of sir Francis Drake departed this life , having be sir Francis extremely sick of a flux , which began the night before Drake . to stop on him . He used some speeches at or a little before his death , rising and appareling himself , but being brought to bed again within one hour died . He made his brother Thomas Drake and captain Jonas Bodenham executors , and M. Thomas Drakes son 
 239 
 his heir to all his lands , except one manor which he gave to captain Bodenham . 
 The same day we ankored at Puerto Bello , being the best harbour we found all along the main both for great ships and small . There stands a saker shot off the shore at the Eastern point a little Hand : and there is betwixt the main & that 5 or 6 fathoms : but the best coming in is the open mouth betwixt that Hand & another Hand that lies to the westward with a range of rocks . 
 In Puerto Bello were but 8 or 10 houses , beside a great new house which they were in building for the Governor that should have be for that place : there was also a very strong Fort all to the waters side with flankers of great trees and stones filled with earth between : and had not our coming disappointed their pretence , they would have made it one of the strongest places in all the main . There they meant to have built a great town . We found there three pieces of brass ordinance sunk in the sea , which we weighed up , all the people were fled and their goods carried away . 
 Up within this bay there was a little village but of no force , where we found a great fresh river , our men rowing up some two leagues found pillage , as wine and oil , and some small quantity of iron . After our coming hither to anchor , and the solemn burial of our general sir Francis in the sea : Sir Thomas Baskervill being aboard the Defiance , where M. Bride made a sermon , having to his audience all the captains in the fleet , sir Thomas commanded all aboard the Garland , with whom he held a Council , & there showing his Commission was accepted for General , & captain Bodenham made captain of the Defiance , & M. Savill captain of the Adventure . 
 The 27 died captain Josias of the Delight , and captain Egerton a Gentleman of the Foresight , and James Wood chief chirurgeon of the fleet out of the Garland . 
 240 
 The 28 died Abraham Kendall out of the Saker . At this place we watered again , washed our ships & made new sails , it being by the general and all the captains agreed , that if we could by any means turn up again for Santa Martha , we should , if not , to go directly for England . Here also we took in some ballast as our need required . 
 The 6 of Februarie the Elizabeth of M. Wattes was discharged and sunk , and that day the Pegasus jolly was going on shore for water , carrying no guard : The Spaniards perceiving it came down upon them , killed two of them , and took 2 or 3 prisoners , and so ran up into the woods again . 
 The seventh the Delight and captain Edens frigate were discharged and sunk because they were old and leaked , and the Queens ships wanted sailors . 
 That day our men being mustered we had sick and whole 2000. And the next day we set on shore all our prisoners as Spaniards and Negros . But before at our first coming to Puerto Bello sir Thomas sent two of those Spaniards to Number de Dios and to Panama to fetch ransom for some of the chiefest prisoners , but they never returned again . As we were setting sail there came one with a flag of truce , and told the General that they had taken 18 of our men , and that they were well used , adding that if he would stay 8 or 10 days longer they should be brought from Panama . We supposed this to have be but a delay to have kept us there while the kings forces had come about by sea , as they daily expected . We set sail the 8 of Februarie , turning up for Santa Martha , and the 14 day we saw the Hands of Baru some 14 leagues to the Westward of Carthagena : The general that night told us he would stand in for the town of Baru in the bay : but that night blew so much wind and continued that small moon , that the same night we lost the Foresight , and the next day standing again to make the land which we had made , x 241 Q 
 we lost company of the Susan Parnel , The Help , and the Pegasus . Then the next day we put over for Cape S. Antonie , and gave over Santa Martha . 
 The Grand The 25 we saw the Hand of Grand Cayman some Cayman . leagues to the Northwestward of Jamaica , being a low sandy Hand , having many tortoises about it . 
 The 26 we saw the high land of Cuba to the Eastward of the broken Hands , to the East of the Hand of Pinos , and were imbayed in among those dangerous places . But perceiving it , we stood out again Southsoutheast and so god clear , and then stood away West The Ik of and by North for the He of Pinos , which we saw the Pinos . first of March . It is a low land with wood and fresh water to the Western end . If you come in with the midst of it you shall see rise up above the rest of the land 8 or 9 round hammocks , and the Westermost hath three in one . 
 Being shot forth with the West end , and standing in for to water we espied 20 sail of ships about one in the afternoon . This was a third part of the fleet which the king sent for Carthagena , the rest of the fleet being gone for the Honduras . They were in all 60 sails sent only to meet our fleet , being commanded wheresoever they herd we were , to come upon us with all their three forces . This fleet which we met withal came standing for Cape de los Corrientes , and had be refreshed at Havana . 
 As soon as they descried us , they kept close upon a tack , thinking to get the wind of us : but we weathered them . And when our Admiral with all the rest of our fleet were right in the winds eye of them , sir Thomas Baskervil putting out the Queens arms , and all the rest of our fleet their bravery , bore room with them , and commanded the Defiance not to shoot , but to keep close by to second him . The Viceadmiral of the Spaniards being a greater ship than any of ours , and the best sailor in all their fleet loofed by and gave the Concord the two first great shot , which she repaid 242 
 LAST VOYAGE OF DRAKE AND HAWKINS a.d. 
 . 1596. 
 presently again , thus the fight began . The Bonaventure The fight bebare full with her , ringing her such a peal of ordinance tween thee and small shot withal , that he left her with torn sides . ^nSllsh The Admiral also made no spare of powder and shot . 
 But the Defiance in the midst of the Spanish fleet J thundering of her ordinance and small shot continued the fight to the end . So that the Viceadmiral with 3 or 4 of her consorts were forced to tack about to the Eastward , leaving their admiral and the rest of the fleet , who came not so hotly into the fight as they did . The fight continued two hours & better . At sun set all the fleet tacked about to the Eastward , we continued our course to the Westward for cape de los Corrientes , supposing we should have met with more of their consorts . In this conflict in the Defiance we had five men slain , three English men , a Greek and a Negro . That night some half hour after , their fleet keeping upon their weather quarter , we saw a mighty smoke Qne of the rise out of one of their great ships which stayed behind : punish great which happened by means of powder as we think , burned . and presently after she was all on a light fire , and so was consumed and all burned , as we might well perceive . 
 The next day being the second of March in the morning by break of day we were hard aboard Cape de los Corrientes , which is a bore low cape , having a bush of trees higher than the rest some mile to the Eastward of the cape . All Cuba is full of wood on the Southside . The Spanish fleet which then were but 14 not more than we were , kept still upon our weather quarter , but dared not to come room with us although our Admiral stayed for them . Assoon as we had cleared our selves of the Cape 3 of their best sailors came room with the Salomon , which was so near the land that she could not double the Cape , but tacked about to the Eastward , & so was both a stern and also to leeward of all our fleet : But when we saw the Spaniards working , the Defiance tacked about to rescue her : which the Spaniards seeing , and having not forgotten the fight which she 243 
 made the night before , they loofed up into the midst of their fleet again , and then all the fleet stayed until the Salomon came up , and so stood along for Cape Zante Cape S. Antonio , which we came in sighed of by two Antonio . } n after noon , being a low cape also , and to the 
 Southwest a white sandy bay , where 3 or 4 ships may very well water . There is a good road for North & Easterly winds : there the Spaniardes began to fallen a stern . That night we stood away a glass or two Northwest , and Northnorthwest , and Northeast , and in the morning-watch South , and in the morning had sighed of Cuba about the East part of the Organs , which are dangerous rocks lying 8 leagues off upon the North part of Cuba , presently assoon as you pass Cape S. Anthonie : then we stood to the Eastward of the land , the wind at Southsouthwest , and at 6 at night had foul weather , but after were becalmed all night . The 5 the wind came scant . The 7 we saw a high land like a crown , which appears so 13 or 14 leagues to the Westward of Havana , and another place in Cuba called The Table , 8 leagues to the Eastward The Crown . of the crown . The land over Havana makes two small mountains like a woman's breasts or paps . Here we found no great current until we came to the Gulf of Bahama . 
 The Cape of The io we saw the Cape of Florida being but Florida . a reasonable low land and broken Hands to the Southward of the Cape . And at two in the afternoon we 
 lost sighed of the land 12 leagues to the Northward of 
 the Cape . After we had disemboqued , we stood West till midnight , and were in 28 degrees , and then stood Northeast till the 13 at night , when we were in 31 degrees . And after the wind scanted with a great storm , in which we lost the Bonaventure , and the Little John , they bearing on head . Then we stood with our larboard tacked Eastsoutheast . 
 The 19 we were in 29 degrees our course Eastnortheast . The 21 we had a great stormy gale of wind 244 
 LAST VOYAGE OF DRAKE AND HAWKINS a.d. 
 J596-and much rain but large . And then all the rest of our fleet fell a stern except the Hope , which bore a head : so that there kept no more with the Admiral , but the Defiance , the Adventure , and the Phoenix . 
 The 28 we were in 39 degrees , and stood away for Flores , which the 8 of Aprill we saw , and the 9 came to and anchor on the Southside , where we watered because the Defiance when we came in had but two buts of water . We bartered with the Portugals for some fresh victuals , and set here on shore at our coming away out of the Admiral our two Portugall Pilots ; which sir Francis Drake carried out of England with him . 
 The 10 being Easter-eve at night we set sail the wind serving us to lie some slent in our course . That night and Easter day we had much rain : the wind came up at Northeast , we beat it up some 30 leagues to the Eastward , & then about to the West , and so again to the East , and tried , and the next board to the West . On Thursday towards night , being the 16 we had sighed of Corvo again , we tried all that night : and on Friday towards night we came to and anchor to the Westward of the point of Santa Cruz under Flores : but before midnight we drave , and set sail the next day standing away Northeast . About three of the clock in the afternoon the wind came up again at North . On sunday the 19 by two of the clock in the afternoon we had made 20 leagues and East way : and then the wind came up a good gale at Northwest , and so Northeast with a flown sheet we made the best way we could : but being dispersed by bad weather we arrived about the beginning of May in the West parts of England . And the last ships which came in together to Plimmouth were the Defiance , the Garland , the Adventure , and the Phoenix . 
 