Letters taken at sea by Captain George Popham . 
 J594 - 
 Alonso his letter from the Gran Canaria to his brother being commander of S. Lucar , concerning El Dorado . 
 THere have be certain letters received here of late , of a land newly discovered called Nuevo Dorado , from the sons of certain inhabitants of this city , who were in the discovery : they write of wonderful riches to be found in the said Dorado , and that gold there is in great abundance : the course to fallen with it is fiftie leagues to the windward of Margarita . 
 [ Alonsos letter 
 x 433 2 e 
 Alonsos letter from thence to certain Merchants of Sant Lucar concerning El Dorado . 
 Sirs , we have no news worth the writing , saving of a discovery lately made by the Spaniardes in a new land called Nuevo Dorado , which is two days sailing to the windward of Margarita : there is gold in such abundance , as the like hath not be herd of . we have it for certain in letters written from thence by some that were in the discovery , unto their parents here in this city . I purpose ( God willing ) to bestow tenne or twelve days in search of the said Dorado , as I pass in my voyage towards Carthagena , hoping there to make some good sale of our commodities . I have sent you therewith part of the information of the said discovery , that was sent to his Majesty . 
 Part of the Copy that was sent to his Majesty , of the discovery of Nuevo Dorado . 
 IN the river of Pato otherwise called Orenoque , in the principali part thereof called Warismero , the 23 of April 1593 Domingo de Vera master of the camp , and general for Antonio de Berreo Governor and Captain generail for our lord the king , betwixt the rivers of Pato and Papamene alias Orenoque , and Mar-rannon , and of the Hand of Trinidad , in presence of me Rodrigo de Caranza Register for the sea , commanded all the soldiers to be drawn together and put in order of battle , the Captains and soldiers , and Master of the camp standing in the midst of them , said unto them : Sirs , Soldiers , and Captains , you understand long since that our General Antonio de Berreo , with the travel of eleven years , and expense of more then and hundred thousand pezos of gold , discovered the royal Provinces of Guiana and Dorado : of the which he took possession to govern the same , but through want of his peoples health , and necessary munition , he issued out at the Hand Margarita , and from thence peopled Trinidad . 
 434 
 But now they have sent me to learn out and discover the ways most easily to enter , and to people the said Provinces , and where the camps and armies may best enter the same . By reason whereof I intend so to do in the name of his Majesty , and the said governor Antonio de Berreo , and in token thereof I require you Francis Carillo , that you aid me to advance this cross that lies here on the ground , which they set on end towards the East , and the said Master of the camp , the captains and soldiers kneeled down , and did due reverence unto the said cross , and thereupon the master of the camp took a bowl of water and drank it off , and took more and threw abroad on the ground : he also drew out his sword and cut the grass off the ground , and the boughs off the trees saying , I take this possession in the name of the king DONE Philip our master , and of his Governor Antonio de Berreo : and because some make question of this possession , to them I answer , that in these our actions was present the Cacique , or principali DONE Antonio , otherwise called Morequito , whose land this was , who yielded consent to the said possession , was glad thereof , and gave his obedience to our lord the king , and in his name to the said Governor Antonio de Berreo . And the said master of the camp kneeled down being in his liberty , and all the Captains and soldiers said , that the possession was well taken , and that they would defend it with their lives , upon whosoever would say the contrary . And the said master bf the camp having his sword drawn in his hand said unto me : Register , that art here present , give me and instrument or testimoniali to confirm me in this possession , which I have taken of this land , for the Governor Antonio de Berreo , and if it be needful I will take it a new . And I require you all that are present to witness the same , and do further declare that I will go on , taking the possession of all these lands wheresoever I shall enter . Signed thus . 
 Domingo de Vera , and underneath , Before me Rodrigo de Caranza , Register of the army . 
 435 
 A Nd in prosecution of the said possession , and the discovery of the way and Provinces , the 27 of April of the said year , the master of the camp entered by little and little with all the camp and men of war , more then two leagues into the inland , and came to a town of a principali , and conferring with him did let him understand by means of Antonio Bisante the Interpretor , that his Majesty and Antonio de Berreo had sent him to take the said possession . And the said friar Francis Carillo by the Interpretor , delivered him certain things of our holy Catholic faith , to all which he answered , that they understood him well and would become Christians , and that with a very good will they should advance the cross , in what part or place of the town it pleased them , for he was for the Governor Antonio de Berreo , who was his master . Thereupon the said master of the camp took a great cross , and set it on end toward the East , and requested the whole camp to witness it , and Domingo de Vera firmed it thus . 
 It is well and firmly done . And underneath . Before me Rodrigo Caranza , Register of the army . 
 THe first of May they prosecuted the said possession and discovery to the town on Carapana . From thence the said Master of the camp passed to the town of Toroco whose principali is called Topiawary being five leagues farther within the land then the first Nation , and well inhabited . And to this principali by mean of the Interpretor they gave to understand that his Majesty and the said Corrigidor commanded them to take the possession of that land , and that they should yield their obedience to his Majesty , and to his Corrigidor , and to the master of the camp in his name , and that in token thereof he would place a cross in the middle of his town . Whereunto the said Cacique answered they should advance it with a very good will , and that he remained in the obedience of our lord the king , and of the said Governor Antonio de Berreo whose vassal he would be . 
 436 
 The fourth of May we came to a Province above five leagues thence , of all sides inhabited with much people , the principali of this pedple came and met us in peaceable manner : and he is called Revato , he brought us to a very large house where he entertained us well , and gave us much Gold , and the interpreter asking him from whence that gold was , he answered , From a Province not passing a days journey off , where there are so many Indians as would shadow the sun , and so much Gold as all yonder plain will not contain it . In which Country ( when they enter into the Borracheras or their drunken feasts ) they take of the said Gold in dust and anoint themselves all over therewith to make the braver show ; and to the end the Gold may cover them , they anoint their bodies with stamped herbs of a gluey substance : & they have war with those Indians . They promised us that if we would go unto them , they would aid us ; but they were such infinite numbers , as no doubt they would kill us . And being asked how they got you same Gold , they told us they went to a certain Down or plain , and pulled or dug Up the grass by the root : which done , they took of the earth , putting it in great buckets , which they carried to wash at the river , and that which came in powder they kept for their Borracheras or drunken feasts : and that which was in pieces they wrought into Eagles . 
 The eight of May we went from thence , and marched about five leagues : at the foot of a Hill we found a principali called Arataco with three thousand Indians , men and women all in peace with much victuali , as Hens and Venison in great abundance , and many sorts of wine . He entreated us to go to his house , and to rest that night in his Town , being of five hundred houses . The interpreter asked whence he had those Hens : he said they were brought from a mountain not passing a quarter of a league thence , where were many Indians , yea so many as grass on the ground , and that these men had the points of their shoulders 
 437 
 higher then the Crowns of their heads , and had so many Hens as was wonderful ; and if we would have any , we should send them Jewes harps , for they would give for every one two Hens . we took and Indian , and gave him five hundred Harps ; the Hens were so many that he brought us , as were not to be numbered . we said we would go thither ; they told us they were now in their Borracheras or drunken feasts , and would kill us . we asked the Indian that brought the Hens , if it were true ; he said it was most true . we asked him how they made their Borracheras or drunken feasts ; he said , they had many Eagles of gold hanging on their breasts , and Pearls in their ears , and that they danced being all covered with Gold . The Indian said unto us , if we would see them , we should give him some Hatchet's , and he would bring us of those Eagles . The Master of the Camp gave him one Hatchet ( he would give him no more because they should not understand we went to seek gold ) he brought us and Eagle that weighed 27. pounds of good Gold . The Master of the Camp took it , and showed it to the soldiers , and then threw it from him , making show not to regard it . About midnight came and Indian and said unto him , Give me a Pickeaxe , and I will tell thee what the Indians with the high shoulders mean to do . The Interpreter told the Master of the Camp , who commanded one to be given him : he then told us , those Indians were coming to kill us for our merchandise . Hereupon the Master of the Camp caused his company to be set in order , and began to march . The eleventh day of May we went about seven leagues from thence to a Province , where we found a great company of Indians appareled : they told us that if we came to fight , they would fill up those Plains with Indians to fight with us ; but if we came in peace , we should enter and be well entertained of them , because they had a great desire to see Christians : and there they told us of all the 
 438 
 I594 ’ riches that was . I do not here set it down , because there is no place for it , but it shall appear by the information that goes to his Majesty : for if it should here be set down , foure leaves of paper would not contain it . 
 