A letter written to M. Richard Staper by John Whithal from Santos in Brasil , the 26. of June 1578. 
 Orshipfiill sir , and well-beloved friend M. Staper , I have me most heartily commended unto you , wishing your health even as mine own . 
 These few words may be to let you understand , that whereas I wrote unto you not many days passed by 
 the way of Lisbon , how that I determined to be with you very shortly , it is in this country offered me to marry , and to take my choice of three or foure : so that I am about three days ago consorted with and 
 This my friend and father in law 
 Italian gentleman to marry with his daughter within these foure days . This my friend and father in law Signor loffo Door is born in the city of Genua in Italy : his kindred is well known among the Italians 
 in London : also he hath but only this child which is his daughter , which he hath thought better bestowed upon me then on any Portugal in all the country , and doth give with her in marriage to me part of and Ingenio which he hath , that doth make every year a thousand roves of sugar . This my manage will be worth to me two thousand ducats , little more or less . Also Signor loffo Door my father in law doth intend to put into my hands the whole Ingenio with sixtie or seventie slaves , and thereof to make me factor for us both . I give my living Lord thanks for placing me in such honour and plentifulness of all things . 
 Also certain days passed I talked with the Provedor and the Captain , and they have certified me , that they Mines of gold have discovered certain Mines of silver and gold , and look every day for Master's to come to open the said " weredatS . Mines : which when they be opened will enrich this Vincent . country very much . This place is called S. Vincent , 26 
 and is distant from you two thousand leagues , and in 24. degrees of latitude on the South side of the Equinoctial line , & almost under the Tropike of Capricorne . A country it is very healthful without sickness . 
 Moreover , I have talked with the Captain and Provedor , and my father in law , who rule all this country , for to have a ship with goods to come from London hither , which have promised me to give me licence , saying that now I am free denizen of this country . To cause a ship to come hither with such commodities as would serve this country , would come to great gains , God sending in safety the profit and gains . In such wares and commodities as you may ship hither 7% voyage to from London is for every one commodity delivered here 81 f three for one , and then after the proceed may be im - X'waXn / ployed in white sugar at foure hundred reis the rove . only . 
 I mean also to have a friend in London to send me a ship of 60. or 70. tons , little more or less , with such commodities as I shall give advice for . This voyage is as good as any Peru-voyage . If you and Master Osborne will deal here , I will deal with you before any other , because of our old friendly friendship in time past . If you have any stomach thereto , in the Name of God do you espy out a fine bark of seventie or eightie tons , and send her hither with a Portugal Pilot to this port of S. Vincent in Brasil , bordering upon the borders of Peru. 
 Also I herewith write unto you in what form and manner you shall furnish this voyage both in commodities and otherwise . 
 First you must lade in the said ship certain Hamp - Inwhatmaner shire and Devonshire karsies : for the which you must to8 ' let her depart from London in October , and to touch a ship of in the Canaries , and there to make sale of the said or 80. tons karsies , and with the proceed thereof to lade fifteene u t0 be made-tunnes of wines that be perfect and good , and sixe dozen of Cordovan skins of these colours , to wit , orange , tawny , yellow , read , and very fine black . 
 I think you shall not find such colours there . Therefore you must cause them that shall go upon this voyage , to take saffron with them , to cause the same skins to be put into the said colours . Also I think you shall find oils there . Three hogsheads of sweet oil for this voyage are very necessary , or a hundred & fiftie jars of oil . Also in London you may lade in the said ship these parcels of commodities or wares , as follows : 
 ' In primis , Foure pieces of hollands of middle sort . 
 Item , One piece of fine holland . 
 Foure hundred else of osenbriges very fine . 
 Foure dozen of sizzors of all sorts . 
 Sixteene kintals of pitch of the Canaries . 
 Twentie dozen of great knives which be made in farthels , of a low price . 
 Foure dozen of a small sort . 
 Sixe pieces of bays of the lowest sort . 
 One very fine piece of bays . 
 Foure hundred else of Manchester-cottons , most black , green , some yellow . 
 Eight or tenne dozen of hats , the one half - trimmed with tafiata , the other plain , with the bans of Cypress . 
 Sixe dozen of course shirts . 
 Three dozen of doublets of canvas . 
 Three dozen of doublets of stitched canvas . 
 One piece of fine Millan-fustian barred . 
 Sixe dozen of locks for doors and chests . 
 Sixe thousand of all manner of fish hooks . 
 Foure dozen reams of paper . 
 Two dozen of glasses of diverse sorts . 
 Two dozen of Venice glasses , the one half great , the other middle sort . 
 Two dozen of mantles of freeze , of the lowest price that can be . 
 Three dozen of freeze gowns . 
 ' Foure hundred pound of tin of the use of Portugall , most small dishes and trenchers . 
 Foure pound of silk of all colours . 
 Twentie pound of spices , cloves , cinamom , pepper , and saffron . 
 Two kintals of white soap . 
 Three pound of thread , white , black , and blew . 
 Three pound of fine white thread . 
 Item , half a dozen of Northern karsies of diverse colours . 
 Foure sorting clothes , blue , read , yellow , and green . 
 Sixe Northern dozens of diverse colours . 
 One fine blue cloth of eight pound . 
 One fine stamell of tenne or twelve pound . 
 One fine sheeps coloured cloth of twelve pound . 
 < One fine black karsie . } { One fine stamell karsie . 
 Sixe yards of black velvet . 
 Three barrels of nails for chests . 
 Two barrels of nails for ships and barks . 
 Sixe kintals of Occom . 
 Two dozen of velvet girdles without hangers . 
 Foure yards of taffeta read , black , and blew , with some green . 
 Two dozen of leather girdles . 
 Sixe dozen of axes , hatchet's , and small bills to cut wood . 
 Foure mazes of gittern strings . 
 Foure hundred or five hundred else of some linen cloth that is of a low price to make shirts and sheets . 
 Foure tun of iron . 
 These be such sort of wares as I would you should send . If you mean to deal , or send any ship hither , have you no doubt , but by the help of God I shall put all things in good order according to your contentment and profit : for my father in law with the Captain and Provedor do rule this country . 
 My father in law & I shall ( God willing ) make 
 a good quantity of sugar every year , which sugar we intend to ship for London from henceforth , if we can get such a trusty & good friend as you to deal with us in this matter . I pray you presently after the receipt of this my letter to write me answer thereof , & send your letter to M. Holder to Lisbone , & he will convey it to me out of hand . 
 " Beside the premises send sixe yards of scarlet , parchment lace of diverse colours . 
 < Sixe yards of crimosin velvet . 
 Sixe yards of crimosin satin . 
 Twelve yards of fine puke black . 
 Here in this country in stead of John Whithall they John Leitoan . have called me John Leitoan : so that they have used this name so long time , that at this present there is no remedy but it must remain so . When you write unto me , let the superscription be unto John Leitoan . 
 Thus I commit you with all yours to the holy Ghost for ever . 
 If you send this ship , I would have you give order that she touch in no part of the coast of Guinie nor any other coast , but to come directly hither to the port of S. Vincent , and from the Canaries let her be dispatched in my name , to wit , John Leitoan . 
 ' Also a dozen of shirts for my wearing let be sent , if you send the ship . 
 < Item , sixe or eight pieces of says for mantles for women , which is the most necessary thing that can be sent . 
 By your assured friend John Whithall . 
 