A copy of the letters of the Adventurers for Brasill sent to John WhithalL dwelling in Santos , by the Minion of London . Anno 1580. the 24. of October in London . 
 Aster Whithall , as unacquainted we commend us unto you , etc. understanding by your friends , M. John Bird , M. Robert Walkaden , and your brother James Whithall of certain letters that they have received of yours from Santos , which we have seen and 
 read , wherein from time to time you do require , and desire them to send a good ship to Santos , with such wares and commodities : as you did write for , whereby you did not only promise that they should have good entertainment , but also should fell the said commodities to make three of one outward at the least in every thing , and that for to relade their ship back , they should have of the best , finest , & whitest dry sugars 32. pound of our weight for a ducat at the most . The premises considered , with the great credit that they and we do give to your writing & promise , have caused us , whose names be hereunder written , to join our selves in company together , & to be at great charges purposely to send this good ship the Minion of London , not only with such merchandizes as you wrote for , but also with as many other things as we thought might any ways pleasure you , or profit the country . And we crave of you , that we and our factors may have so much credit of you , as we have in you and of your letters , which is to believe us that we have taken this voyage upon us , with no other mind or purpose , then to deal faithfully and truly in the trade by sea and land , so as you shall not only have cause to rejoice , and deserve thanks for our coming , but also you will procure the magistrates 31 
 there to be bound , as they use in Galicia , that we may be preserved and defended from all reprisals and imbargments of princes or subject's for any causes or matters whatsoever , whereby we may be encouraged by them , giving us this security of good entertainment , to continue the trade yearly henceforth : and for our parts we promise upon our credits and fidelities , to commit no outrage at the sea nor land , nor suffer any to be done in our company that we may let , but rather to defend and protect all other such peaceable merchants as we are , with their ships and goods . 
 And to the end that you and others shall know that we mean as we say , we have given order to our factors to give you good hostages for your assurance of our good fidelities : and further we have sent a testimoniali of our own true meaning in writing under the seals of this honourable City of London , which we will not discredit by our behaviours for all the treasure that you have : and so we have written to your magistrates of your port , and others in Spanish , the copy whereof we send you herewith enclosed in English . And if the time should fall out so contrary to our expectations , that there should not be fine white sugar sufficient to lade our said ship in due time at Santos , then we pray you direct our factors where they may go with the ship in safety to supply their want , and help them to a good sure Pilot for that purpose , and write your letters to your friends where the best sugar is made in their favours , and help our factors to have a testimoniali from Santos , that they and you traded together friendly , and so departed in good and perfect amity , and show them that the just cause of our coming is to trade as merchants peaceably , and not as Pirates to commit any offence to one or other . 
 Also we pray you , if there be any store of wax , or saltpeter , whereby the price there may yield us as 32 
 much profit as the white sugars at a ducat the rove , or any other commodity of like profile , then to procure that we may lade it without danger of law , be it oar of gold or silver or whatsoever else . 
 A.D. 
 1580. 
 we have sent you copper cauldrons for your Ingenios , with iron and all other necessaries for your purpose , and artificers to set the same : and as we have at your request be at great charges in sending these men , so we pray you let us have lawful favour in like courtesy to further all our causes . And if any of our Mariners or passengers in any respect of displeasure against their company , or in hope of preferment of marriage or otherwise would procure to tarry and dwell there , and leave his charge and office , that then you will be a mean to the Justice that such fugitives should be sent aboard the ship as prisoners : for as you know , without our men we cannot bring home our ship . 
 we have given order to our factors to use your counsel and help in their affairs , and to gratify you for the same as to your courtesy and faithful friendship shall appertain to your good liking : and in the mean time for a token of our good wills towards you , we have sent you a fieldbed of walnut tree , with the canopy , valens , curtains , and gilded knops . And if there be any commodity else that may pleasure you or your friends , we have given order that they shall have the refusing of it before any other , giving for it as it is worth . 
 And thus to conclude , promising to perform all the foresaid things on our parts in every condition , we commit you to God , who ever preserve you with all his 
 blessings . 
 Your loving friends 
 Christopher Hodsdon . 
 Anthonie Garrard . 
 Thomas Bramlie . 
 John Bird . } { William Elkin . 
 XI 
 33 
 