The voyage set out by the right honourable the Earl of Cumberland , in the year 1586. intended for The South sea , but performed no farther then the latitude of 44. degrees to the South of the Equinoctial , Written by M. John Sarracoll merchant in the same voyage . 
 He 26. day of June , in the year 1586. and in the 28. year of the Queens majesties reign , we departed from Gravesend in two ships ; the Admiral called The read dragon , and the other The bark Clifford , the one of the burden of 260. tons , with 130. men , 
 and the other of the burden of 130. tons , with 70. men : the Captain of the Admiral was M. Robert Withrington , Of the viceadmiral M. Christopher Lister , both being furnished out at the costs and charges of the 202 
 1586. right honourable the Earl of Cumberland , having for their master's two brothers , the one John Anthonie , and the other William Anthonie . 
 The 24. of July we came into the found of Plymouth , and being there constrained by Westerly winds , to stay till the 17. of August , we then departed with another ship also for our Rear-admiral called the Roe , whereof M. Hawes was Captain , and a fine pinnace also called the Dorothie , which was sir Walter Raleghs . We foure being out in the sea , met the 20. of August , with 16. sails of hulks in the Sleeve , who nam themselves to be men of Hamborough , laden and come from Lisbone . Our Admiral hailed their Admiral with courteous words , willing him to strike his sails , and to come aboard to him only to know some news of the country , but he refused to do so , only stroke his flag & took it in . The viceadmiral of the hulks being a head , would neither strike flag nor sail , but passed on without budging , whereupon our Admiral lent him a piece of Ordinance , which they repaid double , so that we grew to some little quarrel , whereupon one of the sternemost hulks , being as I suppose more afraid then hurt , stroke amain , our Admiral being near him , laid him aboard , and entered with certain of his men , how many I know not , for that we were giving chase to the Windermost men , thinking our Admiral would have come up again to us , to have made them all to have stroke : but the weather growing to be very thick and foggy , with small rain , he came not up but kept with another of the hulks which Captain Hawes had boarded and kept all night , and took out of her some provision that they best liked . They learned of the men that were in the hulk , that there were 7. hulks laden in Lisbone with Spaniards goods , and because their lading was very rich , they were determined to go about Ireland , and so they let her go again like a goose with a broken wing . 
 The next day after being the 21. day , we espied 5. sails more , which lay along to the Eastwards , but by 203 
 reason of the night which then was near at hand , we could hardly come to them . Yet at last we hailed one of the biggest of them , & they told us that they were all of Hamborough : but another said she was of Denmark , so that indeed they knew neither what to say , nor what to do . Our Admiral being more desirous to follow his course , then to linger by chasing the hulks , called us from pursuing them with his trumpet , and a piece of Ordinance , or else we would have seen what they had be , and wherewith they had be laden . 
 The 22. day because of contrary wind we put into Dartmouth all 4. of us , and tarried there seven days . 
 The 29. we departed thence and put out to Sea , and began our voyage , thinking at the first to have run along the coast of Spaine , to see if we could have met with some good prize to have sent home to my Lord : but our Captain thought it not the best course at the last , but rather kept off in the sea from the coast . And upon Saturday the 17. of September we fell with the coast of Barbarie , and the 18. hailed in with the road of Santa Cruz. The 21. day we fell with one of the islands of the Canaries , called Forteventura . In running alongst this island , we espied upon a hill by the water side , one waving with a white flag , whereupon we manned both our boats , and sent them towards the shore , to understand what news . They found them to be two ragged knaves and one horseman , and they Lanzarota told us that Lanzarota was taken , and spoiled in August spoiled by the Turkes : when we saw they had nothing else to 
 menoj gie / s . we anj proceeded on our course , and fell 
 again with the coast of Barbarie . 
 The 25. day of September about 10. of the clock we RiodelQro , ' ™ feH with Rio del Oro , standing just under our Tropike : nda^alfe we anckered in the mouth of it in 8. fathom , the entrance ' of it is about 2. leagues over . And the next day our Captain with the boat searched the river , and found it to be as broad 14. or 15. leagues up , as at the entry of it , ’ but found no town nor habitation , saving that there 
 204 
 came down two poor men , and one of them spoke good Spanish , and told our Captain , that certain Frenchmen used to come thither , and jaded some ox Trade of the hides , and goats hides , but other commodity there was none . We departed thence the 27 day , & the last day pjj 77O j ' of the month being calm we went aboard our General , & there consented to go for Sierra Leona , to wood and water . From thence till the 10. of October we were much becalmed with extreme hight weather , much lightning , and great store of rain . This 10. day we sounded , finding a great current as we supposed by the rippling water , which after we found to be and ordinary tide , the flood setting to the Northwest , and the ebb Southeast , and here we had but 18. fathom water , and no land to be seen : it was on the Southermost part of the showles that lie in about 11. degrees , but hailing South off again , it presently deeped unto 50. fathom , and after hailing Southeast and by East , and East southeast , we sounded , but had no ground in 120. fathom . 
 The 21. of October we fell with land upon the coast of Guinea , in the height of 8. degrees , a very high land , but of no great length : it was the high land over Sierra Sierra Leona . Leona . we drew in to the land , and found near the shore more water then in the offing : at the Northern end of the high land we anckered about a mile , and somewhat more from the shore in 11. fathom . To go into the harbour of Sierra Leona we did borrow upon the South side , having no ground in 10. fathom , half a mile from the shore . 
 Upon the Northside of this harbour is very shoal water , but on the Southside no fear , more then is to be seen . 
 The 23. day being Sunday we came to and anchor in the bay of fresh water , and going ashore with our boat , we spoke with a Portugal , who told us that not far off there were Negroes inhabiting , and that in giving to the king a Botija of wine , and some linen cloth , he would suffer us to water and wood at our pleasure . But 205 
 our Captains thinking it not good to give any thing for that which they might take freely , landed , and certain of our men with them , whereupon the Portugall and the Negroes ran all away into the woods . Then we returned again into our boats , and presently went and landed in another place , thinking to have fetched a walk , and so to come to our boats again . But wandering through a little wood , we were suddenly and unawares A ton of thee upon a town of the Negroes , whereupon they struck up Negroes . their drum , giving withal a great shout , and off went their arrows as thick as hail . we were in number about 30. calivers , and 20. with our weapons , which we also let fly into the woods among them , and what hurt we did , we know not . 
 Then we returned to our boats , and took wood and water at our pleasure , and reasonable store of fish , and A strange among the rest we hailed up a great foul monster , 
 monster . whose head and back were so hard , that no sword could 
 enter it : but being thrust in under the belly in diverse places , and much wounded , he bowed a sword in his mouth , as a man would do a girdle of leather about his hand , and likewise the iron of a boar spear . He was in length about nine foot , and had nothing in his belly , but a certain quantity of small stones , to the valve of a pottle . 
 Another great The fourth of November we went on shore to a town “ oh / thNe ™ ™ Negros , which stood on the Southeast side of er egros . the harbour , about a Sacar shot from the road , which we found to be but lately built : it was of about two hundreth houses , and walled about with mighty great trees , and stakes so thick , that a rat could hardly get in or out . But as it chanced , we came directly upon a port which was not shut up , where we entered with such fierceness , that the people fled all out of the town , which we found to be finely built after their fashion , and the streets of it so intricate , that it was difficult for us to find the way out , that we came in at . we found their houses and streets so finely and cleanly kept , that 206 
 it was and admiration to us all , for that neither in the houses nor streets was so much dust to be found , as would fill and egg shell . we found little in their houses , except some matts , goards , and some earthen pots . Our men at their departure set the town on fire , and it was burned ( for the most part of it ) in a A town quarter of and hour , the houses being covered with burnt-reed and straw . 
 After this we searched the country about it , where we found in diverse plains good store of rice in stacks , Rice In stacks . which our men did beat out , and brought a board in the husk , to the quantity of 14. or 15. tons in both our ships . 
 The 17. day of November we departed from Sierra Leona , directing our course for the Straights of Magellan . In this harbour diverse of our men fell sick of a disease in the belly , which for the time was extreme , but ( God be thanked ) it was but of small continuance . we found also in diverse places of the woods , images set Idols . upon pins , with diverse things before them , as eggs , meal , rice , round shot of stones , and diverse other things , such as the barbarous people had to offer up . 
 When we came near to the Line , we found it nothing so hight as it is at Sierra Leona , by reason of the great wind and rain . 
 About the 24. day of November one or two of our men died , and others also were sick of a Calentura . 
 The second day of January we had a little sighed of land , being about the height of 28. degrees to the Southward of the Line . 
 The 4. day we fell with the shore high and bold , in 30. degrees , and a terse , little more or less . All of it to the Northward was a high land , but to the Southward it did presently fade , and was a very low land , and all sandy . About sixe leagues from the shore we sounded , and had about fifteene or sixteene fathom water , and black sandy oz . We thought to have gone to the shore , and to have watered , but we 207 
 They fallen with and highland in 30. degrees | . 
 A Portugal ship taken , wherein was for Pilot Abraham Cocke and Englishman , left there before by the Minion of London 1581. 
 Five towns upon the river of Plate . 
 could not discern any good harbour , and therefore we cast off to seaward again . 
 The 12. day we found our selves in 32. degrees and 27. minutes . From the day of the Nativity of Christ , till the 13. day of this month , although the Sun was very near unto us , yet we found no want of winds but variable as in England , & not so hight but that a men shoulders might well digest a freeze gown , and his belly the best Christmas cheer in England , yet we for our parts had no want , but such as might content honest men . 
 The tenth day being about 8. leagues from the shore , and a little short of the River of Plate , it was my good happen to espy a sail , which was a small Portugal bound for the River to a town called Santa Fee : and from thence by horse and carts , the merchants , and part of their goods were to be transported into Peru. This ship being about the burden of 45. or 50. tons , we took that day about three of the clock , wherein there was for Master or Pilot and Englishman called Abraham Cock born in Lee. We examined him and the rest concerning the state of the River , and they told us that there were in the River five towns , some of 70. households , and some of more . The first town was about 50. leagues up the River called Buenos Ayres , the rest some 40. some 50. leagues one from another , so that the uppermost town called Tucaman is 230. leagues from the entrance of the River . In these towns is great store of corn , cattle , wine , and sundry fruits , but no money of gold or silver : they make a certain kind of slight cloth , which they give in truck of sugar , rice , Marmalade , and Sucket , which were the commodities that this ship had . 
 They had aboard also 45. Negros , whereof every one in Peru yields 400. ducats a piece , and beside these , there were as passengers in her , two Portugal women and a child . 
 The 11. day we espied another sail , which was the 208 
 consort of this Portugall , and to him also we gave chase , Another and took him the same day : He was of the burden PortHZ , alS^P of the other , and had in him good store of sugar , Mar - taken ' malade , and Succats , with diverse other things , which we noted down our book . In this ship also we found about 35. Negro women , and foure or five friars , of which one was and Irish man , of the age of three or And Irish friar foure and twentie years , and two Portugal women ta^ew also , which were born in the river of Jenero . Both these ships were bought in Brasil , by a young man which was Factor for the bishop of Tucaman , and bishop of the friars were sent for by that bishop to possess a Tixaman ™ new Monastery , which the bishop was then a built - p^ king . The books , beads , and pictures in her , cost ( as one of the Portugals confessed ) above 1000. 
 ducats . 
 Of these ships we learned , that M. John Drake , who The news went in consort with M. Fenton , had his Bark cast away a little short of the River of Plate , where they ’ were taken captives by the Savages , all saving them which were slain in the taking : the Savages kept them for a time , and used them very hardly , yet at the last John Drake and Richard Faireweather , and two or three Richard more of their company with them god a Canoa , and ^aireweathei . escaped , and came to the first town of the Spaniards . Faireweather is married in one of the towns , but John Drake was carried to Tucaman by the Pilot of this ship , and was living , and in good health the last year . Concerning this voyage of the Portugals they told us that it was the thirde voyage that was made into the River of Plate these 30. years . 
 The 12. of January we came to Seal island , and the Seale-fands 14. day to the Green island , where going in we found and Green-hard aboard the main 8. fathom , 7. and 6. and never less then five fathom . There lies a ledge of rocks in the fair way , betwixt the island and the main , so that you must be sure to borrow hard aboard the main , and leave the ledge on the larboard side . 
 xi 209 oh 
 One of the Portugals which we caned along with us in our ship seemed to be a man of experience , and I entered into speech with him concerning the state of Buenos Ayres , the River : he told me that the town of Buenos Ayres is from the Green island about seventie leagues , standing on the Southside of the River , and from thence Santa Fee . to Santa Fee is ioo . leagues , standing on the same side also . At which town their ships do discharge all their goods into small Barks , which row and tow up the River to another town called Ascension , which is from Santa Fee 150. leagues , where the boats discharge on shore , and so pass all the goods by carts and horses to Tucaman , which is in Peru. 
 The town of Ascension stands in a very fertile place , reaping corn twice in the year , with abundance of wine , cattle , and fruits . In the towns of Ascension and Tucaman a rapier of 20. rials of plate is worth 30. ducats , a box of Marmalade 20. ducats ; a looking glass a foot over is worth 30. li . pictures in tables of 14. inches , 30. and 40. li . a piece . 
 The 16. day we went from Green island to the watering place , which is about a league to the Westward , where we took in about 18. tons of water , and the 22. day came again to Seal island to make provision of Seals , where a storm arose , which put us in some danger , by the breaking of our anchors and cables , and the wind blew so cold , that we much marveiled at it , considering the height of the place . I must needs in this place find fault with our selves and the whole company , that riding in this River 16. days , the channel was not sounded , nor the way made perfect . 
 The 29. day we took into our ship one Miles Philips , which was left in the West Indies by M. Hawkins . 
 The first of February I took the Sun in 38. degrees . And the 3. day of February I took it again and found it to be in 41. degrees . 
 210 
 The 7. day of February our Captain master Lister being in one of the prizes , hoised over board his Gundelo , and went aboard the Admiral , and being there they sent their Gundelo aboard us , for our Master , master Collins , and my self , & at our coming we were called into the Captains cabin , where were set in counsel for matters touching the state of our voyage , these men whose names are under written . 
 ' Master Robert Withrington Captain of the Admiral . 
 Master Christopher Lister Captain of The bark 
 Clifford . 
 John Anthonie , Master of the Admiral . 
 Thomas Hood , Pilot for the Straights . 
 William Anthonie , Master of the bark Clifford . 
 David Collins . } { Tristram Gennings . 
 Master William Withrington . 
 " Master Beumond Withrington . 
 Master Wasnes . } { Master Norton . 
 Master Wilkes . } { Master Harris . 
 Thomas Anthonie . 
 Nicholas Porter . 
 The master Gunner : 
 And Alexander Gundie , his mate . 
 John Sarracol . 
 This company being all assembled together , the Master M. John An-of the Admiral declared that the cause of our assembly t^onie . was to determine after good advice , what course or way were best and most likely to all men's judgments to be taken . First for the good preferment of my Lords voyage , then the health of our men , and lastly the safeguard of our ships , and further showed his mind to us all in these words , as near as I could carry them away . 
 MY master's , my Lords determination touching this our voyage is not unknown unto you all , having appointed it to be made , and by the grace of God to be performed by us for the South sea . But for as much 
 211 
 as we do all see the time of the year to be far spent , as also the winds to hang contrary , the weather draws on colder and colder , the nights longer and longer , our bred so consumed that we have not left above two months biscuit , our drink in a manner all spent , so that we have nothing but water , which in so cold a country as the Straights , if we should get in , and be forced there to winter , would no doubt be a great weakening to our men , and a hazard of the overthrow of the voyage : These things considered , both our Captain , Master Hood , and I do rather think it good for the wealth of our voyage , the health of our men , and safety of our ships , to go room with the coast of Brasill , where by Gods grace we shall well victuali our selves , both with wine which is our greatest want , and other necessaries . 
 Beside , it is given us here to understand by the Portugals which we have taken , that there is no doubt but that by Gods help and our endeavour , we shall be able to take the town of Baya , at our pleasure , which if we do put in practice , and do not perform it , being somewhat advised by them , they offer to lose their lives . And having by this means victualed our selves , we may there spend upon the coast some three or foure months , except in the mean time we may happen upon some good thing to content my Lord , and to purchase our own credits : otherwise , we may take the Spring of the year , and so proceed , according to my lords directions . And assure your selves ( by the assistance of God ) we will not return without such benefit by this voyage , as may redound to my lords profit , and the honour of our country . Now if there be any of you that can give better course and advice , then this which I have delivered , let him speak , and we will not only hear him , but thank him for his A resolute and counseH ( anJ follow it . 
 captain thi® speech of M. Anthony , M. Lister our captain 
 Lister . answered in this sort : M. Withrington , & M. Anthony , 
 212 
 both , you know , that the last words that my lord had with us in such a chamber were , that in any case we should follow our voyage only for the South sea , except by the way , we might perchance meet with such a purchase , as that we might return with 6000 pounds : and therefore I see no safety , how we may dare offer to go back again , being so near the Straights as we are : for my part I neither dare nor will consent unto it , except we be further forced , then yet we are . My account is this , that he that dieth for this year is excused for the next , and I rather choose death , then to return in disgrace with my lord . 
 Hereunto both the captain and master of the Admiral replied that they were all of that mind : yet notwithstanding , that in going room the voyage was in better possibility to be performed , then in wintering either in the Straights , or at Port S. Julian , all things considered And so agreeing , and concluding all in one , they were determined presently to bear up . 
 The next day being the 8 of February , there fell out many and diverse speeches on each part concerning the altering of our course , some would continue for the Straights , and other some would not . Whereupon a view was taken in both ships of victuals , and reasonable store was found for both companies : and the wind withal coming to the North , we determined to take out of the prizes the best necessaries that were in them , and so cast them ofF , and to ply for the Straights . 
 All this time we held on our course , and the 15 day we found our selves in the height of 44 degrees , but then the wind came to the South , with much rain , wind , cold , and other untemperate weather , continuing in that sort five or sixe days , in which time we hulled back again into the height of 42 degrees . 
 Sunday being the 20 of February , our Admiral being something to the leeward of us , and the storm somewhat ceased , put aboard his flag in the mizzen shrowds , as a token that he would speak with us , and there-213 
 They return being in the latitude of degrees . 
 upon we bore room with him , and having hailed one another , captain Withrington showed the disposition of all his company , which was rather to go room with the coast of Brasil , then to lie after that sort in the sea with foul weather and contrary winds . Our captain on the other side showed the contrary disposition of his men , and company , willing notwithstanding to proceed : but in the end , both the ships fell asunder , and our captain said , Seeing then there is no remedy , I must be content , though against my will . 
 The 21 day the weather grew fair , and the wind good at the South for the Straights , yet our Admiral bore room still , we supposing he would have taken the benefit of the time : whereupon our whole company began to think of the inconveniences that would arise by dividing our selves , and losing our Admiral , being very willing to continue their course , and yet not without the company of the Admiral . And then we began to cast about after him , and at the last bore with him , and he told us , that upon a second view of the victuals , he found their store so slender , and their want so great , that there was no remedy for them but to seek some means to be relieved , which was the only cause that he bore Northward . This speech made us of the bark to enter into a new consultation : and we found many of our men weak , and all our calivers not serviceable , and the Smiths that should mend them to be in the Admiral . We considered also , that by breaking of company , eke ship should be the more weakened : we continued in this consultation till the foure and twentieth day , and in all that time found master captain Lister more desirous to accomplish , and to fulfil the voyage , and not willing in any case to turn his ship , but that the desire which we all had to continue in consort with our Admiral , made us to think well of his company , and in fine and agreement and conclusion was thus made on all sides , to follow the Admiral , without any more talk of the Straights till the Spring . 
 214 
 The io day of March , it fell out so unfortunately , that Samuel Teller our master's mate , fell overboard , and so perished , we being not able by any means to recover him . 
 The eight and twentieth day being in the height of one and twenty degrees , we espied a sail , which we judged came out of the Straights , and had rich lading , but the night being at hand , we lost her very unluckily , and the next day could have no sighed of her . 
 The fift day of April we fell with the land of Brasilia , in the height , as I judge , of sixteen degrees and a tierce , and our Captain went then aboard the Admiral , where they concluded to send the pinnace and our boat on shore for fresh water , because we stood in need of it , which did so with eighteene good men , and three or foure tun of water cask . They were from us till the eighth day in the morning , at which time we espied them again , and that day we came all together into the road of Camana , where there came a Canoa aboard us , and one of the chiefest Portugals that belonged to the place . Here we took in beefs , hogs , water and wood at our pleasure , having almost no man able to resist us , but some of our Portugals stole from us in the Canoa . 
 The 11 day we entered into the haven of Baya , where we were received at the point coming in , with two great pieces of Ordinance , which discharged bullets at us five times a piece , but they lost shot and powder , and did us not harm . After we had passed the point , we hailed in for the road as close as the wind would permit us , but could not come so near as we desired , and therefore we came to and anchor a fair birth off the town , not without great store of shot from thence , but yet our harm was none at all for ought they could do . 
 At our coming in , we found in the road eight ships and one caravel , of the which one was a hulk or double fly boat of the burden of two hundred and fifty tons , having in her 24 pieces of good Ordinance : she with the 215 
 A.D. 
 1587. 
 March . 
 The road of Camana . 
 They come into the river of Baya . 
 They take 4 ships out of the harbour of Baya , notwithstanding the shot of the enemy . 
 A hulk of Flushing . 
 rest of the ships , together with the town , gave us shot , and shot , but not one touched so much as any of our sails . And lest we should seem in the mean time to be idle , we repaid for every shot of theirs , two or three sometime at the ships and the town together . 
 The next day at night we thought to have hailed in with the ships , and to have fetched out some of them : but the wind blew then ofF the shore , so that we could not possibly do it . And again the next day at night we concluded to go with our own two boats , and two other boats of the country which we had taken before , which went with caravel-sailes , into the road , and accordingly performed the same , notwithstanding the shot of the enemy . The Moon did shine , and gave very good light , and in we went with our caravels and boats , and the shot came about our ears as thick as hail : but the Portugals and the rest perceiving us no whit at all to shrink or be dismayed , forsook their ships , & began to provide to save themselves , some with their boats , some by swimming , and so we entered the ships with a great shout , and found few to resist us : but yet the shore not being a cables length from us , they did so ply both their great and small ordinance at us , that it much annoyed us : But yet for all that we made light of their shot , and our men of the bark Clifford entered the Admiral and Viceadmiral , and our Admirals men entered two other ships of the like burden , and presently every one cut the cables in the hause , and so by the help of God in despite of them all , we brought away foure of them . The least whereof was of the burden of 130 tons . 
 In this broil the hulk shot at us many times , but did no hurt at all : but at the last coming by the hulk towing our new prizes , we hailed them and demanded whence they were , they answered us of Flushing , and then we commanded him to weigh anchor , and to come after us : And not daring to refuse it , he did so , and brought with him a caravel with fortie or fiftie buts of wine in her , and 216 
 another small bark which had little or nothing in her : and road by us as one of our company , and was a ship of the burden of two hundreth and fifty tons . Our hard happen was to find no great matter , either of merchandise or victuals in these ships , saving in one of them we found foure buts of wine , in another two , in another one , and some fish , and all the rest of their lading was on shore . 
 All this was done upon Easter eeve , and we gave thanks to God , that we had sped so well : and that very night there came a boat from the town , with a Dutch merchant , and one Portugal , to offer some ransom for the ships , as they said , but as I judge rather to espy our strength : we kept them that night aboard , and the next day we sent them to our Admiral . 
 The next day being Easter day arose a very great storm insomuch that our caravel which we first took brake from us , and one of our new prizes also , by means of the breaking of her cable , slipped away : whereupon , although the wind was great , and the sea troublesome , yet we sent certain of our men in our boat , to recover them if they might , but we fear , that the rage of the weather hath caused us to lose both our men and prizes . 
 In the midst of this storm , our two Spaniards which we took in the river of Plate , seeing us all busy about our prizes , began to think how they might escape our hands , and suddenly slipped both out of one of the cabins windows , and by swimming god a shore , a thing which seemed to us impossible , considering the outrage of the weather . 
 This storm continued long , and prevented us of making our intended attempt against the town , having as much to do as possibly we might , in keeping our ships and prizes from running ashore ; and falling into the hands of those that stood gaping greedily for our ruin . 
 The 19 day the storm being a little ceased , we all weighed and came to and Island that lies next Northwest 217 
 from the bay , and the twentieth day we went on , shore , and our carpenters set up our pinnace . 
 The 23 day the people of the country came down amain upon us , and beset us round , and shot at us with their bows and arrows , but in short time we caused them to retire , and many of them were carried away by the help of their fellows , although we had some of our men hurt with some of their arrows . 
 The 24 day we received out of the caravel twelve buts of wine and foure barrels of oil , and half a quarter . 
 The 26 of April our pinnace was launched : and the same day came down unto us a great number of Portugals and Indians , with whom we skirmished the space of two hours to their cost . 
 The second day of May the Admirals boat went a shore with 14 men to fill water , and presently being on shore , they were entrapped with two or three hundred Indians which assaulted them , and slew one or two of our men , but the rest escaped notwithstanding the number of the enemy , and came safe again with water to the ship . We suffered this loss by mere negligence , & want of circumspection . 
 The 5 day the captain of the Admiral himself took a small bark , his own little caravel , our pinnace and the Dutchmans boat , and at night went on shore to get victuals , among the bullocks which were in the fields : and in the morning they were gone so far , that they were out of sighed . Which being perceived by the enemy , they presently made ready their galley for Admiral , with four caravels , with as many men in them as possibly could thrust in & stand one by another : and they bore over with the North shore to meet with our pinnace and boats : whereupon our men fell into great danger , although M. Lister our captain dissuaded M. Withrington from that attempt , by laying before him the danger both of himself and us also , being so far one from the other . But being once gone , there was no remedy but they were to abide whatsoever might happen : we in the bark Clifford , 218 
 although we were weakly left , yet perceiving the Galley to make after our men , weighed and pursued the galley , as near the shore as we could conveniently come for want of water : the hulk also weighed and came after us to follow the enemy , but the enemy with his oars god sighed of our pinnace and boats before we could , and bore directly with them : which being espied of our men , and they seeing no way to avoid them , made themselves ready ( notwithstanding the great odds ) to fight it out like men , and to live and die together . The course that they took for their best advantage upon the sudden , was this : they went all into the pinnace , and made fast the Dutchmans boat to one side , and the small caravel to the other side , and so waited the coming of the enemy , giving them first of all a piece of Ordinance for their welcome , which they presently repaid again with a piece out of the prow of the galley , and presently after , with three or foure small brass pieces , charged with hailshot , and so giving a mighty shout , came all aboard together , crying , entrad , entrad : but our men received them so hotly , with small shot and pikes , that they killed them like dogs . And thus they continued aboard them almost a quarter of and hour , thinking to have devoured our men , pinnace and all . And surely to men judgement , no other thing was likely in regard of their great number , and the fewness of our men , and they at the first thought all was their own : but God , who is the giver of all victories , so blessed our small company , and so strengthened their arms and minds to fight , that the enemy having received a mighty foil , was glad to rid himself from their hands : and whereas at their marvellous entrance , we esteemed them to be no less then betwixt two hundred and three hundred men in the afewofour galley , we could scarce perceive twenty men at their men . 
 departure stand on their legs , but the greater part of them was slain , many deadly wounded , their oars broken , & she departed from our men , hanging upon one side ( as a Sow that hath lost her left ear ) with 
 219 
 Above 360 Portugal & Indians slave . 
 the number of dead and wounded men that lay one upon another . And whereas their coming aboard was in a great bravado , with drum , shouting , and crying , they departed without either noise of drum or speech . 
 We lost in this conflict of our men , three only , which were Alexander the Master Gunners mate , Laurence Gambrel , a proper young man of Hampton , and another that was master Benmans man . Some also were hurt with the arrows of the enemy , but the wounds were curable : and thus it pleased Almighty God , of his great goodness , to give victory to 50 or 60 Englishmen , against sixe or seven hundreth Portugals and Indians , for which we ceased not to give such dutiful thanks to his Majesty , as so miraculous a victory required . 
 Now touching the purpose of our men , who made that attempt for fresh victuals , their labour was nothing lost , but in despite of the enemy they brought to our ships 16 or 17 young bullocks , which was to our great comforts and refreshing . As for us that were in our ship , we could not come near them by two miles , or more , to give them any aid , yet we suppose that the countenance of our ships was and encouragement to our men , and some manner of fear to the enemy . 
 Now whereas our opinion concerning the number of the Portugals and Indians which were slain , as aforesaid , was grounded at that time upon our probable conjecture , not being able otherwise to come to the knowledge thereof : you shall understand that the next night after the fight there came aboard us two Indians upon a Gyngatho , who were run away from their master's , and they told us for a very good truth , that the galley went out from the town with foure hundreth men in her , but there came not back to the town again alive above thirty of them all : and I among the rest being desirous to know of one of them , what the news was at the town , he answered me with great laughter : Todo esta cacado en Tierra . 
 220 
 The twelfth day I was sent for to come aboard the admiral , about the hulk : where upon the complaint of the Dutchmen , master Withrington entered into bound to them for the payment of their fraught , but how my lord would like that bound of debt at our return , I know not . I gave him my advice and counsel to get his bound again into his hands . 
 The thirteenth day our captain sent out of our ship certain victuals unto the Admiral , as one butt of dight rise , two chests of clean rise , one barrel of oatmeal , one barrel of peason , and one barrel of oil , because they were somewhat scanted of victuals , and we at this time were to have out of the Admiral our part of five and twenty chests of fine sugar , and more , of eight chests , and sixe chests that were taken in the Bay of Todos Santos , at the Ingenios , more of one hundreth and thirty hats , and other diverse pillages , which were taken in the prizes , and at the shore . 
 The foureteenth day being Monday , it was concluded among us all , not to leave the town of Baya so , but notwithstanding the time that they had to strengthen themselves and the town , yet to give and attempt for the winning of it : and therefore we provided our pinnaces , caravels , and boats for the enterprise : and as we were departing from our ships , the wind turned directly contrary to our course , so that our determination for that time was broken , and we returned again to our ships : and to say the truth , if the weather and wind had served , our attempt had be very desperate , considering the number of Portugals and Indians which were then gathered together , to the number of seven or eight thousand , and their artillery upon the shore , playing upon us : but nevertheless we had proceeded , if the winds had favoured us . 
 The 16 day we went to certain Ingenios of the Portugals , where we found the people fled and we entered their houses without resistance . We found 
 221 
 A.D. 
 I587 . 
 in their purging house 1000 pots of sugar , some half purged , some a quarter , and some newly put into the pots : so that every man took his pot of sugar for their provision , and set all the rest on fire . 
 The 17 day we all weighed to go to another Ingenio , to see if we could find there better sugar , and in the way we met with a prize , which was a caravel , which we found driving with the weather , and entered her , and had in her only three Falcons of iron , which our pinnace brought away , and set the ship on fire . Dalamor in the small prize ran so far in , that he brought his ship on ground , where she lay three or foure hours , till such time as there came from the town five caravels full of men , which being perceived of us , our captain with our men went to him to aid him . The caravels came within Falcon shot of us , but durst come no nearer , lest they might have tasted of the like banquet , that they received the last time . About half flood came the galley again , and three caravels more , but before they came , the bark was a float , and set sail : and then they all went to guard their Ingenios , which we had purposed to visit : but the night coming on , persuaded us to the contrary . 
 The 19 day we set sail to go into the road of Baya again , with our pinnaces , and a flag of truce , to see if we could recover our foure men , which remained alive of those ten , that perished in our boat , of whom we spoke before , which foure were unfortunately fallen into their hands : but they at our approaching near the town , shot at us , and we as ready as they , gave them in all 27 shot , and so ankored a little from the town , to see what they would do . 
 The 20 day riding still before the town , our Admiral sent a Negro ashore , with letters from the Portugals , that we had prisoners aboard : the effect of which letters was , that if we might have our men released and delivered us , they should have theirs from our ships . 
 222 
 The next day in the morning , in stead of their bloody flag , they put up two white flags , and sent a Gingatho ofF to us with two Indians , with letters of answer from the Governor ; but they would not consent in any case that we should have our men , and willed their Portugals to take their captivity patiently , for they would not redeem them : a motion they made in their letters , to buy again one of their prizes , which we had taken out of the road : but our admiral answered them , no , seeing they detained our men , we would keep both their men , and ships too . The same evening we weighed , and came out of the haven , half a league to seaward . 
 The 22 we set sail to sea , and the 23 came to and And Island \z Island twelve leagues to the Southward of Baya , to wood , tesgustothe 
 j x 6 7 > > South of Bata . 
 and water . J 
 The 24 day being aboard with our pinnaces , we met with a Canoa , wherein was one Portugall , and sixe Indians : we shot at the Canoa , and killed and Indian , and took the Portugall , and one of the Indians , and brought them aboard our ships : we there examined them , and the Portugal confessed that there was a ship laden with meal , and other victuals , bound for Fernambuck , but put into a creek , because she durst not go along the coast , hearing of our ships . Whereupon we manned both our pinnaces , and took the Portugal with us , to go and seek the same ship , but that night we could not find her . 
 The 26 day we went again , and found her , being hailed up into a creek , where a man would have thought a ship boat could not have entered : we found her indeed laden with meal principally : but she had also in her fourteene chests of sugar , of which two were in powder , and twelve in loaves . This ship was of the burden of one hundred and twenty tons , and a new A new Portu-ship , this being the first voyage that ever she made , ^s^ . ete^een and as the Portugall confessed , she was freighted for ' Fernambuck , but the men of Baya having great want 
 223 
 A good warning fir us to be circumspect in landing . 
 June . 
 And offer of captain Lister to go with his one ship only for the South sea . 
 of bred , bought both thee ? ship and her lading , and so thought to stay her in this creek , till we were gone off the coast : but it was our good hap to disappoint their pretense , and to fetch her from thence , where they thought her as safe as if she had be at Lisbon . 
 The 28 day we divided the meal among us , according to the want of every ship . 
 The 30 day , 16 or 17 Dutchmen went with their boat from the hulk to shore , to fill water : and upon a sudden they were assaulted with fifty or sixty Portugals , and so many more Indians armed with shot and other weapons , and they slew their Master and Purser , and the rest were hurt , but yet escaped with their lives : a good warning for us to be circumspect , and careful in our landing . 
 The last day of May we cast off one of our prizes , which we called the George , and our Admiral and the hulk took the men and other necessaries out of her , into them . The same day the Portugals which had hurt the Dutchmen came to the shore , and dared us to come on land : whereupon we went into our pinnaces with fortie shot : but the cowardly villains ran all away to the hills , from the water side : but master Lister with nine men followed them , and they fled still before them , and durst not stay their approach : so they came back again , and we filled water quietly , and at our pleasure . 
 The third day of June our captain master Lister , having a great desire for the performance of this voyage , according to my Lords direction , went to our admiral , and requested him to give him sixe buts of wine , one barrel of oil , three or foure barrels of flesh , and to have Thomas Hood and seven or eight seamen for some of our landmen , and by Gods help he with the bark Clifford , would alone proceed for the South sea : but admiral mightily withstood his motion , and would grant no jot of his particular requests . 
 224 
 The 7 of June , having no use at all of our prizes , we burned one , and cast off another , and filled our own ships with the necessaries of them . 
 The 8 day we put off to sea , but yet with much ado came again to our anchoring place , because of the weather . 
 The 10 day the admiral sent for us to come aboard him , and being come , he opened a Card before all the company , and told us that my lords voyage for the South sea was overthrown for want of able men , and victuals , and that therefore he thought it best to ply for some of the Islands of the West India , or the Azores , to see if they could meet with some good purchase , that might satisfy my lord . These words were taken heavily of all the company , and no man would answer him , but kept silence , for very grief to see my lords hope thus deceived , and his great expenses and costs cast away . The common sort seeing no other remedy , were contented to return as well as he . 
 The 16 day we espied a sail , whereupon our pinnace and Dalamor gave her chase , and put her ashore upon the Island , where the men forsook her , and ran away with such things as they could conveniently carry : our pinnace boarded her , and found little in her ; they Another pin-tooke out of her nine chests of sugar , and one hog , ness taken-and 35 pieces of pewter , and so left her upon the sands . 
 From this time forward we began to ply Northwards , July-and the first of July fell with the land again , where we They returned fished , and found reasonable good store . I took the °ri war ' latitude that day , and found our selves in 10 degrees and 22 minutes . 
 The 7 day we determined to fallen with Fernambuck , and we came so near it , that Dalamor ( as he told us ) espied some of the ships that were in the harbour : yet notwithstanding we all fell to leeward of the river , & could not after that , by any means recover the height of it again : but we ceased not on all parts to xi 225 p 
 Fernambuck in the Southerly latitude of 7 deg . 50 min. 
 A low Island in 3 degrees & 49 minutes . 
 August . 
 endeavour the best we could , & oftentimes lost company for a day or two , one of another , but there was no remedy , but patience , for to Fernambuck we could not come , having so much overshot it to the Northward , and the wind keeping at the South and Southwest . 
 The 20 day I took the Sun in 5 degrees 50 minutes , which was 2 degrees to the Northward of Fernambuck , and the further we went , the more untowardly did the rest of our ships work , either to come into haven , or to keep company one with another . And truly I suppose , that by reason of the froward course of the Admiral , he meant of purpose to loose us : for I know not how the nearer we endeavoured to be to him , the further off would he beafe from us , and we seeing that , kept on our own course , and looked to our selves as well as we could . 
 The 24 day our whole company was called together to consultation , for our best course : some would go for the West India , some directly North for England ; and in conclusion , the greater part was bent to ply for our own country , considering our necessities of victuals and fresh water , and yet if any place were offered us in the way , not to omit it , to seek to fill water . 
 The 26 day in the morning , we espied a low Island , but we lost it again , and could descry it no more . This day we found our selves in 3 degrees and 49 minutes . 
 The 27 day we searched what water we had left us , and found but nine buts only , so that our captain allowed but a pint of water for a man a day , to preserve it as much as might be , wherewith every man was content , and we were then in number fiftie men and boys . 
 The first of August we found our selves 5 degrees to the Northward of the line , all which month we continued our course homeward , without touching any where : towards the end whereof , a sorrowful accident 226 
 1572-87 . fell out in our hulk , which being divided from us in Thehulkeof a calm , fell afire by some great negligence , and per - ^s^ngJ > urnt ished by that means in the seas , we being not able men ne^ any ways to help the ship , or to save the men . gence . 
 The 4 day of September , we had brought our selves into the height of 41 degrees & 20 minutes , somewhat to the Northwards of the Islands of the Azores : and thus bulting up and down with contrary winds , the 29 of the same month , we reached the coast of England , and so made and end of the voyage . 
 