The admirable and prosperous voyage of the Worshipful Master Thomas Candish of Trimley in the County of Suffolke Esquire , into the South sea , and from thence round about the circumference of the whole earth , begun in the year of our Lord 1586 , and finished 1588. Written by Master Francis Pretty lately of Ey in Suffolke , a Gentleman employed in the same actium . 
 Ee departed out of Plimmouth on Thursday the 21. of July 1586. with 3. sails , to wit , The Desire a ship of 120. tons , The Content of 60 tons , and the Hugh gallant a bark of 40. tons : in which small Fleet were 123. persons of all sorts with all kind of furniture and 
 victuals sufficient for the space of two years , at the charges of the worshipful Master Thomas Candish of Trimley in the County of Suffolke Esquire , being our general . 
 290 
 On Tuesday the 26. of the same month , we were 
 45. leagues from Cape Finis terrae where we met 
 with 5. sails of Biskaynes coming from the Grande 3. GreatBis-Bay in Newfoundland , as we supposed , which our , 
 Admiral shot at , and fought with them 3. hours , but m of we took none of them by reason the night grew on . 
 The first of August we came in sighed of Forteven - August . tura , one of the Isles of the Canaries , about ten of the clock in the morning . 
 On Sunday being the 7. of August , we were got 
 as high as Rio del oro on the coast of Barbarie . Bio deal oro . 
 On Munday the 19. we fell with cape Blanco : but Cape Blanco . 
 the wind blew so much at the North , that we could not get up where the Canters do use to ride and fish : therefore we lay off 6. hours West Southwest , because of the sand which lies off the cape Southwest and by dangerous South . sand 
 The 15. day of the same month we were in the height of cape Verde by estimation 50. leagues off " the same . 
 The 18. Sierra leona did bear East off us , being 45. leagues from us : and the same day the wind shifted to the Northwest , so that by the 20. day of the said month we were in 6. degrees to the Northward , from the Equinoctial line . 
 The 23. we put room for Sierra leona , and the 25. 
 day we fell with the point on the South side of Sierra Sierra leona . leona , which Master Brewer knew very well , and went in before with the Content which was Viceadmiral : and we had no less then 5. fathoms water when we had least , and had for 14. leagues in Southwest all the way running into the harbour of Sierra leona 16. 14. 
 12. 10 and 8. fathoms of water . 
 The 26. of the said month we put into the harbour , and in going in we had by the Southermost point when we had least 5. fathoms water fair by the rock as it lies at the said point , and after we came , 2 or 3. cables length within the said rock , we never had less then 10. fathoms , until we came up to the 
 291 
 road , which is about a league from the point , borrowing always on the South side until you come up to the watering place , in which Bay is the best road ; but you must ride far into the Bay , because there run marvellous great tides in the offin , and it flows into the road next of any thing at a Southeast and by East moon . 
 It is out of England to this place 930. leagues : which we ran from the 21. of July to the 26. of this month of August . 
 On Saturday being the 27. day there came 2. Negros aboard our Admiral from the shore , and made signs unto our general that there was a Portugal ship up within the harbour ; so the Hugh Gallant being the Rear-admiral went up 3. or 4. leagues , but for want of a Pilot they sought no farther : for the harbour runneth 3. or 4. leagues up more , and is of a marvellous breadth and very dangerous , as we learned afterwards by a Portugal . 
 On Sunday the 28. the general sent some of his company on shore , and there as they played and danced all the forenoon among the Negroes , to the end to have herd some good news of the Portugal ship , A Portugal towards their coming aboard they espied a Portugal taken . which lay hid among the bushes , whom we took and brought away with us the same night : and he told us it was very dangerous going up with our boats for to seek the ship that was at the town . Whereupon we went not to seek her , because we knew he told us the truth : for we bound him and made him fast , and so examined him . Also he told us that his ship was there cast away , and that there were two more of his company among the Negroes : the Portugals name was Emmanuel , and was by his occupation a Calker , belonging to the Port of Portugal . 
 On Munday morning being the 29. day , our general landed with 70. men or thereabouts , and went up to their town , where we burned 2. or 3. houses , and took what 
 292 
 spoil we would , which was but Iide , but all the people fled : and in our retiring aboard in a very little plain at their towns end they shot their arrows at us out of the woods , and hurt 3. or 4. of our men ; their arrows were Poisoned poisoned , but yet none of our men miscarried at that time , arrowes-thanked be God . Their town is marvelous artificially descrip-builded with mud walls , and built round , with their yards paled in and kept very clean as well in their ’ streets as in their houses . These Negroes use good obedience to their king , as one of our men said , which was with them in pawn for the Negroes which came first . 
 There were in their town by estimation about one hundred houses . 
 The first of September there went many of our men on shore at the watering place , and did wash shirts very quietly all the day : and the second day they went again , and the Negroes were in ambush round about the place : and the carpenter of the Admiral going into the wood to do some speciali business , espied them by good fortune . But the Negroes rushed out upon our men so suddenly , that in retiring to our boats , many of them were hurt : among whom one William Pickman a soldier was shot into the thigh , who plucking the arrow out , broke it , and left the head behind ; and he told the Chirurgeons that he plucked out all the arrow , because he would not have them lance his thigh : whereupon the poison wrought so that night , that he was marvelously swollen , and all his belly and privy parts were as black as ink , and the next morning he died , the piece of the arrow with the poison being plucked out of his thigh . 
 The third day of the said month , diverse of our fleet went up 4 miles within the harbour with our boat , and caught great store of fish , and went on shore and took Limmons from the trees , and coming aboard again , saw two Bufles . 
 The 6. day we departed from Sierra leona , and went out of the harbour , and stayed one tide 3. leagues from the 
 September . 
 Many of our men hurt by Negros . 
 William Pickman dieth of a poisoned arrow . 
 This poison is the juice of and herb . 
 2 Buffet . Their departure from Sierra leona . 
 293 
 A.D. 1586. point of the mouth of the Harbour in 6. fathoms , and it flows South Southwest . On Wednesday being the 7. of the same month 
 The Isles of Madrabumba inhabited by ' Negros . we departed from one of the Isles of Cape Verde , alias the Isles of Madrabumba , which is 10. leagues distant from the point of Sierra leona : and about five of the clock the same night we anchored 2. miles ofF the Hand in 6. fathoms water , and landed the same night , and found Plantans only upon the Island . The 8. day one of our boats went out & sounded round about the Hand , 8c they passed through a found at the west end of the Hand , where they found 5. fathoms round about the Hand , until they came unto the very gut of the found , and then for a cast or two they had but two fathoms , and presently after , 6. fathoms , and so deeper and deeper . And at the East end of the Hand 
 A town . there was a town , where Negroes do use at sometime , as we perceived by their provision . There is no fresh water on all the South side , as we could perceive , but on the North side three or foure very 
 Fresh water . good places of fresh water : and all the whole Hand is a wood , save certain little places where their houses stand , which are environed round about with Plantan-trees , whereof the fruit is excellent meat . This place is subject marvelous much to thunder , rain , and lightning in this month . I think the reason is , because the sun ne is so near the line Equinoctial . On Saturday the tenth we departed from the said Hand about 3. of the clock in the afternoon , the wind being at the Southwest . 
 October . Cape Frio in Brasil . The last of October running West Southwest about 24. leagues from Cape Frio in Brasile , we fell with a great mountain which had and high round knop on the top of it standing from it like a town , with two little Hands from it . 
 November . S. Sebastians Hand . The first of November we went in between the Hand of Saint Sebastian and the main land , and had our things on shore , and set up a Forge , and had our 294 
 cask on shore : our coopers made hoops , and so we remained there until the 23. day of the same month : in which time we fitted our things , built our Pinnace , and filled our fresh water . And while our Pinnace was in building , there came a Canoa from the river of Jenero , The river of meaning to go to S. Vincent , wherein were sixe naked Jenero-slaves of the Country people , which did row the Canoa , and one Portugal . And the Portugal knew Christopher Hare Master of the Admiral , for that Master Hare had be at Saint Vincent in the Minion of London in the year 1581. And thinking to have John Whithal the Englishman which dwells at Saint Vincent come unto us , which is twentie leagues from this Harbour with some other , thereby to have had some fresh victuals , we suffered the Portugal to go with a letter unto him , who promised to return or send some answer within ten days , for that we told him we were Merchants , and would traffic with them : but we never received answer from him any more ; and seeing that he came not according to appointment , our business being dispatched we weighed anchor , and set sail from S. Sebastian on the 
 23. of November . 
 The 16. day of December we fell with the coast of America in 47. degrees the land bearing West from us ®ecemter-about 6. leagues off : from which place we ran along the shore , until we came into 48. degrees . It is a steep 48 Degrees . beach all along . 
 The 17. day of December in the afternoon we entered into and harbour , where our Admiral went in first : wherefore our general nam the said harbour Port Port Desire . Desire : in which harbour is and Hand or two , where there is wondered great store of Seals , and another Hand 
 of birds which are gray gulls . These Seals are of a Seals strange wondered great bigness , huge , and monstrous of ™ d0 ? 6 antl shape , and for the forepart of their bodies cannot be come - * ' 
 pared to any thing better then to a lion : their head , and neck , and foreparts of their bodies are full of rough hair : their feet are in manner of a fin , and in form like 
 295 
 unto a men hand : they breed and cast every month , giving their young milk , yet continually get they their rmg Seals living in the sea , and live altogether upon fish : their young are very good are marvelous good meat , and being boiled or roasted , ‘ are hardly to be known from lamb or mutton . The old ones be of such bigness and force , that it is as much as 4. men are able to do to kill one of them with great cowl-staves : and he must be beaten down with striking on the head of him : for his body is of that bigness that foure men could never kill him , but only on the head . For being shot through the body withan Harquebus or a Musket , yet he will go his way into the sea , and never Fowls breed - care for it at the present . Also the fowls that were in there , were very good meat , and great store of them : 
 canted* 1 they have burrows in the ground like conies , for they We call these cannot fly . They have nothing but down upon their fowls Pen - pinions : they also fish and feed in the sea for their living , and breed on shore . 
 This harbour is a very good place to trim ships in , and to bring them on ground , and grave them in : for They grave there ebbeth and flows much water : therefore we and trim gravecl and trimmed all our ships there . 
 tO etr s tps . The of p ) ecem^er being Christmas Even , a man and a boy of the Rear-admiral went some fortie score from our ships into a very fair green valley at the foot of the mountains , where was a little pit or well which our men had dug and made some 2. or 3. days before to get fresh water : for there was none in all the Harbour ; and this was but brackish : therefore this man and boy came thither to wash their linen : and being in washing at the said Well , there were great store of Indians which were come down , and found the said man and boy in washing . These Indians being divided on eke side J man and a of the rocks , shot at them with their arrows and hurt ne ence^ them both , but they fled presently , being about fiftie or negigence . threescore , though our general followed them but with 16. or 20. men . The men name which was hurt was John Garge , the boys name was Lutch : the man was shot 296 
 clean through the knee , the boy into the shoulder : either of them having very soar wounds . Their arrows are made of little canes , and their heads are of a flint stone , set into the cane very artificially : they seidome or never see any Christians : they are as wild as ever was a buck or any other wild beast : for we followed them , and they ran from us as it had be the wildest thing in the world . we took the measure of one of their feet , kind °f and it was 18. inches long . Their use is when any of synthem die , to bring him or them to the cliffs by the seaside , and upon the top of them they bury them , and in their graves are buried with them their bows and arrows , and all their jewels which they have in their life time , which are fine shells which they find by the sea side , which they cut and square after and artificiali manner : and all is laid under their heads . The grave is made all with great stones of great length and bigness , being set all along full of the dead men darts which he used when he was living . And they colour both their darts and their graves with a read colour which they use in colouring of themselves . 
 The 28 of December we departed out of the Port of Their deparDesire , and went to and Hand which lies 3. leagues to the Southward of it ; where we trimmed our saved ’ penguins with salt for victual all that and the next day , and departed along the coast Southwest and by South . 
 The 30. day we fell with a rock which lies about 5. leagues from the land , much like unto Ediestone , which lies off the found of Plimouth , and we sounded , and had 8. fathoms rocky ground , within a mile thereof : the rock bearing West Southwest . we went coasting along South Southwest , and found great store of Seals all along the coast . This rock stands in 48. degrees to the Southward of the line . 
 The 2. day of Januarie we fell with a very fair white January Cape , which stands in 51. degrees , and had 7. fathoms r587-water a league off the land . 
 297 
 They enter the Straights the 6. rf Januarie . 
 A Spaniard taken in the Straights of Magellan . 
 The Bark John Thomas one of sir Francis Drakes consorts . 
 King Philips city left desolate in the Straights of Magellan , which our general called Port famine . 
 The third day of the foresaid month we fell with another great white cape , which stands in 52. degrees and 4 5. minutes : from which Cape there runneth a low beach about a league to the Southward , and this beach reaches to the opening of the dangerous Straight of Magellan , which is in diverse places 5. or 6. leagues wide , and in two several places more narrow . Under this Cape we anchored and lost and anchor , for it was a great storm of foul weather , and lasted three days very dangerous . 
 The 6. day we put in for the Straights . 
 The 7. day between the mouth of the Straights and the narrowest place thereof , we took a Spaniard whose name was Hernando , who was there with 23 Spaniards more , which were all that remained of foure hundred , which were left there three years before in these straights of Magellan , all the rest being dead with famine . And the same day we passed through the narrowest of the Straights , where the aforesaid Spanyard showed us the hull of a small Bark , which we judged to be a Bark called The John Thomas . It is from the mouth of the straights unto the narrowest of the Straights 14. leagues , and the course lies West and by North . The mouth of the straights stands in 52. degrees . 
 From the narrowest of the Straights unto Pengwin Hand is 10. leagues , and lies West Southwest somewhat to the Southward , where we anchored the 8. day , and killed and salted great store of Penguins for victuals . 
 The ninth day we departed from Pengwin Island , and ran South Southwest to King Philips city which the Spaniards had built : which Town or ci tie had foure Forts , and every Fort had in it one cast piece , which pieces were buried in the ground , the carriages were standing in their places unburied : we dug for them and had them all . They had contrived their City very well , and seated it in the best place of the Straights for wood and water : they had built up their Churches by themselves : they had Laws very severe among them-298 
 selves , for they had erected a Gibbet , whereon they had done execution upon some of their company . It seemed unto us that their whole living for a great space was altogether upon muscles and lympits : for there was not any thing else to be had , except some Dear which came out of the mountains down to the fresh rivers to drink . These Spaniards which were there , were only come to fortify the Straights , to the end that no other nation should have passage through into the South sea saving only their own : but as it appeared , it was not Gods will so to have it . For during the God enemy to time that they were there , which was two years at thee the paniards-least , they could never-have any thing to grow or in any wise prosper . And on the other side the Indians oftentimes preyed upon them , until their victuals grew so short , ( their store being spent which they had brought with them out of Spaine , and having no means to renew the same ) that they died like dogs in their houses , and in their clothes , wherein we found them still at our coming , until that in the end the town being wonderfully tainted with the smell and the savour of the dead people , the rest which remained alive were driven to bury such things as they had there in their town either for provision or for furniture , and so to forsake the town , and to go along the seaside , and seek their victuals to preserve them from starving , taking nothing with them , but every man his harquebus and his furniture that was able to carry it ( for some were not able to carry them for weakness ) and so lived for the space of a year and more with roots , leaves , and sometime a foul which they might kill with their piece . To conclude , they were determined to have travailed towards the river of Plate , only being left alive 23. persons , whereof two were women , which were the remainder of 4. hundred . In this place we watered and wooded well and quietly . Our general nam this 
 town Port famine : it stands in 53. degrees by obser - Port famine vation to the Southward . tn degrees . 
 299 
 The 14. day we departed from this place , and ran South southwest , and from thence southwest unto cape Cape Froward Froward 5. leagues West Southwest , which Cape is the w ^8 ™ ' Southermost part of all the straights , and stands in the latitude of 54. degrees . From which cape we ran West and by north 5. leagues , and put into a bay or Muscle Cove . Cove on the south side , which we called Muscle-cove , because there were great store of them : we rid therein 6. days , the wind being still Westerly . 
 The 21. day of Januarie we departed from Muscle-cove , and went Northwest and by West 10. leagues to a very fair sandy Bay on the North side , which our Elizabeth general called Elizabeth Bay , and as we rid there Ba > that night , one of our men died which went in the Hugh Gallant , whose name was Gray , a Carpenter by his occupation , and was buried there in that Bay . 
 The 22. we departed from Elizabeth Bay in the afternoon , and went about 2. leagues from that place , where there was a fresh water river , where our general went up with the ship-boat about three miles , which river hath very good and pleasant ground about it , and it is low and champion soil , and so we saw none other ground else in all the Straights but that was craggy rocks and monstrous high hills and mountains . In this river are great store of Savages which we saw , and had con-^ruti^h1 ference with them : They were men-eaters , and fed Savages that altogether upon raw flesh , and other filthy food : which ever were people had preyed upon some of the Spaniardes before 
 teene . spoken of . For they had got knives and pieces of 
 Rapiers to make darts of . They used all the means they could possibly to have allured us up farther into the river , of purpose to have betrayed us , which being espied by our general , he caused us to shoot at them with our harquebusses , whereby we killed many of them . The Channel of So we sailed from this river to the Channel of Saint Saint Jerome . Jeromej which is 2 leagues ofF . 
 From the river of Saint Jerome about three or foure leagues , we ran ne West unto a Cape which is on the 300 
 North side : and from that Cape unto the mouth of the Straights the course lies Northwest and by West , and Northwest . Between which place and the mouth of the Straights to the Southward we lay in Harbour until the three and twentieth of Februarie , by reason of contrary winds and most vile and filthy fowl weather , with such rain and vehement stormy winds which came down from the mountains and high hills , that they hazarded the best cables and anchors that we had for to hold , which if they had failed , we had be in great danger to have be cast away , or at the least famished . For during this time , which was a full month , we fed almost altogether upon muscles and limpits , and birds , or such as we could get on shore , seeking every day for them , as the fowls of the air do , where they can find food , in continual rainy weather . 
 There is at every mile or two miles end and Harbour on both sides of the land . And there are between the river of Saint Jerome and the mouth of the Straights going into the South sea about 34. leagues by estimation . So that the length of the whole Straights is about 90. leagues . And the said mouth of the Straights stands in the same height that the entrance stands in when we pass out of the North sea , which is about 52. degrees and f to the Southward of the line . 
 The 24. day of February we entered into the South sea : and on the South side of the going out of the Straights is a fair high Cape with a low point adjoining unto it : and on the North side are 4. or 5. Hands , which lie 6. leagues off the main , and much broken and sunken ground about them : by noon the same day we had brought these Hands East of us 5. leagues off ; the wind being Southerly . 
 The first of March a storm took us at North , which night the ships lost the company of the Hugh Gallant , being in 49. J and 45. leagues from the land . This storm continued 3. or 4. days , and for that time we in the Hugh Gallant being separated from the other 2. 
 301 
 A.D. 
 1587. 
 Februarie 1587. 
 The straights of Magellan are about 90 leagues long . The Western mouth of the Straights is in 52 degrees and 2 terces . Theirentrance into the South sea the 24 of Februarie . Hands in the Southseacalled LasAnegadas . 
 March 1. 
 Extreme dan-geroftheHugh Gallant by a great leak . 
 ships , looked every hour to sink , our bark was so leak , and our selves so dilvered and weakened with freeing it of water , that we slept not in three days and three nights . 
 The 15. of March in the morning the Hugh Gallant came in between the Hand of S. Marry and the main , where she met with the Admiral and the Content , which The lie of had rid at the Hand called La Mocha 2. days , which Mocha in & stands jn the Southerly latitude of 38 degrees : at subject to the which place some of our men went on shore with the Spaniards . Viceadmirals boat , where the Indians fought with them with their bows and arrows , and were marvelous wary of their Calivers . These Indians were enemies to the Spaniards , and belonged to a great place called Arauco , and took us for Spaniards , as afterwards we learned . 
 Arauco is the This place which is called Arauco is wonderful rich , richest place m and ( j fuq of gOlde mines , and yet could it not be subdued for glide , and at any time by the Spaniards , but they always returned is not subdued with the greatest loss of men . For these Indians are the marvelous desperate and careless of their lives to live 
 Spaniards as at their own liberty and freedom . 
 ^et ' The 15. day aforesaid in the afternoon we weighed 
 Saint Marry anchor , and ran under the West side of Saint Marry 
 3 J , Hand , where we rid very well in 6. fathoms water , and terce , which is very fair ground all that night . 
 subdued to the The 16. day our General went on shore himself with 
 Spaniards . 70. or 80. men every one with his furniture : there came down to us certain Indians with two which were the principals of the Hand to welcome us on shore , thinking we had been Spaniards , for it is subdued by them : who brought us up to a place where the Spaniards had erected 
 A Church a Church with crosses & altars in it . And there were 
 ™ and altar ? a^out Church 2. or 3. store houses , which were full 
 ’ of wheat and barley ready threshed and made up in cades of straw to the quantity of a bushel of corn in every cade . The wheat and barley was as fair , as clean , and every way as good as any we have in England . There were also the like cades full of potato roots , which were 
 302 
 very good to eat , ready made up in the store houses for the Spaniards against they should come for their tribute . This Hand also yields many sorts of fruits , hogs , and hens . These Indians are held in such slavery by them , that they dare not eat a hen or and hog themselves . But the Spaniards have made them all in that Hand Christians . Thus we fitted our selves here with corn ma^e as as we would have , and as many hogs as we had Christians . salt to powder them withal , and great store of hens , with a number of bags of Potato roots , and about 500. dried dogge-fishes , and Guinie wheat , which is called Maiz. And having taken as much as we would have , yet we left marvelous great store behind us . Our General had the two principals of the Hand aboard our ship , and provided great cheer for them , and made them merry with wine : and they in the end perceiving us to be no Spaniards , made signs , as near as our general could perceive , that if we would go over unto the main land 
 unto Arauco , that there was much Gold , making us Arauco richin signs , that we should have great store of riches . But e-because we could not understand them , our general made some haste , and within 2. or three days we furnished our selves . 
 The 18. day in the morning we departed from this place , and ran all that day Northnortheast about io . leagues , and at night lay with a short sail ofF and on the coast . 
 The 19. we ran in East Northeast with the land , and bore in with a place called The Conception , where The Concep-wee anchored under and Hand , and departed the next tion‘ morning without going on land . 
 The 20. we departed from The Conception , and went into a little Bay which was sandy , where we saw fresh water and cattle , but we stayed not there . 
 The 30. day we came into the Bay of Quintero , Quintero which stands in 33. degrees & 50 minutes . stands m 
 The said day presently after we were come unto and 50 anchor in the Bay , there was a Neteherd or one that kept cattle which lay upon the point of the hill asleep , 
 303 
 which when he awaked and had espied three ships which were come into the Bay , before we could get on shore , he had caught and horse which was feeding by , and road his way as fast as ever he might : and our general with 30. shot with him went on shore . He had not be on land one hour , but there came 3. horsemen with bright swords towards us so hard as they might ride , until they came within some twentie or thirtie score of us , and so stayed , and would come no nearer unto us : so our general sent unto them a couple of our men with their shot , and one Fernando , which was the Spaniard that we had taken up at the mouth of the Straights , which was one of the 400. that were starved there . But the Spaniards would not suffer our men to come near with their shot , but made signs that one of our men should come alone unto them : so the said Fernando the Spaniard went unto them , and our two men stood not far from them . They had great conference , and in the end Fernando came back from them , and told our general that he had parled with them for some victuals , who had promised as much as we would have . Our General sent him back again with another message and another shot with him : and being come near unto them , they would not suffer any more than one to approach them , whereupon our men let the Spaniard go unto them alone himself : who being some good distance from them , they stayed but a Theperjurleof small time together , but that the said Fernando leapt a Spaniard . Up behind one of them and rid away with them , for all his deep and damnable oaths which he had made continually to our general and all his company never to forsake him , but to die on his side before he would be false . Our general seeing how he was dealt withal , filled water all that day with good watch , and carried it aboard : and night being come , he determined the next day to send into the country to find their town , and to have taken the spoil of it , and to have fired it if they could have found it . 
 304 
 The last of March Captain Havers went up into the Country with 50. or 60. men with their shot and furniture with them , and we travailed 7. or 8. miles into the land : and as we were marching along , we espied a number of herds of cattle , of kine and bullocks which were wonderful wild : we saw also great store of horses , mares and colts which were very wild and unhandled : there is also great store of hares and conies , and plenty of partridges and other wild fowls . The country is very fruitful with fair fresh rivers all along full of wild foul of all sorts . Having travailed so far that we could go no further for the monstrous high mountains , we rested our selves at a very fair fresh River running in and alongst fair low meadows at the foot of the mountains , where every man drunk of the River , and refreshed themselves . Having so done , we returned to our Ships the likest way that we thought their Town should be : so we travailed all the day long , not seeing any man , but we met with many wild dogs : yet there were two hundred horsemen abroad that same day by means of the Spaniard which they had taken the day before from us , who had told them that our force , was but small , and that we were wonderfully weak ; who though they did espy us that day , yet durst they not give the onset upon us . For we marched along in array , and observed good order , whereby we seemed a great number more then we were , until we came unto our ships that night again . 
 The next day being the first of Aprill 1587 , our men went on shore to fill water at a pit which was a quarter of a mile from the waters side : and being early hard at their business were in no readiness . In which mean while there came powering down from the hills almost 200 horsemen , and before our people could return to the rocks from the watering place , twelve of them were cut off , part killed , and part taken prisoners , the rest were rescued by our soldiers xi 305 u 
 A.D. 
 I587 . 
 Our men march 7 or 8 miles into their enemies land . 
 which came from the rocks to meet with them , who being but fifteene of us that had any weapons on shore , yet we made the enemy retire in the end with loss of Spaniards some foure and twentie of their men , after we had > latne ’ skirmished with them and hour . 
 The names of our men that were slain were these . 
 Killed out of the Hugh Gallant . 
 Thomas Lucas of London , soldier . ' Richard Wheeler of London . 
 Robert Pitcher of Norffolke , soldier . Out of the John Langston of Glocestershire . [ Admiral . 
 William Kingman of Dorsetshire , soldier . 
 William Hills of Cornewall . 
 1 William Byet of Weymouth . 1 Killed out of 
 2 Laurence Gamesby , of Newcastle . j the vice adm . 
 1 Henry Blackenals of Weymouth . 
 2 William Stevens of Plymmouth , gunner . 3 William Pit of Shereborne in Dorsetshire . 4 Humphrey Derricke of London . 
 After the loss of these men , we rid in the road , and watered in despite of them with good watch and ward , until the fift of the said month . 
 The fift day we departed out of this bay of Quintero : A little Hand and off from the bay there lies a little Hand about a full of pen - leagUe distant , whereon there are great store of penguins 
 and other fowls ; whereof we took to serve our turns , and sailed away North and North and by West : for so lies the coast along in this place . 
 Mom ' The fifteenth we came thwart of a place which is called de^es’anda Morro moreno , which stands in 23 degrees % , and is and i^e . 1 a excellent good harbour : and there is and Island which makes it and harbour : and a ship may go in at either end of the Island : here we went with our general on shore to the number of 30 men : and at our going on shore upon our landing , the Indians of the place came down from the rocks to meet with us , with fresh water and wood on their backs . They are in marvellous awe 306 
 of the Spaniards , and very simple people , and live marvellous savagely : For they brought us to their bidings about two miles from the harbour , where we saw their women and lodging , which is nothing but the skin of some beast laid upon the ground : and over them in stead of houses , is nothing but five or sixe sticks laid across , which stand upon two forks with sticks on the ground and a few boughs laid on it . Their diet is raw fish , which stinketh most vilely . And when any of them die , they bury their bows and arrows ‘ with them , with their canoa and all that they have : for we opened one of their graves , and saw the order of them . Their canoas or boats are marvellous artificially made of two skins Mostarti-like unto bladders , and are blown full at one end with butts . quills : they have two of these bladders blown full , which are sown together and made fast with a sinew of some wild beast ; which when they are in the water swell , so that they are as tied as may be . They go to sea in these boats , and catch very much fish with them , and pay much of it for tribute unto the Spaniards : but Tribute paid they use it marvellous beastly . in fish . 
 The 23 in the morning we took a small bark which bark . came out of Arica road , which we kept and called The George : the men rorsooke it , and went away with their 7^ George . boat . Our admirals pinnace followed the boat , & the Hugh Gallants boat took the bark : our admirals pinnace could not recover the boat before it god on shore , but went along into the road of Arica , and laid aboard a Aricastandeth great ship of and hundreth tons riding in the road in right afore the town , but all the men and goods were taken . gone out of it , only the bore ship was left alone . They made three or foure very fair shots at the pinnace as she was coming in , but missed her very narrowly with a Minion shot which they had in the fort . Whereupon we came into the road with the admiral and the Hugh Gallant : but the Content which was viceadmiral was behind out of sighed : by means whereof , and for want of her boat to land men withal we landed not : otherwise 
 307 
 if we had be together , our general with the company would resolutely have landed to take the town , whatsoever had come of it . The cause why the Content stayed behind was , that she had found about 14 leagues to the Southward of Arica , in a place where the Spaniards Gnat store of had landed , a whole ships lading of botijas of wine of wine found . Castillia , whereof the said Content took into her as many as she could conveniently carry , and came after us into the road of Arica the same day . By this time we perceived that the town had gathered all their power together , and also conveyed all their treasure away , and buried it before we were come near the town : for they had herd of Us. Now because it was very populous with the aid of one or two places up in the land , our general saw there was no landing without loss of many men : wherefore he gave over that enterprise . While we rid in the road they shot at us , and our ships shot at them again for every shot two . Moreover , our pinnace went in hard almost to the shore , and fetched out Another bark another bark which rid there in despite of all their forts oad tO > ie though they shot still at the pinnace , which they could 
 ‘ never hit . After these things our general sent a boat on shore with a flag of truce to know if they would redeem their great ship or no ; but they would not : for they had received speciali commandement from the viceroy from Lima , not to buy any ship , nor to ransom any man upon pain of death . Our general did this in hope to have redeemed some of our men , which were taken prisoners on shore by the horsemen at Quintero , otherwise he would have made them no offer of parley . 
 The fourth The 25 riding still in the said road , we spied a sail bark taken . coming from the Southward , and our general sent out his pinnace to meet her , with all our boats ; but the town made such signs from the hill with fires A watchhouse , and tokens out of the watchhouse , that before our pinnace could get to them , they ran the bark on shore two miles to the Southward of the town ; but they 308 
 had small leisure to carry any thing with them ; but all the men ; scape , among whom there were certain friars : for we saw them in their friars weeds as they ran on shore : many horsemen came from the town to rescue them , and to carry them away , otherwise we had landed and taken or killed them . So we went aboard the bark as she lay sunk , and fetched out the pillage : but there was nothing in it of any valve , and came aboard our ships again the same night : and the next morning we set the great ship on fire in the road , and sunk one of the barks , and carried the other along with us , and so departed from thence , and went away Northwest . 
 The 27 day we took a small bark , which came from The first S. Iago near unto Quintero , where we lost our men b^en°^ad^se first . In this bark was one George a Greek , a reason - ‘ able pilot for all the coast of Chili . They were sent to the city of Lima with letters of adviso of us , and of the loss of our men . There were also in the said bark one Flemming and three Spaniards : and they were all sworn and received the Sacrament before they came to sea by three or foure friars , that if we should chance to meet them , they should throw those letters over board : which ( as we were giving them chase with our pinnace ) before we could fetch them up , they had accordingly through wen away . Yet our general wrought so with them , that they did confess it : but he was feign to cause them to be tormented with their thumbs in a wrinch , and to continue them at several times with extreme pain . Also he made the old Flemming believe that he would hang him ; and the rope being about his neck he was pulled up a little from the hatches , and yet he would not confess , choosing rather A good mind if to die , then he would be perjured . In the end it was confessed by one of the Spaniards , whereupon we burned s ' the bark , and carried the men with us . 
 The third of May we came into a bay where are three little towns , which are called Paracca , Chincha , and 
 309 
 The Hugh Gallant lost company of the fleet , and met not until the seventeenth . 
 400 bags of meal found . 
 Pisca , where some of us landed and took certain houses , wherein was bred , wine , figs and hens : but the sea went so high , that we could not land at the best of the towns without sinking of our boats , and great hazard of us all . This place stands in thirteene degrees and f to the Southward of the line . 
 The fift of May we departed from this harbour , leaving the Content our viceadmiral within at and Island of seals , by which means at that time we lost her company . 
 The ninth we gave chase to a sail , namely , Our admiral , The Hugh Gallant , and The George which we had taken before coming out of the road of Arica ; The Content which was our viceadmiral being still lost : but we could not fetch it . The George made after it , but lost it that night . 
 The tenth day the Hugh Gallant ( in which bark I Francis Pretty was ) lost company of our admiral . 
 The eleventh we which were in the Hugh Gallant put into a bay which stands in 12 degrees f , in which bay we found a river of fresh water about eight of the clock at night ; and though we were but of small force , and no more but one bark and 18 men in it , yet we went on shore to fill water ; where having filled one boats lading , while our boat was in going aboard , two or three of our company which were on shore , as they were going a little from the watering place with their furniture about them , espied where there were foure or five hundred bags of meal on and heap covered with a few redes . So that night we filled water and took as much meal as we thought good : which fell out well for us that were then lost and stood in need of victuals : and by break of day in the morning we came aboard , and there stayed and road until the afternoon . In which mean time the town seeing us ride there still , brought down much cattle to the sea side to have enticed us to come on shore : but we saw their intent , and weighed anchor and departed the twelft day . 
 310 
 The 13 day at night we put into a bay which « 9-standeth in 9 degrees and where we saw horsemen : and that night we landed , namely , M. Bruer Captain , my self Francis Pretty , Arthur Warford , John Way Join Way a Preacher , John Newman , Andrew Wight , William Preacher-Gargefield , and Henry Hilliard . And we 8 only , having every man his harquebus and his furniture about him , marched three quarters of a mile along the sea side , where we found a boat of five or sixe tons haled up dry on the shore about a cables length from the water : and with extreme labour we launched the 
 bark ; when it was on float , Captain Bruer and I went in , while the rest of our company were fetching their things : but suddenly it was ready to sink : And the Captain and I stood up to the knees lading out water with our targets ; but it sunk down faster then we were able to free it , insomuch as in the end we had much ado to save our selves from drowning . When we were out , we stood in great fear that our own boat wherein we came on shore was sunk : for we could not where see it . Howbeit the Captain commanded them to keep it off - , for fear of the great surge that went by the shore . Yet in the end we spied it , and went aboard by two and two , and were driven to wade up to the armholes 60 paces into the sea before we could get into the boat , by reason of the shoaldnesse : and then departed the foureteenth day in the morning . 
 The 16 we took with the Hugh Gallant , being but sixteene men of us in it , a great ship which came from Guaianil , which was called The Lewis , and was of the burden of three hundred tons , having foure and twentie men in it , wherein was pilot one Gonsalvo de Ribas , whom we carried along with us , and a Negro called Emmanuel . The ship was laden with nothing but timber and victuals : wherefore we left her seven leagues from the land very leak and ready to sink in 7 degrees to the Southward of the line : we sunk 
 A ship of 300 tons taken after half and hours fight . 
 Seven degrees of Southerly latitude . 
 They met their fleet again . Two rich ships taken . 
 One ship worth 20000 pounds . 
 The bay of Paita in 5 degrees 4 min. 
 A new fort in building . 
 The town of Paita taken and burned . 
 her boat and took away her foresail and certain victuals . 
 The 17 of May we met with our admiral again , and all the rest of our fleet . They had taken two ships , the one laden with sugar , molosses , maiz , Cor-dovan-skinnes , montego de Porco , many packs of pintados , many Indian coats , and some marmalade , and 1000 hens : and the other ship was laden with wheat-meal , and boxes of marmalade . One of these ships which had the chief merchandise in it , was worth twentie thousand pounds , if it had be in England or in any other place of Christendome where we might have sold it . we filled all our ships with as much as we could bestow of these goods : the rest we burned and the ships also ; and set the men and women that were not killed on shore . 
 The 20 day in the morning we came into the road of Paita , and being at and anchor , our general landed with sixtie or seventie men , skirmished with them of the town , and drave them all to flight to the top of the hill which is over the town , except a few slaves and some other which were of the meaner sort , who were commanded by the governors to stay below in the town , at a place which is in building for a fort , having with them a bloody ensign , being in number about one hundred men . Now as we were rowing between the ships and the shore , our gunner shot ofF a great piece out of one of the barks , and the shot fell among them , and drave them to fly from the fort as fast as they might run , who god them up upon and hill , and from thence shot among us with their small shot . After we were landed and had taken the town , we ran upon them , and chased them so fiercely up the hills for the space of and hour that we drave them in the end away perforce , and being god up the hills , we found where they had laid all their stufle which they had brought out of the town , and had hidden it there upon the mountains . We also found the 
 312 
 quantity of 25 pounds weight in silver in pieces of eight rials , and abundance of household stuff and storehouses full of all kind of wares : but our general would not suffer any man to carry much cloth or apparel away , because they should not cloy themselves with burdens : for he knew not whither our enemies were provided with furniture according to the number of their men : for they were five men to one of us : and we had and English mile and and half to our ships . 
 Thus we came down in safety to the town , which was 
 very well budded , and marvellous clean kept in every street , with a town-house or Guild hall in the midst , and had to the number of two hundred houses at the least in it . we set it on fire to the ground , and goods to the valve of five or sixe thousand pounds : there was also a 
 bark riding in the road which we set on fire , and fire . 
 departed , directing our course to the Hand of Puna . 
 The 25 day of May we arrived at the Hand of Puna , where is a very good harbour , where we found a great ship of the burden of 250 tons riding at and anchor with all her furniture , which was ready to be haled on ground : for there is a speciali good place for that purpose . we sunk it , and went on shore where the lord of the Hand dwelled , which was by the waters side , who had a sumptuous house marvellous well contrived with very many singular good rooms and chambers in it : and out of every chamber was framed a gallery with a stately prospect into the sea on the one side , and into the Hand on the other side , with a marvellous great hall below , and a very great storehouse at the one end of the hall , which was filled with botijas of pitch and bash to make cables withal : for the most part of the cables in the South sea are made upon that Hand . This great Cacique does make all the Indians upon the Hand to work and to drudge for him : and he himself is and Indian born , but is married to a marvellous fair woman which is a Spaniard , by reason of his pleasant habitation and of his great wealth . 
 313 
 A.D. 
 1587. 25 pounds weight in silver . 
 The town of Paitahad 200 houses in it . 
 A bark set on 
 The Hand of Puna within 1 degree the Equinoctial to the South . A great ship burned . 
 Great store of cables made in Puna . 
 This Spanish woman his wife is honoured as a Queen in the Island , and never goes on the ground upon her feet : but holds it too base a thing for her : But when her pleasure is to take the air , or to go abroad , she is always carried in a shadow like unto and horselitter upon foure men's shoulders , with a veil or canopy over her for the sun or the wind , having her gentlewomen still attending about her with a great troop of the best men of the Hand with her . But both she and the lord of the Island with all the Indians in the town were newly fled out of the Island before we could get to and anchor , by reason we were becalmed before we could get in , and were gone over unto the main land , having carried away with them to the sum of 100000 crowns , which we knew by a captain of the Island and Indian , which was left there with some other upon the Island under him , whom we had taken at sea as we were coming into the road , being in a balsam or canoa for a spy to see what we were . 
 The 27 our General himself with certain shot and some targeteers went over into the main unto the place where this foresaid Indian captain which we had taken had told us that the Cacique , which was the lord of all the Island , was gone unto , and had carried all his treasure with him : but at our coming to the place which we went to land at , we found newly arrived there foure or five great balsas , which were laden with plantans , bags of meal , and many other kinds of victuals . Our general marveled what they were and what they meant , asking the Indian guide and commanding him to speak the truth upon his life : being then bound fast , he answered being very much abashed , as well as our company were , that he neither knew from whence they should come , nor who they should be : for there was never a man in any one of the balsas : and because he had told our general before , that it was and easy matter to take the said Cacique and all his treasure , and that there were but three or foure 
 314 
 ... 15871 houses standing in a desert place and no resistance , and that if he found it not so , he should hang him . 
 Again being demanded to speak upon his life what he thought these Balsas should be , he answered that he could not say from whence they should come , except it were to bring 60 soldiers , which he did hear were to go to a place called Guaiaquil , which of 
 was about 6 leagues from the said island , where two Guaiaiu^-or three of the kings ships were on the stocks in building , where are continually and hundred soldiers in garrisons who had herd of us , and had sent for sixtie more for fear of burning of the ships and town . 
 Our general not any whit discouraged either at the sighed of the balsas unlooked for , or for hearing of the threescore soldiers not until then spoken of , with a brave courage animating his company in the exploit , went presently forward , being in the night in a most desert path in the woods , until such time as he came to the place ; where , as it seemed , they had kept watch either at the waters side , or at the houses , or else at both , and were newly gone out of the houses , having so short warning , that they left the meat both boiling and resting at the fire and were fled with their treasure with them , or else buried it where it could not be found , being also in the night . Our company took hens and such things as we thought good , and came away . 
 The 29 day of May our general went in the ship - A little Island boat into a little Island there by , whereas the said Cacique np ™ a unt0 which was the lord of Puna , had caused all the hang - ’ ings of his chambers , which were of cordovan leather all guilded over , and painted very fair and rich , with all his household stuff , and all the ships tackling which was riding in the road at our coming in , with great store of nails , spikes of iron , and very many other things to be conveyed : all which we found , and brought away what our general thought requisite for the ships business . 
 3*5 
 The I'll of Puna is almost as big as the lie of Wight . 
 Cotton trees . 
 And excellent orchard . 
 This Hand is very pleasant for all things requisite , and fruitful : but there are no mines of gold nor silver in it . There are at the least 200 houses in the town about the Caciques palace , and as many in one or two towns more upon the Hand , which is almost as big as the He of Wight in England . There is planted on the one side of the Caciques house a fair garden , with all herbs growing in it , and at the lower end a well of fresh water , and round about it are trees'set , whereon bombasin cotton grows after this manner : The tops of the trees grow full of cods , out of which the cotton grows , and in the cotton is a seed of the bigness of a peas , and in every codde there are seven or eight of these seeds : and if the cotton be not gathered when it is ripe , then these seeds fallen from it , and spring again . 
 There are also in this garden figtrees which bear continually , also pompions , melons , cucumbers , radishes , rosemary and thyme , with many other herbs and fruits . At the other end of the house there is also another orchard , where grow oranges sweet and sour , limmons , pomegranates and lymes , with diverse other fruits . 
 There is very good pasture ground in this Hand ; and withal many horses , oxen , bullocks , sheep very fat and fair , great store of goats which be very tame , and are used continually to be milked . They have moreover abundance of pigeons , turkeys , and ducks of a marvellous bigness . 
 There was also a very large and great church hard by the Caciques house , whither he caused all the Indians in the Hand to come and hear mass : for he himself was made a Christian when he was married to the Spanish woman before spoken of , and upon his conversion he caused the rest of his subject's to be Christened . In this church was and high altar with a crucifix , and five bells hanging in the neither end thereof . We burned the church and brought the bells away . 
 316 
 By this time we had haled on ground our admiral , and had made her clean , burned her keel , pitched and tarred her , and had haled her on float again . And in the mean while continually kept watch and ward in the great house both night and day . 
 The second day of June in the morning , by and by after break of day , every one of the watch being gone abroad to seek to fetch in victuals , some one way , some another , some for hens , some for sheep , some for goats , upon the sudden there came down upon us and hundred Spanish soldiers with muskets and and ensign , which were landed on the other side of the Hand that night , and all the Indians of the Hand with them , every one with weapons and their baggage after them : which was by means of a Negro , whose name was Emmanuel , which fled from us at our first landing there . Thus being taken at advantage we had the worst : for our company was not passed sixteene or twentie ; whereof they had slain one or two before they were come to the houses : yet we skirmished with them and hour and and half : ’ at the last being soar overcharged with multitudes , we were driven down from the hill to the waters side , and there kept them play a while , until in the end Zacharie Saxie , who with his halberd had kept the way of the hill , and slain a couple of them , as he breathed himself being somewhat tired , had and honourable death and a short : for a shot struck him to the heart : who feeling himself mortally wounded cried to God for mercy , and fell down presently dead . But soon after the enemy was driven somewhat to retire from the banks side to the green : and in the end our boat came and carried as many of our men away as could go in her , which was in hazard of sinking while they hastened into it : And one of our men whose name was Robert Maddocke was shot through the head with his own piece , being a snaphance , as he was hasting into the boat . But foure of us were left behind which the boat could not carry : to wit , my self 
 317 
 A.D. 
 1587. 
 The second graving of their shift . 
 The first skirmish with the Spaniards . 
 Z . acharie Saxie slain honorably . 
 Robert Maddock slain with his own piece . 
 Francis Pretty , Thomas Andrewes , Steven Gunner , and Richard Rose : which had our shot ready and retired our selves unto a cliff , until the boat came again , which was presently after they had carried the rest 46 Spaniards aboard . There were sixe and fortie of the enemies ‘ slaine^0 ™ s^a^ne by us , whereof they had dragged some into ane ' bushes , and some into old houses , which we found 
 afterwards . we lost twelve men in manner following . 
 1 Zacharie Saxie , 
 2 Neales Johnson , 
 3 William Geirgifield , 
 4 Nicolas Hendie , 
 5 Henry Cooper , 
 k Slain by the enemy . 
 1 Robert Maddocke , killed with his piece . 
 2 Henry Mawdly , burned . 
 1 Edward the gunners man , 1 drowned 
 2 Ambrose the musician , J ' 
 1 Walter Tilliard , 
 2 Edward Smith , > taken prisoners . 
 3 Henry Aselye , J 
 The self same day being the second of June , we went The second on shore again with seventie men , and had a fresh skir-skirmish with mjsh with the enemies , and drave them to retire , being and tO e pamar s . hundred Spaniards serving with muskets , and two hundred Indians with bows , arrows and darts . This done , The chief set fire on the town and burned it to the ground , tbw-ntnPUna having in it to the number of three hundred houses : ‘ and shortly after made havoc of their fields , orchards and gardens , and burned foure great ships more which were in building on the stocks . 
 The third of June the Content which was our viceadmiral was haled on ground , to grave at the same place in despite of the Spaniards : and also our pinnace TO , . , which the Spaniards had burned , was new trimmed . etPmtk e fift day of June we departed out of the road 25 of May . of Puna , where we had remained eleven days , and 318 
 turned up for a place which is called Rio dolce , where we watered : at which place also we sunk our rear-admiral called The Hugh Gallant for want of men , The Hugh being a bark of fortie tons . arkeofo 
 The tenth day of the same month we set the Indians on shore , which we had taken before in a balsam as we were coming into the road of Puna . 
 The eleventh day we departed from the said Rio Rio dolce . dolce . 
 The twelft of June we doubled the Equinoctial line , and continued our course Northward all that month . 
 The first of Julie we had sighed of the coast of Nueva Espanna , being foure leagues distant from land in the latitude of ten degrees to the Northward of the line . 
 The ninth of Julie we took a new ship of the burden of 120 tons , wherein was one Michael Sancius , whom our general took to serve his turn to water along the coast : for he was one of the best coasters in the South sea . This Michael Sancius was a Pro - Michael vensal , born in Marseils , and was the first man that Ancius a told us news of the great ship called The Santa arst ian ' Anna , which we afterwards took coming from the Philippinas . 
 There were sixe men more in this new ship : we A great new took her sails , her ropes , and firewood , to serve our burned . turns , set her on fire , and kept the men . 
 The tenth we took another bark which was going The second with advice of us and our ships all along the coast , barheofadvise as Michael Sancius told us : but all the company that 1 ' were in the bark were fled on shore . None of both these ships had any goods in them . For they came both from Sonsonate in the province of Guatimala ; Sonsonate in the new ship , for fear we should have taken her in the road , and the bark , to carry news of us along ' the coast ; which bark also we set on fire . Abarkeburnt . 
 The 26 day of July we came to and anchor at 10 fathoms in the river of Copalita , where we made account The river of to water . And the same night we departed with 30 
 319 
 Aguatulco in 15 degrees and 40 minutes Northward . 
 A barkebumt . 
 Anile . 
 Cacoas . 
 Aguatulco a town of 100 houses burned . 
 Cacaos go for money in Nueva Espanna . 
 Our general entered two miles into the main land with 30 men . 
 men in the pinnace , and rowed to Aguatulco , which is but two leagues from the aforesaid river ; and stands in 15 degrees 40 minutes to the Northward of the Equinoctial line . 
 The 27 in the morning by the break of day we came into the road of Aguatulco , where we found a bark of 50 tons , which was come from Sonsonate laden with cacaos and anile which they had there landed : and the men were all fled on shore . we landed there , and burned their town , with the church and customhouse which was very fair and large : in which house were 600 bags of anile to die cloth ; every bag whereof was worth 40 crowns , and 400 bags of cacaos : every bag whereof is worth ten crowns . These cacaos go among them for meat and money . For 150 of them are in valve one rial of plate in ready payment . They are very like unto and almond , but are nothing so pleasant in taste : they eat them , and make drink of them . This the owner of the ship told us . I found in this town before we burned it , a flasket full of boxes of balm . After we had spoiled and burned the town , wherein there were some hundred houses , the owner of the ship came down out of the hills with a flag of truce unto us , which before with the rest of all the townsmen was run away at our first coming ; and at length came aboard our pinnace upon Captain Havers word of safe return . We carried him to the river of Copalita where our ships road : and when he came to our general , he caused him to be set on shore in safety the same night , because he came upon the captains word . 
 The 28 day we set sail from Copalita , because the sea was so great there , that we could not fill water , and ran the same night into the road of Aguatulco . 
 The 29 our general landed and went on shore with thirtie men two miles into the woods , where we took a Mestizo , whose name was Michael the Truxillo , who was customer of that town , and we found with him two chambers full of his stufie : we brought him 
 320 
 and his stuff aboard . And whereas I say he was a Mestizo , it is to be understood that a Mestizo is one which hath a Spaniard to his father and and Indian to his mother . 
 The second day of August , we had watered , and examined the said Mestizo , and set him on shore again and departed from the port of Aguatulco the same night , which stands as I said before in 15 degrees and 40 minutes to the Northward of the line . 
 Here we overslipped the haven of Acapulco , from whence the ships are set forth for the Philippinas . 
 The foure and twentieth day of August , our general with 30 of us went with the pinnace unto and haven called Puerto de Natividad , where we had intelligence by Michael Sancius that there should be a pinnace , but before we could get thither the said pinnace was gone to fish for pearls 12 leagues farther , as we were informed by certain Indians which we found there . We took a mullato in this place , in his bed , which was sent with letters of advice concerning us along the coast , of Nueva Galicia , whose horse we killed , took his letters , left him behind , set fire on the houses , and burned two new ships of 200 tons the piece , which were in building there on the stocks , and came aboard of our ships again . 
 The sixe and twentie day of August , we came into the bay of S. Iago , where we watered at a fresh River , along which river many plantans are growing : here is great abundance of fresh fish . Here also certain of our 
 Ourdeparture from Aguatulco . 
 Puerto de Natividad in 19 degrees . 
 Thethirdposte of advice taken . 
 Puerto de 
 Natividad burned . 
 Two new ships burned . 
 The river of Sant Iago . 
 company dragged for pearls and caught some quantity . Pearls taken . 
 The second of September we departed from Sant Iago at foure of the clock in the evening . This bay of Sant Iago stands in nineteene degrees and eighteene minutes to the Northward of the line . 
 The 3 of September we arrived in a little bay a league to the Westward ofF Port de Natividad called Malacca , & a3 °f which is a very good place to ride in : and the same day Malacca . about twelve of the clock our general landed with 
 XI 
 321 
 The Isle of Sant Andrew . 
 I guanos good meat . 
 Massatlan in 2 3 degrees , and and half . 
 thirtie men or there about , and went up to a town of Indians which was two leagues from the road , which town is called Acatlan : there were in it about 20 or 30 houses and a Church , which we defaced and came aboard again the same night . All the people were fled out of the town at the sighed of us . 
 The fourth of September , we departed from the road of Malacca , and sailed along the coast . 
 The 8 we came to the road of Chaccalla , in which bay there are two little houses by the waters side . This bay is 18 leagues from the Cape de los Corrientes . 
 The 9 in the morning our general sent up Captain Havers with fortie men of us before day , and Michael Sancius being our guide , we went unto a place about two leagues up into the country in a most villainous desert path through the woods and wilderness : and in the end we came to a place where we took three householders with their wives and children and some Indians , one carpenter which was a Spaniard , and a Portugall , we bound them all and made them to come to the sea side with us . 
 Our general made their wives to fetch us Plantans , Lymmons , and Oranges , Pineapples and other fruits whereof they had abundance , and so let their husbands depart , except Sembrano the Spanish Carpenter , and Diego the Portugal ; and the tenth day we departed the road . 
 The twelfth day we arrived at a little Island called the Isle of Sant Andrewe , on which there is great store of fowl and wood : where we dried and salted as many of the fowls as we thought good : we also killed there abundance of seals , and Iguanos which are a kind of Serpents , with foure feet , and a long sharp tail , strange to them which have not seen them ; but they are very good meat . we rid here until the seventeenth day , at which time we departed . 
 The 24 day we arrived in the road of Massatlan , which stands in 23 degrees just under the Tropicke 322 
 of Cancer : It is a very great river within , but it is barred at the mouth : and upon the North side of the bar without , is good fresh water : but there is very evil filling of it ; because at a low water it is shoaled half a mile off the shore . There is great store of fresh fish in that bay : and good fruits up into the country , whereof we had some , though not without danger . 
 The seven and twentieth day of September , we departed from the road of Massatlan and ran to and island is ! aneia which is a league to the Northward the said Massatlan , N°rth-where we trimmed our ships and new built our Massatlan . pinnace : and there is a little island a quarter of a league from it , on which are seals : where a Spanish prisoner , whose name was Domingo , being sent to wash shirts with one of our men to keep him , made a escape , & swam to the main , which was and English mile distant : at which place we had seen 30 or 40 Spaniards & Indians , which were horsemen , and kept watch there , which came from a town called Chiametla , which was 11 leagues up into the country , as Michael Sancius told us . We found upon the island where we trimmed our pinnace , fresh water by the assistance of God in that our great need by digging two or three foot deep in the sand , where no water nor sign of water was before to be perceived . Otherwise we had gone back 20 or 30 leagues to water : which might have be occasion that we might have missed our prey we had long waited for . But God raised one Flores a Spaniard , which was also a prisoner with us , to make a motion to dig in the sands . Now our general having had experience ones before of the like , commanded to put his motion in practice , and in digging three foot deep we found very good and fresh water . So we watered our ships , and might have filled a thousand tons more , if we had would . 
 We stayed in this island until the 9 day of October , at which time we departed at night for the cape of S. Lucar , which is on the West side of the point of California . 
 323 
 The escape of one Domingo , a Spaniard . 
 Fresh water at 2 or 3foote deep in the sand . 
 The cape of S. The 14 of October we fell with the cape of S. Lucar , 
 ucar on the which cape is very like the Needles at the isle of Wight ; 
 fimia , and within the said cape is a great bay called by the 
 Aguada Spaniards Aguada Segura : into which bay falls a fair 
 Se&ira . fresh river , about which many Indians use to keep : 
 we watered in the river and lay off and on from the said cape of S. Lucar until the fourth of November , and had the winds hanging still Westerly . 
 The 4 of November the Desire and the Content , wherein were the number of Englishmen 
 only living , beating up and down upon the headland California in of California , which stands in 23 degrees and f to Northward , between seven and 8 of the clock in ’ the morning one of the company of our Admiral which was the trumpeter of the ship going up into the top espied a sail bearing in from the sea with the cape , whereupon he cried out with no small joy to himself and the whole company , A sail , A sail , with which cheerful word the master of the ship and diverse others of the company went also up into the main top , who perceiving the speech to be very true gave information unto our general of these happy news , who was no less glad then the cause required : whereupon he gave in charge presently unto the whole company to put all things in readiness , which being performed we gave them chase some 3 or 4 hours , standing with The fight our best advantage and working for the wind . In the 
 reats " Anna afternoon we got UP unto them , giving them the broad ^andus . nM s^e our great ordinance and a volee of small shot , and presently laid the ship aboard , whereof the king of Spaine was owner , which was Admiral of the south sea , called the S. Anna , & thought to be 700 tons in burden . Now as we were ready on their ships side to enter her , being not passed 50 or 60 men at the uttermost in our ship , we perceived that the Captain of the said ship had made fights before and after , and laid their sails close on their poop , their mid ship , with their before castle , and having not one man to be seen , stood 324 
 close under their fights , with lances , javelins , rapiers , & targets , & and innumerable sort of great stones , which they threw overboard upon our heads and into our ship so fast and being so many of them , that they put us ofF the ship again , with the loss of 2 of our men which were slain , & with the hurting of 4 or 5. 
 But for all this we new trimmed our sails , and fitted The second every man his furniture , and gave them a fresh encounter encounter-with our great ordinance and also with our small shot , raking them through and through , to the killing and maiming of many of their men . Their Captain still like a valiant man with his company stood very stoutly unto his close fights , not yielding as yet : Our General The third encouraging his men a fresh with the whole noise of ennunter-trumpets gave them the third encounter with our great ordinance and all our small shot to the great discomforting of our enemies raking them through in diverse places , killing and spoiling many of their men . They being thus discomforted and spoiled , and their ship being in hazard of sinking by reason of the great shot which were made , whereof some were under water , within 
 5 or 6 hours fight set out a flag of truce and The greats . parled for mercy , desiring our general to save their lives and to take their goods , and that they would presently yield . Our general of his goodness promised them mercy , and willed them to strike their sails , and to hoist out their boat and to come aboard : which news they were full glad to hear of , and presently struck their sails , hoised their boat out , and one of their chief merchants came aboard unto our general : and falling down upon his knees , offered to have kissed our Generals feet , and craved mercy : our General most graciously pardoned both him and the rest upon promise of their true dealing with him and his company concerning such riches as were in the ship : and sent for the Captain and their Pilot , who at their coming used the like duty and reverence as the former did . 
 The general of his great mercy & humanity , promised 
 325 
 One hundreth and two and twenty thousand pezos of gold . 
 A pezo is 8x . 
 The merchandise in the great ship . 
 The 
 Spaniardes set on shore to the number of 190. 
 Mutiny against the general . 
 their lives and good usage . The said Captain and Pilot presently certified the general what goods they had within board , to wit , and hundreth and 22 thousand pezos of gold : and the rest of the riches that the ship was laden with , was in silks , sattens , damasks , with musk & diverse other merchandise , and great store of all manner of victuals with the choice of many conserves of all sorts for to eat , and of sundry sorts of very good wines . These things being made known to the general by the aforesaid Captain and Pilot , they were commanded to stay aboard the Desire , and on the 6 day of November following we went into and harbour which is called by the Spaniards , Aguada Segura , or Puerto Seguro . 
 Here the whole company of the Spaniardes , both of men and women to the number of 190 persons were set on shore : where they had a fair river of fresh water , with great store of fresh fish , foul , and wood , and also many hares and conies upon the main land . Our generail also gave them great store of victuals , of garuansos , peason , and some wine . Also they had all the sails of their ship to make them tents on shore , with licence to take such store of planks as should be sufficient to make them a bark . Then we fell to hoisting in of our goods , sharing of the treasure , and allotting to every man his portion . In division whereof the eight of this month , many of the company fell into a mutiny against our general , especially those which were in the Content , which nevertheless were after a sort pacified for the time . 
 On the 17 day of November , which is the day of the happy Coronation of her Majesty , our general commanded all his ordinance to be shot off , with the small shot both in his own ship where himself went , and also in the Content , which was our Viceadmiral . This being done , the same night we had many fireworks and more ordinance discharged , to the great admiration of all the Spaniards which were there : for the most part of them had never seen the like before . 
 326 
 This ended , our general discharged the Captain , gave him a royal reward , with provision for his defence against the Indians and his company , both of swords , targets , pieces , shot and powder to his great contentment : but before his departure , he took out of this great ship two young lads born in Japon , which could both wright and read their own language , the eldest being about 20 years old was nam Christopher , the other was called Cosmus , about 17 years of age , both of very good capacity . He took also with him out of their ship , 3 boys born in the isles of Manilla , the one about 15 , the other about 13 , and the youngest about 9 years old . The name of the eldest was Alphonso , the second Anthony de Dasi , the third remains with the right honourable the Countess of Essex . He also took from them , one Nicholas Roderigo a Portugall , who hath not only be in Canton and other parts of China , but also in the islands of Japon being a country most rich in silver mines , and hath also be in the Philippinas . 
 He took also from them a Spaniard whose name was Thomas the Ersola , which was a very good Pilot from Acapulco and the coast of Nueva Espanna unto the islands of Ladrones , where the Spaniardes do put in to water , sailing between Acapulco and the Philippinas : in which isles of Ladrones , they find fresh water , plantans , and potato roots : howbeit the people be very rude and heathens . The 19 day of November aforesaid , about 3 of the clock in the afternoon , our general caused the kings ship to be set on fire , which having to the quantity of 500 tons of goods in her we saw burned unto the water , and then gave them a piece of ordinance and set sail joyfully homewards towards England with a fair wind , which by this time was come about to Eastnortheast : and night growing near , we left the Content a stern of us , which was not as yet come out of the road . And here thinking she would have overtaken us , we lost her 
 327 
 A.D. 
 1587. 
 Two boys of Japan . 
 Three boys of Manilla . 
 Nicolas Rod-erigp , a Portugal . 
 A Spanish Pilot . 
 Acapulco is the haven whence they set forth to the Philippinas . 
 Good watering at the Ladrones . 
 The wind at Eastnortheast . The Content whereof Steven Hare was master , left behind in the road . 
 company and never saw her after . we were say ling from this haven of Aguada Segura in California unto the isles of Ladrones the rest of November , and all December , and so forth until the 3 of Januarie 1588 , with a fair wind for the space 45 days : and we esteemed it to be between 17 and 18 hundred leagues . The 3 day of January by sixe of the clock in the morning we had sighed of one of the islands of Ladrones The island of called the island of Guana , standing in 13 degrees Ih^I^adrma towards North , and sailing with a gentle gale before In 13 degrees wmde , by i or 2 of the clock in the afternoon , andtwothirds . vree were come up within 2 leagues of the island , where Commodities we met with 60 or 70 sails of canoas full of Savages , adrone^ w^° came to sea unto us ’ and brought with them 
 ‘ in their boats plantans , cocos , potato roots , and fresh 
 fish , which they had caught at sea , and held them up unto us for to truck or exchange with us ; which when we perceived , we made fast little pieces of old iron upon small cords and fishing lines , and so vered the iron unto their canoas , and they caught hold of them and took ofF the iron , and in exchange of it they would make fast unto the same line either a potato root , or a bundle of plantans , which we haled in : and thus our company exchanged with them until they had satisfied themselves with as much as did content them : yet we could not be rid of them . For afterwards they were so thick about the ship , that it stemmed & brake 1 or 2 of their canoas : but the men saved themselves being in every canoa 4 , 6 , or 8 persons all naked & excellent The colour and swimmers and diverse . They are of a tawny colour & 5people of the marvellous fat , & bigger ordinarily of stature then the 
 isles of La - most part of our men in England , wearing their hair 
 drones . marvelous long ; yet some of them have it made up 
 and tied with a knot on the crown , & some with 2 ^ knots , much like unto their images which we saw them etr images . carvej jn wood , anj standing in the head of their Artificial boats like unto the images of the devil . Their canoas 
 eamas - were as artificially made as any that ever we had seen : 
 328 
 considering they were made and contrived without any edge-tool . They are not above half a yard in breadth and in length some seven or eight yards , and their heads and sternes are both alike , they are made out with rafts of canes and redes on the starrebordside , with mast and sail : their sail is made of mats of sedges , square or triangle wise : and they sail as well right against the wind , as before the wind : These Savages followed us so long , that we could not be rid of them : until in the end our General commanded some half dozen harquebusses to be made ready ; and himself struck one of them and the rest shot at them : but they were so yare and nimble , that we could not discern whither they were killed or no , because they could fallen backward into the sea and prevent us by diving . 
 The 14 day of January lying at hull with our ship all the middle watch , from 12 at night until foure in the morning , by the break of day we fell with and headland of the isles of the Philippinas , which is called Cabo deal Spirito Santo which is of very great bigness and length , high land in the midst of it , and very low land as the Cape lies East and West , trending far into the sea to the westward . This cape or island is distant from the isle of Guana , one of the Ladrones , 310 leagues . We were in sailing of this course eleven days with skant winds and some foul weather , bearing no sail two or three nights . This island stands in 13 degrees , and is a place much peopled with heathen people , and all woody through the whole land : and it is short of the chiefest island of the Philippinas called Manilla about 60 leagues . Manilla is well planted and inhabited with Spaniards to the number of sixe or seven hundred persons : which dwell in a town unwalled , which hath 3 or 4 small block houses , part made of wood , and part of stone being indeed of no great strength : they have one or two small Galleys belong to the town . It is a very rich place of gold and many other commodities ; and they have yearly traffic from Acapulco in Nueva 
 Canoas sailing right against the wind . 
 The nimbleness of the people of the Ladrones . 
 Cabo del Spirito Santo , one of the isles of the Philippinas in 13 degrees . 
 From Guana and isle of The Ladrones to Cabo deal Spirito Santo is $10 leagues . 
 The description of the town of Manilla . 
 Trade from Acapulco to Manilla . 
 329 
 Silver exchanged weight for weight for gold . 
 The island of Capul at which our men stayed 9 days . 
 One of the chiefs governors of the island came aboard us . 
 Espanna , and also 20 or 30 ships from China and from the Sanguelos , which bring them many sorts of merchandise . The merchants of China and the Sanguelos are part Moors and part heathen people . They bring great store of gold with them , which they traffic and exchange for silver , and give weight for weight . These Sanguelos are men of marvelous capacity in devising and making all manner of things , especially in all handy crafts and sciences : and every one is so expert , perfect , and skilful in his faculty , as few or no Christians are able to go beyond them in that which they take in hand . For drawing & embroidering upon satin , silck , or lawn , either beast , fowl , fish or worm , for liveliness and perfectness , both in silk , silver , gold , & pearl , they excel . Also the 14 day at night we entered the straights between the island of Luzon , & the island of Camlaia . 
 The fifteenth of January we fell with and island called Capul , and had betwixt the said island and another island but and narrow passage , and a marvelous rippling of a very great tIED with a ledge of rocks lying off the point of the island of Capul : and no danger but water enough a fair breadth off : and within the point a fair bay and a very good harbour in foure fathoms water hard aboard the shore within a cables length . About 10 of the clock in the morning we came to and anchor . 
 Our ship was no sooner come to and anchor , but presently there came a canoa rowing aboard us , wherein was one of the chief Caciques of the island whereof there be seven , who supposing that we were Spaniardes , brought us potato roots , which they call camotas , and green cocos , in exchange whereof we gave his company pieces of linen to the quantity of a yard for foure Cocos , and as much linen for a basket of potato roots of a quart in quantity ; which roots are very good meat , and excellent sweet either roasted or boiled . 
 This Caciques skin was carved and cut with sundry and many strikes and devises all over his body . We 330 
 CANDISH’S CIRCUMNAVIGATION a.d. 1588. kept him still aboard and caused him to send those men which brought him aboard back to the island to cause the rest of the principals to come aboard : who were no sooner gone on shore , but presently the people of the island came down with their cocos and potato roots , and the rest of the principals likewise came aboard and brought with them hens and hogs : Hens and and they used the same order with us which they do with the Spaniardes . For they took for every hog ( which they call Balboye ) eight rials of plate , and for every hen ne or cock one riall of plate . Thus we road at anchor all that day , doing nothing but buying roots , cocos , hens , hogs , and such things as they brought , refreshing our selves marvellously well . 
 The same day at night being the fifteenth of January 1588 , Nicolas Roderigo the Portugal , whom we took out of the great Santa Anna at the Cape of California , desired , to speak with our General in secret : which when our General understood , he sent for him , & asked him what he had to say unto him . The Portugal made him this answer , that although he had offended his worship heretofore , yet now he had vowed his faith and true service unto him , and in respect thereof he neither could nor would conceal such treason as was in working against him and his company : and that was this . That the Spaniard which was taken out of The treason of the great sant Anne for a Pilot , whose name was the Spanish Thomas de Ersola , had written a letter , and secretly sealed it and locked it up in his chest , meaning to The copy of convey it by the inhabitants of this island to Manilla , the Spanish the contents whereof were : That there had be two Pistes letter English ships along the coast of Chili , Peru , Nueva Espanna , and Nueva Galicia , and that they had taken Manilla , many ships and merchandise in them , and burned which was diverse towns , and spoiled all that ever they could come fiun^in unto , and that they had taken the kings ship which came from Manilla and all his treasure , with all the Timothy Shot-marchandize that was therein ; and had set all the tun . 
 331 
 people on shore , taking himself away perforce . Therefore he willed them that they should make strong their bulwarks with their two Galleys , and all such provision as they could possibly make . He farther signified , Capul adjoin - that we were riding at and island called Capul , which was at the end of the island of Manilla , being but Manilla . one ship with small force in it , and that the other ship , as he supposed , was gone for the Northwest passage , standing in 55 degrees : and that if they could use any means to surprise us being there at and anchor , they should dispatch it : for our force was but small , and our men but weak , and that the place where we The north - road was but 50 leagues from them . Otherwise if west passage . jet us escape within few years they must make from Manilla . account to have their town besieged and sacked with and army of English . This information being given , our general called for him , and charged him with these things , which at the first he utterly denied : but in the end , the matter being made manifest and known of certainty by especial trial and proofs , the next morn-The Spanish ing our General willed that he should be hanged : ™ °*£ansf : worser which was accordingly performed the 16 of January . treachery . We road for the space of nine days about this island of Capul , where we had diverse kinds of fresh victuals , with excellent fresh water in every bay , and great store The manner of of wood . The people of this island go almost all naked the people of anj are tawny of colour . The men wear only a a ? u ‘ stroope about their wastes , of some kind of linen of 
 their own weaving , which is made of plantan leaves , and another stroope coming from their back under their twists , which covereth their privy parts , and is made fast to their girdles at their navels . 
 A strange These people use a strange kind of order among them , tJun& which is this . Every man and manchild among them hath a nail of Tin thrust quite through the head of his privy part , being split in the lower end and riveted , and on the head of the nail is as it were a crown : which is driven through their privities when 332 
 they be young , and the place grows up again , without any great pain to the child : and they take this nail out and in , as occasion serves : and for the truth thereof we our selves have taken one of these nails from a son of one of the kings which was of the age of 10 years , who did wear the same in his privy member . 
 This custom was granted at the request of the women of the country , who finding their men to be given to the fowl sin of Sodomy , desired some remedy against that mischief , and obtained this before nam of the magistrates . Moreover all the males are circumcised , having the foreskin of their flesh cut away . These people wholly worship the devil , and often times have conference with him , which appears unto them in most ugly and monstrous shape . 
 On the 23 day of January , our general M. Thomas Candish caused all the principals of this island , and of and hundred islands more , which he had made to pay tribute unto him ( which tribute was in hogs , hens , potatoes and cocos , ) to appear before him , and made himself and his company known unto them , that they were English men , and enemies to the Spaniardes : and thereupon spread his Ensign and sounded up the drums , which they much marveled at : to conclude , they promised both themselves and all the islands thereabouts to aid him , whensoever he should come again to overcome the Spaniardes . Also our general gave them , in token that we were enemies to the Spaniardes , money back again for all their tribute which they had paid : which they took marvelous friendly , and rowed about our ship to show us pleasure marvelous swiftly : at the last our generail caused a saker to be shot offj whereat they wondered , and with great contentment took their leaves of us . 
 Circumcision . 
 The inhabitants of Capul with all the islands adjoining , promise to aid the English against the Spaniards . 
 The next day being the twentie foure of Januarie , Our^P^tnre we set sail about sixe of the clock in the morning , j^d of and ran along the coast of the island of Manilla , shaping Capul . 
 333 
 Marks of shallow water . 
 A Balsa is a great canoa . 
 A Spaniard of Manilla taken . 
 our course Northwest between the isle of Manilla , and the isle of Masbat . 
 The 28 day in the morning about 7 of the clock , riding at and anchor betwixt 2 islands , we spied a Frigate under her two coarses , coming out between 2 other islands , which as we imagined came from Manilla , sailing close aboard the shore along the main island of Panama : we chased this frigate along the shore , & got very fast upon it , until in the end we came so near that it stood in to the shore close by a wind , until she was becalmed and was driven to stricke her sail , and banked up with her oars : whereupon we came unto and anchor with our ship , a league and and half from the place where the Frigate rowed in ; and manned our boat with half a dozen shot and as many men with swords , which did row the boat : thus we made after the Frigate which had hoised sail and ran into a river , which we could not find . But as we rowed along the shore , our boat came into very shallow water , where many wears and sticks were set up in diverse places in the sea , from whence 2 or 3 canoas came forth , whereof one made somewhat near unto us , with 3 or 4 Indians in it : we called unto them , but they would not come nearer unto us , but rowed from us : whom we durst not follow too far from fear of bringing our selves to much to the leewarde of our ship . Here , as we looked about us , we espied another Balsa or canoa of a great bigness which they which were in her , did set along as we do usually set a barge with long staves or poles , which was built up with great canes , and below hard by the water made to row with oars ; wherein were about 5 or 6 Indians and one Spaniard : now as we were come almost at the Balsa , we ran a ground with our boat ; but one or two of our men leapt overboard and freed it again presently , and keeping thwart her head , we laid her aboard and took in to us the Spaniard , but the Indians leapt into the sea and dived and rose far off again from us . Presently upon the taking of this 
 334 
 CANDISH’S CIRCUMNAVIGATION canoa , there showed upon the sand a band of soldiers marching with and ensign having a read Cross like the flag of England , which were about 50 or 60 Spaniardes , which were lately come from Manilla to that town which is called Ragaun in a Bark to fetch a new ship of the kings , which was building in a river within the bay , and stayed there but for certain irons that did serve for the rudder of the said ship , which they looked for every day . 
 This band of men shot at us from the shore with their muskets , but hit none of us , and we shot at them again : they also manned a Frigate and sent it out after our boat to have taken us , but we with sail and oars went from them : and when they perceived that they could not fetch us , but that they must come within danger of the ordinance of our ship , they stood in with the shore again and landed their men , and presently sent their Frigate about the point , but whither we knew not . So we came aboard with this one Spaniard , which was neither soldier nor sailor , but one that was come among the rest from Manilla , and had be in the hospital there a long time before , and was a very simple soul , and such a one as could answer to very little that he was asked , concerning the state of the country . Here we road at anchor all that night , and perceived that the Spaniards had dispersed their band into 2 or 3 parts , and kept great watch in several steeds with fires and shooting off their pieces . This island hath much plain ground in it in many places , and many fair and straight trees do grow upon it , fit for to make excellent good masts for all sorts of ships . There are also mines of very fine gold in it which are in the custody of the Indians . And to the Southward of this place , there is another very great island , which is not subdued by the Spaniards , nor any other nation . The people which inhabit it are all Negroes ; and the island is called the island of Negroes : and is almost as big as England , standing in 9 degrees : the most part of it seems to 335 
 A.D. 
 1588. 
 50 or 60 Spaniards show themselves . 
 A new ship of the kings in building . 
 They manned out a Frigate after us . 
 And hospitali in Manilla . 
 Mines ofvery fine gild in the Island of Panama . 
 The island oj Negros in < ) degrees . 
 Their departure from the Philippinas . 
 Batochina . 
 11 or 12 small islands in 3 degrees 10 min. to the Southward . 
 Islands in 4 degrees southward of the dine . 
 The death of eaptaine Havers . 
 . 
 be very low land , and by all likelihood is very fruitful . 
 The 29 day of January about sixe of the clock in the morning we set sail , sending our boat before until it was two of the clock in the afternoon , passing all this time as it were through a straight betwixt the said 2 islands of Panama , and the island of Negroes , and about 16 leagues off we espied a fair opening , trending Southwest and by South , at which time our boat came aboard , and our general sent commendations to the Spanish captain which we came from the evening before by the Spaniard which we took , and willed him to provide good store of gold : for he meant for to see him with his company at Manilla within few years , and that he did but want a bigger boat to have landed his men , or else he would have seen him then : and so caused him to be set on shore . 
 The 8 day of February by 8 of the clock in the morning we espied and island near Gilolo , called Batochina , which stands in one degree from the Equinoctial line Northward . 
 The 14 day of February we fell with n or 12 very small islands , lying very low and flat , full of trees , and passed by some islands which be sunk and have the dry sands lying in the main sea . These islands near the Malucoes , stand in 3 degrees and 10 min. to the Southward of the line . 
 On the 17 day , one John Gameford a Cooper died , which had be sick of and old disease a long time . The 20 day we fell with certain other islands which had many small islands among them , standing 4 degrees to the Southward of the line . On the 21 day of Februarie , being Ashwednesday Captain Havers died of a most fervent and pestilent ague , which held him furiously some 7 or 8 days , to the no small grief of our general and of all the rest of the company , who caused two Falcons and one Sacre to be shot off , with all the small shot in the ship , who after he was shrouded 336 
 in a sheet and a prayer said , was heved over board with great lamentation of us all . ' Moreover , presently after his death my self with diverse others in the ship fell marvelously sick , and so continued in very great pain for the space of three weeks or a month by reason of the extreme heat and untemperatnesse of the Climate . 
 The first day of March having passed through the Straights of Java minor and Java major , we came to and anchor under the Southwest parts of Java major : where we espied certain of the people which were fishing by the sea side in a bay which was under the island . Then our general taking into the shipboat certain of his company , and a Negro which could speak the Morisco tongue , which he had taken out of the great S. Anna , made towards those fishers , which having espied our boat ran on shore into the wood for fear of our men : but our general caused his Negro to call unto them : who no sooner herd him call , but presently one of them came out to the shore side and made answer . Our general by the Negro inquired of him for fresh water , which they found , and caused the fisher to go to the King and to certify him of a ship that was come to have traffic for victuals , and for diamonds , pearls , or any other rich jewels that he had : for which he should have either gold or other merchandise in exchange . The fisher answered that we should have all manner of victuals that we would request . Thus the boat came aboard again . Within a while after we went about to furnish our ship thoroughly with wood and water . 
 About the eighth of March two or three Canoas came from the town unto us with eggs , hens , fresh fish , oranges , and lymes , and brought word we should have had victuals more plentifully , but that they were so far to be brought to us where we rid . Which when our general herd he weighed anchor and stood in nearer for the town : and as we were under sail we met with one of the kings canoas coming toward us : whereupon we shook the ship in the wind and 
 xi 337 Y 
 March 1588. 
 Ourarrivalat Java major . 
 The Morisco or , Arabian tongiie common in Java . 
 Cloves , pepper , sugar , and many other commodities in Java major . 
 stayed for the canoa until it came aboard of us , and stood into the bay which was hard by and came to and anchor . In this canoa was the Kings Secretary , who had on his head a piece of died linen cloth folded up like a Turkes Tuliban : he was all naked saving about his waste , his breast was carved with the broad arrow upon it : he went barefooted : he had and interpretor with him , which was a Mestizo , that is , half and Indian and half a Portugall , who could speak very good Portugese . This Secretary signified unto our general that he had brought him and hog , hens , eggs , fresh fish , sugar-canes and wine : ( which wine was as strong as any aquavitae , and as clear as any rock water : ) he told him farther that he would bring victuals so sufficiently for him , as he and his company would request , and that within the space of foure days . Our general used him singularly well , banqueted him most royally with the choice of many and sundry conserves , wines both sweet and other , and caused his Musicians to make him music . This done our general told him that he and his company were Englishmen ; and that we had be at China and had had traffic there with them , and that we were come thither to discover , and purposed to go to Malaca . The people of Java told our general that there were certain Portugals in the island which lay there as Factors continually to traffic with them , to buy Negroes , cloves , pepper , sugar , and many other commodities . This Secretary of the King with his interpretor lay one night aboard our ship . The same night , because they lay aboard , in the evening at the setting of the watch , our general commanded every man in the ship to provide his harquebus and his shot , and so with shooting off 40. or 50. small shot and one Sacre , himself set the watch with them . This was no small marveile unto these heathen people , who had not commonly seen any ship so furnished with men and Ordinance . The next morning we dismissed the Secretary and his interpretor with all humanity . 
 338 
 The fourth day after , which was the 12. of March , according to their appointment came the Kings canoas ; but the wind being somewhat skant they could not get aboard that night , but put into a bay under the island until the next day , and presently after the break of day there came to the number of 9. or 10. of the Kings Nine or in . canoas so deeply laden with victuals as they could swim , °fthe with two great live oxen , half a score of wonderful ' great and fat hogs , a number of hens which were alive , drakes , geese , eggs , plantans , sugar canes , sugar in plataeae , cocos , sweet oranges and sour , lymes , great store of wine and aquavitae , salt to season victuals withal , and almost all manner of victuals else , with diverse of the Kings officers which were there . Among all the rest of the people in one of these canoas came two Portugales , Two Portu-which were of middle stature , and men of marvelous in proper personage ; they were each of them in a lose jerkin , and hose , which came down from the waste to the ankle , because of the use of the Country , and partly because it was Lent , and a time for doing of their penance , ( for they account it as a thing of great dislike among these heathens to wear either hose or shoes on their feet : ) they had on each of them a very fair and a white lawn shirt , with falling bans on the same , very decently , only their bore legs excepted . These Portugales were no small joy unto our general and all the rest of our company : For we had not seen any Christian that was our friend of a year and and half before . Our general used and entreated them singularly well , with banquets and music : They told us that they were no less glad to see us , then we to see them , and inquired of the estate of their country , and what was become of DONE Antonio their King , and whither he were Enquiry oj living or no : for that they had not of long time bene Antonie . in Portugal ! , and that the Spaniards had always brought them word that he was dead . Then our general satisfied them in every demand ; Assuring them , that their King was alive , and in England , and had honourable 
 339 
 The wives kill themselves after their husbands death's . 
 A strange order . 
 allowance of our Queen , and that there was war between Spaine and England , and that we were come under the King of Portugall into the South sea , and had warred upon the Spaniards there , and had fired , spoiled and sunk all the ships along the coast that we could meet withal , to the number of eighteene or twentie sails . With this report they were sufficiently satisfied . 
 On the other side they declared unto us the state of the island of Java . First the plentifulness and great choice and store of victuals of all sorts , & of all manner of fruits as before is set down : Then the great and rich merchandise which are there to be had . Then they described the properties and nature of the people as follows . The name of the King of that part of the island was Raja Bolamboam , who was a man had in great majesty and fear among them . The common people may not bargain , fell , or exchange any thing with any other nation without speciali licence from their king : and if any so do , it is present death for him . The King himself is a man of great years , and hath and hundred wives , his son hath fiftie . The custom of the country is , that whensoever the king doth die , they take the body so dead and burn it and preserve the ashes of him , and within five days next after , the wives of the said king so dead , according to the custom and use of their country , every one of them go together to a place appointed , and the chief of the women , which was nearest unto him in account , hath a ball in her hand , and throweth it from her , and to the place where the ball rests , thither they go all , and turn their faces to the Eastward , and every one with a dagger in their hand , ( which dagger they call a Crise , and is as sharp as a razor ) stab themselves to the heart , and with their hands all to bee-bath themselves in their own blood , and falling groveling on their faces so end their days . This thing is as true as it seems to any hearer to be strange . 
 The men of themselves be very politic and subtle , and singularly valiant , being naked men , in any actium 340 
 they undertake , and wonderfully at commandment and fear of their king . For example : if their king command them to undertake any exploit , be it never so dangerous or desperate , they dare not nor will not refuse it , though they die every man in the execution of the same . For he will cut off the heads of every one of them which return alive without bringing of their purpose to pass : which is such a thing among them , as it makes them the most valiant people in all the Southeast parts of the world : for they never fear any death . For being in fight with any nation , if any of them feeleth himself hurt with lance or sword , he will willingly run himself upon the weapon quite through his body to procure his death the more speedily , and in this desperate sort end his days , or overcome his enemy . Moreover , although the men be tawny of colour and go continually naked , yet their women be fair of complexion and go Fare women more appareled . in Java - 
 After they had thus described the state of the island , and the order and fashions of the people ; they told us farther , that if their king DONE Antonio would come DONE Antonio unto them , they would warrant him to have all the Malucos at commandment , beside , China , Sangles , and - tn £ast * the isles of the Philippinas , and that he might be indies . assured to have all the Indians on his side that are in the country . After we had fully contented these Portugals , and the people of Java which brought us victuals in their Canoas , they took their leaves of us with promise of all good entertainment at our returns , and our general gave them three great pieces of Ordinance at their departing . Thus the next day being the 16. They depart of March we set sail towards the Cape of good hope , called by the Portugals Cabo de buena Esperancza on c 
 the Southermost coast of Africa . 
 The rest of March and all the month of April we spent in traversing that mighty and vast Sea , between the isle of Java and the main of Africa , observing the heavens , the Crosiers or South-pole , the other stars , the 
 341 
 fowls , which are marks unto the Sea men of fair weather , foul weather , approaching of lands or islands , the winds , the tempests , the reins & thunders , with the alterations of tides and currents . 
 The 10. day of May we had a storm at the West , and it blew so hard that it was as much as the ship could stir close by under the wind : and the storm continued all that day and all that night . 
 The next day being the 11. of May in the morning one of the company went into the top , and espied land bearing North , and North and by West ofF us , & about noon we espied land to bear West ofF us , which as we did imagine was the cape of Buena Esperanza , whereof indeed we were short some 40. or 50. leagues : and by reason of the skantnesse of the wind we stood along to the Southeast until midnight ; at which time the wind came fair , and we haled along Westward . 
 The 12. and 13. days we were becalmed , and the sky was very hazy and thick until the 14. day at three of the clock in the afternoon , at which time the sky cleared , and we espied the land again which was the cape Cabo Falso , called Cabo Falso , which is short of the Cape de buena Esperanza 40 or 50 leagues . This Cape is very easy to be known . For there are right over it three very high hills standing but a small way one ofF another , and the highest stands in the midst , and the ground is much lower by the seaside . The Cape of Good hope bears West and by South from the said Cabo Falso . 
 The 16. day of May about 4. of the clock in the afternoon the wind came up at East a very stiff gale , which held until it was Saturday with as much wind as ever the ship could go before : at which time by sixe of the clock in the morning we espied the pro-They double montorie or headland , called the Cape de Buena Esperanza , ' bo^^ which is a reasonable high land , & at the Westermost point Speranza . a ^e ofF the main do show two hammocks , the one upon the other , and three other hammocks lying further ofF into the sea , yet low land between and adjoining unto the sea . 
 342 
 This cape of Buena Esperanza is set down and accounted for two thousand leagues from the island of Java in the Portugall sea carts : but it is not so much almost by and hundred and fiftie leagues , as we found by the running of our ship . We were in running of these eighteene hundred and fiftie leagues just nine weeks . 
 The eighth day of June by break of day we fell in sighed of the island of S. Helena , seven or eight leagues short of it , having but a small gale of wind , or almost none at all : insomuch as we could not get into it that day , but stood off and on all that night . 
 The next day being the 9. of June having a pretty easy gale of wind we stood in with the shore , our boat being sent away before to make the harbour ; and about one of the clock in the afternoon we came unto and anchor in 12. fathoms water two or three cables length from the shore , in a very fair and smooth bay under the Northwest side of the island . 
 This island is very high land , and lies in the main sea standing as it were in the midst of the sea between the main land of Africa , and the main of Brasilia and the coast of Guinea : And is in 15. degrees and 48. minutes to the Southward of the Equinoctial line , and is distant from the Cape of Buena Esperanza between 5. and 6. hundreth leagues . 
 The same day about two or three of the clock in the afternoon we went on shore , where we found a marvelous fair & pleasant valley , wherein diverse handsome buildings and houses were set up , and especially one which was a Church , which was tiled & whited on the outside very fair , and made with a porch , and within the Church at the upper end was set and altar , whereon stood a very large table set in a frame having in it the picture of our Saviour Christ upon the Cross and the image of our Lady praying , with diverse other histories curiously painted in the same . The sides of the Church were all hanged with stained clothes having many devises drawn in them . 
 A.D. 
 1588. 
 From Java to the Cape of Bona Speranda it but 1850. leagues . 
 June 1588. 
 They anchor at the island ofS . Helena the tO ) . of June . 
 8. Helena is in the latitude of 15. degrees 48. min. to the Southward . 
 343 
 There are two houses adjoining to the Church , on each side one , which serve for kitchens to dress meat in , with necessary rooms and houses of office : the coverings of the said houses are made flat , whereon is planted a very fair vine , and through both the said houses runneth a very good and wholesome stream of fresh water . 
 There is also right over against the said Church a fair causey made up with stones reaching unto a valley by the seaside , in which valley is planted a garden , wherein grow great store of pompions and melons : And upon the said causey is a frame erected whereon hang two bells' wherewith they ring to Mass ; and hard unto it is a Cross set up , which is squared , framed and made very artificially of free stone , whereon is carved in ciphers what time it was built , which was in the year of our Lord 1571. 
 This valley is the fairest and largest low plot in all the island , and it is marvelous sweet and pleasant , and planted in every place either with fruit trees , or with herbs . There are fig trees , which bear fruit continually , & marvelous plentifully : for on every tree you shall have blossoms , green figs , and ripe figs , all at ones : and it is so all the year long : the reason is that the island Thegreatstore stands so near the Sun . There be also great store of diverse of lymon trees , orange trees , pomegranate trees , pomecitron trees , date trees , which bear fruit as the fig trees do , and are planted carefully and very artificially with very pleasant walks under and between them , and the said walks be overshadowed with the leaves of the trees : and in every void place is planted parceley , sorell , basil , fenell , annis seed , mustard seed , radishes , and many speciali good herbs : and the fresh water brook runneth through diverse places of this orchard , and may with very small pains be made to water any one tree in the valley . 
 This fresh water stream comes from the tops of the mountains , and falls from the cliff into the valley 344 
 the height of a cable , and hath many arms out of it , which refresh the whole island , and almost every tree in it . The island is altogether high mountains and steep valleis , except it be in the tops of some hills , and down below in some of the valleis , where marvelous store of all these kinds of fruits before spoken of doe grow : there is greater store growing in the tops of the mountains then below in the valleis : but it is wonderful laboursome and also dangerous traveling up unto them and down again , by reason of the height and steepen esse of the hills . 
 There is also upon this island great store of partridges , Abundance of which are very tame , not making any great haste to fly in 
 away though one come very near them , but only to run away , and get up into the steep cliffs : we killed some of them with a fowling piece . They differ very much from our partridges which are in England both in bigness and also in colour . For they be within a little as big as and hen , and are of and ash colour , and live in covies twelve , sixteen , and twentie together : you cannot go ten or twelve score but you shall see or spring one or two covies at the least . 
 There are likewise no less store of fesants in the island , Great store of which are also marvelous big and fat , surpassing those fesants-which are in our country in bigness and in numbers of a company . They differ not very much in colour from the partridges before spoken of . 
 we found moreover in this place great store of Guinie Turkles In cocks , which we call Turkeys , of colour black and white , Ereatluant^t-with read heads : they are much about the same bigness which ours be of in England : their eggs be white , and as big as a Turkies egg . 
 There are in this island thousands of goats , which the Exceeding Spaniards call Cabritos , which are very wild : you shall numbers of see one or two hundred of them together , and sometime s°ati ' you may behold them going in a flock almost a mile long . Some of them , ( whither it be the nature of the breed of them , or of the country I wot not ) are as big as 
 345 
 and ass , with a main like and horse and a beard hanging down to the very ground : they will climb up the cliffs which are so steep that a man would think it a thing unpossible for any living thing to go there . We took and killed many of them for all their swiftness : for there be thousands of them upon the mountains . 
 Here are in like manner great store of swine which be very wild and very fat , and of a marvelous bigness : they keep altogether upon the mountains , and will very seidome abide any man to come near them , except it be by mere chance when they be found asleep , or otherwise , according to their kind , be taken laid in the mire . 
 We found in the houses at our coming 3. slaves which were Negroes , & one which was born in the island of Java , which told us that the East Indian fleet , which were in number 5. sails , the least whereof were in burden 8. or 900. tons , all laden with spices and Calicut cloth , with store of treasure and very rich stones and pearls , were gone from the said island of S. Helena but 20. days before we came thither . 
 This island hath be found of long time by the Por-tugals , and hath be altogether planted by them , for their refreshing as they come from the East Indies . And when they come they have all things plentiful for their relief , by reason that they suffer none to inhabit there that might spend up the fruit of the island , except some very few sick persons in their company , which they stand in doubt will not live until they come home , whom they leave there to refresh themselves , and take away the year following the other Fleet if they live so long . They touch here rather in their coming home from the East Indies , then at their going thither , because they are thoroughly furnished with corn when they set out of Portugal , but are but meanly victualed at their coming from the Indies , where there grows little corn . 
 The 20. day of June having taken in wood & water and refreshed our selves with such things as we found there , 346 
 1588. and made clean our ship , we set sail about 8. of the clock in the night towards England . At our setting sail we had the wind at Southeast , and we haled away Northwest and by West . The wind is commonly ofF the shore at this island of S. Helena . 
 On Wednesday being the thirde day of July we went July 1588. away Northwest the wind being still at Southeast ; at which time we were in 1. degree and 48 minutes to the Southward of the Equinoctial line . 
 The twelfth day of the said month of July it was very little wind , and towards night it was calm and blew no wind at all , and so continued until it was Munday , being the 15. day of July . 
 On Wednesday the 17. day of the abovesaid month we had the wind skant at West northwest . we found the wind continually to blow at East , and Northeast , and Eastnortheast after we were in 3. or 4. degrees to the Northward ; and it altered not until we came between 30. and 40. degrees to the Northward of the Equinoctial Line . 
 On Wednesday the 21. day of August the wind came up at Southwest a fair gale : by which day at noon we were in 38. degrees of Northerly latitude . 
 On Friday in the morning being the 23. day of August , at foure of the clock we haled East , and East and by South for the Northermost islands of the Azores . 
 On Saturday the 24. day of the said month by 5. of the clock in the morning we fell in sighed of the two islands of Flores and Corvo standing in 39. degrees and Corvo and Flo-and sailed away Northeast . reptwoylands 
 The third of September we met with a Flemish hulk e zores ' which came from Lisbone , & declared unto us the overthrowing of the Spanish Fleet , to the singular rejoicing and comfort of us all . 
 The 9. of September , after a terrible tempest which carried away most part of our sails , by the merciful favour of the Almighty we recovered our long wished port of Plimmouth in England , from whence we set forth at the beginning of our voyage . 
 