Concerning the mighty kingdom of Coray , tributary to the king of China , and borthering upon his Northeast frontiers , called by the Portugales Coria , and by them esteemed at the first and island , but since found to adjoin with the main not many days journey from Paqui the metropolitan city of China . The more perfect discovery whereof and of the coast of Tartaria Northward , may in time bring great light ( if not full certainty ) either of a Northwest or a 
 Northeast passage from Europe to those rich countries . Collected out of the Portugale Jesuites yearly 
 Japonian Epistles dated 
 1590 , 1591 , 1592 , 
 1594 , etc. 
 The first testimony containing a resolute determination of Quabacondono the great Monarch of all Japan , to invade and conquer China by the way of Coray , being a country divided from the Isles of Japan only by and arm of the sea about twentie leagues broad , and abounding with victuals and all other necessaries for the maintenance of the wars . Out of the Epistles of father Frier Lewis Frois , dated 1590. 
 Uabacondono having subdued all the petie kingdoms of Japan , in the year of our Lord 1590 ( as father Frier Lewis Frois writeth in 
 his Japonian Epistles of the foresaid year ) grew so proud and insolent that he seemed another Lucifer ; so far forth , that he made a solemn vow and other , 
 422 
 that he would pass the sea in his own person to conquer China : and for this purpose he made great preparations , saying , that since he is become Lord of all Japan , he hath nothing now to do but to conquer China , and that although he should end his life in that enterprise , he is not to give over the same . For he hopeth to leave behind him hereby so great fame , glory , and renown , as none may be comparable thereunto . And though he could not conquer the same , and should end his life in the actium , yet should he always remain immortali with this glory . And if God does not cut him off , it is thought verily , that he will thoroughly attempt the same . And for his more secure passage thither , he is determined to leave behind him two Governors ( after his manner ) in the parts of Miac6 with the administration of Finqua ; and of those of his Monarchic he says that he will take with him all the great Japonish Lords , or at the least all his principali subject's , and leave in his dominions such guard and garrisons as shall seem best unto him . And so having passed the winter , he means to come to these parts ofXimo , for from hence he is to set forth his army , Ximo . 
 & : to pass to the land of Coray , which the Portugales Coray con-call Coria , being divided from Japan with and arm of the sea . And although the Portugales in times past thought , m a^ut ' that it was and lie or Peninsula , yet is it firm land , which joineth unto the kingdom of Paqui . And he hath now stricken such a terror with his name in the country of Coray , that the king thereof hath sent his ambassadors hither to yield unto him a kind of homage , as he required ; which ambassadors are now in the city of 
 Miac6 . And by this Peninsula of Coray he may pass FromCorayan with his army by land in few days journey unto the city of Paqui , being the principali city where the king of - tn fa days China hath his residence . And as the Chinians be weak , to Paqui the and the people of Japan so valiant and feared of them , if of God does not cut him off in this expedition , it may fallen China-out according to his expectation . 
 423 
 But whatsoever become of China , it is held for a certainty , that his coming will cause great alterations in these parts of Ximo , especially in this kingdom of Figen , wherein are the princedoms of Arima and Omura , and all the force of our Christianity : and he told DONE Protasio when he was with him once before , that he would make him a great man in China , and that he would remove these lords , and deliver their governments unto lords that were Gentiles ; which would be the ruin of all this Christianity ; neither should we have any place wherein to remain . For , as it is the custom of Japan in the alterations of estates and kingdoms ( which they call Cuningaia ) to remove all the nobility and gentry , and to leave only the base people and labourers , committing them to the government of Ethnics , we shall hereby also lose our houses , and the Christians shall be dispersed with their lords ; whom sometime he handleth in such sort , that he gives them nothing to sustain themselves , and so they remain with all their followers , as men banished , and utterly ruined . 
 The second Testimony containing the huge levies and preparations of Quabacondono , as also his wars and conquests , and the success thereof in the kingdom of Coray . Together with a description of the same kingdom , and of their traffic and manner of government : and also of the shipping of China , Japan , and Coray , with mention of certain isles thereunto adjacent , and other particulars very memorable . Out of the Epistles of the aforesaid Father Fryer Luis Frois dated 1591 , and 1592. 
 A Bout this time Quabacondono determining to put his war against China in execution , assembled sundry of his nobles and captains , unto whom he declared his intent ; who , albeit they were all of a quite contrary 424 
 opinion , yet all of them without any pretense of difficulty approved his determination . For he had given out that he would not abstain from this war , although his own son should rise from death to life and request him ; yea whosoever would move any impediment or difficulty in that matter , he would put him to death . Wherefore for certain months there was nothing in all places to be seen , but provision of ships , armour , munition , and other necessaries for the wars . Quabacondono making a catalogue of all the lords and nobles his subject's , willed every one of them ( not a man excepted ) to accompany him in this expedition , enjoining and appointing to each one , what numbers they should bring . In all these kingdoms of Ximo he hath nominated 4 of his especial favourites ; whom ( to all men's admiration ) he will have to be heads over all these new kingdoms , notwithstanding that here are 4 others far more mighty then they . Of whom ( by Gods good providence ) two are Christians , to wit , Augustine Eucunocamindono governor of half the kingdom of Finga , & Cainocami the son of Quambioindono governor of the greater part of the kingdom of Bugen . The other two are Ethniques , namely Toranosuque governor of the half of the kingdom of Finga and Augustins mortali enemy ; and Iconocami governor of the residue of the kingdom of Bugen , and and enemy both to Augustine and Cainocami . And Quabacondono hath commanded all the Christian lords of Teximo to follow Christian governors . Whereupon the lord Protasius was there with 2000 soldiers ; & Omurandono the lord of Ceuxima and Augustins son in law , which lately became a Christian , with a thousand . Also he appointed that the governors of Firando and Goto should follow Augustine , who albeit they were Gentiles , had many Christians to their subject's . Wherefore Augustine was to conduct 15000 soldiers , beside mariners , slaves , and other base people to carry the baggage of the army , all which being as great a number as the former , so soon as they arrived in the kingdom of 
 425 
 Coray , were made soldiers , and boar arms . Unto the said Augustine , Quabacondono , in token of singular favour , granted the first assault or invasion of the kingdom of Coray , to wit , that he only with his forces might enter the same , the other lords remaining in Ceuxima ( which is 18 leagues distant from Coray ) till they should be advertized from Augustine : which thing procured unto Augustine great envy and disdain from them all ; howbeit ( as you shall forthwith understand ) it proved in the end most honourable unto him . The other Christian governor Cainocami being but a young man of 23 years , he commanded the king of Bungo to follow with 6000 soldiers ; so that with the 4000 which he had before , his number amounted unto 10000 , beside mariners and others which carried burdens . This was most joyful news to us , and to all the Christians . Of the Ethnic lords Quabacondono appointed the governor of Riosogo together with Foranosuque to march with 8000 : and likewise the king of Sazeuma and Iconocami with as many . And among all he gave the first and chief place unto Augustine . All the other soldiers of Japan he caused to accompany his own person : the number of all together ( as appeared out of a written catalogue ) amounting to three hundreth thousand persons : of whom two hundred thousand were soldiers . 
 The order prescribed in this whole army was , that first they should make their entrance by the kingdom of Coray , which is almost and island , one end whereof joineth upon the main land of China ; which though it be a several kingdom of it self , yet is it subject and tributary unto the king of China . And because this kingdom of Coray is divided but by and arm of the sea from Japan , Quabacondono determined to subdue the same , for that it so aboundeth with victuals , that from thence he might the easier invade China . While all things were preparing , it was commanded , that at the chief port of Ximo called Nangoia , being twelve leagues distant from Firando , there should be erected a mighty 426 
 great castle ; where Quabacondono with all his fleet was minded to stay , till news were brought of the success of the aforesaid 4 governors or captains . He appointed also another castle to be built in Fuchinoxima , which is another island situate between Nangoia and Ceuxima . And he built a third castle in Ceuxima , that his passage might be the more commodious . The charge of building these castles he imposed upon the 4 aforesaid governors , and commanded the other lords of Ximo their associates to assist them ; all which so applied that business , that in 6 months space it was wholly finished . The castle of Nangoia was environed with a double wall of square and beautiful stone , with broad and deep ditches like unto Miac6 . The innermost wall being less then the other two was 100 fathom square , within the compass whereof were so many houses built both for the lords , and their followers , and also for merchants shops , and victualers houses , distinguished with broad and direct streets , that it seemed a fair town . But ( that which was much more admirable ) all the way from Miac6 to Nangoia , at the end of every days journey , all the lords and governors , at the commandment of Quabacondono , built each one within his jurisdiction new and stately palaces from the ground , so that for 20 days together he lodged every night with all his train in one of those palaces . And because these things were done at the very same time when the expedition into the kingdom of Coray was in hand , all Japan was so grievously oppressed ( Quabacondono in the mean while being at no charges ) as it was most intolerable . Yet is it incredible how ready every one is to do him service : which appears by these magnificent stately buildings reared up in so short a space , which in Europe would have required a long time and huge expenses . In the mean season it was commonly given out , that this enterprise of Quabacondono would have most unfortunate success , as being a matter wrought by constraint , and that it would be and occasion of manifold dissensions in Japan : for no man there was , but 
 427 
 misliked of this war : yea , all the lords were in great hope , that some one man at length would step forth and restore their liberty ; howbeit there is none as yet found , which dare put his hand to that business . Wherefore they were all ( though to their great grief and lamentation ) violently constrained to prosecute the enterprise . But Quabacondono being void of all anxiety , to the end he might encourage his followers , boasted that he would make great alterations of kingdoms , and would bestow upon them the kingdoms of Coray and China ; and unto the lord Protasius he hath promised 3 kingdoms : but he with all the other lords giving him great thanks , had much rather retain a small portion of their estate in Japan , then to hunt after all those kingdoms which he promises . 
 And whereas Quabacondono had by proclamation published , that he would personally be present at Nangoia the 3 moon of this year ; troops and armies of men began to resort from all the quarters of Japan to these parts . Now were our afflictions renewed . For so long as Quabacondono remained at Miac6 , we might stay in these parts of Ximo without any danger : but after he began to come this way , it seemed impossible for our state to continue whole and found , and we were put into no small perplexi tie . For the Christian lords advised us , that since Quabacondono was come so near , all our company that lived in the College , in the house of Probation , and in the Seminary , should depart to some other place . And the Christians from Miac6 writ daily unto us , that we should pull down our houses and Churches at Omura , Arima , and Cansaco , and that the father's of Europe should return unto Nangasaque in the secular habit of Portugals , but that the Japonian Friars should retire themselves unto several houses of Christians , that so they might all remain safe and out of danger . But this remedy , as it was too grievous and subject to many difficulties , so did it afford us but small comfort . In brief the Father visitor talking of this matter with 428 
 Eucunocamindono , the lord Protasius , and Omurandono , before their expedition towards the kingdom of Coray , found them , as before , in the same fortitude of mind , being constant in their first opinion : neither would they give any other counsel or direction , then that the father's should keep themselves secret , and should only forsake their houses at Arima , and Omura , wherein the Toni or great lords would have some of their kinsmen remain . It was also thought convenient , that the number of the Seminary should be diminished , and that of 90 there should only remain 50 in our schools , namely such as studied the Latin tongue . With the Father Visitor there came unto Nangasaque certain Father's and Friars , which were said to be of Fungo and Firando . For the said Father under the name of a Legate might retain them with him more openly . 
 About this time Quabacondono , that he might with some pastime recreate his Nobles which accompanied him ; and also might declare , with how great confidence and security of mind he took upon him this expedition for China ; and likewise to obscure the most renowned fame of a certain hunting and hawking performed of old by that mighty Prince Joritono , who was Emperor over all Japan ; he determined to ordain ( as it were ) another royal court of diverse kinds of fowl . Whereupon being accompanied with many great lords and others , he departed to the kingdom of Oiaren , where his game had so good success , that he caught above 30000. fowls of all sorts ; among which were many falcons . Howbeit , for Quabacondono his greater recreation , and for the more solemnity of the game , there were also added many dead fowls , which the Japonians with certain poulders or mean to compositions know how to preserve sweet in their feathers a long time . This game being ended , Quaba - - m t^ir condono returned with great pomp unto Miac6 ; before feathers a long whom went great multitudes which carried those thou - time . sands of fowls upon guilded canes . Next after these followed many horsemen sumptuously attired , carrying 
 429 
 a great number of Falcons and other birds . After them were led many horses by the reins , most richly trapped . Next of all were brought Coscis or Littiers very stately adorned : after which was carried Quabacondono himself in a Littier of another fashion , like unto those which in India are called Palanchins , which was made in China , with most curious and singular workmanship , and was presented unto him by the Father Visitor , and seems exceedingly to content him , for that in all actions of solemnity he uses the same . Last of all followed a great troop of Princes and Nobles bravely mounted on horseback , and gorgeously attired , thereby the more to delight Quabacondono , who in triumphant sort being welcomed by the way , with the shout and applause of infinite swarms of people , entered the city of Miac6 . 
 Now when the time of sailing towards China approached , Quabacondono determined first to proclaim his nephew Inangondono his successor , and governor of all Japan , to the end he might supply his own room in the time of this war . And therefore he commanded the Dairi to transfer unto his said nephew the dignity belonging to himself , calling him by the name of Taicusama , that is to say , Great lord . Which dignity was in such sort translated , that albeit he assigned unto his nephew large revenues , together with that princely title , yet himself remained the very same that he was before . The day of the said translation being appointed , he summoned all the Princes of Japan to appear , and to swear obedience unto this his nephew : Who with great pomp going unto the Dairi to receive that dignity at his hand , had surrendered unto him the Castle of Miac6 , and the palaces of Quabacondono to dwell in . 
 Thus at the beginning of the third moon , he set forward on his journey to Nangoia , having before given order , that Augustine should pass over into the kingdom of Coray , and that his other Captains should remain in Ceuxima . Wherefore , the twentieth day of the third Moon he came unto Nangoia , where the companies 43° 
 of the other lords being numbered , were found to be 200000. persons , beside those that were conducted by the foure foresaid governors . In the mean season Augustine with his forces , and with a Fleet of eight hundred Fleet of Ships , arrived at Coray . In whose army the lord Pro - 8°0-tasius excelled all others ; for though he had but the leading of 2000. soldiers , yet for the goodness of his armour , and the beauty of his ships , he was admired of all men . At their very first entrance they won 2. castles of the kingdom of Coray by main force , wherein the Corayans reposed great confidence ; for they were environed with mighty high walls , and defended with great multitudes of soldiers , and with a kind of guns guns of 2. spans and long , which in stead of bullets wtth discharged with a terrible noise wooden arrows headed arrows with forked points of iron : but the said guns being able to hurt but a small distance off , and the Japonians being furnished with brazen ordinance unknown unto the Corayans , they presently drave them from their walls , and with ladders made for the same purpose of great canes , they forthwith scaled the same , and planted their ensigns thereon ; the Corayans indeed for a short time making resistance , but after a while betaking themselves to dishonourable flight , 5000 men of their part being slain , and of Augustines but 100. and 400. wounded . 
 Augustine perceiving that the Corayans could not endure any long assault , determined to take upon himself , and his army the whole burden and honour of this war , and not staying for the governors his associates , to march up into the heart of the kingdom , and to the principali City ; unto which determination all the lords that were with him gave their consent . This was ( no doubt ) a bold , yea , and in some sort , a rash enterprise of Augustine : but yet it argue a wise and valiant mind in him . But this long delay was so grievous to the Captains which in Ceuxima expected the success of the war , that before they herd any news at all concerning the surprise of the two Castles , they brought Augustine in suspicion among 
 431 
 their friends , that he ambitiously affected the honour of the whole war . Which thing being known unto Quabacondono , he was so troubled in mind even before he came to Nangoia , that suddenly he commanded the other Captains to set sail from Ceuxima . But when Quabacondono was come to Nangoia , and herd news of the two Castles taken , and that Augustine pursuing thee The significa - victory proceeded on towards the Miaco , that is to say , time of Miaco . cltie of Coray , and was determined to invade 
 the same also ( all which Augustine himself wrote , and requested him to send the other captains and commanders to assail the kingdom on all sides , and to furnish the castles which he had taken and should take , with garrisons of soldiers , because as yet he had not men enough to hold those fortresses which he had won ) he was surprised with such unspeakable joy , as he affirmed openly , that in all Japan he had no subject comparable to Augustine : and that neither Nabunanga , nor himself ever knew any man endued with so valiant and courageous a mind . I ( says he ) knowing against whom and with what forces I waged war , subdued by little and little all Japan unto me : but Augustine in so short a time and with so small forces , hath boldly set his foot in a foreign region , and with most glorious victory hath subdued the mighty kingdom of Coray . Wherefore ( quoth he ) I will reward him with many kingdoms , and will make him next unto my self the greatest Prince in all Japan . He added farther , that now his own son seemed to be risen from the death : and that whosoever durst either disgrace or extenuate the deeds of Augustine , he would grievously punish him , not respecting whither he did it upon reason or malice . By this speech the name and report of Augustine grew so honourable among all men , that those which most envied his estate , durst not speak one ill word of him , but highly commended him before Q^bacondono . 
 breadth of This kingdom or Coray extendeth in length about Coray . roo . and in breadth 60. leagues . And albeit the inhabi - 
 432 
 tants in nation , language , and strength of body ( which makes the people of China to dread them ) be different from the Chinians , yet because they pay tribute to the king of China , and exercise traffic with his subject's , they do after a sort imitate the Laws , apparel , customs , and government of the Chinians . They border on one side upon the Tartars , and other nations , with whom sometime they have peace , and sometime war : but with the Chinians they have continual peace . They are speciali good bowmen ; but at other weapons , because they have but few , and those bad , they are nothing so skilful . Wherefore they are not comparable to the Japonians , who by reason of their wars are continually exercised in arms , and are by nature more courageous and valiant , being furnished with iron-pieces , with lances , and with excellent swords . Only in shipping they are inferior to the Corayans and Chinians , by reason of the hugeness of their Ships which they use upon the sea . Wherefore , if they were to join battles by sea , there is no doubt but that both the foresaid Nations would be too The people of hard for them . But now because they knew nothing of an the coming of the Japonian army , or for that they str^er in doubted that their sea-forces were the stronger , or else shipping , then because God was determined to punish them , he suffered they of Japan . them to be destitute of all the defence of their shipping , so that the Japonians without any resistance landed upon their dominions . 
 Now the fame of Augustines victory causing the army notably to increase , and the Mariners , and many others which carried burdens ( as they were trained up in war from their childhood ) bearing arms , while the Corayan captives supplied their baser offices : so great a terror possessed all the people of Coray where Augustine came , that all the castles and fortresses which he passed by were forsaken by their garrisons , and all men fled for refuge to the principali city . And while other commanders and Christians sent from Ceuxima and Nangoia shaped their course for Coray , Augustine had pitched his camp near 
 xi 433 2 e 
 The king of Coray fleeth out of his frin-cipall city . 
 unto the foresaid principali city : of the which being come within 3. days journey , he was encountered by 20000. men ; whom at the very first assault , having slain 3000. of them , he put to flight . But approaching very near unto the city , and having passed a river , he maintained a valiant conflict at a certain narrow passage against 80000. Corayans , 8000. whereof were slain , and a great number drowned in the river . Here while Augustine appointed all his troops to remain for two days , to the end they might somewhat refresh their weary limbs , the king of Coray seeing himself besieged by his enemy , and that many other Japonian lords with strong armies invaded his kingdom on all sides , determined to have his city strengthened with garrisons , and to retire himself into the inland of China . Which by reason of the abundance of horses that he had , he was able right com-modiously to perform . Whereupon the second or third day after , Augustine without any resistance entered the head-city , being presented with great store of victuals and gifts by them that remained therein . Thus Augustine , with other captains his associates , became lord of the principali city , and won all the honour of the victory unto himself : for albeit by this time the other captains were come from Ceuxima , and many from Nangoia , yet they found all things performed to their hands . 
 Quabacondono being advertised of this second victory , yielded as much honour unto Augustine as he could possibly devise , speaking so highly to the commendation both of him , and of other Captains his associates , as if but the tenth part of his fair promises come to effect , they shall be far greater then they are , and Augustine ( next unto himself ) shall be the principali person in all Japan . And now he is become so famous in the Court , and throughout the whole kingdom of Japan , that at all their meetings and assemblies there is no talk but only of the valour and fortitude of Augustine , who in twentie days space hath subdued so mighty a kingdom to the Crown of Japan . And all the Nobles account him a 434 
 most happy man , being astonished at the immortali renown which he hath attained unto by this exploit : yea , and Quabacondono sent forthwith unto him , as unto the conqueror and vanquisher of the Corayans , in token of great honour , a two-edged sword and a horse , which among the Japonians is a pledge of the most peerless honour that can possibly be done to a man : and this very gift did Nabunanga in times passed send unto Quabacondono , when he had in any battle won any kingdom from Morindono . And by this great event the power of the Christians God , and his providence towards his children is known not only to the Christians , but even to the very Ethnics themselves , for that in the heat of such extreme persecution it hath pleased his divine Majestic to lay the honour of all this war upon Christian lords . Wherefore we doubt not , but they will prove more mighty and famous then ever they were . 
 Hence it comes to pass that the Portugals ship come from China , hath wintered in Japan : by which occasion the presence of the father Visitor hath be a great comfort not only to us , but to all the other Christians , who in regard of the departure of so many men with Quabacondono and his captains to the wars , thought they should have be left utterly forsaken and destitute , had not the father Visitor , in whom they reposed all their confidence , remained here . But the singular providence and love of God towards us appeared in this , that he would have the said Ship , contrary to their usual custom , to winter in Japan . For when Quabacondono having obtained that victory , was determined to return unto Ximo , they were all shrouded under the protection of the foresaid Father ; who hearing that he was entered into Nangoia , caused Frier John Rodorigues and the governor of the Portugal ship to salute and welcome him . For the Christians of Miaco , which succeeded in their rooms that went for Coray , advised him in their letters so to do . 
 And it was very acceptable to Quabacondono to see the 435 
 Portugals Captain General attended upon by so many Portugals sumptuously attired , and coming with so many ships in the company of Friar John Rodoriguez : and he asked the Friar how the father Visitor did ? And whither the presents to the Viceroy liked him ? As also , that he took it in very good part that the Father had wintered in Japan , and that the Friar should stay with him . Afterwards writing and answer to the father , he declared therein the great favour which he boar to the captain of the ship . Whom , having familiarly entertained him for the space of 2. hours , he dismissed with evident tokens of good will . After the Captains return , Friar Rodoriguez staying behind above a month , attempted very often to speak with Quabacondono , of whom he was always most kindly used . Afterwards by reason of sickness he returned to Nangasaque ; whereupon Quabacondono demanded why he was not cured at the same place where himself remained ? Jacuino answered , that being a stranger , he was to be cured with such diet and medicines , as were not there to be had : with which answer he was satisfied . Hence it is , that by often conferences which were made by reason of the ambassage , Quabacondono waxes every day more courteous and affable . And yet for all this , new occasions of troubles and afflictions are not cut ofF : for certain it is , that Quabacondono hath given out , that if he have good success with his war against China , he will make great alterations of estates , in assigning the kingdoms of Coray and China to the Christian princes , and placing in their rooms Ethnic lords throughout Japan : which thing might redound to the ruin and destruction of all Christianity here , neither should the Christians find in Japan any place of refuge . And albeit Augustine had certainly informed the father Visitor ’of the said alteration of estates , and Jacuine had written unto Augustine , that 
 Quabacondono had fully determined to altar the states or governments of Ximo , and so consequently the state of Augustine , and of the Christian princes of Arima and 436 
 Omura ; yea , and that the said two princes had notice thereof : yet almighty God with the eyes of his infinite mercy hath vouchsafed to regard the prayers of his faithful servants ( who for this cause were most perplexed and sorrowful ) and to provide this remedy following . 
 The Corayans having intelligence , that their king and the forces which he carried with him were in safety , went the greatest part of them , with as much victuals as they could get , and hid themselves in the mountains and woods , remaining there with such hate and indignation against the Japonians , that with promise of safe conduct they could by no means be drawn out of their starting holes . Wherefore albeit the Japonians have all the castles and places of defence in their own possession , yet because they want people to till the ground , and to do them other necessary services , they cannot choose but forego all that which they have won . Moreover , the common high ways are so pestered with thieves and murderers , that unless the Japonians march in whole troops all together , they are suddenly oppressed with swarms of Corayans issuing forth of the woods . Many of the Corayans also have retired themselves unto the neighbour-islands , from whence with numbers of great Hands near ships , to the mighty loss of the Japonians , they assail unt0 Coray-their small and weak ones , and have already sunk many of them . Wherefore all the Japonian lords whi h remain in Coray have written unto Quabacondono , that his army must for a certain time in no wise remove from the place where it is , for avoiding of such imminent dangers as in proceeding further it may incur . Upon these advertisements Quabacondono being ready to take his journey to Coray , to divide the whole kingdom , was hindered from his purpose , and sent most friendly letters to all his nobles , willing them to be of good cheer , for that he would not deal about altering of their estates , till 3. years were expired : whereupon they were eased of exceeding great care and grief . For albeit there is no great trust to be given to his words , yet we hope that 
 437 
 this year he will not meddle : what he will do afterwards , God knoweth . In Coray at this present there are above 200000. Japonian soldiers , who at the commandment of Quabacondono are divided throughout the whole kingdom . Augustine lies upon the very extreme frontiers of China : but because the Chinians are separated from the kingdom of Coray with a mighty river of 3. leagues broad , and abound with great ships , and have planted innumerable troops of men upon the shore , the success of the war remaineth most doubtful and uncertain . Neither do we know whither the Japonians will proceed any farther this year or no . 
 The third testimony of Coray , signifying ( among other notable and political observations ) the later success of the wars of Japan against Coray ; and to what end Quabacondono still maintaineth garrisons in that kingdom . Out of the Epistles of Father Organtino Brixiano , bearing date from Japan Anno 1594. 
 THe whole Empire of Japan is now in the hands of this king Quabacondono : and ( which hath not be known since the first creation thereof ) there is not the breadth of one foot throughout all the whole Island , which is not absolutely subject unto him . And he reigneth in so great peace and tranquillity , that if his successors follow the same course of government , there is no likelihood of future sedition or perturbation in any of the kingdoms . And doubtless the means which he uses to establish continual ! peace and concord among the Japonians , are very great and effectual ! . 
 One is , that after he hath passed his public promise , he never putteth any of his adversaries to death , which his predecessor Nabunanga performed not : for he having subdued any kingdom , would put all the lords and governors to the sword . But this king grants unto them not only life , but also yearly revenues , whereby to 438 
 maintain themselves in and honest and mean estate : in which regard they all rest contented , and willingly submit themselves . 
 Another is , in that he hath brought the husbandmen and peasants ( by whose assistance & wealth all the pety-king-doms were after a sort sustained ) unto such extreme poverty , that they have scarce wherewithal ! to keep life and soul together : as likewise he hath bereft them of all kind of weapons . 
 The third is , because he hath most streightly forbidden all contentions , seditions , frays , and skirmishes . For whosoever be found culpable of this crime , they die every man of them on both parties . If any escape by flight , their kinsefolks are punished in their stead ; and for lack of them , their servants ; and for default of both their next neighbours . If many were guilty , many are punished and suffer death : but hence it comes to pass , that many innocent persons are constrained to die . And this severity is the cause , why there are at this present so seidome frays and contentions in Japan . 
 The fourth is , that in administering of justice he is most upright , without all respect either to his own kindred , or to his ancient captains , or the blood royal , or any of the Bonzii , be they never so famous : and being once advertized of a crime , he pardoneth no man . And albeit himself is exceedingly addicted to women , yet will he permit none of his subject's to have any concubines . For which cause not many days ago , he banished a Bonzio of great wealth , being in alliance and dignity most near unto himself . And being informed that all the Bonzii of Miac6 kept concubines , he would have put them all to death , had not the governor of Miac6 promised , that he would undertake to keep them from offending any more in that kind . Wherefore he caused all the Bonzii every month to be sworn , that they should live honestly upon pain of death : as also he hath sworn the heads or superiors of all their 
 439 
 The war of Japan against Coray and China . 
 religious houses under pain of death , to give up their names whom they most suspect of the foresaid crime . Hence it is , that all of them ( if you regard their outward estate ) live in extreme fear ... 
 The fift is , for that he suffers none of his soldiers , nor his great lords to live in idleness . If there be no wars for their employment , he occupieth them in building of stately palaces , and in raising new fortresses , or in repairing and strengthening of old , and also in performing other notable works , to the ornament of Japan , and to his own lasting honour . So that at this present near unto Miac6 there are thirtie thousand men employed about the building of one castle ; and in the city of Bozacca above and hundred thousand : which employments afford them neither place nor time to practise any rebellions . 
 The sixt is his altering of governments : for he removeth his governors from one extreme part of Japan to another . 
 The seventh , for that unto his soldiers ( beside the ordinary pay continually allotted unto them for their service ) in time of war he alloweth victuals at his own costs . Whereof it comes to pass , that he effecteth whatsoever he thinks good by their means . Neither hath he hitherto waged any war , wherein his enemy was not vanquished , according to his own desire : this late war of China only excepted , which far surmounted all his forces . Howbeit in the kingdom of Coray he maintaineth as yet great garrisons , as well to keep his honour , as to constrain the Chinians to sue for peace . 
 The eighth is , in that he curbeth and restraineth persons of ambitious and aspiring minds , who ( as he conjectureth ) after his death might work some innovations in the common wealth , or disturb the kingdoms . 
 The ninth is , because he hath on no side within foure or five days journey of Miac6 , any mighty or industrious captain or governor . 
 44° 
 The tenth and last is , for that he hath brought his yearly revenues to two millions of gold . 
 By these courses and means , we are in good hope that firm peace will be established in all these kingdoms , and also that a fit way will be prepared , for the conversion of all the great lords unto Christian religion . 
 