451 
 Prematica . 
 452 
 EXAMINATION OF SPANISH PILOTS a.d. 
 .. 1586. 
 The same in English . 
 The examination of the Master's and Pilots which sail in the Fleets of Spaine to the West Indies : Written in the Spanish tongue by Pedro Dias a Spanish pilot taken by Sir Richard Grinville 1585. 
 First they make suit unto the Pilot major ( who at this present is called Alonzo de Chiavez ) that he would admit them to examination , because they are natural Spaniards , and sufficient for the same . 
 Hereupon the Pilot major commands the party to The witness be examined , to give information that he is a mariner , °ffive or , ixe and well practised in those parts , about which he desires ° x‘ to be examined . And then immediately he brings five or sixe pilots before examined to give testimony that he is a good mariner , and sufficient to become a pilot , that he is a Spaniard born , and that he is not of the raze of the Moors , Jewes or Negroes . 
 Having made this information , he presents it unto The pilots ad-the Pilot major . And the Pilot major seeing the information to be good , wills the Kings public reader Kings reader . of navigation ( who is now Roderigo Zamorano ) to admit him to his lectures . Whither there do resort foureteene or fifteene persons that desire to be examined : and they They hear the come to a certain house which the kings reader hath rea^eri appointed unto him for the same purpose , at eight of the clock in the morning : and then they stay two hours , for two and two hours likewise in the afternoon : in one of mrneths . 
 453 
 Their disputations of the art of navigation before the Kings reader who is their moderator . 
 The hall of examination . 
 The manner oj the young pilots examination . 
 which hours Zamorano readeth unto them , and in the other they ask one another many particulars concerning the art of navigation in the presence of the said kings reader : and him that answereth not to the purpose the said reader instructeth more perfectly , and telleth him how everything is . And this exercise continueth two months , during which time the examinates must not fail to be present twice in a day , as is aforesaid . 
 And having herd the kings reader those two months , they resort then unto the hall of examination which is in the Contractation house , where there are assembled the Pilot major and diverse other pilots , to the number of 25 at the least ; who all sitting there in order , the Pilot major demandeth of him that would be examined , of what part of the Indies he desires to be examined : Whereto the examinate answereth , that he would be examined concerning Nueva Espanna , or of Number de Dios and Tierra Firma . And others that are not experienced in those parts , crave to be examined of Santo Domingo , Puerto rico , and Cuba . 
 Then the Pilot major commands the examinate to spread a sea-chart upon the table , and in the presence of the other pilots to depart or show the course from the bar of Sant Lucar to the Canarie-Islands , and from thence to the Indies , till he come to that place whereof he is to be examined , and then also to return back to the bar of Sant Lucar in Spaine , from whence he departed . Also the Pilot major asks him , if when he saileth upon the sea , he be taken with a contrary wind , what remedy he is to use , that his ship be not too much turmoiled upon the sea ? And the examinate answereth him aswell as he can . 
 Then one of the other pilots opposeth him about the rules of the Sun and of the North-star , and how he ought to use the declination of the Sun at all times of the year : whom the examinate is bound to answer in every thing that he demandeth . Then another asks him of the signs and marks of those 454 
 lands which lie in his way to that haven whereof he is examined . And then another demandeth , that if his masts should be broken by tempest , what remedy he would use ? Others ask him , if his ship should take a leak , to the hazarding of the lives of himself and his company , what remedy he would find to stop the same with least danger ? Others ask him , what remedy , if his rudder should chance to fail ? Others oppose him about the account of the Moon and of the tides ? Others ask him if a Pirate should take him and leave him destitute of his Chart , his Astrolabe , and his other instruments serving to take the height of the Sun and of the star , what course he would take in that extremity ? Others demand other questions needful for a mariner to know , which desires to be a pilot . Unto all which the examinate is very attentive , and answereth to every particular . 
 After they have all asked him so much as they think expedient , they bid him depart out of the hall , to the end that every one of them may severally be sworn upon a book , that they will speak the truth . Then they put into a certain vessel of silver standing there for the same purpose so many beans , and so many peason as there are pilots within the hall : and every one putting his hand into the vessel in order , he that thinketh the party examined to be sufficient , takes up a bean , and he that thinketh him not sufficient , takes up a peas . And after that all have taken out what they please , the Pilot major looks what voices the examinate hath : and if he find him to have as many voices for him as against him , he commands him to make another voyage : but if he hath more voices for him then against him , then they give him letters testimoniali of his examination signed by the Pilot major , by the1 kings reader , and the secretary , and sealed with the seal of the Contractation house . And upon the receipt of these letters testimoniali , the new pilot gives a present unto the Pilot major , and the kings reader , for their gloves and hens , every one 455 
 The manner of their election . 
 Letters testimoniali of every new pilots examination and approbation , under the hands of the Pilot major , the kings reader , and the secretary , and seal of the Contractation house . 
 The order of the Contracta-tion house . 
 according to his ability , which is ordinarily some two or three ducats . # 
 And then he may take upon him to be pilot in any ship whatsoever , unto that place for which he was examined : and if he find in the Indies any ship under the charge of a pilot not before examined , he may put him out of his office , and may himself take charge of that ship for the same wages that the other pilot agreed for . 
 The pilots wages for making a voyage outward and homeward is according to the burden of the ship . If she be of 100 tons , he hath 200 or 250 ducats : and if she be of 400 or 500 tons , he takes for his wages 500 or 550 ducats : and if she be bigger , he hath a greater allowance : over and beside all which , he hath every day while he remains on land , foure reals for his diet . And the greater ships are always committed unto the more ancient pilots , because they are of greater experience and better skill , then the younger sort which newly take upon them to be pilots . 
 The pilot undertaketh no farther travel nor care , but in directing the course or navigation : for the master's of the ships take charge of the freighting and preparing their ships , and to pay the mariners , and to do all things needful for the ship ; for the pilot comes not unto the ship , until the visitors come to visit the same , to see whither he hath all things necessary for the voyage . 
 The visitors are foure men which are appointed by the king , and these are men of great understanding : and they come to visit the ships before they take in their lading , to see whither they be well prepared to make the voyage . And after the ships be laden , they return again to visit them the second time , to see whither they have all things necessary , according to the order , of the Contractation house : and whither they have all their mariners , victuals , powder , shot , and ordinance , and all other things necessary for the voyage . And if they want any thing , they charge them upon grievous penalties , , to provide the same before they set out of the haven . 
 The ships that go to the Indies are wont eke of them to have with them a Notary , whose charge is to keep a note of remembrance of all the merchandise which is laden in the ship , and to take the marks thereof , thereby to deliver the commodities in the ship to their particular owners , after they have finished their voyage , and he serves likewise to make wills , and other instruments , which are wont to be made by a Notary , if any man chanceth to fallen sick . And his wages in eke voyage is as much as the wages of two mariners . 
 The general of the fleets uses continually , after Thefirstbarke he is arrived in the Indies , to send into Spaine a bark °f Aviso . of Aviso , to advertise the king of the state of his arrival ; 
 And after the fleets be ready to come home , he dis-patcheth another pinnace of Aviso to certify them how secon^ the fleets are now ready to set sail , with other particularities . There go with the fleets two great ships , ' the one as Admiral , the other as Viceadmiral , of the burden of 400 or 500 tons , which carry nothing but victuals and soldiers for the wafting of the rest of the fleet , and these are paid out of the merchandise which come in the fleet , after the rate of one in the hundred , and sometime at one and and half in the hundred . 
 There is in the Contractation house of Sivil a table which serves for and Aranzel , or table of rate or taxation , written in letters of gold , wherein the value's of all kind of merchandise , which are embarked for the Indies , are set down . 
 lie this table a man may know how many Botijas g® or jars make a tun of wine , or how many packs , or how many quintals , or how many 
 barrels , or how many chests make a tun . 
 And all merchandise have their rates set down , to pay the king his customs and the Master his due fraught . 
 A table of rates , etc. set up in the Contractation house . 
 457 
 And therein is set up in writing that no Master may carry any passenger to the Indies , without licence , especially not learned men , nor any fryer , or clergyman , nor any body else without licence of the king : nor any strangers not born in the kingdoms of Spaine . 
 Moreover , that they may not carry away any merchandise not comprised in the foresaid order , under pain of death : and that all goods which they carry with them , they ought to carry the same registered ; under pain of death . 
 Furthermore , that no Master nor Pilot may carry any Chart , nor Astrolabe , nor Cross-staff , nor regiment , without they be signed and sealed by the Pilot major Alonzo de Chiavez , and the Cosmographer the kings reader Rodrigo Zamorano . 
 Moreover , that going in company with the fleet , they do and obey all such things , as their general shall command them , under pain of death . 
 Written by me Pedro Dias born in the Isle of ' Palma one of the Canaries , upon the request and gratification of M. Richard Hakluyt , in February 1586. 
 END OF VOLUME XI . 
 