 146 a discourse of Sebastian Cabot touch his discovery of part of the west India out of England in the time of king Henry the seven , use to Galeacius Butrigarius the pope legate in Spain , and report by the say legate in this sort . ) e you not understand say he ( speak to certain gentleman of Venice ) how to pass to India towards the northwest , as do of late a citizen of Venice , so valiant a man , and so well practise in all thing pertain to navigation , and the science of cosmography , that at this present he have not his like in Spain , insomuch that for his virtue he be prefer above all other pilot that sail to the west Indies , who may not pass thither without his licence , and be therefore call piloto mayor , that be , the grand pilot and when we say that we know he not , he proceed , say , that be certain year in the city of Sivil , and desirous to have some knowledge of the navigation of the Spaniard , it be tell he that there be in the city a valiant man , a venetian bear name Sebastian Cabot , who have the charge of those thing , be a expert man in that science , and one that can make card for the sea with his own hand , and that by this report , seek his acquaintance , he find he a very gentle person , who entertain he friendly , and show he many thing , and among other a large map of the world , with certain particular navigation , as well of the Portugal , as of the Spaniard , and that he speak further unto he to this effect . this discourse be take out of the second volume of the voyage of Baptista Ramusius . Sebastian Cabota Pilot mayor of Spain . [ Iii . 7. ] when my father depart from Venice many year since to dwell in England , to follow the trade of merchandises , he take i with he to the city of London , while i be very young , yet have nevertheless some knowledge of letter of humanity , and of the sphere . 147 the second voyage of Cabot to the land of Brasil , and Rio the plat a. the english voyage and when my father die in that time when news be bring that don Christopher Colonus Genuese have discover the coast of India , whereof be great talk in all the court of king Henry the 7. who then reign , insomuch that all man with great admiration affirm it to be a thing more divine then humane , to sail by the west into the east where spice grow , by a way that be never know before , by this fame and report there increase in my heart a great flame of desire to attempt some notable thing . And understand by reason of the sphere , that if i shall sail by way of they northwest , i shall by a short tract come into India , i thereupon cause the king to be advertise of my devise , who immediate command two caravel to be furnish with all thing appertain to the voyage , which be as far as 1 remember in the year 1496. in the begin of summer . i begin therefore to sail towards the northwest , not think to find any other land then that of Cathay , and from thence to turn towards India , but after certain day i find that the land run towards the north , which be to i a great displeasure . nevertheless , sail along by the coast to see if i can find any gulf that turn , i find the land still continent to the 56. degree under our pole . And see that there the coast turn towards the east , despair to find the passage , i turn back again , and sail down by the coast of that land towards the equinoctial ( ever with intent to find the say passage to India ) and come to that part of this firm land which be now call Florida , where my victual fail , i depart from thence and return into England , where i find great tumult among the people , and preparation for war in Scotland : by reason whereof there be no more consideration have to this voyage . whereupon i go into Spain to the catholique king , and queen Elizabeth , which be advertise what i have do , entertain i , and at their charge furnish certain ship , wherewith they cause i to sail to dis-148 cover the coast of Brasile , where i find a exceed great and large river name at this present Rio de la plata , that be , the river of silver , into the which i sail and follow it into the firm land , more than six score league , find it every where very fair , and inhabit with infinite people , which with admiration come run daily to our ship . into this river run so many other river , that it be in manner incredible . after this i make many other voyage , which i now pretermit , and wax old , i give my self to rest from such travel , because there be now many young and lusty pilot and mariner of good experience , by who for - office of wardnesse i do rejoice in the fruit of my labour , and ’ " ‘ mere with the charge of this office , as you see . 