a true report of such thing as happen in the second voyage of captain Frobisher , pretend for the discovery of a new passage to Cataya , China and the east India , by the northwest . Ann. Dom. 1577. eing furnish with one tall ship of her majesty , name the aid , of two hundred ton , and two other small bark , the one name the Gabriel , the other the Michael , about thirty tun a piece , be fit appoint with man , munition , victual , and all thing niece - sary for the voyage , the say captain Frobisher , with the rest of his company come aboard his ship ride at Blackwall , intend ( with God help ) to take the first wind and tide serve he , the 25 day of May , in the year of our lord God 1577. the name of such gentleman as attempt this discovery , and the number of soldier and mariner in each ship , as follow . aboard the aid be admiral be the number of 100 man of all sort , whereof 30 or more be gentleman and soldier , the rest sufficient and tall sailor . aboard the Gabriel be vice-admiral , be in all 18 person , whereof six be soldier , the rest mariner . aboard the Michael be 16 person , whereof five be soldier , the rest mariner . 284 ' generali of the | whole company for her majesty encage Martin Frobisher . his lieutenant his ensign Corporali of the shot George Best . 1 Richard Philpot. Francis Forder . aboard the aid be the rest of the gentleman ' Henry Carew . Edmund Stafford . John Lee. m. Harvie . Matthew Kinersley . Abraham Lins . Robert Kinersley . Francis Brakenbury . William Armshow . aboard Gabrieli aboard Michael than i be | the i be ] the master the mate the pilot - the master gunner ' captain | one gentleman the master 1 captain | one gentleman the master encage ' Christopher hall . Charles Jackman . Andrew Dier . Richard Cox. ' Edward Fenton . [ he . 61. ] William Tamfield . William Smyth . " " Gilbert York . Thomas Chamberlaine . James bear . on Whitsunday be the 26 of may , anno 1577 , early in the morning , we weigh anchor at Blackwall , and fall that tie down to Gravesend , where we remain until Monday at night .. on Monday morning the 27 of may , aboard the aid the^mmun-we receive all the communion by the minister of ion 285 thefirst arrival after our departingfrom England . a i of silver find in Orkney . the english voyage Gravesend , and prepare we as good Christians towards God , and resolute man for all fortune : and towards night we depart to Tilbery hope . Tuesday the eight and twenty of may , about nine of the clock at night , we arrive at Harwitch in Essex and there stay for the take in of certain victual , until Friday be the thirty of May , during which time come letter from the lord of the council , straight command our generali , not to exceed his compliment and number appoint he , which be , one hundred and twenty person : whereupon he discharge many proper man which with unwilling mind depart . he also dismiss all his condemn man , which he think for some purpose very needful for the voyage , and towards night upon Friday the one and thirty of May we set sail , and put to the sea again . And sail northward alongst the east coast of England and Scotland , the seven day of June we arrive in saint magnus sound in Orkney hand , call in latin Orcades , and come to anchor on the south side of the bay , and this place be reckon from Blackwall where we set sail first league . here our company go on land , the inhabitant of these island begin to flee as from the enemy , whereupon the lieutenant will every man to stay together , and go himself unto their house to declare what we be and the cause of our come thither , which be understand , after their poor manner they friendly entreat we , and bring we for our money such thing as they have . and here our goldfiner find a i of silver . Orkney be the principali of the isle of the Orcades , and stand in the latitude of fifty nine degree and a half . the country be much subject to cold , answerable for such a climate , and yet yield some fruit , and sufficient maintenance for the people content so poor to live . there be plenty enough of poultrey , store of egg , fish , and foul . 286 for their bread they have oaten cake , and their drink be ewe milk , and in some part ale . their house be but poor without and sluttish enough within , and the people in nature thereunto agreeable . for their fire they burn heath and turf , the country in most part be void of wood . they have great want of leather , and desire our old shoe , apparel , and old rope ( before money ) for their victual , and yet be they not ignorant of the value of our coin . the chief town be call Kyrway . Kyrway then in this island have be sometime a abbey or a cq , fa ™ ne < > f religious house call saint Magnus , be on the west s magnus side of the he , whereof this sound bear name , through find why so which we pass . their governor or chief lord be call . call the lord Robert steward , who at our being there , as we understand , be in durance at Edinburgh , by the regent commandment of Scotland . after we have provide we here of matter sufficient for our voyage the eight of June we set sail again , and pass through saint magnus sound have a merry wind by night , come clear and lose sight of all the land , and keep our course west northwest by the space of two day , the wind shift upon we so that we lay in traverse on the sea , with contrary wind , make good ( as near as we can ) our course to the westward , and sometime to the northward , as the wind shift . and hereabout we meet with 3 sail of english fisherman from Iseland , bind homeward , by who we write our letter unto our friend in England . we traverse these sea by the space of 26 day without sight of any land , and meet with much drift wood , and whole body of tree . we see many monstrous fish and strange fowl , great body of tree drive in the sea . [ Iii . 62. ] monstrous fish in strange foul live which seem to live only by the sea , be there so far distant from any land . at length God favour we with more prosperous wind , and after we have sail four day with good wind in the poop , the four of July the Michael be foremost a head shoot off a piece sea 287 water be black and smooth signify land to be near . hand ofyce . we first sight of Frisland then . 4. of July . Frisland describe . a easy kind of fish . of ordinance , and strike all her sail , suppose that they descry land which by reason of the thick mist they can not make perfect : howbeit , as well our account as also the great alteration of the water , which become more black and smooth , do plain declare we be not far off the coast . Oure generali send his master aboard the Michael ( who have be with he the year before ) to bear in with the place to make proof thereof , who descry not the land perfect , but see sundry huge hand of ice , which we deem to be not pass twelve league from the shore , for about ten of the clock at night be the four of July , the weather be more clear , we make the land perfect and know it to be frislande . and the heighth be take here , we find our self to be in the latitude of 60 degree and a half , and be fall with the southermost part of this land . between Orkney and Frisland be reckon league . this frislande show a ragged and high lahde , have the mountain almost cover over with snow alongst the coast full of drift ice , and seem almost inaccessible , and be think to be a hand in bigness not inferior to England , and be call of some author , west Frislande , i think because it lie more west than any part of Europe . it extend in latitude to the northward very far as seem to we , and appear by a description set out by two brethren venetian , Nicholaus and Antonius Zeni , who be drive off from Ireland with a violent tempest make shipwreck here , and be the first know Christians that discover this land about two hundred year sithence , and they have in their sea-cardes set out every part thereof and describe the condition of the inhabitant , declare they to be as civil and religious people as we . and for so much of this land as we have sail alongst , compare their card with the coast , we find it very agreeable . this coast seem to have good fish , for we lie becalm let fall a hook without any bait and present 288 catch a great fish call a hollibut , who serve the whole company for a day meat , and be dangerous meat for surfeit . And sound about five league off from the shore , our lead bring up in the tallow a kind of coral almost white , and small stone as bright as crystal : and it be not to be doubt but that this land may be find very rich and beneficial if it be thorough discover , although we see no creature there but little bird . it be a marvellous thing to behold of what great bigness and depth some hand of ice be here , some seventie , some eighty fathom under water , beside that which be above , seem hand more than half a mile in circuit . all these ice be in taste fresh , and seem to be breed in the sound thereabouts , or in some land near the pole , and with the wind and tide be drive alongst the coast . we find none of these hand of ice salt in taste , whereby it appear that they be not congeal of the ocean sea water which be always salt , but of some stand or little move lake or great fresh water near the shore , cause either by melt snow from top of mountain , or by continual access of fresh river from the land , and intermingle with the sea water , bear yet the dominion ( by the force of extreme frost ) may cause some part of salt water to freeze so with it , and so seem a little brackish , but otherwise the main sea freeze not , and therefore there be no mare Glaciale or freeze sea , as the opinion hitherto have be . Oure generali prove land here twice , but by the sudden fall of mist ( whereunto this coast be much subject ) he be like to loose sight of his ship , and be greedy endanger with the drive ice alongst the coast , be force aboard and fain to surcease his pretence till a better opportunity may serve : and have spend four day and night sail alongst this land , find the coast subject to such bitter cold and continual mist , he determine to spend no more time therein , but to bear out his course towards the straight call frobisher strait after the general name , who seven 289 t White coral get by sound . monstrous isle of ice , in taste fresh , tohere-hence they be suppose to come . the opinion of the freeze sea be destroy by experience . be the first that ever pass beyond 58 degree to the northward , for any thing that have be yet know of certainty of new find land , otherwise call the continent or firm land land of America , discover the say straight this last year 1576. between Frisland and the straight we have one great storm , wherein the Michael be somewhat in danger , the stirrage have her stirrage break , and her top mast blow °bnkenb^ae^ over board , and be not pass 50 league short of the tempest ? straight by our account , we strike sail and lay a hull , fear the continuance of the storm , the wind be at the north-east , and have lose company of the bark the first en - in that flaw of wind , we happy meet again the seven-tranceofthe teenth day of July , have the evening before see * s' diverse hand of fleet ice , which give a argument that we be not far from land . Oure generali in the morning from the main top ( the weather be reasonfill . 63. ] able clear ) descry land , but to be better assure he send the two bark two contrary course , whereby they may descry either the south or north foreland , the aid lie off and on at sea , with a small sail by a hand of ice , which be the mark for we to meet together again . and about noon , the weather be more clear , we make the north foreland perfect , which hall Ilana otherwise be call Halles hand , and also the small hand bear the name of the say hall whence the ore be take up which be bring into England this last year 1576 then say hall be present at the find and take up thereof , who be then master in the gabrieli with captain Frobisher . at our arrival here all the sea about this coast be so cover over with huge quanti tie of great ice , that we think these place may only deserve the name of mare Glaciale , and be call the icy sea the descrip - this north foreland be think to be divide from the trafhb continent of the Northerland , by a little sound call ' Halles sound , which make it a hand , and be think little less than then he of wight , and be the first entrance 290 of the straight upon the norther side , and stand in the latitude of sixty two degree and fifty minute , and be reckon from Frisland league . God have bless we with so happy a landfall , we bear into the straight which run in next hand , and somewhat further up to the northward , and come as near the shore as we may for the ice , and upon the eighteenth day of July our generali take the goldfiner with he , attempt to go on shore with a small row pinnace , upon the small island where the ore be take up , to prove whether there be any store thereof to be find , but he can not get in all that hand a piece so big as a walnut , where the first be find . but our man which seek the other hand thereabouts find they all to have good store of the ore , whereupon our generali with these good tiding return aboard about ten of the clock at night , and be joyful welcome of the company with a volie of shot . he bring egg , fowl , and a young seal aboard , which the company have kill ashore , and have find upon those hand begin set to catch foul , and stick new cut , with other thing , he well perceive that not long before some of the country people have resort thither . have therefore find those token of the people access in those part , and be in his first voyage well acquaint with their subtle and cruel disposition , he provide well for his better safety , and on Friday the ninteenth of July in the morning early , with his best company of gentleman and soldier , to the number of forty person , go on shore , aswell to discover the inland and habitation of the people , as also to find out some fit harborowe for our ship . And pass towards the shore with no small difficulty by reason of the abundance of ice which lie alongst the coast so thick together • that hardly any passage through they may be discover , we arrive at length upon the main of hall great hand , and find there also aswell as in the other small hand good store of the ore . and no more gold over find in the first hand . egg in fowl of Meta incognita . snare set to catch bird withal . 291 the building of a column , call mount Warwick . the first sight of the country people , waft with a flag . the meeting apart of two Englishman , with two of that country . the order oj their traffic leave his boat here with sufficient guard we pass up into the country about two english mile , and recover the top of a high hill , on the top whereof our man make a column or cross of stone heap up of a good heighth together in good sort , and solemn sound a trumpet , and say certain prayer kneel about the ensign , and honour the place by the name of mount Warwick , in remembrance of the right honourable the lord Ambrose Dudley earl of Warwick , who noble mind and good countenance in this , as in all other good action , give great encouragement and good furtherance . this do , we retire our company not see any thing here worth further discovery , the country seem barren and full of ragged mountain and in most part cover with snow . and thus march towards our boat , we espy certain of the country people on the top of mount Warwick with a flag waft we back again and make great noise , with cry like the mow of Buis seem great desirous of conference with we : whereupon the generali be therewith better acquaint , answer they again with the like cry , whereat and with the noise of our trumpet they seem greedy to rejoice , skip , laugh and dance for joy . and hereupon we make sign unto they , hold up two finger , command two of our man to go apart from our company , whereby they may do the like . so that forthwith two of our man and two of they meet together a good space from company , neither party have their weapon about they . our man give they pin and point and such trifle as they have . and they likewise bestow on our man two bow case and such thing as they have . they earnest desire our man to go up into their country , and our man offer they like kindness aboard our ship , but neither part ( as it seem ) admit or trust the other courtesy . their manner of traffic be thus , they do use to lay down of their merchandise upon the ground , so much as they mean to part withal , and 292 so look that the other party with who they make trade shall do the like , they themselves do depart , and then if they do like of their mart they come again , and take in exchange the other merchandise , otherwise if they like not , they take their own and depart . the day be thus well near spend , in haste we retire our company into our boat again , mind forthwith to search alongst the coast for some harbour fit for our ship , for the present necessity thereof be much , consider that all this while they lie off and on between the two land , be continual subject aswell to great danger of fleet ice , which environ they , as to the sudden flaw which the coast seem much subject unto . but when the people perceive our departure , with great token of affection they earnest call we back again , follow we almost to our boat : whereupon our generali take his master with he , who be best acquaint with their manner , go apart unto two of they , mean , if they can lay sure hold upon they , forcible to bring they aboard , with intent to bestow certain toy and apparel upon the one , and so to dismiss he with all argument of courtesy , and retain the other for a interpreter . the generali and his master be meet with their two companion together , after they have exchange certain thing the one with the other , one of the savage for lack of better merchandise , cut off the tail of his coat ( which be a chief ornament among they ) and give it unto our generali for a present . but he present upon a watchword give with his master sudden lay hold upon the two savage . but the ground underfoot be slippery with the snow on the side of the hill , their handfast fail and their prey escape run away and light recover their bow and arrow , which they have hide not far from they behind the rock . And be only two savage in sight , they so fierce , desperate , and with such fury assault and pursue our generali and his master , be altogether unarm , and not mistrust their subtlety 293 another meeting of two of our man with two of they . the Englishman chase to their boat . one of that countryman take . the english voyage that they chase they to their boat , and hurt the generali in the buttock with a arrow , who the rather speedy flee back , because they suspect a great number behind the rock . our soldier ( which be command before to keep their boat ) perceive the danger , and hear our man call for shot come speedy to rescue , think there have be a great number . but when the savage hear the shot of one of our caliver ( and yet have first bestow their arrow ) they run away , our man speedy follow they . but a servant of my lord of Warwick , call Nicholas Conger a good footman , and uncumber with any furniture have only a dagger at his back overtook one of they , and be a Cornishman and a good wrestler , show his companion such a cornish trick , that he make his side ache against the ground for a month after . and so be stay , he be take alive and bring away , but the other escape . thus with their strange and new prey our man repair to their boat , and pass from the main to a small hand of a mile compass , where they resolve to tarry all night ; for even now a sudden storm be grow so great at sea , that by no mean they can recover their ship . and here every man refresh himself with a small portion of victual which be lay into the boat for their dinner , have neither eat nor drink all the day before . but because they know not how long the storm may last , nor how far off the ship may be put to sea , nor whither they shall ever recover they again or not , they make great spare of their victual , as it great behoove they : for they know full well that the best cheer the country can yield they , be rock and stone , a hard food to live withal , and the people more ready to eat they then to give they wherewithal ! to eat . and thus keep very good watch and ward , they lie there all night upon hard clifle of snow and ice both wet , cold , and comfortless . Theise thing thus happen with the company on land , 294 the danger of the ship at sea be no less perilous . for within one hour after the general depart in the morning by negligence of the cook in overheating , and the workman in make the chimney , the aid be set on fire , and have be the confusion of the whole if by chance a boy espy it , it have not be speedy with great labour and god help well extinguish . this day also be diverse storm and flaw , and by nine of the clock at night the storm be grow so great , and continue such until the morning , that it put our ship at sea in no small peril : for have mountain of fleet ice on every side , we go roomer for one , and loof for another , some scrape we , and some happy escape we , that the least of a m. be as dangerous to strike as any rock , and able to have split asunder the strong ship of the world . we have a scope of clear without ice , ( as God will ) wherein we turn , be otherwise compass on every side about : but so much be the wind and so little be our sea room , that be able to bear only our forecourse we cast so oft about , that we make fourteen horde in eight ' glass running , be but four hour : but God be our best steresman , and by the industry of Charles Jackman and Andrew Dyer the master mate , both very expert mariner , and Richard Cox you master gunner , with other very careful sailor , then within board , and also by the help of the clear night which be without darkness , we do happy avoid those present danger , whereat since we have more marvel then in the present danger fear , for that every man within board , both better and worse have enough to do with his hand to hale rope , and with his eye to look out for danger . but the next morning be the 20 of July , as God will , the storm cease , and the generali espy the ship with his new captive and whole company , come happy aboard , and report what have pass a shore , whereupon altogether upon our knee we give God humble and hearty thanks , for that it have please he , the aid set on fire . the great danger of those rock of ice . [ Iii . 65. ] night without darkness in that country . 295 from so speedy peril to send we such speedy deliverance , and so from this northern shore we strike over towards the Southerland . the one and twenty of July , we discover a bay which run into the land , that seem a likely harbour gur first come - for our ship , wherefore our generali row thither with his boat , to make proof thereof , and with his goldfiner fa , " » ™ to search for ore , have never assay any thing on the straight . south shore as yet , and the first small hand which we land upon . here all the sand and cliff do so glister and have so bright a marquesite , that it seem all to be gold , but upon trial make , it prove no better than a i of black-lead , and verify the proverb . all be not gold black lead . tjiat glister . upon the two and twenty of July we bear into the say sound , and come to anchor a reasonable breadth off the shore , where think our self in good security , we be great endanger with a piece of drift ice , which the ebb bring forth of the sound and come thwart we ere we be aware . but the gentleman and soldier within board take great pain at this pinch at the Capstone , overcome the most danger thereof , and yet for all that may be do , it strike on our stern such a blow , that we fear lest it have strike away our rudder , and be force to cut our cable in the hawse , we be fain to set our fore sail to run further up within , and if our stirrage have not be strong than in the present time we fear , we have run the ship upon the rock , have a very narrow channel to turn in , but as God will , all come well to pass . and this jackmans be name jackmans sound , after the name of the sound . master mate , who have first like unto the place . smith hand . upon a small hand , within this sound call smith hand ( because he first set up his forge there ) be find a i of silver , but be not win out of the rock without great labour . here our goldfiner make say of such ore as they find upon the Northerland , and find four sort thereof to hold gold in good quantity . 296 i577-upon another small hand here be also find a great dead fish , which as it shall seem , have be embay with ice , and be in proportion round like to a porpose , be about twelve foot long , and in bigness answerable , have a horn of two yard long grow out of Thejmdingtf the snout or nostril . this horn be wreathe and an " ic°rnes strait , like in fashion to a taper make of wax , and ’ may true be think to be the sea unicorn . this horn be to be see and reserve as a jewel by the queen majesty commandment , in her wardrobe of robe . Tuesday the three and twenty of July , our generali with his best company of gentleman , soldier and sailor , to the number of seventie person in all , march with ensign displayde , upon the continent of the Southerland ( the suppose continent of America ) where , command a trumpet to sound a call for every man to repair to the ensign , he declare to the whole company how much the cause import for the service of her majesty , our country , our credit , and the safety of our own life , and therefore require every man to be conformable to order , and to be direct by those he shall assign . and he appoint for leader , captain Fenton , captain York , and his lieutenant George Beste : which do , we cast our self into a ring , and altogether upon our knee , give God humble thank for that it have please he of his great goodness to preserve we from such imminent danger , beseech likewise the assistance of his holy spirit , so to deliver we in safety into our country , whereby the light and truth of these secret be know , it may redound to the more honour of his holy name , and consequent to the advancement of our common wealth . and so , in as good sort as the place suffer , we march towards the top of the mountain , which be no less painful in climb then dangerous in descend , by reason of their steepness and ice . and have pass about five mile , by such unwieldy way , we return unto our ship with - 297 out sight of any people , or likelihood of habitation . here diverse of the gentleman desire our generali to suffer they to the number of twenty or thirty person to march up thirty or forty league in the country , to the end they may discover the inland , and do some acceptable service for their country . but he not content with the matter he seek for , and well consider the short time he have in hand , and the greedy desire our country have to a present savour and return of gain , bend his whole endeavour only to find a i to fraught his ship , and to leave the rest ( by God [ three . 66. ] help ) hereafter to be well accomplish . and therefore the twenty six of July he depart over to the Northland , with the two bark , leave the aid ride in jackmans sound , and mean ( after he have find convenient harbour , and fraught there for his ship ) to discover further for the passage . the bark come the same night to anchor in a sound upon the Northerland , where the tide do run so swift , and the place be so subject to indraft of ice , that by reason thereof they be great endanger , and have find a very rich i , as they suppose , and get almost twenty ton of ore together , upon the 28 of July the ice come drive into the sound where the bark ride , in such sort , that they be therewith great distress . and the Gabrieli ride astern the Michael , have her cable gall asunder in the hawse with a piece of drive ice , and lose another anchor , and have but one cable and anchor leave , for she have lose two before , and the ice still drive upon she , she be ( by God help ) well fence from the danger of the rest , by one great hand of ice , which come a ground hard a head of she , which if it have not so chance , i think sure she have be cast upon the rock with the ice . the Michael more anchor upon this great ice , and ride under the lee thereof : but about midnight , by the weight of it self , and the set of the tide , the ice break within half the bark length , and make 298 unto the company within board a sudden and fearful noise . the next flood towards the morning we weigh anchor , and go further up the straight , and leave our ore behind we which we have dig , for haste leave the place by the name of bear sound after the master name of the Michael , and name the hand lecester hand . in one of the small hand here we find a tomb , wherein the bone of a dead man lie together , and our savage captive be with we , and be demand by sign whether his countryman have not slay this man and eat his flesh so from the bone , he make sign to the contrary , and that he be slay with wolf and wild beast . here also be find hide under stone good store of fish , and sundry other thing of the inhabitant ; as sled , bridle , kettle of fish-skinne , knife of bone , and such other like . and our savage declare unto we the use of all those thing . And take in his hand one of those country bridle , he catch one of our dog and hamper he handsome therein , as we do our horse , and with a whip in his hand , he teach the dog to draw in a sled as we do horse in a coach , set himself thereupon like a guide : so that we may see they use dog for that purpose that we do our horse . and we find since by experience , that the lesser sort of dog they feed fat , and keep they as domestical cattle in their tent for their eat , and the great sort serve for the use of draw their sled . the twenty nine of July , about five league from bear sound , we discover a bay which be fence on each side with small hand lie off the main , which break the force of the tide , and make the place free from any indraft of ice , do prove a very fit harbour for our ship , where we come to anchor under a small island , which now together with the sound be call by the name of that right honourable and virtuous lady , anne countess of Warwick . and this be the further place that this year we have enter up 299 bear sound . lecesters hand . a tomb with a dead man bone in it . bridle , knife , and other instrument find hide among the rock . they use great dog to draw sleds , and title dog for their meat . thirty league discover within the strait . a good precedent of a good captain show by captain Frobisher . the english voyage within the streite , and be reckon from the cape of the queen foreland , which be the entrance of the streite not above 30 league . upon this hand be find good store of the ore , which in the wash hold gold to our think plain to be see : whereupon it be think best rather to load here , where there be store and indifferent good , than to seek further for better , and spend time with jeoperdie . and therefore our generali set the miner to work , and show first a good precedent of a painful labourer and a good captain in himself , give good example for other to follow he : whereupon every man both better and worse , with their best endeavour willing lay to their help hand . and the next day , be the thirty of July , the Michael be send over to jackmans sound , for the ay de and the whole company to come thither . upon the main land over against the countess hand we discover and behold to our the manner of great marvel the poor cave and house of those their house in country people , which serve they ( as it shall seem ) t country . por tjjejr winfer dwelling , and be make two fathom under ground , in compass round , like to a oven , be join fast one by another , have hole like to a fox or Conny berry , to keep and come together . they undertrench these place with gutter so , that the water fall from the hill above they , may slide away without their annoyance : and be seat common in the foot of a hill , to shield they better from the cold wind , have their door and entrance whale bone ever open towards the south . from the ground up-timber^ ward they build with whale bone , for lack of m er ' timber , which bend one over another , be handsome compact in the top together , and be cover over with sealesskinne , which in stead of tile , fence they from the rain . in which house they have only one room , have the one half of the flower raise with broad stone a foot high than the other , whereon straw moss , they make their nest to sleep in . 300 they defile these den most filthy with their beastly [ hl 67. ] feed , and dwell so long in a place ( as we think ) until their sluttishness loathe they , they be force to S‘ seek a sweet air , and a new seat , and be ( no doubt ) a disperse and wander nation , as the tar-tarians , and live in hold and troop , without any certain abode , as may appear by sundry circumstance of our experience . here our captive be ashore with we , to declare set up the use of such thing as we see , stay himself alone behind the company , and do set up five small stick mean round in a circle one by another , with one small bone thereof . place just in the midst of all : which thing when one of our man perceive , he call we back to behold the matter , think that he have mean some charm or witchcraft therein . but the best conjecture we can make thereof be , that he will thereby his countryman shall understand , that for our five man which they betray the last year ( who he signify by the five stick ) he be take and keep prisoner , which he signify by the bone in the midst . for afterward the savage when we show he the picture of his countreman , which the last year be bring into England ( who countreiman counterfeit we have draw , with boat and other furni - picture . ture , both as he be in his own , and also in english apparel ) he be upon the sudden much amaze thereat , and behold advise the same with silence a good while , as though he will strain courtesy whether shall begin the speech ( for he think he no doubt a lively creature ) at length begin to question with he , as with his companion , and find he dumb and mute , seem to suspect he , as one disdeinfull , and will with a little help have grow into choler at the matter , until at last by feel and handle , he find he but a deceive picture . and then with great noise and cry , cease not wonder , think that we can make man live or die at our pleasure . and thereupon call the matter to his remembrance , 301 another show of twenty person of that country in one boat . the english voyage he give we plain to understand by sign , that he have knowledge of the take of our five man the last year , and confess the manner of each thing , numbered the five man upon his five finger , and point unto a boat in our ship , which be like unto that wherein our man be betray : and when we make he sign , that they be slay and eat , he earnest deny , and make sign to the contrary . the last of July the Michael return with the aid to we from the Southerland , and come to anchor by we in the countess of Warwick sound , and report that since we depart from jackmans sound there happen nothing among they there great worth the remembrance , until the thirty of July , when certain of our company be a shore upon a small island within the say jackmans sound , near the place where the aid ride , do espy a long boat with diverse of the country people therein , to the number of eighteen or twenty person , who so soon as our man perceive , they return speedy aboard , to give notice thereof unto our company . they may perceive these people climb up to the top of a hill , where with a flag , they waft unto our ship , and make great outcry and noise , like so many Buis . hereupon our man do present man forth a small skiff , have not above six or seven person therein , which row near the place where those people be , to prove if they can have any conference with they . but after this small boat be send a great , be well appoint for their rescue , if need require . as soon as they espy our company come near they , they take their boat and haste away , either for fear , or else for policy , to draw our man from rescue further within their danger : wherefore our man construe that their come thither be but to seek advantage , follow speedy after they , but they row so swift away , that our man can come nothing near they . howbeit they fail not of their best endeavour in 302 row , and have chase they above two mile into the sea , return into their ship again . the morning follow be the first of August , captain York with the Michael come into jackmans sound , and declare unto the company there , that the last night pass he come to anchor in a certain bay ( which since be name York sound ) about four league distant from jackmans sound , be put to leeward of that place for lack of wind , where he discover certain tent of the country people , where go with his company ashore , he enter into they , but find the people depart , as it shall seem , for fear of their come . but among sundry strange thing which in these tent they find , there be raw and new kill flesh of unknown sort , with dead carcase and bone York sound . the apparel of dog , and i know not what . they also behold ( to their great marveile ) a doublet of canvas make after f0 ™ * 1 a^n^ . , the english fashion , a shirt , a girdle , three shoe for jman which the contrary foot , and of unequal bigness , which they well year before conjecture to be the apparel of our five poor country - be take man , which be intercept the last year by these captwe-countrey people , about fifty league from this place , further within the strait . whereupon our man be in good hope , that some of they may be here , and [ hl 68 ] yet live : the captain devise for the best leave his mind behind he in write , with pen , ink , and paper also , whereby our poor captive countryman , if it may come to their hand , may know their friend mind , and of their arrival , and likewise return their answer . and so without take any thing away in their tent , leave there also look glass , point , and other of our toy ( the better to allure they by such friendly mean ) depart aboard his bark , with intent to make haste to the aid , to give notice unto the company of all such thing as he have there discover : and so mean to return to these tent again , hope that he may by force or policy entrap or entice the people to some friendly conference . which thing when he have deliver a good devise of captain York . 3°3 to the whole company there , they determine forthwith to go in hand with the matter . hereupon captain York with the master of the aid and his mate ( who the night before have be at the tent , and come over from the other side in the Michael with he ) be accompany with the gentleman and soldier to the number of thirty or forty person in two small row pinnace make towards the place , where the night before they discover the tent of those people , and set Charles Jackman , be the master mate , ashore with a convenient number , for that he can best guide they to the place , they march over land , mean to compass they on the one side , while the captain with his boat may entrap they on the other side . but land at last at the place where the night before they leave they , they find they with their tent remove . notwithstanding , our man which march up into the country , pass over two or three mountain , by chance espy certain tent in a valley underneath they near unto a creek by the sea side , which because it be not the place where the guide have be the night before , they judge they to be another company , and besetting the Savages they about , determine to take they if they can . but have boat of they have quick descry our company , launch one 3 ™ ’ great and another small boat , be about 16 or 18 person , and very narrow escape , put themselves to sea . the english whereupon our soldier discharge their caliver , and " those^people of f°^owed they , think the noise thereof be hear that country . to our boat at sea , our man there will make what speed they may to that place . and thereupon indeed our man which be in the boat ( cross upon ' they in the mouth of the sound whereby their passage be let from get sea room , wherein it have be impossible the swift for we to overtake they by row ) force they to put rowtngof those themselves ashore upon a point of land within the say * e < * e ' sound ( which upon the occasion of the slaughter there , the bloody be since name the bloody point ) whereunto our man five ™ * ' so speedy follow , that they have little leisure leave they 304 to make any escape . but so soon as they land , each of they break his oar , think by that mean to prevent we , in carry away their boat for want of oar . and desperate return upon our man , resist they manful in their land , so long as their arrow and dart last , and after gather up those arrow which our man shoot at they , yea , and pluck our arrow out of their body encounter afresh again , and maintain their cause until both weapon and life fail they . and when they find they be mortal wound , be ignorant what mercy mean , with deadly fury they cast themselves headlong from off the rock into the sea , lest perhaps their enemy shall receive glory or prey of their dead carcaise , for they suppose we belike to be cannibal or eater of man flesh . in this conflict one of our man be dangerous hurt in the belly with one of their arrow , and of they be slay five or six , the rest by flight escape among the rock , save two woman , whereof the one be old and ugly , our man think she have be a devil or some witch , and therefore let she go : the other be young , and cumber with a suck child at her back , hide her self behind the rock , be espy by one of our man , who suppose she have be a man , shoot through the hair of her head , and pierce through the child arm , whereupon she cry out , and our surgeon mean to heal her child arm , apply salve thereunto . but she not acquaint with such kind of surgery , pluck those salve away , and by continual lick with her own tongue , not much unlike our dog , heal up the child arm . and because the day be wellnear spend our man make haste unto the rest of our company which on the other side of the water remain at the tent , where they find by the apparel , letter , and other english furniture , that they be the same company which captain York discover the night before , have remove themselves from the place where he leave they . and now consider their sudden fly from our vn 305 u York sound . a hot skirmish between the english and they of that country . the desperate nature of those people . the take of the woman and her child . a pretty kind of surgery which nature teach . man , and their desperate manner of fight , we begin to suspect that we have hear the last news of our man which the last year be betray of these people . And consider also their ravenous and bloody disposition in eat any kind of raw flesh or carrion howsoever stink , it be to be think that they have slay and devour our man : for the doublet which be find in their tent have many hole therein be make with their arrow and dart . [ Iii . 69. ] but now the night be at hand , our man with their captive and such poor stufie as they find in their tent , return towards their ship , when be at sea , there arise a sudden flaw of wind , which be not a little dangerous for their small boat : but as God will they come all safe aboard . and with these good news they return ( as before mention ) into the countess of Warwick sound unto we . and between jackmans sound , from whence they come , and the countess of Warwick sound between land and land , be think the narrow the narrow place of the strait be judge nine raius^s league over at the least : and jackmans sound be league over . upon the Southerland , lie direct almost over against the countess sound , as be reckon scarce thirty league the queen within the strait from the queen cape , which be the entrance of the streit of the Southerland . this cape be name queen Elizabeth cape , stand in the latitude of 62 degree and a half to the northward of new find land , and upon the same continent , for any thing that be yet know to the contrary . the manner of have now get a woman captive for the comfort the meeting of qf our manj we bring they both together , and every five , and their man with silence desire to behold the manner of their entertainment , meet and entertainment , the which be more worth the behold then can be well express by writing . at their first encounter they behold each the other very wistly a good space , without speech or word utter , with great change of colour and countenance , as though it seem the grief and disdeine of their captivity have 306 take away the use of their tongue and utterance : the woman at the first very sudden , as though she disdain or regard not the man , turn away , and begin to sing as though she mind another matter : but be again bring together , the man break up the silence first , and with stern and stay countenance , begin to tell a long solemn tale to the woman , whereunto she give good hear , and interrupt he nothing , till he have finish , and afterward , be grow into more familiar acquaintance by speech , they be turn together , so that ( i think ) the one will hardly have live without the comfort of the other . and for so much as we can perceive , albeit they live continual together , yet they do never use as man and wife , though the woman spare not to do all necessary thing that appertain to a good housewife indifferent for they both , as in make clean their cabin , and every other thing that appertain to his ease : for when he be seasick , she will make he clean , she will kill and flay the dog for their eat , and dress his meat . only i think it worth the note , the continency of they both : for the man will never shift himself , except he have first cause the woman to depart out of his cabin , and they both be most shamefast , lest any of their privy part shall be discover , either of themselves , or any other body . on Monday the six of August , the lieutenant with all the soldier , for the better guard of the miner and the other thing a shore , pitch their tent in the countess island , and fortify the place for their better defence as well as they can , and be to the number of forty person , when be all at labour , they may perceive upon the top of a hill over against they a number of the country people waft with a flag , and make great outcry unto they , and be of the same company , which have encounter late our man upon the other shore , be come to complain their late loss , and to entreat ( as it seem ) for restitution of the shamefastness and chastity of those savage captive . another appearance of the country people . 307 these people know the use of writing . a letter send unto the five english captive . [ in . 70. ] the english voyage the woman and child , which our man in the late conflict have take and bring away ; whereupon the generali take the savage captive with he , and set the woman where they may best perceive she in the high place of the island , go over to talk with they . this captive at his first encounter of his friend fall so out into tear that he can not speak a word in a great space , but after a while , overcome his kindness , he talk at full with his companion , and bestow friendly upon they such toy and trifle as we have give he , whereby we note , that they be very kind one to another , and greedy sorrowful for the loss of their friend . Oure generali by sign require his five man which they take captive the last year , and promise they , not only to release those which he have take , but also to reward they with great gift and friendship . our savage make sign in answer from they that our man shall be deliver we , and be yet live , and make sign likewise unto we that we shall write our letter unto they , for they know very well the use we have of writing , and receive knowledge thereof , either of our poor captive countryman which they betray , or else by this our new captive who have see we daily write , and repeat again such word of his language as we desire to learn : but they for this night , because it be late , depart without any letter , although they call earnest in haste for the same . and the next morning early be the seven of August , they call again for the letter , which be deliver unto they , they speedy depart , make sign with three finger , and point to the sun , that they mean to return within 3 day , until which time we hear no more of they , and about the time appoint they return , in such sort as you shall afterward hear . this night because the people be very near unto we , the lieutenant cause the trumpet to sound a call , and every man in the island repair to the ensign , he put they in mind of the place so far from their 308 country wherein they live , and the danger of a great multitude which they be subject unto , if good watch and ward be not keep , for at every low water the enemy may come almost dryfoot from the main unto we , wherefore he will every man to prepare he in good readiness upon all sudden occasion , and so give the watch their charge , the company depart to rest . i think the captain letter well worth the remembering , not for the circumstance of curious endite , but for the substance and good meaning therein contain , and therefore have repeat here the same , as by himself it be hasty write . the form of m. Martin Frobishers letter to the english captive . in the name of God , in who we all believe , who ( i trust ) have preserve your body and soul among these infidel , i commend i unto you . i will be glad to seek by all mean you can devise for your deliverance , either with force , or with any commodity within my ship , which i will not spare for your sake , or any thing else i can do for you . i have aboard , of they , a man , a woman , and a child , which i be content to deliver for you , but the man which i carry away from hence the last year be dead in England . Moreover you may declare unto they , that if they deliver you not , i will not leave a man alive in their country . and thus , if one of you can come to speak with i , they shall have either the man , woman , or child in pawn for you . and thus unto God who i trust you do serve , in haste i leave you , and to he we will daily pray for you . This Tuesday morning the seven of August . anno 1557. you to the uttermost of my power , Martin Frobisher . i have send you by these bearer , pen , ink , and postscript paper , to write back unto i again , if personal you can come to certify i of your estate . 3°9 the cause why m , Frobisher enter no fur-therwithin the streit this year . best bulwark . their king calledCatchoe . how he be honour . the english voyage now have the generali alter his determination for go any further into the streite at this time for any further discovery of the passage , have take a man and a woman of that country , which he think sufficient for the use of language : and have also meet with these people here , which intercept his man the last year , ( as the apparel and english furniture which be find in their tent , very well declare ) he know it be but a labour lose to seek they further off , when he have find they there at hand . And consider also the short time he have in hand , he think it best to bend his whole endeavour for the get of i , and to leave the passage further to be discover hereafter . for his commission direct he in this voyage , only for the search of the ore , and to defer the further discovery of the passage until another time . on Thursday the nine of August we begin to make a small fort for our defence in the countess island , and entrench a corner of a cliff , which on three part like a wall of good heighth be compass and well fence with the sea , and we finish the rest with cask of the earth , to good purpose , and this be call best bulwark , after the lieutenant name , who first devise - the same . this be do for that we suspect more lest the desperate man may oppress we with multitude , than any fear we have of their force , weapon , or policy of battle : but as wisdom will we in such place ( so far from home ) not to be of our self altogether careless : so the sign which our captive make unto we , of the come down of his governor or prince , which he call Catchoe , give we occasion to foresee what may ensue thereof , for he show by sign that this Catchoe be a man of high stature far then any of our nation be , and he be accustom to be carry upon man shoulder . about midnight the lieutenant cause a false alarm to be give in the island , to prove as well the readiness of the company there ashore , as also what help may be 310 hope for upon the sudden from the ship if need so require , and every part be find in good readiness upon such a sudden . Saturday the eleven of August the people show themselves again , and call unto we from the side of a hill over against we . the general ( with good hope to hear of his man , and to have answer of his letter ) go over unto they , where they present themselves not above three in sight , but be hide indeed in great number behind the rock , and make sign of delay with we to entrap some of we to redeem their own , do only seek advantage to train our boat about a point of land from sight of our company : whereupon our man just suspect they , keep aloof without their danger , and yet set one of our company ashore , which take up a great bladder which one of they offer we , and leave a look glass in the place , come into the boat again . in the mean while our man which stand in the countess island to behold , who may better discern they , than those of the boat , by reason they be on high ground , make a great outcry unto our man in the boat , for that they see diverse of the savage creep behind the rock towards our man , whereupon the generali present return without tiding of his man . concern this bladder which we receive , our captive make sign that it be give he to keep water and drink in , but we suspect rather it be give he to swim and shift away withal , for he and the woman seek diverse time to escape , have loose our boat from astern our ship , and we never a boat leave to pursue they withal , and have prevail very far , have they not be very timely espy and prevent therein . after our general come away from they they muster themselves in our sight , upon the top of a hill , to the number of twenty in a rank , all hold hand over their head , and dance with great noise and song 3 “ [ he - 7i . ] a bladder change fir a looking-glass . no news oj the english captive . to what end the bladder be deliver . those people dance upon the hill top . a skirmish show to those people . their flag make of bladder . the english voyage together : we suppose they make this dance and show for we to understand , that we may take view of their whole company and force , mean belike that we shall do the same . and thus they continue upon the hill top until night , when hear a piece of our great ordinance , which thunder in the hollowness of the high hill , it make unto they so fearful a noise , that they have no great will to tarry long after . and this be do more to make they know our force then to do they any hurt at all . on Sunday the 12 of August , captain Fenton train the company , and make the soldier maintain skirmish among themselves , as well for their exercise , as for the country people to behold in what readiness our man be always to be find , for it be to be think , that they lie hide in the hill thereabouts , and observe all the manner of our proceed . on Wednesday the fourteenth of August , our generali with two small boat well appoint , for that he suspect the country people to lie lurk thereabouts , go up a certain bay within the countess sound , to search for ore , and meet again with the country people , who so soon as they see our man make great outcry , and with a white flag make of bladder sow together with the gut and sinew of beast , waft we amain unto they , but show not above three of their company . but when we come near they , we may perceive a great multitude creep behind the rock , which give we good cause to suspect their traitorous meaning : whereupon we make they sign , that if they will lay their weapon aside , and come forth , we will deal friendly with they , although their intent be manifest unto we : but for all the sign of friendship we can make they they come still creep towards we behind the rock to get more advantage of we , as though we have no eye to see they , think belike that our single wit can not discover so bare devise and simple drift of they . their spokesman earnest persuade we with 312 ... I577 > many entice show , to come eat and sleep ashore , with great argument of courtesy , and clap his bare hand over his head in token of peace and innocence , will we to do the like . but the better to allure our hungry stomach , he bring we a trim bait of raw great offer . flesh , which for fashion sake with a boathook we catch into our boat : but when the cunning cater perceive his first cold morsel can nothing sharpen our stomach , he cast about for a new train of warm flesh to procure our appetite , wherefore he cause one of his fellow in halt manner , to come forth as a lame man from behind the rock , and the better to declare his kindness in carve , he hoist he upon his shoulder , and bring he hard to the water side where we be , leave he there limp as a easy prey to be take of we . his hope be that we will bite at this bait , and speedy leap ashore within their danger , whereby they may have apprehend some of we , to ransom their friend home again , which before we have take . the gentleman and soldier have great will to encounter they ashore , but the generali moor careful by process of time to win they , then wilful at the first to spoil they , will in no wise admit that any man shall put himself in hazard ashore , consider the matter he now intend be for the ore , and not for the conquest : notwithstanding to prove this cripple footmanship , he give liberty for one to shoot : whereupon the cripple have a part blow , light recover a rock and go away a true and no feign cripple , and have learn his lesson for ever halt afore such cripple again . but his fellow which lie hide before , full quick then appear in their likeness , and maintain the skirmish with their sling , bow and arrow very fierce , and come as near as the water suflr they : and with as desperate mind as have be see in any man , without fear of shcrtte or any thing , follow we all along the coast , but all their shot fall short of we , and be of little danger . they have belay all the coast along for we , [ in . 72. ] 313 and be disperse so , be not well to be number , a hundred but we may discern of they above a hundred perSavages . sonsj anj bad cause to suspect a great number . and thus without loss or hurt we return to our ship again . now our work grow to a end , and have , only with five poor miner , and the help of a few gentleman and soldier , bring aboard almost two hundred ton of ore in the space of twenty day , every man therewithal ! well comfort , determine lusty to work a fresh for a bone voyage , to bring our labour to a speedy and happy end . and upon Wednesday at night be the one and twenty of August , we full finish the whole work . and it be now good time to leave , for as the man be well weary , so their shoe and clothes be well wear , their basket bottom tear out , their tool break , and the ship reasonable well fill . some with overstraining themselves receive hurt not a little dangerous , some have their belly break , and other their leg make lame . and about this time the ice begin to congeal and freeze about our ship side a night , which give we a good argument of the sun decline southward , and put we in mind to make more haste homeward . it be not a little worth the memory , to the commendation of the gentleman and soldier herein , who leave all reputation apart , with so great willingness and with courageous stomach , have themselves almost overcome in so short a time the difficulty of this so great a labour . and this to be true , the matter , if it be well weigh without further proof , now bring home do well witness . Thursday the 22 of August , we pluck down our tent , and every man haste homeward , and make bonfire upon the top of the high mount of the island , and march with ensign display round about the island , we give a volley of shot for a farewell , in honour of the right honourable lady Anne , countess of Warwick , who name it bearethi : and so depart aboard . the 23 of August have the wind large at west , we set sail from out of the countess sound homeward , they return . but the wind calm we come to anchor within the point of the same sound again . the 24 of August about three of the clock in the morning , have the wind large at west , we set sail again , and by nine of the clock at night , we leave the queen foreland astern of we , and be clear of the streite , we bear further into the main ocean , keep our course more southerly , to bring our self the soon under the latitude of our own climate . the wind be very great at sea , so that we lay a hull all night , and have snow half a foot deep on the snow a hatch . fauus ? e from the 24 until the 28 we have very much wind , * ' but large , keep our course southsoutheast , and have like to have lose the bark , but by good hap we meet again . the height be take , we be in degree and a half . the 29 of August the wind blow much at Northeast , so that we can bear but only a bunt of our foresail , and the bark be not able to carry any sail at all . the Michael lose company of we and shape her course towards Orkney because that way be better know unto they , and arrive at Yermouth . the 30 of August with the force of the wind , and a surge of the sea , the master of the Gabriel and than the master boatswain be strike both overboard , and hardly be the boatswain recover , have hold on a rope hang overboard in the sea , and yet the bark be lace fore and after with rope a breast high within board . this master be call William smith , be but a young man and a very sufficient mariner , who be all the morning before exceed pleasant , tell his captain he dream that he be cast overboard , and that the 315 boatswain have he by the hand , and can not save he , and so immediate upon the end of his tale , his dream come right evil to pass , and indeed the boatswain in like sort hold he by one hand , have hold on a rope with the other , until his force fail , and the master drown . the height be take we find our self to be in the latitude of degree and a half , and reckon our self from the queen cape homeward about two hundred league . the last of August about midnight , we have two or three great and sudden flaw or storm . the first of September the storm be grow very great , and continue almost the whole day and night , and lie a hull to tarry for the bark our ship be much beat with the sea , every sea almost overtake our poop , so that we be constrain with a bunt of our sail to try it out , and ease the roll of our ship . and so the Gabriel not able to bear any sail to keep company with we , and our ship be high in the poop , [ three . 73. ] and a tall ship , whereon the wind have more force to drive , go so fast away that we lose sight of they , and leave they to God and their good fortune of sea the second day of September in the morning , it please God of his goodness to send we a calm , whereby we perth rudder of ceive the rudder of our ship tear in twain , and almost the aid tome ready to fap away . wherefore take the benefit of the ’ time , we fling half a dozen couple of our best man over board , who take great pain under water , drive plank , and bind with rope , do well strengthen and mend the matter , who return the most part more than half dead out of the water , and as god pleasure be , the sea be calm until the work be finish . how the lati - the September , the height of the sun be tude be take , we find our self to be in the latitude of always take degree and a half . in this voyage common we ' ratte-mth^^ take the latitude of the place by the height of the sun , staff then because the long day take away the light not only of astrolabe . the polar , but also of all other fix star . and here 316 the north star be so much elevate above the horizon , that with the staff it be hardly to be well observe , and the degree in the astrolabe be too small to observe minute . therefore we always use the staff and the sun as fit instrument for this use . have spend four or five day in traverse of the sea with contrary wind , make our Souther way good as near as we can , to raise our degree to bring our self with the latitude of Sylley , we take the height the ten of September , and find our self in the latitude of degree and ten minute . the eleven of September about six a clock at night the wind come good Southwest , our vex sb eat and set our course southeast . and upon Thursday , the twelve of September , take the height , we be in the latitude of and a half , and reckon our self not past one hundred and fifty league short of Sylley , the weather fair , the wind large at Westsouth west , we keep our course southeast . the thirteenth day the height be take , we find our self to be in the latitude of degree , the wind Westsouthwest , then be in the height of Sylley , and we keep our course east , to run in with the sleeve or chanel so call , be our narrow sea , and reckon we short of Sylley twelve league . Sunday , the 15 of September about four of the clock , we begin to sound with our lead , and have ground at 61 fathom depth , white small sandy ground , and reckon we upon the back of Sylley , and set our course east and by north , Eastnortheast , and Northeast among . the sixteenth of September , about eight of the clock in the morning sound , we have 65. fathom osey sand , and think our self thwart of saint George channel a little within the bank . And bear a small sail all night , we make many sounding , which be about forty fathom , and so shallow , that we can not well tell where we be . 317 the seventeenth of September we sound , and have forty fathom , and be not far off the land end , find brand sand with small worm and cockle shell , and be shoot between Sylley and the land end , and be within the bay , we be not able to double the point with a south and by east way , but be fain to make another board , the wind be at southwest and by west , and yet can not double the point to come clear of the land end , to bear along the channel : and the weather clear up when we be hard aboard the shore , and we make the land end perfect , and so put up along saint George chanel . and the weather be very foul at sea , we covet some harbour , because the arrival of our steerage be break , and so come to anchor in Padstow ? road in Cornwall . but ride there a very dangerous Cornwall ride , we be advise by the country , to put to sea again , and of the two evil , to choose the less , for there be nothing but present peril where we ride : whereupon we ply along the channel to get to Londy , from whence we be again drive , be but a open road , where our anchor come home , and with force of weather put to sea again , and about the three and twenty our cam of September , arrive at Milford haven in wale , which ^haven^ be a very good harbour , make we happy man , that ’ we have receive such long desire safety . about one month after our arrival ! here , by order from the lord of the counsel , the ship come up to the arrival Bristol , where the ore be commit to keep in the ^qrhtow^1 castle there . here we find the Gabriel one of the ’ bark , arrive in good safety , who have never a man within board very sufficient to bring home the ship , after the master be lose , by good fortune , when she come upon the coast , meet with a ship of Bristol at sea , who conduct she in safety thither . the Michael here we hear good tiding also of the arrival of the “ llorth ' art^ other bark call the Michael , in the north part , which cr pars . as not a ttie joyful unto we , that it please God so to bring we to a safe meeting again , and we lose in 318 all the voyage only one man , beside one that die only one man at sea , which be sick before he come aboard , and be die the so desirous to follow this enterprise , that he rather choose to dye therein , than not to be one to attempt so notable a voyage .