the description of the aforesaid river and haven . the say river be small , not past 50. pase broad , and ship draw three fathom water may enter in at a full sea : and at a low water there be nothing but a channel of a foot deep or thereabouts . on both side of the say river there be very good and fair ground , full of as fair and mighty tree as any be in the world , and diverse sort , which be above ten fathom high than tree above ■ $. the rest , and there be one kind of tree above three fathom fathm abqut - about , which they in the country call Hanneda , which have the most excellent virtue of all the tree of the world , whereof i will make mention hereafter . Moreover there be great store of Okes the most excellent that ever i see in my life , which be so lade with mast that they crack again : beside this there be fair arable , cedar , beech , and other tree , then grow in France : and hard unto this wood on the south side the ground be all cover with vine , which we find lade with grape as black as mulberry , but they be not so kind as those of France because the vine be not till , and because they grow of their own accord . Moreover there be many white thorn , which bear leave as big as oaken leaf , and fruit like unto meddler . to be short , it be as good a country to blow and manure as a man shall find or desire . we sow seed here of our country , as cabbage , naveau , lettuce and other , which grow and spring up out of the ground in eight day . the mouth of the river be towards the south , and it wind northward like unto a snake : and at the mouth of it towards the east there be a high and steep cliff , where we make a way in manner of a pair of stair , and aloft we make a fort to keep the nether fort and the ship , and all thing that may pass aswell by the great as by this small river . Moreover a man may behold a great extension of ground apt for tillage , strait and handsome and somewhat inclining towards the south , as easy to be bring to tillage as 267 Hanneda the most excellent tree of the world . abundance of vine full of grape . fruit like meddler . seed spring out of the ground within 8 day . a greatplaine of very good arable ground . i will desire , and very well replenish with fair oak and other tree of great beauty , no thick than the forest of France . here we set twenty man to work , which in one day have labour about a acre and a half of the say ground , and sow it part with Naveaus or small turnip , which at the end of eight day , as i say before , spring out of the earth . and upon that high cliff we find a fair fountain very near the say fort : adjoin whereunto we find good store of diamond of stone , which we esteem to be diamond . on the Canada . other side of the say mountain and at the foot thereof , which be towards the great river be all along a goodly a ynn my of the best iron in the world , and it reach even mtne ' hard unto our fort , and the sand which we tread on be perfect refine my , ready to be put into the furnace . Leaves of fine and on the water side we find certain leaf of fine asthic e jj as hiekg as a man nail . and westward of the nail find in say river there be , as have be say , many fair tree : Canada . and towards the water a goodly meadow full of as fair and goodly grass as ever i see in any meadow in France : and between the say meadow and the wood be great store of vine : and beyond the say vine the land excellent and grow full of hemp which grow of it self , which strong hemp . - s as gooc [ as possible may be see , and as strong . and at the end of the say meadow within a hundred pase there be a rise ground , which be of a kind of slate stone black and thick , wherein be vein of mynerall matter , which show like gold and silver : and throughout all that stone there be great grain of the say i . and in some place we have find stone like diamond , the most fair , polish and excellent cut that it be possible for a man to see , when the sun shine upon they , they glister as it be sparkle of fire . 