of the nature and manner of the people . t rest i speak a word or two of the naturali inhabitant , their nature and manner , leave large discourse thereof until time more convenient hereafter : now only so far forth , as that you may know , how that they in respect of trouble our inhabit and plant , be not to be fear , but that they shall have cause both to fear and love we , that shall inhabit with they . they be a people clothe with loose mantle make of dear skin , and apron of the same round about their middle , all else naked , of such a difference of stature only as we in England , have no edge tool or weapon of iron or steel to offend we withal , neither know they how to make any : those weapon that they • have , be only bow make of witch-hazel , and arrow of reed , flat edge truncheon also of wood about a yard long , neither have they any thing to defend themselves but target make of bark , and some armour make of stick wicker together with thread . their town be but small , and near the sea coast but few , some contain but ten or twelve house ; some 20. the great that we have see have be but of 30. house : if they be wall , it be only do with bark of tree make fast to stake , or else with pole only fix upright , and close one by another . their house be make of small pole , make fast at the top in round form after the manner as be use in many arbory in our garden of England , in most . five . 4 town cover with bark , and in some with artificiali mat make of long rush , from the top of the house down to the ground . the length of they be common double to the breadth , in some place they be but 12. and 16. yard long , and in other some we have see of four and twenty . in some place of the country , one only town belong to the government of a wiroan or chief lord , in other some two or three , in some six , eight , and more : the great wiroan that yet we have deal with , have but eighteen town in his government , and able to make not above seven or eight hundred fight man at the most . the language of every government be different from any other , and the further they be distant , the great be the difference . their manner of war among themselves be either by sudden surprise one a other most common about the dawn of the day , or moonlight , or else by ambush , or some subtle devise . set battle be very rare , except it fall out where there be many tree , where either part may have some hope of defence , after the delivery of every arrow , in leap behind some or other . if there fall out any war between we and they , what their fight be likely to be , we have advantage against they so many manner of way , as by our discipline , our strange weapon and devise else , especial ordinance great and small , it may easy be imagine : by the experience we have have in some place , the turn up of their heal against we in run away be their best defence . in respect of we they be a people poor , and for want of skill and judgement in the knowledge and use of our thing , do esteem our trifle before thing of great value : notwithstanding , in their proper manner ( consider the want of such mean as we have ) , they seem very ingenious . for although they have no such tool , nor any such craft , science and art as 375 we , yet in those thing they do , they show excellende of wit . and by how much they upon due consideration shall find our manner of knowledge and craft to exceed they in perfection , and speed for do or execution , by so much the more be it probable that they shall desire our friendship and love , and have the great respect for please and obey we . whereby may be hope , if mean of good government be use , that they may in short time be bring to civility , and the embrace of true religion . some religion they have already , which although it be far from the truth , yet be as it be , there be hope it may be the easy and soon reform . they believe that there be many god , which they call Mantoac , but of different sort and degree , one only chief and great God , which have be from all [ three . 277. ] eternity . who , as they affirm , when he purpose to make the world , make first other god of a principali order , to be as mean and instrument to be use in the creation and government to follow , and after the sun , moon , and star as petty god , and the instrument of the other order more principal . first ( they say ) be make water , out of which by the god be make all diversity of creature that be visible or invisible . for mankind they say a woman be make first , which by the work of one of the god , conceive and bring forth child : and in such sort they say they have their beginning . but how many year or age have pass since , they say they can make no relation , have no letter nor other such mean as we to keep record of the particularity of time pass , but only tradition from father to son . they think that all the god be of humane shape , and therefore they represent they by image in the form of man , which they call kewasowok , one alone be call Kewas : they they place in house appropriate or temple , which they call Machicomuck , where they 376 worship , pray , sing , and make many time offer unto they . in some MachicOmuck we have see but one Kewas , in some two , and in other some three . the common sort think they to be also god . they believe also the immortality of the soul , that after this life as soon as the soul be depart from the body , accord to the work it have do , it be either carry to heaven the habitacle of god , there to enjoy perpetuali bliss and happiness , or else to a great pit or hole , which they think to be in the further part of their part of the world towards the sun set , there to burn continual : the place they call Popogusso . for the confirmation of this opinion , they tell i two story of two man that have be late dead and revive again , the one happen but few year before our come into the country of a wicked man , which have be dead and bury , the next day the earth of the grave be see to move , be take up again , who make declaration where his soul have be , that be to say , very near enter into Popogusso , have not one of the god save he , and give he leave to return again , and teach his friend what they shall do to avoid that terrible place of torment . the other happen in the same year we be there , but in a town that be 60. mile from we , and it be tell i for strange news , that one be dead , bury , and take up again as the first , show that although his body have lie dead in the grave , yet his soul be alive , and have travail far in a long broad way , on both side whereof grow most delicate and pleasant tree , bear more rare and excellent fruit , then ever he have see before , or be able to express , and at length come to most brave and fair house , near which he meet his father that have be dead before , who give he great charge to go back again , and show his friend what good they be to , do to enjoy the pleasure of that place , which when he have do he shall after come again . 377 what subtlety soever be in the wiroance and priest , this opinion work so much in many of the common and simple sort of people , that it make they have great respect to their governor , and also great care what they do , to avoid torment after death , and to enjoy bliss , although notwithstanding there be punishment ordain for malefactor , as stealer , whoremonger , and other sort of wicked doer , some punish with death , some with forfeiture , some with beat , accord to the greatness of the fact . and this be the sum of their religion , which i learn by have speciali familiarity with some of their priest . wherein they be not so sure ground , nor give such credit to their tradition and story , but through converse with we they be bring into great doubt of their own , and no small admiration of we , with earnest desire in many , to learn more than we have mean for want of perfect utterance in their language to express . most thing they see with we , as mathematical ! instrument , sea compass , the virtue of the loadstone in draw iron , a perspective glass whereby be show many strange sight , burn glass , wild firewoorke , gun , hook , write and read , spring-clock that seem to go of themselves and many other thing that we have be so strange unto they , and so far exceed their capacity to comprehend the reason and mean how they shall be make and do , that they think they be rather the work of god then of man , or at the leastwise they have be give and teach we of the god . which make many of they to have such opinion of we , as that if they know not the truth of God and religion already , it be rather to be have from we who God so special love , then from a people that be so simple , as they find themselves to be in comparison of we . whereupon great credit be give unto that we speak of , concern such matter . 378 many time and in every town where i come , accord as i be able , i make declaration of the content of the bible , that therein be set forth the true and only God , and his mighty work , that therein [ he . 278. ] be contain the true doctrine of salvation through Christ , with many particularity of miracle and chief point of religion , as i be able then to utter , and think fit for the time . and although i tell they the book material and of it self be not of any such virtue , as i think they do conceive , but only the doctrine therein contain : yet will many be glad to touch it , to embrace it , to kiss it , to hold it to their breast and head , and strike over all their body with it , to show their hungry desire of that knowledge which be speak of . the wiroan with who we dwell call Wingina , and many of his people will be glad many time to be with we at our prayer , and many time call upon we both in his own town , as also in other whither he sometime accompany we , to pray and sing psalm , hope thereby to be partaker of the same effect which we by that mean also expect . twice this wiroan be so grievous sick that he be like to die , and as he lie languish , doubt of any help by his own priest , and think he be in such danger for offend we and thereby our God , send for some of we to pray and be a mean to our God that it will please he either that he may live , or after death dwell with he in bliss , so likewise be the request of many other in the like case . on a time also when their corn begin to wither by reason of a drought which happen extraordinary , fear that it have come to pass by reason that in some thing they have displease we , many will come to we and desire we to pray to our god of England , that he will preserve their corn , promise that when it be ripe we also shall be partaker of the fruit . 379 there can at no time happen any strange sickness , loss , hurt , or any other cross unto they , but that they will impute to we the cause or mean thereof , for offend or not please we . one other rare and strange accident , leave other , will i mention before i end , which move the whole country that either know or hear of we , to have we in wonderful admiration . there be no town where we have any subtle devise practise against we , we leave it unpunished or not revenge ( because we seek by all mean possible to win they by gentleness ) but that within a few day after our departure from every such town , the people begin to die very fast , and many in short space , in some town about twenty , in some fourty , and in one six score , which in truth be very many in respect of their number . This happen in no place that we can learn , but where we have be , where they use some practise against we , and after such time . the disease also be so strange , that they neither know what it be , nor how to cure it , the like by report of the old man in the country never happen before , time out of mind . a thing special observe by we , as also by the naturali inhabitant themselves . insomuch that when some of the inhabitant which be our friend , and especial the wiroan Wingina , have observe such effect in four or five town to follow their wicked practise , they be persuade that it be the work of our god through our mean , and that we by he it may kill and slay who we will without weapon , and not come near they . and thereupon when it have happen that they have understanding that any of their enemy have abuse we in our journey , hear that we have wrought no revenge with our weapon , and fear upon some cause the matter shall so rest : do come and entreat we that we will be a mean to our God that they as other that have deal ill with we might in like sort die , 380 allege how much it will be for our credit and profit , as also they , and hope furthermore that we will do so much at their request in respect of the friendship we profess they . who entreaty although we show that they be ungodly , affirm that our god will not subject himself to any such prayer and request of man : that indeed all thing have be and be to be do according to his good pleasure as he have ordain : and that we to show our self his true servant ought rather to make petition for the contrary , that they with they may live together with we , be make partaker of his truth , and serve he in righteousness , but notwithstanding in such sort , that we refer that , as all other thing , to be do according to his divine will and pleasure , and as by his wisdom he have ordain to be best . yet because the effect fall out so sudden and short after accord to their desire , they think nevertheless it come to pass by our mean , and that we in use such speech unto they , do but dissemble the matter , and therefore come unto we to give we thanks in their manner , that although we satisfy they not in promise , yet in deed and effect we have fulfil their desire . this marvelous accident in all the country wrought so strange opinion of we , that some people can not tell whether to think we god or man , and the rather because that all the space of their sickness , there be no man of we know to die , or that be special sick : they note also that we have no woman among we , neither that we do care for any of they . some therefore be of opinion that we be not bear of woman , and therefore not mortal , but that we be man of a old generation many year past , then rise again to immortality . some will likewise seem to prophecy that there [ three . 279 - ] be more of our generation yet 3 » i to come to kill they and take their place , as some think the purpose be , by that which be already do . those that be immediate to come after we they imagine to be in the air , yet invisible and without body , and that they by our intreaty and for the love of we , do make the people to die in that sort as they do , by shoot invisible bullet into they . to confirm this opinion , their physician ( to excuse their ignorance in cure the disease ) will not be ashamed to say , but earnest make the simple people believe , that the string of blood that they suck out of the sick body , be the string wherewithal ! the invisible bullet be tie and cast . some also think that we shoot they our self out of our piece , from the place where we dwell , and kill the people in any town that have offend we , as we list , how far distant from we soever it be . and other some say , that it be the speciali work of God for our sake , as we our self have cause in some sort to think no less , whatsoever some do , or may imagine to the contrary , special some astrologer , know of the eclipse of the sun which we see the same year before in our voyage thitherward , which unto they appear very terrible . and also of a comet which begin to appear but a few day before the begin of the say sickness . but to exclude they from be the speciali cause of so speciali a accident , there be further reason than i think fit at this present to be allege . Theise their opinion i have set down the more at large , that it may appear unto you that there be good hope they may be bring through discreet deal and government to the embracing of the truth , and consequent to honour , obey , fear and love we . and although some of our company towards the end of the year , show themselves too fierce in slay some of the people in some town , upon cause that on our part may easy enough have be bear 382 withal : yet notwithstanding , because it be on their part just deserve , the alteration of their opinion general and for the most part concern we be the less to be doubt . and whatsoever else they may be , by carefulness of our self need nothing at all to be fear , 