the eight and twenty , George Howe , one of our twelve assistant be slay by diverse savage , which be come over to Roanoak , either of purpose to espy our company , and what number we be , or else to hunt deer , whereof be many in the island . Theise Savages be secret hide among high reed , where oftentimes they find the deer asleep , and so kill they , espy our man wade in the water alone , almost naked , without any weapon , save only a small fork stick , catch crab therewithal , and also be stray two mile from 392 his company , and shoot at he in the water , where they give he sixteen wound with their arrow : and after they have slay he with their wooden sword , they beat his head in piece , and flee over the water to the main . on the thirty of July master Stafford and twenty of our man pass by water to the island of croatoan , with Manteo , who have his mother , and many of his kindred dwell in that island , of who we hope to understand some news of our fifteen man , but especial to learn the disposition of the people of the country towards we , and to renew our old friendship with they . at our first land they seem as though they will fight with we : but perceive we begin to march with our shot towards they , they turn their back , and flee . then Manteo their country man call to they in their own language , who , assoon as they hear , they return , and throw away their bow and arrow , and some of they come unto we , embrace and entertain we friendly , desire we not to gather or spill any of their corn , for that they have but little . we answer they , that neither their corn , nor any other thing of they , shall be diminish by any of we , and that our come be only to renew the old love , that be between we and they at the first , and to live with they as brethren and friend : which answer seem to please they well , wherefore they request we to walk up to their town , who there feast we after their manner , and desire we earnest , that there may be some token or badge give they of we , whereby we may know they to be our friend , when we meet they any where out of the town or island . they tell we further , that for want of some such badge , diverse of they be hurt the year before , be find out of the island by master lane his company , whereof they show we one , which at that very instant lie lame , and have lie of that hurt ever since : but they say , they know our man mistake they , and hurt they in stead of winginos man , wherefore they hold we excuse . 393 A.D. I587 - August . the next day we have conference further with they , concern the people of Secotan , Aquascogoc , and pomeiok , will they of croatoan to certify the people of those town , that if they will accept our friendship , we will willing receive they again , and that all unfriendly deal past on both part , shall be utter forgive and forget . to this the chief man of croatoan answer , that they will glad do the best they can , and within seven day , bring the wiroance and chief governor of those town with they , to our governor at Roanoak , or their answer . we also understand of the man of croatoan , that our man master how be slay by the remnant of winginos man dwell then at Dasamonguepeuk , with who Wanchese keep company : and also we understand by they of croatoan , how that the 15 Englishman leave at Roanoak the year before , by sir Richard Grinvile , be sudden set upon , by 30 of the man of Secota , Aquascogoc , and Dasamonguepeuk , in manner follow . they convey themselves secret behind the tree , near the house where our man careless live : and have perceive that of those fifteen they can see but eleven only , two of those savage appear to the 11 Englishman , call to they by friendly sign , that but two of their chief man shall come arm to speak with those two savage , who seem also to be unarm . wherefore two of the chief of our Englishman go glad to they : but while one of those savage traitorous embrace one of our man , the other with his sword of wood , which he have secret hide under his manteli , strike he on the head and slay he , and present the other eight and twenty Savages show they self : the other Englishman perceive this , flee to his company , who the savage pursue with their bow , and arrow , so fast , that the Englishman be force to take the house , wherein all their victuali , and weapon be : but the 394 the four voyage to Virginia a.d. . 1587 - savage forthwith set the same on fire : by mean whereof our man be force to take up such weapon as come first to hand , and without order to run forth among the savage , with who they skirmish above a hour . in this skirmish another of our man be shot into the mouth with a arrow , where he die : and also one of the Savages be shoot into the side by one of our man , with a wild fire arrow , whereof he die present . the place where they fight be of great advantage to the savage , by mean of the thick tree , behind which the savage through their nimbleness , defend themselves , and so offend our man with their arrow , that our man be some of they hurt , retire fight to the water side , where their boat lie , with which they flee towards Hatorask . by that time they have row but a quarter of a mile , they espy their four fellow come from a creek thereby , where they have be to fetch oyster : these four they receive into their boat , leave Roanoak , and land on a little island on the right hand of our entrance into the harbour of Hatorask , where they remain a while , but afterward depart , whither as yet we know not . have now sufficient dispatch our business at croatoan , the same day we depart friendly , take our leave , and come aboard the fleet at Hatorask . the eight of August , the governor have long expect the come of the wiroanse of pomeiok , Aquascogoc , Secota , and Dasamonguepeuk , see that the seven day be pass , within which they promise to come in , or to send their answer by the man of croatoan , and no tiding of they hear , be certain also inform by those man of croatoan , that the remnant of Wingina his man , which be leave alive , who dwell at Dasamonquepeuk , be they which have slay George Howe , and be also at the drive of our eleven Englishman from Roanoak , he think to defer the revenge thereof no long . wherefore the same night about midnight , he pass over the water , 395 accompany with captain Stafford , and 24 man , whereof Manteo be one , who we take with we to be our guide to the place where those savage dwell , where he behave himself towards we as a most faithful Englishman . the next day , be the 9 of August , in the morning so early that it be yet dark , we land near the dwell place of our enemy , and very secret convey our self through the wood , to that side , where we have their house between we and the water : and have espy their fire , and some sit about it , we present set on they : the miserable soul herewith amaze , flee into a place of thick reed , grow fast by , where our man perceive they , shoot one of they through the body with a bullet , and therewith we enter the reed , among which we hope to acquit their evil do towards we , but we be deceive , for those savage be our friend , and be come from croatoan to gather the corn and fruit of that place , because they understand our enemy be flee immediate after they have slay George Howe , and for haste have leave all their corn , tobacco , and pompion stand in such sort , that all have be devour of the bird , and deer , if it have not be gather in time : but they have like to have pay dear for it : for it be so dark , that they be naked , and their man and woman apparel all so like other , we know not but that they be all man : and if that one of they which be a wiroances wife have not have a child at her back , she have be slay in stead of a man , and as hap be , another Savage know master Stafford , and run to he , call he by his name , whereby he be save . find our self thus disappoint of our purpose , we gather all the corn , pease , pompion , and tobacco that we find ripe , leave the rest unspoiled , and take menatoan his wife , with the young child , and the other savage with we over the water to Roanoak . 396 the four voyage to Virginia a.d. although the mistake of these savage somewhat grieve Manteo , yet he impute their harm to their own folly , say to they , that if their wiroance have keep their promise in come to the governor at the day appoint , they have not know that mischance . the 13 of August our savage Manteo , by the commandment of sir Walter Ralegh , be christen in [ three . 285. ] Roanoak , and call lord thereof , and of dasamonguepeuk , in reward of his faithful service .