to the worshipful and my very friend master Richard Hakluyt , much happiness in the lord . ir , as well for the satisfy of your earnest request , as the performance of my promise make unto you at my last be with you in England , i have send you ( although in a homely stile , especial for the contentation of a delicate ear ) the true discourse of my last voy - age into the west Indies , and part of America call Virginia , take in hand about the end of February , in the year of our redemption 1590. and what event [ three . 288. ] happen unto we in this our journey , you shall plain perceive by the sequel of my discourse . there be at the time aforesaid three ship absolute determine to go for the west Indies , at the speciali charge of m. John watte of London Marchant . but when they be full furnish , and in readiness to make their departure , a generali stay be command of all ship throughout England . which so soon as i hear , i present ( as 1 thought it most requisite ) acquaint sir Walter Ralegh therewith , desire he that as i have sundry time afore be chargeable and troublesome unto he , for the supply and relief of the planter in Virginia : so likewise , that by his endeavour it will please he at that instant to procure licence for those three ship to proceed on with their determine voyage , that thereby the people in Virginia ( if it be god’s pleasure ) may speedy be comfort and relieve without further charge unto he . whereupon he by his good mean obtain licence of the queen majesty , and order to be take , that the owner of the 3 ship shall be bind unto sir Walter Ralegh or his assign , in 3000 pound , that those 3 ship in consideration of their release - 404 mean shall take in , and transport a convenient number of passenger , with their furniture and necessary to be land in Virginia . nevertheless that order be not observe , neither be the bond take accord to the intention aforesaid . but rather in contempt of the aforesaid order , i be by the owner and commander of the ship deny to have any passenger , or any thing else transport in any of the say ship , save only my self and my chest ; no not so much as a boy to attend upon i , although i make great suit , 8c earnest intreaty aswell to the chief commander , as to the owner of the say ship . which cross and unkind deal , although it very much discontent i , notwithstanding the scarcity of time be such , that i can have no opportunity to go unto sir Walter Ralegh with complaint : for the ship be then all in readiness to go to the sea , will have be depart before i can have make my return . thus both governor , master , and sailor , regard very small the good of their countryman in Virginia ; determine nothing less than to touch at those place , but whole dispose themselves to seek after purchase and spoil , spend so much time therein , that summer be spend before we arrive at Virginia . and when we be come thither , the season be so unfit , 8c weather so foul , that we be constrain of force to forsake that coast , have not see any of our planter , with loss of one of our ship-boat , and 7 of our chief man : and also with loss of 3 of our anchor and cable , and most of our cask with fresh water leave on shore , not possible to be have aboard . which evil 8c unfortunate event ( as well to their own loss as to the hindrance of the planter in Virginia ) have not chance , if the order set down by sir Walter Ralegh have be observe , or if my daily 8c continual petition for the performance of the same may have take any place . thus may you plain 405 perceive the success of my five and last voyage to Virginia , which be no less unfortunate end then froward begin , and as luckless to many , as sinister to my self . but i will to God it have be as prosperous to all , as noisome to the planter ; and as joyful to i , as discomfortable to they . yet see it be not my first cross voyage , i remain content . And want my wish , i leave off from prosecute that whereunto i will to God my wealth be answerable to my will . thus commit the relief of my discomfortable company the planter in Virginia , to the merciful help of the almighty , who i most humble beseech to help and comfort they , accord to his most holy will and their good desire , i take my leave : from my house at newtowne in Kylmore the 4 of February , 1593. your most wellwishing friend , John white . 