the second voyage unto Florida , make and write by captain Laudonniere , which fortify and inhabit there two summer and one whole winter . Fter our arrival at diepe , at our come home , from our first voyage ( which be the twenty of July 1562 ) we find the civil war begin , which be in part the cause why our man be not succour , as captain John Ribault have promise they : whereof it follow that the civil war the cause why the Frenchman be not sup - captain Albert be kill by his soldier , and the phed , which country abandon , as heretofore we have sufficient ^re , ty* discourse , and as it may more at large be understand j^rst voyase by those man which be there in person . after the peace be make in France , my lord admiral de chastillon show unto the king , that he hear no news at all of the man which captain John Ribault have leave in Florida , and that it be pity to suffer they to perish . in which respect , the king be content he shall cause 3 ship to be furnish , the one of six score ton , the other of 100 , and the three of 60 , to seek they out , and to succour they . my lord admiral therefore be well inform of the faithful service which i have do , aswell unto his majesty as to his predecessor king of France , advertise the king how able i be to do he service in this voyage , which be the cause that he make i chief captain over these 3 ship , and charge i to ix laudonnier second voyage to Florida , with three ship the 22 of April 1564. the isle of Teneriffa , or the pike . the english voyage depart with diligence to perform his commandment , which for my own part i will not gainsay , but rather think my self happy to have be choose out among such a infinite number of other , which in my judgement be very well able to have quit themselves in this charge , i embark my self at new haven the 22 of April 1564 , and sail so , that we fall near unto the coast of England : and then i turn towards the south , to sail direct to the fortunate island , at this present call the canary , one of which call the isle savage ( because as i think it be altogether without inhabitant ) be the first that our ship pass . sail therefore on forward , we land the next day in the isle of Teneriffa , otherwise call the pike , because that in the midst thereof there be a exceed high mountain , near as high as that of Aetna , which rise up like a pike , into the top whereof no man can go up but from the midst of may until the midst of August , by reason of the over great cold which be there all the year : which be a wonderful strange thing , consider that it be not past 27 degree and a half distant from the equator . we see it all cover over with snow , although it be then but the five of May . the inhabitant in this isle be heretofore pursue by the Spaniard , retire themselves into this mountain , where for a space they make war with they , and will not submit themselves to their obedience , neither by foul nor fair mean , they disdain so much the loss of their island . for those which go thither on the Spaniard behalf , leave their carcase there , so that not so much as one of they return home to bring news . notwithstanding in the end , the inhabitant not able to live in that place accord to their nature , or for want of such thing as be necessary for the commodity of their livelihood , do all die there . after i have furnish my self with some fresh water , very good and excellent , which .. 15640 spring out of a rock at the foot of this mountain , i continue my course towards the west , wherein the wind favour i so well , that 15 day after our ship arrive safe and sound at the Antilles : and go on land at the isle of Martinino , one of they the e 0 °f first of they , the next day we arrive at Dominica , mat-ttnino . twelve league distant from the former . island . Dominica be one of the fair island of the west , full of hill , and of very good smell . who singularity desire to know as we pass , and seek also to refresh our self with fresh water , i make the mariner cast anchor , after we have sail about half along the coast thereof . as soon as we have cast anchor , two Indians ( inhabitant of that place ) sail towards we in two canoas full of a fruit of great excellency which they call Ananas . as they Ananas a approach unto our bark , there be one of they fruit of great which be in some misdoubt of we , go back eme enae ' again on land , and flee his way with as much speed as he can possible . which our man perceive and [ three . 320. ] enter with diligence into the other Canoa , wherein they catch the poor indian , and bring he unto i . but the poor fellow become so astonish in behold we , that he know not which way to behave himself , because that ( as afterward i understand ) he fear that he be fall into the Spaniard hand , of who he have be take once before , and which , as he show we , have cut of his stone . at length this poor Indian be secure of we , and discourse unto we of many thing , whereof we receive very small pleasure , because we understand not his mind but by his sign . than he desire i to give he leave to depart , and promise i that he will bring i a thousand present , whereunto i agree on condition that he will have patience until the next day , when i purpose to go on land , where i suffer he to depart after i have give he a shirt , and certain small trifle , wherewith he depart very well content from we . the place where we go on shore be hard by a very high rock , out of which there run a little river of sweet and excellent good water : by which river we stay certain day to discover the thing which be worthy to be see , and traffic daily with the Indians : which above all thing beseech we that none of our man shall come near their lodging nor their garden , otherwise that we shall give they great cause of jealousy , and that in so do , we shall not want of their fruit which they call Ananas , whereof they offer we very liberal , receive in recompense certain thing of small value . this notwithstanding , it happen on a day that certain of our man desirous to see some new thing in these strange country , walk through the wood : and follow still the little river side , they spy two serpent of exceed bigness , which go side by side overthwart the way . my soldier go before they think to let they from go into the wood : but the serpent nothing at all astonish at these gesture glance into the bush with fearful hyssing : yet for all that , my man draw their sword and kill they , and find they afterward 9 great foot long , and as big as a man leg . during this combat , certain other more undiscreet go and gather their ananas in the indian garden , trample through they without any discretion : and not therewithal ! content they go towards their dwelling ; whereat the Indians be so much offend , that without regard any thing they rush upon they and discharge their shot , so that they hit one of my man name Martine chaveau , which remain behind . we can not know whether he be kill on the place , or whether he be take prisoner : for those of his company have enough to do to save themselves without think of their companion . whereof Monsieur de Ottigni my lieutenant be advertise , send unto i to know whether i think good that he shall lay a ambush for the Indians which have either take or kill our man , or whether he shall go direct to their dwelling to know the truth . i send unto he after good deliberation hereupon , that he shall not attempt any thing , and that for diverse occasion : but contrariwise that he shall embark himself with all diligence , and consequent all they that be on land : which he do with speed . but as he sail towards our ship he perceive along the shore a great number of Indians which begin to charge they with their arrow : he for his part discharge store of shot against they , yet be not able to hurt they , or by any mean to surprise they : for which cause he quite forsake they , and come unto our ship . where stay until the next day morning we set sail follow our wont course , and keep the same , we discover diverse isle conquer by the Spaniard , as the isle of S. Christopher , and of the saint , of Monserrate , and la Redonda : afterwards we pass between Anguilla and Anegada , sail towards new France . where we arrive 15 day after , to wit , on Thursday the 22 of June about 3 of the clock in the afternoon , and land near a little river which be 30 degree distant from the equator , and 10 lague above cape Francois draw towards the south , and about thirty league above the river of May . after we have strike sail and cast anchor athwart the river , i determine to go on shore to discover the same . therefore be accompany with monsieur Ottigni , with monsieur de Arlac my ensign , and a certain number of gentleman and soldier , i embark my self about 3 or 4 of the clock in the evening . And be arrive at the mouth of the river , i cause the channel to be sound , which be find to be very shallow , although that far within the same the water be there find reasonable deep , which separate it self into two great arm , whereof one run towards the south , and the other his arrival in Florida the zz of June 1564. cape Francois be between the river of dolphin and the river of May , make that the distance 30 league about , which be but 10 league over land . towards the north . have thus search the river , i go on land to speak with the Indians which wait for we upon the shore , which at our come on land , come before we , cry with a loud voice in their indian language , Antipola Bonassou , which be as much to say , as brother , friend , or some such like [ three . 321. ] thing . after they have make very much of we , they show we their Paracoussy , that be to say , their king and governor , to who i present certain toy , wherewith he be well please . and for my own the great love part , i praise God continual , for the great love andc^eof which i have find in these savage , which be sorry t e on tans . nothing , but that the night approach , and make we retire unto our ship . for though they endeavour by all mean to make we tarry with they , and show by sign the desire that they have to present we with some rare thing , yet nevertheless for many just and reasonable occasion i will not stay on shore all night : but excuse my self for all their offer , i embark my self again and return towards my ship . howbeit , before my then river of departure , i name this river , the river of dolphin , dolphin , because that at my arrival , i see there a great the savage , number or dolphin , which be play in the mouth thereof . the next day the 23 of this month ( because that towards the south i have not find any commodious place for we to inhabit , and to build a fort ) i give commandment to weigh anchor , and to hoist our sail to sail towards the river of May , their arrival where we arrive two day after , and cast anchor . at the river of afterwards go on land , with some number of ay ' Gentlemen and soldier to know for a certainty the singularity of this place , we espy the Paracoussy of the country , which come towards we ( this be the very same that we see in the voyage of captain John Ribault ) which have espy we , cry very far off , Antipola , Antipola : and be so joyful that he can not contain himself , he come to meet we , accompany then .... i564 ' with two of his son , as fair and mighty person as may be find in all the world , which have nothing in their mouth but this word , Amy , Amy : that be to say , friend , friend : yea , and know those which be there in the first voyage , they go principal to they to use this speech unto they . there be in their train a great number of man and woman , which still make very much of we , and by evident sign make we understand how glad they be of our arrival . this good entertainment past , the Paracoussy pray i to go see the pillar which we have erect in the voyage of John Ribault ( as we have declare heretofore ) as a thing which they make great account of . have yield unto he and be come to the place the f^ar set where it be set up , we find the same crown with crown of bay , and at the foot thereof many little crownedwith basket full of mill which they call in their language garland of Tapaga Tapola . then when they come thither they Laurelland kiss the same with great reverence and beseech we ironedmth to do the like , which we will not deny they , to the f^rne end we may draw they to be more in friendship worshipped'by with we . this do , the Paracoussy take i by the the savage . hand , as if he have desire to make i understand some great secret , and by sign show i very well up within the river the limit of his dominion , and say that he be call Paracoussy Satourioua , which be as much as king Paracoussy Satourioua . his child have the self same title of Satourioua . Paracoussy : the elder be name athore , a man , i dare say , perfect in beauty , wisdom , and honest sobriety , show by his modest gravity that he deserve the name which he bear , beside that he be gentle and tractable . after we have sojourn a certain space with they , the Paracoussy pray one of his son to present unto i a wedge of silver , which he do and that wedge oj with a good will : in recompense whereof i give he a silver-cutting hook and some other better present : wherewith he seem to be very well please . afterwards we take our leave of they , because the night approach , and then return to lodge in our ship . be allure with this good entertainment i fail not the next day to embark my self again with my lieutenant Ottigni and a number of soldier to return towards the Paracoussy of the river of May , which of purpose wait for we in the same place , where the day before we confer with he . we find he under the shadow of a arbour accompany with fourscore Indians at the least , and apparel at that time after the indian fashion , to wit , with a great heart skin dress like chamois , and paint with device of strange and diverse colour , but of so lively a portraiture , and represent antiquity , with rule so just compass , that there be no painter so exquisite that can find fault therewith : the naturali disposition of this strange people be so perfect and well guide that without any aid and favour of art , they be able by the help of nature only to content the eye of artisan , yea even of those which by their industry be able to aspire unto thing most absolute . than i advertise Paracoussy Satourioua , that my desire be to discover far up into the river , but that this shall be with such diligence that i will come again unto he very speedy : wherewith he be content , promise to stay for i in the place where he be : and for a earnest of his promise , he offer i his goodly skin , which i refuse then , and promise to receive it of he at my return . for my part i give he certain small trifle , to the intent to retain he in our friendship . [ Iii . 322. ] depart from thence , i have not sail three league up the river , still be follow by the Indians , which coast i a long the river , cry still , Amy , Amy , that be to say friend , friend : but i discover a hill of mean height , near which i go on land , hard by the field that be sow with will , at one corner whereof there be a house build for their lodging , which keep and guard the mill : for there be such number of cor-gnsses . nish chough in this country , which continual devour .. 15641 and spoil the mill , that the Indians be constrain to keep and watch it , otherwise they shall be deceive of their harvest . 1 rest my self in this place for certain hour , and command Monsieur de Ottigni , and monsieur de my sergeant to enter into the wood to search out the dwelling of the Indians : where after they have go awhile , they come unto a marish of reed , where find their way to be stop , they rest under the shadow of a mighty bay tree to refresh themselves a little and to resolve which way to take . than they discover , as it be on the sudden , five Indians half hide in the wood , which seem somewhat to distrust our man , until they say unto they in the indian language Antipola Bonassou , to the end that understand their speech they may come unto we more bold , which they do incontinent . but because they see , that the four that go last , bear up the train of the skin wherewith he that go foremost be apparel our man imagine that the foremost must needs be some man of great quality than the rest , see that withal they call he Paracoussy , Paracoussy , wherefore , some of our company go towards he , and use he courteous show he , monsieur de Ottigni , their lieutenant , for who they have make a harbour with bay and palm bough after the indian fashion , to the end that by such sign the savage may think the Frenchman have compain with such as they at other time . the indian Paracoussy draw near to the french , and courtesy begin to make he a long oration , which tend to no other end , but that he beseech the Frenchman very earnest to come and see his dwell and his parent , which they grant he , and straight for pledge of better amity , he give unto my lieutenant Ottigni , the very skin that he be clad with . than he take he by the hand , lead he right towards the marsh , over which the Paracoussy , monsieur Ottigni , and certain other of our man be bear upon the indian shoulder : and the rest which can not pass because of the mire and reed , go through the wood , and follow a narrow path which lead they forth until they come unto the paracoussyes dwelling ; out of which there come about fifty Indians to receive our man gallant , and to feast they after their manner . after which they bring at their entrance a great vessel of earth , make after a strange fashion full of fountain water clear and very excellent . this vessel be bear by a indian , and there be another young which bear of this water in another little vessel of wood , and present thereof to every one to drink , observe in do the same , a certain order and reverence , which he make to each of they , to who he give drink . our thirst well quench by this mean , and our man be sufficient refresh , the Paracoussy bring they to his father lodging , one of the old man that live upon the earth . our man regard his age , begin to make much of he , use this speech , Amy , Amy , that be to say , friend , friend , whereat the old sire show himself very glad . afterwards they question with he concern the course of his age : whereunto he make answer , show that he be the first living originali , from whence five generation be descend , as he show unto they by another old man that sit direct over against he , man of ex - which far exceed he in age . and this man be his ceedmg old father ? which seem to be rather a dead carkei than a live body : for his sinew , his vein , his artier , his bone , and other part , appear so clear through his skin , that a man may easy tell they , and discern they one from another . also his age be so great , that the good man have lose his sight , and can not speak one only word but with exceed great pain . monsieur de Ottigni have see so strange a thing , turn to the young of these two old man , pray he to vouchsafe to answer he to that which he demand touch - savage in Florida of 250. year old . eagles in Florida . Rene Laudonniere a.d. 1564. king his age . then the old man call a company of Indians , and strike twice upon his thigh , and lay his hand upon two of they , he show he by sign , that these two be his son : again smite upon their thigh , he show he other not so old , which be the child of the two first , which he continue in the same manner until the five generation . but though this old man have his father alive more old than himself , and that both of they do wear their hair very long , and as white as be possible , yet it be tell they , [ he . 323. ] that they may yet live thirty or forty year more by the course of nature : although the young of they both be not less than two hundred and fifty year old . after he have end his communication , he commanded two young eagles to be give to our man , which he have breed up for his pleasure in his house . he cause also little panier make of palm leave full of gourd red and blow to be deliver unto they . for recompense of which present he be satisfy with french toy . Theise two old man cause our man to be guide back again to the place from whence they come , by the young Paracoussy which have bring they thither . and have take leave of the Paracoussy , they come and seek i out in the place where i stay , and rehearse unto i all that they have see , pray i also that i will reward their guide , which so frank and hearty have receive they into his house , which i will not fail to do by any mean . now be i determine to search out the quality of the hill . therefore i go right to the top thereof , where we find nothing else but cedar , palm , and baytree of so sovereign odour , that balm smell nothing like in comparison . the tree be environ round about with vine bear grape in such quantity , that the number will suffice to make the place habitable . beside this fertility of the soil for vine , a man may see Esquine wreathe about the shrub in 11 cedar , palm , bay exceed sweet . abundance of grape . Esquine a drug excellent against the pocket . silver certain day journey up within the river of May . thimogoamor-tall enemy to Satourioua . the english voyage great quantity . touch the pleasure of the place , the sea may be see plain and open from it , and more than six great league off , near the river Belle , a man may behold the meadow divide asunder into isle and islet interlace one another : brief the place be so pleasant , that those which be melancholic will be enforce to change their humour . after i have stay there a while , i embark again my people to sail towards the mouth of the river , where we find the Paracoussy , which accord to his promise wait for we . wherefore to content he , we go on shore , and do he that reverence that on our part be requisite . than he give i the skin so rich paint , and i recompense he with somewhat of our merchandise . i forget not to demand of he the place whence the wedge of silver come which he have give i before : whereunto he make i a very sudden answer , which notwithstanding i understand not , which he well perceive . and then he show i by evident sign that all of it come from a place more within the river by certain day journey from this place , and declare unto we that all that which they have thereof , they get it by force of arm of the inhabitant of this place , name by they Thimogoa , their most ancient and naturali enemy , as he large declare . whereupon when i see with what affection he speak when he pronounce Thimogoa , i understand what he will say . and to bring my self more into his favour , i promise he to accompany he with all my force , if he will fight against they : which thing please he in such sort , that from thenceforth he promise himself the victory of they , and assure i that he will make a voyage thither within a short space , will cause store of mill to be prepare , and will command his man to make ready their bow , and furnish themselves with such store of arrow , that nothing shall be want to give battle to Thimogoa . in fine he pray i very earnest not to fail of my promise , and in so do , he hope to procure i gold and silver in such good quantity , that my affair shall take effect accord to my own and his desire . the matter thus full resolve upon , i take my leave of he to return unto my ship , where after we have rest our self all the night follow , we hoist sail the next day very early in the morning , and sail toward the river of Seine , distant from they the river of river of May about four league : and there continue - seine-ing our course toward the north , we arrive at the mouth of Somme , which be not past six league the river of distant from the river of Seine : where we cast anchor , somme-and go on shore to discover that place as we have do the rest . there we be gracious and cour - the courtesy teous receive of the Paracoussy of the country , °^the which be one or the tall man and best proportion river of that may be find . his wife sit by he , which Somme . beside her indian beauty , wherewith she be great endue , have so virtuous a countenance and modest gravity , that there be not one among we but do great commend she ; she have in her train five of her daughter of so good grace and so well bring up , that i easy persuade my self that their mother be their mistress , and have teach they well and straight to preserve their honesty . after that the Paracoussy have receive we as i have say , he command his wife to present i with a certain number of bullet of silver , [ three . 324. ] for his own part he present i with his bow and his arrow , as he have do unto captain John Ribault in our first voyage , which be a sign of a perpetuali amity and alliance with those which they honour with such a kind of present . in our discourse with one another , we enter into speech as touch the exercise of arm . then the Paracoussy cause a corselet to be set on end , and pray i to make a proof of our harquebuss and their bow : but this proof please he very little ; for assoon as he know that our harquebuss do easy 13 pierce that which all the force of their bow can not hurt , he seem to be sorry , muse with himself how this thing may be do . nevertheless go about to dissemble in his mind that which his countenance can not do by any mean , he begin to fall into another matter , and pray we very earnest to stay with he that night in his house or lodging , affirm that no great happiness can come unto he then our long abode , which he desire to recompense with a thousand present . nevertheless we can not grant he this point , but take our leave of he to return to our ship : laudonnleres where soon after i cause all my company to be consultation assemble , with the master and pilot of my ship , anywlureit to consult together of the place whereof we shall might be best make choice to plant our habitation . first i let they fir they to understand , how none of they be ignorant , that the part which be toward the cape of Florida , be altogether a marish country , and therefore unprofitable for our inhabitation : a thing which can yield neither profit to the king , nor any contentment or pleasure to we , if peradventure we will inhabit there . on the other side if we pass further towards the north to seek out port royal , it will be neither very profitable nor convenient : at the least if we shall give credit to the report of they which remain there a long time , although the haven be one of the fair of the west Indies : but that in this case the question be not so much of the beauty of the place , as of thing necessary to sustain life . and that for our inhabit it be much more needful for we to plant in place plentiful of victuali , then in goodly haven , fair , deep and pleasant to the view . in consideration whereof that i be of opinion , if it seem good unto they , to gold and sil - seat our self about the river of May : see also that in our first v°yase we f°und the same only among rtver of ajj the rest tQ abqun ( je jn mafz anj cornc ) besije the ' gold and silver that be find there : a thing that 14 put i in hope of some happy discovery in time to come . after i have propose these thing , every one give his opinion thereof : and in fine all resolve , namely those which have be with i in the first voyage , that it be expedient to seat themselves rather on the river of may then on any other , until they may hear news out of France . this point be thus agree upon , we sail towards the river , and use such diligence , that with the favour of the wind we arrive there the morrow after about the break of day , which be on Thursday the 29. of the month of June . have - June the 29. king cast anchor , i embark all my stuff and the soldier of my company , to sail right towards the open of the river : wherein we enter a good way up , and find a creek of a reasonable bigness , which invite we to refresh our self a little , while we repose our self there . afterwards we go on shore to seek out a place plain without tree , which we perceive from the creek . but because we find it not very commodious for we to inhabit there : we determine to return unto the place which we have discover before , when we have ace be join to a be more fit and come - modious to build a fortress , then that where we be last . therefore we take our way towards the forest be guide therein by the young Paracoussy which have lead we before to his father lodging . afterwards we find a large plain cover with high pinetree distant a little from the other : under which we perceive a infinite number of stag which bray amid the plain , athwart the which we pass : than we discover a little hill adjoin unto a great vale very green and in form flat : wherein be the fair meadow of the world , and grass to feed cattle . Moreover it be environ with a great number of brook of fresh water , and high wood , which make the vale J5 sail up the river . This pl mountain , and it seem unto 1 more delectable to the eye . after i have take the view thereof at my ease , i name it at the request of our then vale of soldier , the vale of Laudonniere . thus we go Laudonniere . forwar ( £ anon have go a little forward , we meet a indian woman of tall stature , which also be a an Herma - hermaphrodite , who come before we with a great ves-phrodite . sep of c | ere fountain water , wherewith she great refresh we . for we be exceed faint by reason of the ardent heat which molest we as we pass through those high wood . and i believe that without the succour of that indian hermaphrodite , or rather , if it have not be for the great desire which we have to [ he . 325. ] make we resolute of our self , we have take up our lodging all night in the wood . be therefore refresh by this mean , we gather our spirit together , and march with a cheerful courage , we come to the place which we have choose to make our habitation in : whereupon at that instant near the river brink we strew a number of bough and leaf , to take our rest on they the night follow , which we find exceed sweet , because of the pain which before we have take in our travel . on the morrow about the break of day , i commanded a trumpet to be sound , that be assemble they begin we may give God thanks for our favourable and their plant happy arrival . there we sing a psalm of thankes-mth^ prayer to givjng unto God , beseech he that it will please ' he of his grace to continue his accustom goodness towards we his poor servant , and aid we in all our enterprise , that all may turn to his glory and the advancement of our king . the prayer end , every man begin to take courage . afterwards have measure out a piece of ground in form of a triangle , we endeavour our self of all side , some to bring earth , some to cut faggot , and other to raise and make the rampire , for there be not a man that have not either a shovel , or cut hook , or hatchet , as well to make the ground plain by cut down the 16 1564-tree , as for the build of the fort , which we do hasten w‘ such cheerfulness , that within few day the effect of our diligence be apparent : in which mean space the Paracoussy Satourioua our near neighbour , and on who ground we build our fort , come usual accompanied with his two son and a great number of Indians to offer to do we all courtesy . and i likewise for my part bestow diverse of our trifle frank on he , to the end he may know the good will we bear he , and thereby make he more desirous of our friendship , in such sort , that as the day increase , so our amity and friendship increase also . after that our fort be bring into form , i begin to build a grange to retire my munition and thing necessary for the defence of our fort : pray the Paracoussy to command his subject to make we a cover of palm leave , and this to the end that when that ln Florida be do , i may unfreight my ship , and put under coverture those thing that be in they . sudden the palm Paracoussy command in my presence all the indian leaf . of his company to dress the next day morning so good a number of palm leave , that the grange be cover in less than two day : so that business be finish . for in the space of those two day , the Indians never cease from work , some in fetch palm leave , other in interlace of they : in such sort that their king commandment be execute as he desire . our fort be build in form of a triangle . the side the form of towards the west , which be towards the land , be in - fortcaro-closed with a little trench and raise with trave make in the west side . form of a battlement of nine foot high : the other side which be towards the river , be enclose with a palisado of plank of timber after the manner that gabions be make . on the south side there be a kind of bastion TheSouthside . within which i cause a house for the munition to be build : it be all build with faggot and sand , save about two or three foot high with turf , whereof the battlement be make . in the midst i cause a great ix 17 b Caroline . [ he . 326. ] the first voyage twenty league . court to be make of eighteen pace long and broad , in the midst whereof on the one side draw towards the south i build a corpse de guard , and a house on the other side towards the north , which i cause to be raise somewhat too high : for within a short while after the wind beat it down : and experience teach i , that high building may not build with high stage in this country , be mtlipod fi > r by reason of the wind whereunto it be subject . one ountrey . fl-ia 1 be / ' locxarl my cmirf trrliir’k t morlA of the side that enclose my court , which i make very fair and large , reach unto the grange of my muni tion : and on the other side towards the river be i own lodging , round about which be gallery all cover . the principali door of my lodging be in the midst of the great place , and the other be toward the river . a good distance from the fort i build a oven to avoid the danger against fire , because the house be of palm leave , which will soon be burn after the fire catch hold of they , so that with much ado a man shall have leisure to quench they . Loe here in brief the description of our four tress , which i name Caroline in the honour of our prince king Charles . after we be furnish with that which be most necessary , i will not lose a minute of a hour , without employ of the same in some virtuous exercise : therefore i charge monsieur de Ottigni my lieutenant , a man in truth worthy of all honour for his honesty and virtue , to search up within the river , what this Thimogoa may be , whereof the Paracoussy Satourioua have speak to we so often at our come on shore . for execution hereof the Paracoussy give he two Indians for his guide , which take upon they to lead he in this voyage , seem to go unto a wedding , so desirous they be to fight with their enemy . be embark they hoist sail , and have sail about twenty league , the Indians which still look on this side and that side to espy some of their enemy , discover three canoas . and immediate they begin to 18 cry Thimogoa , Thimogoa , and speak nothing else but to hasten forward to go fight with they : which the captain seem to be willing to do , to content they . when they come to board they , one of the indian get hold of a halbert , another of a cutlass in such a rage , that he will have leap into the water to have fight with they alone . nevertheless Ottigni will not let they do it , for while he defer to board they , he give the other respite to turn the prowess of their canoas towards the shore , and so to escape into the wood . again , the meaning of Ottigni be not to make war upon they of Thimogoa , but rather to make they friend , and to make they thenceforth to live in peace one with another if it be possible , hope by this mean to discover daily some new thing , and especial the certain course of the river . for this purpose he cause the bark to retire , wherein be the two Indians his guide , and go with his man toward the canoas which be on the river side . be come unto they , he put certain trifle into they , and then retire a good way from they , which thing cause the Indians which be flee away to return to their boat , and to understand by this sign , that those of our bark be none of their enemy , but rather come only to traffic with they . wherefore be thus assure of we , they call to our man to come near unto they : which they do incontinent and set foot on land , and speak free unto they , with diverse ceremony over long to recount . in the end Ottigni demand of they by sign if they have any gold or silver among they . but they tell he they have none as then : and that if he will send one of his man with they , they will bring he without danger into a place where they may have some . Ottigni see they so willing , deliver they one of his man which seem very resolute , to undertake this voyage : this fellow stay with they until ten of the clock the next morning , so that captain Ottigny somewhat ten ieague offend with his long stay , sail ten great league further . mayrraak rich in gold and silver . the second voyage . KingMolloua . Olata ouae utina a great king . the english voyage further up the river : although he know not which way he shall go , yet he go so far up that he espy the boat wherein his soldier be : which report unto he , that the Indians will have carry he three great day journey further , and tell he that a king name Mayrra rich in gold and silver , dwell in those quarter , and that for small quantity of merchandise enough may be have of he : yet that he will not hazard himself without his leave , and that he bring but a very little gold . This be do , our man return towards our fort Caroline , after they have leave the soldier with the Indians to inform himself more and more of such thing as he may discover more at leisure . fifteen day after this voyage to Thimogoa , i dispatch captain Vasseur and my sergeant also to return again into this country , and to seek out the soldier which remain there in the former voyage . be therefore embark , they sail two whole day : and before they come to the dwell of the Indians , they find two of they on the river side , which be express send unto that place to descry whether any of their enemy be come to that part , with intention to surprise they , as they do usual . when they perceive captain Vasseur , they know incontinent that he be none of their enemy , and therefore make no difficulty to come near unto the bark , and show he by sign that the soldier which they seek be not in that place , but be at that present in the house of king Molloua which be vassal unto another great king name by they Olata ouae utina : and that if the captain will sail thitherward , he shall come thither very quick : wherewith he be content , and cause his man to row to that part which the Indians show he : whereat they be so glad , that they run quick before by land to declare his arrival , which be at the lodging of king Molloua , after he have row not past half a league . while king Molloua have end entertain captain Vasseur and his man , the soldier come in with five or six pound weight of silver which he have truck five or stxe and traffic with Indians . ofluver^ this king cause bread to be make , and fish to be ’ dress after the indian fashion to feast our man : to who , while they be at meat , he make a discourse of diverse other king his friend and ally , reckon up to the number of nine of they by name , to wit , Cadecha , Chilili , Eclauou , Enacappe , Calany , Anacharaqua , omit-taqua , Aequara , moquoso : all which with he to the number of more than forty , he assure we to be the vassal of the most renown Olata ouae utina . ^uthia t0 this do , he go about likewise to discover the [ m . 327. ] enemy of ouae utina , in which number he place as the first the Paracoussy Satourioua monarch of the confine of the river of May , which have under his obeisance thirty other paracoussy , whereof there be ten which be all his brethren , and that therefore he be great esteem in those part : than he name three other not less puissant than Satourioua , whereof the first dwell two day journey from his lord Olata ouae utina , and ordinary make war upon he , who name be Potanou , a man cruel in war , but pitiful in the king Potanou . execution of his fury . for he take the prisoner to mercy , be content to mark they on the left arm with a great mark like unto a seal , and so imprint as if it have be touch with a hot iron , than he let they go without any more hurt . the two other be name Onatheaqua , and Houstaqua , be great lord , and abound in riches , and principal Onatheaqua , which dwell near unto the high mountains , wherein there be abundance of many rare thing , exceed and infinite quantity of a kind of slate stone , wherewith they make wedge to cleave their wood . the occasion which ( as he say ) move Potanou to wage war against Olata ouae utina , be the fear that he have , lest he and his companion shall get of that hard some paint their face with black , and some with red . the english voyage stone in his country , wherewith they head their arrow , and can not get it in any near place . beside all this , Molloua recite to captain Vasseur , that the king ally the vassal of the great Olata , arm their breast , arm , thigh , leg and forehead with large plate of gold and silver : and that by this mean the arrow that be discharge upon they can do they no manner of hurt at all , but rather be break against they . hereupon captain Vasseur inquire whether the king Onetheaqua and Houstaqua be like unto we . for by the description that they make of they , he begin to doubt whether they be Spaniards or no : but Molloua tell he that they be not , but that they be Indians like the rest , save that they paint their face with black , and that the rest as Molloua , paint they with red . than my lieutenant Vasseur , and my sergeant promise he , that one day i shall march with my force into those country , and that join my self with his lord Olata , i will subdue the inhabitant of the high of those mountain . he be very glad of this speech , and answer that the least of these king which he have name , shall present unto the generali of these succour the height of two foot of gold and silver , which by force of arm they have already get of those two king , Onatheaqua , and Houstaqua . the good cheer be do , and the discourse end , my man embark themselves again , with intention to bring i those good news unto the fort Caroline . but after they have sail a very long while down the river , and be come within three league of we , the tide be so strong against they , that they be constrain to go on land , and to retire themselves because of the night , unto the dwell of a certain Paracoussy name Molona , which show himself very glad of their arrival : for he desire to know some news of Thimogoa , and think that the french man go thither for none other occasion but for to invade ... i564 ' they . which captain Vasseur perceive , dissemble so well , that he make he believe that he go to Thimogoa with none other intention , but to subdue they , and to destroy they with the edge of the sword without mercy , but that their purpose have not such success as they desire , because that the people of Thimogoa be advertise of this enterprise , retire into the wood , and save themselves by flight : that nevertheless they have take some as they be flee away , which carry no news thereof unto their fellow . the Paracoussy be so glad of this relation , that he interrupt he , and ask Vasseur of the beginning and manner of his execution , and pray he that he will show he by sign how all thing pass . immediate Francis la caille the sergeant of my band take his sword in his hand , say , that with the point thereof he have thrust through two Indians which run into the wood , and that his companion have do no less for their part . and that if fortune have so favour they , that they have not be discover by the man of Thimogoa , they have have a victory most glorious and worthy of eternal memory . hereupon the Paracoussy show himself so well satisfy , that he can not devise how to gratify our man , which he cause to come into his house to feast they more honourable : and have make captain Vasseur to sit next he , and in his own chair ( which the Indians esteem for the chief honour ) and then underneath he two of his son , goodly and mighty fellow , he command all the rest to place themselves as they think good . this do , the Indians come accord to their good custom , to present their drink Cassine to the Paracoussy , and then to certain of his chief friend , and the Frenchman . than he which bring it set the cup aside , and [ three . 328. ] draw out a little dagger stick up in the roof of the house , and like a mad man he lift his head aloft , and run apace , and go and smite a indian which sit alone in one of the corner of the hall , cry with a loud voice , hyou , the poor indian stir not at all for the blow , which he seem to endure patient . he which hold the dagger go quick to put the same in his former place , and begin again to give we drink as he do before : but he have not long continue , and have scarce give three or four thereof , but he leave his bowl again , take the dagger in his hand , and quick return unto he which he have strocken before , to who he give a very sore blow on the side , cry Hyou , as he have do before : and then he go to put the dagger in his place , and set himself down among the rest . a little while after he that have be strike fall down backward , stretch out his arm and leg , as if he have be ready to yield up the latter gasp . and then the young son of the Paracoussy apparel in a long white skin , fall down at the foot of he that be fall backward , weep bitter half a quarter of a hour : after , two other of his brethren clad in like apparel , come about he that be so strike , and begin to sigh pitiful . their mother bear a little infant in her arm come from another part , and go to the place where her son be , at the first she use infinite number of outcry , than one while lift up her eye to heaven , another while fall down unto the ground , she cry so doleful , that her lamentable mourning will have move the most hard and stony heart in the world with pity . yet this suffice not , for there come in a company of young girl , which do never leave weep for a long while in the place where the indian be fall down , who afterward they take , and with the sad gesture they can devise , carry he away into another house a little way off from the great hall of the Paracoussy , and continue their weep and mourn by the space of two long hour : in which mean while the indian cease not to drink Cassine , but with such silence that one word be not hear in the parlour . Vasseur be grieve that he understand not these ceremony , demand of the Paracoussy what these thing mean : which answer he slow , Thimogoa , Thimogoa , without say any more . be more displease than he be before with so slight a answer , he turn unto another Indian the paracoussyes brother , who be a Paracoussy as well as his brother , call Malica , which make he a like answer as he do at the KlngMalica . first , pray he to ask no more of these matter , and to have patience for that time . the subtle old Paracoussy pray he within a while after , to show he his sword , which he will not deny he , think that he will have behold the fashion of his weapon : but he soon perceive that it be to another end : for the old man hold it in his hand , behold it a long while on every place , to see if he can find any blood upon it , which may show that any of their enemy have be kill : for the Indians be wont to bring their weapon wherewith their enemy have be defeat , with some blood upon they , for a token of their victory . but see no sign thereof upon it , he be upon the point to say unto he , that he have kill none of the man of Thimogoa : when as Vasseur prevent that which he may object , declare and show unto he by sign , the manner of his enterprise , add , that by reason of the two indian which he have slay , his sword be so bloody , that he be enforce to wash and make it clean a long while in the river : which the old man believe to be like to be true , and make no manner of reply thereunto . Vasseur , la caille , and their other companion go out of the hall to go into the room whither they have carry the indian : there they find the Paracoussy sit upon tapestry make of small reed , which be tapistrymade at meat after the indian fashion , and the indian that qfsmailreeds-was smite hard by he , lie upon the self same tapestry , about who stand the wife of the Paracoussy , with all the young damsel which before bewail he in they lap the hall ; which do nothing else but warm a great deal moss about of moss instead of napkin to rub the indian side . their wound tt i j t* • r and use it in hereupon our man ask the Paracoussy again for stead of nap - what occasion the indian be so persecute in his kin . presence : he answer , that this be nothing else but a ceremony a kind of ceremony , whereby they will call to mind death'of death and persecution of the paracoussy their their ancestor ancestor execute by their enemy Thimogoa : allege slalne by their moreover , that as often as he himself , or any of his enemy . friend and ally return from the country , without they bring the head of their enemy , or without bring home some prisoner , he use for a perpetuali memory of all his predecessor , to beat the best belove of all his child with the self same weapon wherewith they have be kill in time past : to the end that by renew of the wound their death shall be lament afresh . now when they be thus inform of those ceremony , they thank the Paracoussy for their good intertai nement which they have receive , and so set sail come to i unto the fort : [ he . 329. ] where they declare all unto i as i have recite it the return of heretofore . the eight and twenty of July our ^ardfrance s^tpes depart to return into France . and within a the 28. of while , about two month after our arrival in Florida , July . the Paracoussy Satourioua send certain Indians unto i to know whether i will stand to my promise which i have make he at my first arrival in that country , which be that i will show my self friend to his friend , and enemy unto his - enemy , and also to accompany he with a good number of harquebuss , when he shall see it expedient , and shall find a fit occasion to go to war . now see he rest upon this promise , he pray i not to defer the same : see also that make account thereof , he have take such good order for the execution of his enterprise , that he be ready , and be furnish with all thing that be necessary for the voyage : i make he answer , that for his amity i will not purchase the enmity of the other , and that albeit i will , yet notwithstanding i want mean to do it . for it behoove i at that present to make provision of victual and munition for the defence of my fort on the other side , that my bark be nothing ready , and that this enterprise will require time : moreover , that the Paracoussy Satourioua may hold himself ready to depart within two month , and that then i will think of fulfil my promise to he . the indian carry this answer to their Paracoussy , which be little please with it , because he can not defer his execution or expedition , aswell because all his victual be ready , as also because ten other paracoussy be assemble with he for the performance of this enterprise . the ceremony which this savage use before he embark his army deserve not to be forget . for when he be set down by the river side , be compass about with ten other paracoussy , he command water to be bring he speedy . this do , look up into heaven , he fall to discourse of diverse thing with gesture that show he to be in exceed great choler , which make he one while shake his head hither and thither , and by and by with i wot not what fury to turn his face towards the country of his enemy , and to threaten to kill they . he oftentimes look upon the sun , pray he to grant he a glorious victory of his enemy . which when he have do by the space of half a hour , he sprinkle with his hand a little of the water which he hold in a vessel A.D. i564 . the ceremony which they use before they go to war . upon the head of the paracoussy , and cast the rest as it be in a rage and despite into a fire which be there prepare for the purpose . this do , he cry out thrice , he Thimogoa , and be follow with five hundred Satourioua fol-indians at the least , which be there assemble , which low with cry all with one voice , he Thimogoa . this ceremony , as a certain indian tell i familiar , signify nothing else , but that Satourioua beseech the sun to grant unto he so happy a victory , that he may shed his enemy blood , as he have shed that water at his pleasure . Moreover , that the paracoussy which be sprinkle with a part of that water , may return with the head of their enemy , which be the only and chief triumph of their victory . the Paracoussy Satourioua have no soon end his ceremony and have take a view of all his company , but he embark himself , and use such diligence with his Almadies or boat , that the next day two hour before the sun set , he arrive on the territory of his enemy about eight or ten league from their village . consultation afterwards cause they all to go on land , he assemble ^ { saulnheir counse^ > wherein it be agree that five of the paraenemy , coussy shall sail up the river with half of the troop , and by the break of the day shall approach unto the dwell of their enemy : for his own part , that he will take his journey through the wood and forest as secret as he can : that when they be come thither , as well they that go by water as he which go by land shall not fail by the break of the day to enter into the village , and cut they all in piece , except the woman and little child . how they use these thing which be thus agree upon , be ^hch^the^ execute with as great fury as be possible : which when take in war they have do , they take the head of their enemy which they have slay , and cut off their hair round about with a piece of their skull : they take also four and twenty prisoner , which they lead away , and retire themselves immediate unto their boat which wait for they . be come thither , they begin to singe praise unto the sun , to who they attribute their victory . and afterward they put the skin of those head on the end of their javelin , and go altogether towards the king Omoloa . territory of Paracoussy Omoloa , one of they which be in the company . be come thither , they divide their prisoner equal to each of the paracoussy , and leave thirteen of they to Satourioua , which straightway dispatch a indian his subject , to carry news before of the victory to they which stay at home to guard their 28 ... i564 ' house , which immediate begin to weep . but assoon as night be come , they never leave dance and play a thousand gambol in honour of the feast . the next day the Paracoussy Satourioua come home , who before he enter into his lodging cause all the [ three . 330. ] hairy skull of his enemy to be set up before his door , and crown they with branch of laurel , show by this glorious spectacle the triumph of the victory which °f triumfh-hee have obtain . straightway begin lamentation and mourning , which assoon as the night begin be turn into pleasure and dance . after that i be advertise of these thing , i send a soldier unto Satourioua , pray he to send i two of his prisoner : which he deny i , say that he be nothing behold unto i , and that i have break my promise , against the oath which i have swear unto he at my arrival . which when i understand by my soldier , which be come back with speed , i devise how i may be revenge of this savage , and to make he know how dear this bold bravado of he shall cost he : therefore i command my sergeant to provide i twenty soldier to go with i to the house of Satourioua : where after i be come and enter into the hall without any manner of salutation , i go and sit i down by he , and stay a long while without speak any word unto he , or show he any sign of friendship , which thing put he deep in his dump : beside that certain soldier remain at the gate , to who i have give express commandment to suffer no indian to go forth : have stand still about half a hour with this countenance , at length i demanded where the prisoner be which he have take at Thimogoa , and command they present to be bring unto i . whereunto the Paracoussy angry at the heart , and astonish wonderful , stand a long while without make any answer , notwithstanding at last he answer i very stout , that be afraid to see we come the english voyage thither in such warlike manner they flee into the wood , and that not know which way they be go , they be not able by any mean to bring they again ; then i seem to make as though i understand not what he say , and ask for his prisoner again , and for some of he principali ally . then Satourioua command his son athore to seek out the prisoner , and to cause they to be bring into that place , which thing he do within a hour after . after they be come to the lodging of the Paracoussy , they humble salute i , and lift up their hand before i , they will have fall down prostrate as it be at my foot : but i will not suffer they , and soon after lead they away with i unto my own fort the Paracoussy be wonderful offend with this bravado , bethink himself by all mean how he may be revenge of we . but to give we no suspicion thereof , and the better to cover his intention , he send his messenger oftentimes unto we bring always with they some kind of present . among other one day he send three Indians , which bring we two basket full of great pumpion , much more excellent than those which we have in France , and promise i in their king behalf , that during my abode in that country , i shall never want victual : i thank they for their king good will , and signify unto they the great desire which i have , aswell for the benefit of Satourioua , as for the quiet of his subject , to make a peace between he and those of Thimogoa : which thing can not choose but turn to their great benefit , see that be ally with the king of those part , he have a open passage against onatheaqua his ancient enemy , which otherwise he can not set upon . Moreover that Olata ouae utina be so mighty a Paracoussy , that Satourioua be not able to withstand his force : but be agree together they may easy overthrow all their enemy , and may pass the confine of the far river that be towards the south . the messenger pray i to have patience until the morrow , 30 at what time they will come again unto i to certify i of their lord inclination : which they fail not to do , advertise i that Paracoussy Satourioua be the glad man in the world to treat of this accord ( although indeed he be quite contrary ) and that he beseech i to be diligent therein , promise to observe and perform whatsoever i shall agree upon with those of Thimogoa : which thing the messenger also rehearse unto the prisoner which i have lead away . after they be depart , i resolve within two day to send back again the prisoner to Olata ouae utina , who subject they be : but before i embark they , i give they certain small trifle , which be little knife or tablet of glass , wherein the image of king Charles the nine be draw very lively , for which they give i very great thanks , as also for the honest entertainment which be give they at the fort Caroline . after this they embark themselves , with captain Vasseur , and with monsieur de Arlac my ensign , which i have send of purpose to remain a certain time with ouae utina , hope that the favour of this great Paracoussy will serve my turn great to make my discovery in time to come . i send with he also one of my sergeant , and six gallant soldier . thus thing pass on this manner , and the hatred of Paracoussy Satourioua against i do still continue , until that on the nine and twenty of August a lightning [ he . 331. i from heaven fall within half a league of our fort , - awanderfm more worthy i believe to be wonder at , and to be ofjugut put in writing , than all the strange sign which have be see in time past , and whereof the history have never write . for although the meadow be at that season all green , and half cover over with water , nevertheless the lightning in one instant consume above five hundred acre therewith , and burn with the ardent heat thereof all the fowl which take their pastime in the meadow , which thing continue for three day space , which cause we not a little to muse , not be able to judge whereof this fire proceed : for one while we think that the Indians have burn their house , and abandon their place for fear of we : another while we think that they have discover some ship in the sea , and that accord to their custom they have kindle many fire here and there , to signify that their country be inhabit : nevertheless be not assure , KingSar - i determine to send to Paracoussy Serrany to know ranay . the truth thereof . but even as i be upon the point to send one by boat to discover the matter , six Indians king Allima - come unto i from Paracoussy Allimacany , which at can3 ' their first entry make unto i a long discourse , and a very large and ample oration ( after they have present i with certain basket full of Maiz , of pompion and of grape ) of the love amity which Allimacany desire to continue with i , and that he look from day to day when it will please i to employ he in my service . therefore consider the serviceable affection that he bear unto i , he find it very strange , that i the savage thus discharge my ordinance against his dwell , ‘ lightning to be and burn up a infinite sight of green meadow , discharge of and consume even down unto the bottom of the the christian water , and come so near unto his mansion , that he ordinance . think he see the fire in his house : wherefore he beseech i most humble to command my man that they will not shoot any more towards his lodging , otherwise that hereafter he shall be constrain to abandon his country , and to retire himself into some place further off from we . have understand the foolish opinion of this man , which notwithstanding can not choose but be very profitable for we , i dissemble what i think thereof for that time , and answer the indian with a cheerful countenance , that the relation which they make unto i of the obedience of their Paracoussy do please i right well , because that before he have not behave himself in such sort towards i , especial when i summon he to send i the prisoner of great Olata ouae utina which he detain , whereof notwithstanding he make no great account , which be the principali cause wherefore i have discharge my ordinance against he : not that i mean to reach unto his house ( as i may have do easy , if it have please i ) but that i be content to shoot the half way to make he know my force : assure he furthermore , that on condition that Laudonniere he will continue in his good affection , no more ordinance shall be discharge against he hereafter : and ^ “ profit beside that i will become his faithful protector against his great enemy . the indian content with my answer return to assure their Paracoussy , which notwithstanding the assurance withdraw himself from his dwelling twenty or five and twenty league off and that for the space of more than two month . after that three day be expire , the fire be quite extinguish . but for two day after there follow such a excessive heat in the air , that a wonderfuu the river near unto which we plant our habitation , heate-became so hot , that i think it be almost ready to see . for there die so great abundance of fish , and that of so many diverse sort , that in the mouth of the river only there be find dead enough to have load fifty fifty cart load cart , whereof there issue a putrefaction in the air , deadph which breed many dangerous disease among we , insomuch that most of my man fall sick , and almost ready to end their day . yet notwithstanding it please our merciful God so to provide by his providence , that all our man recover their health without the loss of any one of they . monsieur de Arlac , captain Vasseur , and one of my then third sergeant be embark with their ten soldier voyage they about the ten of September , to carry back the prisoner unto utina , sail so far up the river , that they do - e^um er ' cover a place call Mayarqua distant from our fort Mayarqua a about fourscore league , where the Indians give they fa* 8o-good entertainment , and in many other village which ^ “ ersgfmay they find . from this place they row to the dwell - ix 33 c ling of Paracoussy utina , which after he have feast they accord to his ability and power , pray monsieur de Arlac and all his soldier to stay a while with he , to aid and assist he in battle against one of his KingPatanou . enemy call Potanou , whereunto Monsieur de Arlac consent willing . and because he know not how long he may have occasion to stay in these part , he send i captain Vasseur and the bark back again , which bring home only five soldier with he . the Indians now because the custom of the Indians be always to manner of war . wage war by surprise , utina resolve to take his enemy [ he . 332. ] Potanou in the morning by the break of the day : to bring this to pass , he make his man to travail all the two hundred night , which may be in number two hundred person , Indians . so wep advise , that they pray our french-shot to be in the forefront , to the end ( as they say ) that the noise of their piece may astonish their enemy : notwithstanding they can not march so secret , but that those of the village of Potanou , distant from the dwell of utina about five and twenty league , be ware of they : which sudden employ and bestow a village in - all their endeavour to defend their village enclose all dose with with tree , and issue out in great company : but ' find themselves charge with shot , ( a thing where - with they never have be acquaint ) also behold the captain of their band fall down dead in the begin of their skirmish , with a shot of a harquebus which strike he in the forehead , discharge by the hand of monsieur de Arlac , they leave the place : and the Indians of utina gate into the village , take utina get man , woman , and child prisoner . thus Paracoussy the victory of utina obtain the victory by the aid of our man , ^imofth^ which slay many of his enemy , and lose in this conflict trench . one their companion , wherewith utina be very much grieve . eight or ten day after , i send captain Vasseur back again with a bark to fetch home Monsieur de Arlac and his soldier , which at their return bring i certain present from utina , as some silver , a small quantity of gold , paint skin , silver , and and other thing , with a thousand thanks , which the geld , and Paracoussy give i , which promise that if in any enterprise of importance i shall have need of his sister tnne ' man , he will furnish i with three hundred and above .