the first and second discovery of the gulf of California , and of the sea-coast on the northwest or back side of America , lie to the west of new Mexico , Cibola and Quivira , together with sir Francis drake land and take possession upon Nova Albion in the behalf of the crown of England , and the notable voyage of Francis Gaul ; wherein among many other memorable matter be set down the huge breadth of the ocean sea from China and Japan to the northwest part of America , in the 38. and 40. degree . a relation of the discovery , which in the name of God the fleet of the right noble Fernando Cortes Marques of the valley , make with three ship ; the one call Santa Agueda of 120. ton , the other the Trinity of 35. ton , and the third saint Thomas of the burden of 20. ton . of which fleet be captain the right worshipful knight Francis de Ulloa bear in the city of Merida . take out of the three volume of the voyage gather by m. John Baptista Ramusio . Chap. 1. Francis Ulloa a captain of Cortes depart with a fleet from the port of Acapulco , and go to discover unknown land , he pass by the coast of Sacatula and Motin , and by tempest run to the river of Guajaval , from whence he cross over to the haven of Santa Cruz , along the coast whereof he discover 3. small hand , and within two day and a half return to the main land he discover the river call Rio de san Pedro y san Pablo , and not far distant from thence two other river as big or great than that of Guadalquivir which run by Sivil , together with their head-spring . e embark our self in the haven of Acapulco in Acapulco on the 8. of July in the year i 7 ; degree of of our lord 1539 , call upon almighty atitude-God to guide we with his holy hand unto such place where he may be serve , and his holy faith advance . and we sail from the say port by the coast of Sacatula and Motin , which be sweet and pleasant the coast of through the abundance of tree that grow thereon , and $acatfla river which pass through those country , for the which motin-wee often thank God the creator of they . So sail along we come to the haven of saint Iago in the province s - Iago de of Colima : but before we arrive there , the main mast of our ship call Santa Agueda be break by a storm of wind that take we , so as the ship be force to sail without her mast until we arrive in the say haven . from the port of Acapulco to this haven of Colima we be sail the space of 20. day . here we stay to mend our mast and to take in certain victual , water , and wood , the space of 27. day . and we depart from the say haven the 23. of August , and the isle of sail by the isle of Xalisco the 27. or 28. of the Xalisco . say month we be take with a extreme tempest wherein we think we shall have perish , and be toss and weather-beaten , we run as far as Guajaval . the river of Guajaval in the province of culiacan . in this storm we lose the pinnace call Sant Thomas , and because we have lose she we cross over to the Santa Cruz port of Santa Cruz in California : for while we be ' cedifornla so beat tbe f°rmer tempest , the pilot of the bark signify unto we , that he perceive she begin to leak , and that already she have receive in much water , insomuch that she begin to founder : whereupon , to help her need , and that we may meet together in a know haven , if by chance the tempest shall separate we , as it do indeed , we will he to repair to the haven of Santa Cruz , where we mean to repair his harm and our own . wherefore be all arrive in this place of Santa Cruz , we stay there five day and take in water , wherein we hear no news of our bark which we have lose : whereupon the captain resolve to follow on our voyage ; wherefore we set sail the 12. of September , and as we sail we three hand , see along the coast of the say haven 3. Islands , whereof the captain make no great account , think there can be no great good find in any of they . Theise Islands seem not to be great ; wherefore he command the master and pilot to proceed on their voyage , and not to lose time without any profit . So sail over the gulf of California , in two day and a half Rio de san we come to the river of saint Peter and S. Paul , find Ppablo* ! an before we enter into the same a small island in the a ° ' mouth of the river , be 4. or 5. mile distant from the main . on both side of this river we behold goodly and pleasant great plain full of many green and beautiful tree , and far within the land we behold certain exceed high mountain full of wood very pleasant to behold . from this river we sail still along the coast the space of 15. league , in which course we find two other river in our judgement two great as great or great than Guadalquivir the river of nvers-sivilia in Spain . all the coast by these river be plain as the other which we have pass , with many wood : likewise within the land appear great mountain cover with wood very beautiful to behold , and beneath in the plain appear certain lake of water . from these river we sail 18. league , and find very pleasant plain , and certain great lake who certainegreat mouth open into the sea : here our captain thought la^es ' good thorough to discover what those lake be , and to search whether there be any good haven for his ship to ride in , or to harbour themselves , if any tempest shall arise ; and so he command a boat to be hoist out into the sea , with a master and five or six man to view they , and to sound the depth , and bottom of they : who go thither , and find the coast very shall , and the mouth of the lake ; whereupon they make no account of they , only because the shore be so shallow , for otherwise the land be very pleasant . here at evening we see on the shore 10. or 12. Indians and fire . the aforesaid two river be two league distant the one from the other little more or less , and be great , as i have say , and be in the last of they we go up to the ship-top , and see many lake , and one among the rest exceed great , and we suppose that they have their spring out of this great lake , as other river also have from other lake , for we see the course of they several each by themselves , have goodly wood grow all along their bank . the current of these river may be discern three league within the sea : and at the mouth of they be many small stake set up for mark : the shore here be plain and sandy , and the country very pleasant . Chap. 2. sail along the coast from the two aforesaid great river , they discover three mouth of lake and a goodly country , they come unto Cabo Roxo , and take possession of those country for the emperor majesty . a discourse of the fair haven that be on those coast , and of very many island which they see , before they come to the cape call Capo de las plaias . this day we sail along the coast the space of 16. league , and in the midst of this voyage there be a bay very fair of 4. or 5. league , have certain bank or fence in it , in behold whereof we take great pleasure . the night follow we ride in 20. radome water . the next day we follow our voyage towards the north , and have sail 3. or 4. league we see 3. mouth of lake which enter into the land , where they become like stand pool . we ride a league distance from these mouth in 6. fathom water , to see what they be , and send our boat with certain man , to see if there be any entry for our ship : for half a league from shore we have not pass one or two fathom water . here our man see 7. or 8. Indians , and find sundry sort of green herb somewhat differ from those of Nueva Espanna . the country be plain , but far within land they see great and small hill extend themselves a great way , and be very fair and pleasant to behold . the day follow we proceed on our voyage , sail always in sight of the plain coast towards the northwest , in 10. or 15. fathom water . and have sail 6. good league we find a bay on the coast within the land of about 5. league over , from whence the coast trend northwest , and this day we sail about 16. league . all this coast be plain , and not so pleasant as that which we have pass : here be certain small hill , but not so high as those which we have find before . thus we sail all night northwest , and until the next day at noon , at which time we fall with a headland of white sand , where by the height which we take that day we find our self to be in the latitude of 27. degree and this cape we call Capo roxo . all the coast be plain and fair and clean sand , and we see within land some few tree not very great , with certain mountain 8c wood 3. or 4. league distant from the say cape : and here likewise appear a mouth of a river , which ( as far as we can discern ) make certain lake up within the land : from the mouth whereof for the space of a league into the sea it seem to be very shall , because the sea do break very much . here we see within the land 3. or 4. river . in this sort we sail on our voyage to the northward , 8c because we have not good weather we ride that night in a great haven lie in our way , where on the shore we see certain plain , and up within the land certain hill not very high : and continue our course towards the north about 3. league from this haven we find a hand of about one league in circuit lie before the mouth of the say haven . And sail forward we find a haven which have two mouth into the sea , into which we enter by the northermost mouth , which have 10. or 12. fathom water , 8c so decrease till it come to 5. fathom , where we ancker in a pool which the sea make , which be a strange thing to behold , for there be so many entrance 8c mouth of stream and haven , that we be all astonish at the sight thereof ; and these haven be so excellent frame by nature , as the like be not to be see in the world , wherein we find great store of fish . here we ancker , and the captain go on shore , and take possession , use all such ceremony as thereunto belong . here also we find certain wear to catch fish make by the Indians , and certain small cottage , wherein be diverse piece of earthen pot as fine make as those in Spain . here by commandment of the captain a cross be erect upon a hill , and it be set up by Francis Preciado . in this place we see the country full of fresh and green grass , howbeit differ from that of new Spain , and up within the country we see many great and very green mountain . this country seem very goodly and delightsome to all of we , in regard of the greenness and beauty thereof , and we judge it to be very populous within the land . from this haven we depart and keep our way towards the northwest with good weather , and begin to find hard by the seashore exceed high mountain spot with white , and in they we see many fowl which have their nest in certain hole of those rock , and sail io . league until night , all which night we be becalm . the next day we follow our course northwest with good weather : and from that day forward we begin to see on the western shore ( whereon the foresay haven of saint Cruz stand ) certain island or high land , whereat we rejoice not a little . and so sail a island . forward we meet with a island about two league in bigness , and on the east shore have still the main land and island in sight , we sail 15. league until the evening , always find hard by the sea-coast exceed high mountain bare of tree , the land appear still more plain unto we on the western shore . where-some take they upon we begin to be of diverse opinion , some think lfomiaafe ' that coast of Santa Cruz be a firm land , and nothing but that join with the continent of Nueva Espanna , island . other think the contrary , and that they be nothing else but island , which be to the westward . and in this sort we proceed forward , have the land on both side of we , so far , that we all begin to wonder at it . this day we sail some 15. league , and call this cape Capo de las plaias . Capo roxo . the coast run it northward . fishingweare like those of Virginia . of the strait which they discover on the coast of Capo de las plaias , and of the pleasant country which they find before they come to the rock call los diamantes . of the wonderful whiteness of that sea , and of the ebb and flow thereof : and of the multitude of island and land , which extend themselves northward from the haven of Santa Cruz. the day follow we sail until night with so good weather , that we run about 20. league . all this coast along the shore be full of little hill without grass or tree : and that night our ancker in 20. fathom water . the next day we follow our voyage beginning to sail before break of day northwestward , and we come into the midst of a strait or mouth which be straight of 12 league broad from one land to the other , which straight have two hand in the midst thereof be 4. cede depth league distant the one from the other : and here we discern the country to be plain , and certain mountain , 8c it seem that a certain gut of water like a brook run through the plain . This straight ( as far as we can perceive ) be very deep , for we can find no bottom : and here we see the land stretch afar off from the one shore to the other , and on the western shore of the haven of saint Cruz , the land be more high with very bare mountain . the day follow we pass on our way towards the north , and sail some the strait 15. league , and in the midst of our way we find a ^re rume circuit or bay of 6. league into the land with many northward . coove or creek , and the next day follow continue our course we sail some 10. league , and the coast in this day journey be all of high mountain naked and bare without any tree . it be very deep hard by the shore , and that night we be constrain to stay by reason of the contrary wind . the next morning before break of day we sail still along the coast to the northwest until evening , and run about some 15. league . all along this shore we see very goodly mountain within the land , and many plain and down with some few tree , and the sea shore be all sandy . in the midst of this day course we find certain small rock in the sea 4. league distant from the main , be the say land make a great point into the sea , and here we stay the rest of the night , where we have a very great shower of rain . the day follow we proceed on our voyage , and sail until night by a compass or turn , some 8. or 9 league , and see within land a few mountain have no tree upon they , but the sun shine always very clear , as far as we can descry , they be very great , on the western shore of the haven of Santa Cruz. here we stay all night because we find very shallow water and see the sea very white , and in a manner like to chalk , so that we all begin to marveile thereat . the day follow we go forward again along the coast northwestward , and sail eight league , and see another land which stretch northwest , and be full of high mountain . and still continue this course we search very diligent to see if there be any passage through between both the land , for right forward we see no land . and thus sail we always find more shallow water , and the sea thick , black , and very muddy , and come at length into five fathom water ; and see this , we determine to pass over to the land which we have see on the other side , and here likewise we find as little depth and less , whereupon we ride all night in five fathom water , and we perceive the sea to run with so great a rage into the land , that it be a thing much to be marveil at , and with the like fury it return back again with the ebb ; during which time we find 11. fathom water , and the flood and ebb continue from six to six hour . the day follow the captain and pilot go up to the ship top , and see all the land full of sand in a great round compass , and join it self with the other shore , and it be so low , that whereas we be a league from the same we can not well discern it , and it seem that there be a inlet of the mouth of certain lake , whereby the sea go in and out . there be diverse opinion among we , and some thought that that current enter into those lake , and also that some great river there may be the cause thereof . and when we can perceive no passage through , nor can discern the country to be inhabit , the captain accompany with certain of we go to take possession thereof . the same day with the ebb of the sea we fall down from the other coast from the side of Nueva Espanna , though always we have in sight the firm land on the one side of we , and the other island on our left hand , on the side of the port of Santa Cruz situate on the western shore : for on that side there be so many island and land , so far as we can descry , that it be great to be wonder at : for from the say haven of Santa Cruz , and from the coast of culiacan we have always in a manner land on both side of we , and that so great a country , that i suppose if it shall so continue further inward , there be country enough for many year to conquer . this day we have the wind contrary , and cast anchor until the flood increase , which be in the afternoon , and then we set sail likewise with contrary wind until midnight , and then cast anchor . the next day we depart , shape our course along the coast Southwest , until midnight with little wind , and we see within the land high mountain with some opening , and we make way some three league , and all the next night we be becalm , and the next day we continue our course but a little while , for we sail not above five league , and all the night be becalm , and see the land full of bare and high mountain , and on our left hand we descry a plain country , and see in the night certain fire . chap 4. they land upon a island to discover the same , and there they see many fire , which issue out of certain mountain , and many seal-fish . here they take a indian , and can not understand his language . run along they discover another island , and take possession thereof for the emperor majesty , and a great haven in the firm land , which they call Ancon de Sant Andres , or the haven of saint Andrew . the next day follow our course we see a great haven with a hand in the sea , within a crossbow shoot of the firm land , and in this island and on the firm land be see many smoke by the judgement of all the company ; wherefore the captain think good that we shall go on land to know the certainty of these smoke and fire , himself take ten or twelve of we with a boat in his company : and go on shore in the island , we find that the smoke proceed out of burn certain mountain and breach of burn earth , where-mountaine . out ascend into the air certain cinder and ash which mount up to the middle region of the air , in such great quantity , that we can not esteem less than twenty load of wood to be burn for the cause of every of those smoke , whereat we be all not a little amaze . in this island be such abundance of seal , as it be wonderful . here we stay that day , and kill a great number of these seal , with who we have some trouble : for they be so many , and aid one another so well , that it be strange to behold ; for it fall out , that while we be occupy in kill some of they with staff , they assemble twenty or thirty together , and lift abundance of themselves up assail we with their foot in a squadron , seal . and overthrow two or three of our company on the ground : whereupon let go those which they have in their hand , they and the other escape we and go into the sea , howbeit we kill good store of they , which be so fat as it be wonderful : and when we open some of they to have their liver , we find certain small b'lacke stone in their body , whereat we much marveil . 