the true and perfect description of a voyage perform and do by Francisco the gualle a spanish captain and pilot , for the viceroy of new Spain , from the haven of Acapulco in new Spain , to the island of the lu^ones or philippinas , unto the haven of manilla , and from thence to the haven of Macao in China , and from Macao back again to Acapulco , accomplish in the year of our lord , 1584. Chap. 1. he ten of march in the year of our lord 1582 we set sail out of the haven of Acapulco , lie in the country of new Spain , direct our course towards the island of the Lugones , or philippinas west Southwest , run in that manner for the space of twenty five league , till we come under sixteen degree , that so we may shun the calm by sail close by the shore . from thence forward we hold our course west for the space of 30 league , and be there , we run west , and west and by south , for the space of 1800 [ three . 443. ] league , to the hand call Isla deal Enganno , which be the further hand lie in the south part of you hand call des los ladrone , that be , the hand of rover , or Islas de las Velas , under 13. degree and in latitude septentrionali , and 164. degree in longitude orientali , upon the fix meridionali line , which lie 326 right with the hand of Ter^era . from thence we hold our course westward for the space of 280. league , till we come to the point call el capo de Espirito Santo , that be , the point of the holy ghost , lie in the hand Tandaya , the first hand of those that be call philippinas , lu^ones , or Manillas , which be a country with few hill , with some mine of brimstone in the middle thereof . from the point aforesaid , we sail west for the space of eighteen league to the point or entry of the channel , which run in between that hand and the hand of Lu^on . this point or entry lie scarce under 12. degree . all the coast that stretch from the entry of the chanel to the point of el capo del Spirito santo , be not very fair . eight league from the say point lie a haven of indifferent greatness , call Baya de Lobos , that be , the bay of wolf , have a small hand in the mouth thereof : and within the channel about half a league from the end of the say hand lie a hand or cliff , and when you pass by the point in the middle of the channel , than you have five and twenty fathom deep , with brown sand : there we find so great a stream run westward , that it make the water to cast a skum as if it have be a sand , whereby it put we in fear , but cast out our lead , we find five and twenty fathom deep . from the aforesaid entry of the channel north , and north and by east about ten league , lie the island of catanduane , about a league distant from the land of lu^on , on the further point eastward , and from the same entry of the channel towards the west and Southwest lie the hand Capuli about six league from thence , stretch westsouth west , and eastnortheast , be five league long , and four league broad : and as we pass by it , it lie northward from we under twelve degree and | . and somewhat high land . four league from the aforesaid hand of Capuli northwestward lie the three hand of the haven of Bollon in the 327 hand of lufone , stretch north and south about four league , distant from the firm land half a league , whereof the further southward lie under thirteen degree : in this channel it be twenty fathom deep , with white sand , and a great stream , run southeast : we pass through the middle of the channel . from this channel we hold our course Southwest , and Southwest and by west , for the space of twenty league , until we come to the west end of the hand of Tycao , which reach east and west thirteen league . this point or hook lie under 12. degree and in the middle between this hand and the hand Capuli there lie three hand call the faranias , and we run in the same course on the northside of all the hand , at the depth of 22. fathom with white sand . from the aforesaid west point of the hand Tycao to the point of Buryas it be east and west to sail about the length of a league or a league and a half : we put into that channel , hold our course south , and south and by west about three league , until we be out of the channel at sixteen fathom deep , with half white and reddish sand in the channel , and at the mouth thereof , whereof the middle lie under 12. degree and f . and there the stream run northward . the hand of Buryas stretch northwest and southeast , and be low land , whereof the northwest point be about three league from the coast of Lugon , but you can pass between they with any ship , but with small foist and bark of the country . this shallow channel lie under twelve degree : and run through the aforesaid channel between the hand Tycao and Buryas , as i say before , we sail southward about the isle of two league from the hand of masbate , which stretch masbate . past anj west 8. league long , be in breadth 4. league , and lie under 12. degree and in the middle thereof , and be somewhat high land . from the say channel between Tycao and Buryas , we hold our course westnorthwest for thirteen 328 league , leave the hand masbate on the southside , and the hand Buryas on the north side : at the end of thirteen league we come by a hand call Banton , which be in form like a hat , under twelve degree and f . when we have sail the aforesaid thirteen league and eight league more , on the south side we leave the hand call rebuiam , which stretch northwest and northwest and by north , and southeast , and southeast and by south , for the space of eight league , be high and crooked land , whereof the north point lie under twelve degree and and there you iinde 35. fathom deep , with white sand . from the aforesaid hand of Banton southward nine league , there begin and follow three island , one of they be call Bantonsilla , which be a small hand in form of a sugar loaf : the second Crymara , be somewhat great in length , reach east and west about two league : the three Itaa , or the he of goat , have certain hovel . by all these hand aforesaid you may pass [ three . 444. ] with all sort of ship , whereof the foremost lie southward under twelve degree and j . from the hand of Bantonsilla , or small Banton , we hold our course northwest for the space of four league , to the channel between the hand call the verey , and the hand Marinduque , the verey lie on the south side under twelve degree and ( which be two small hand like two frigate ) and the hand Marinduque on the north side under twelve degree , and which be a great hand , stretch westnorthwest , and eastsoutheast , have in length 12. and in breadth 7. league . on the north side with the hand lu^on it make a long and small channel , run somewhat crooked , which be altogether full of shallows and sand , whereby no ship can pass through it . the further point westward of the same hand lie under thirteen degree and J. it be high land , on the east side have the form of a mine of brimstone or fiery hill , and on the west side the land run downward at the point thereof be round like 329 a loaf of bread : in the channel between it and the verey , there be 18. fathom deep with small black sand . from the aforesaid channel of verey and marinduque , we hold our course westnorthwest twelve league to the land of Mindora , to the point or hook call Dumaryn , lie full under thirteen degree : five league forward from the say channel on the south side we leave a hand call Isla deal maestro del Campo , that be , the hand of the colonel , lie under twelve degree and which be a small and flat hand : in this course we have 45 fathom deep , with white sand . by this point or end of the hand Marinduque begins the hand of Myndoro , which have in length east and west five and twenty league , and in breadth twelve league , whereof the further point southward lie under thirteen degree , and the further point northward under thirteen degree and f . and the further point westward under thirteen degree . this hand with the hand of Lu. ? on make a channel of five league broad , and ten or twelve fathom deep with muddy ground of diverse colour , with white sand . five league forward from Marinduque lie the river of the town of Anagacu , which be so shallow , that no ship may enter into it . from thence two league further lie the hand call Bacco , which be three hand lie in a triangle , two of they be distant from the land about three hundred cubit , and between they and the land you may pass with small ship : and from the land to the other hand , be about two hundred cubit , where it be altogether shallows and sand , so that where the ship may pass outward about 150. cubit from the land , you leave both the hand on the south side , run between the three hand and the river call Rio deal Bacco , somewhat more from the middle of the chanel towards the hand , which be about a league distant from the other : the channel be ten fathom deep , with mud and shell upon the ground : the river of 33° Bacco be so shallow , that no ship may enter into it . from this hand with the same course two league forward , you pass by the point el Capo de Rescaseo , where we cast out our lead , and find that a man may pass close by the land , and there you shall find great strong stream : and half a league forward with the same course , lie the town of Mindoro , which have a good haven for ship of three hundred ton . three league northward from the same haven lie the hand call Cafaa , stretch from east and west , be hilly ground . from the say town of Myndoro , we hold our course westnorthwest eight league , till we come to the point or hook of the sand call Tulen , lie upon the hand of Lu^on , which sand or bank reach into the sea half a league from the coast : you must keep about a hundred cubit from it , where you find eight fathom water , muddy and shel ground : you run along by those sand north , and north and by west for the space of two league , till you come to the river call Rio de anasebo : all the rest of the coast call de los limbone to the mouth or entry of the bay call manilla , ( which be four league ) be sail with the same course . the limbone ( which be hand so call ) be high in form like a pair of organ , with good haven for small ship , run along by the limbone : and two league beyond they on the south side , we leave the hand of fortan , and four hand more , but the three hand of Lubao , which be very low , lie under 13. degree and J. and the limbone lie in the mouth or entry of the bay of manilla under 14. degree and J. from thence we run northwest for the space of six league to the haven of cabite , keep along by the land lie on the west side , where it be shallow , and be call los Baixos deal Rio de Cannas , the shallows of the river of reed : all along this bay in the same course , there be from ten to four fathom deep . 331 A.D. i584 . the bay of manilla in 14 degree and one quarter . be by the point or hook of cabite , than we keep but a hundred pace from it , run Southwest , southsouthwest , and south , until we discover the whole mouth or entry of the bay , where we may anchor at four fathom about two hundred cubit from the land , and then the town of manilla be two league northward from we . Chap. 2. the course and voyage of the aforesaid Francisco gualle out of the haven or road of manilla , to the haven of Macao in China , with all the course and situation of the place . sail out of the haven of cabite , lie in the bay of manilla , we hold our course westward for the space of eighteen league , to the point call el Cabo de sambaly : and when we be eight league in our way , we leave the two hand maribillas on the south side , and sail about a league from they : the point of sambalies aforesaid lie under fourteen degree , and f . be low land , at the end of the same coast of lu^on , on the west side . from the hook or point aforesaid , we run north , and north and by west , for the space of five and twenty league ( about a league from the coast of lu^on ) to the point call Cabo de Bullinao : all this coast and cape be high and hilly ground , which cape lie under sixteen degree and - | . from this cape de Bullinao we hold our course north , and north and by east , for 45. league to the point call el Cabo de Bojador , which be the further land northward from the hand Lu. ? on lie under 19 degree . the cape de Bullinao be past the land make a great creek or bough , and from this creek the coast run north to the point of bojador , be a land full of cliff and rock that reach into the sea , and the land of the hook or point be high and hilly ground . from the point of bojador , we hold our course 332 westnorthwest a hundred and twenty league , until we come to the hand call at ilha Branca , or the white hand , lie in the begin of the coast and bay of the river Canton under two and twenty degree , have four and twenty fathom brown muddy ground . from the hand ilha Branca , we hold the aforesaid course of westnorthwest , for the space of sixteen league , to the hand of Macao lie in the mouth of the river of Canton , and it make the river to have two mouth or entry , and it be a small hand about three league great . Canton 22. degree . the hand of Macao . Chap. 3. the navigation or course of the aforesaid Francisco gualle out of the haven of Macao to new Spain , with the situation and stretching of the same , with other notable and memorable thing concern the same voyage . when we have prepare our self , and have take our leaf of our friend in Macao , we set sail upon the four and twenty of July , hold our course southeast , and southeast and by east , be in the wane of the moon : for when the moon increase , it be hard hold the course between the hand , because as then the water and stream run very strong to the northwest ; we travail through many narrow channel by night , have the depth of eight or ten fathom , with soft muddy ground , until we be about the hand ilha Branca , yet we see it not , but by the height we ilha Branca . know that we be past it . be beyond it , we run eastsoutheast a hundred and fifty league , to get above the sand call os Baixos do pescadore , and the begin of the hand Lequeos on the east side , which hand be call as s ilhasfer-ilhas fermosa , that be to say , the fair hand . this mosa ' i understand by a Chinar call santy of Chinchon , and he say that they lie under one and twenty degree and there it be thirty fathom deep : and although 333 we see they not , notwithstanding by the height and depth of the water we know we be past they . be pass as ilhas fermosa , or the fair hand , we hold our course east , and east and by north , for two hundred and sixty league , until we be past the length Lequeos . of the hand Lequeos , sail about fifty league from they : the say Chinar tell i , that those hand call lequeos be very many , and that they have many and very good haven , and that the people and inhabitant thereof have their face and body paint like the Bysayas of the hand of Lu. go or philippinas and be mine of gild . apparel like the Bysayas , and that there also be mine of gold : he say likewise that they do often come with small ship and bark lade with buck and harts-hides , and with gold in grain or very small piece , to traffic with they of the coast of China , which he assure i to be most true , say that he have be nine time in the small hand , bring of the same ware with he to China : which i believe [ three . 446. ] to be true , for that afterward i inquire thereof in Macao , and upon the coast of China , and find that he say true . the further or uttermost of these hand stretch northward and eastward , lie under nine and twenty degree . be past these hand , than you come to the hand of japon , whereof the first lie west and south , be Firando . the hand of Firando , where the Portugal use to traffic : they be in length altogether a hundred and thirty league , and the further eastward lie under two and thirty degree : we run still east , and east and by north , until we be past the say hundred and thirty league . all this information i have of the aforesaid Chinar , as also that there i shall see some mine of brimstone or fiery hill , be seventie league beyond they , and thirty league further i shall find four hand lie together , which i likewise find , as he have tell i : and that be in japon , he say he have there 334 see certain man of a very small stature , with great roll of linen cloth about their head , that bring gold in small piece , and some white Cangas of cotton , ( which be piece of cotton-linen so call by the chinar ) as also saltfish like the spanish atun , or Tunney , which he say come out of other island east - hand ward from japon : and by the token and mark which eastward , ) f he show i , i guess whereabout those hand shall ‘ be , and find they not far from whence he say they lie . he say likewise that all the hand of japon have good haven and channel , be a country full of rice , corn , fish , and flesh , and that they be a in-difierent and reasonable people to trafiique with , and that there they have much silver . run thus east , and east and by north about three hundred league from japon , we find a very hollow water , with the stream run out of the north and northwest , with a full and very broad sea , without any hindrance or trouble in the way that we pass : and what wind soever blow , the sea continue all in one sort , with the same hollow water and stream , until we have pass seven hundred league . about JaPm 9°°-two hundred league from the coast and land of new Spain we begin to lose the say hollow sea and America in stream : whereby i most assure think and believe , 37 degree that there you shall find a channel or straight passage , awl 1111 between the firm land of new Spain , and the country of Asia and Tartary . likewise all this way from the aforesaid seven hundred league , we find a great number of whale-fish and other fish call by the Spaniard atun or tunny , whereof many be find on the coast of Gibraltar in Spain , as also alba-coras and bonito , which be all fish , which common keep in channel , straight , and run water , there to disperse their seed when they breed : which make i more assure believe , that thereabouts be a channel or straight to pass through . be by the same course upon the coast of new 335 seven and Spain , under seven and thirty degree and J. we am&'and pass by a very high and fair land with many tree , read Francis whole without snow , and four league from the land , Ulloa chapter 16. you find thereabouts many drift of root , leaf of tree , reed , and other leaf like fig leave , the like whereof we find in great abundance in the country of japon , which they eat : and some of those that we find , 1 cause to be sodden with flesh , and be sodden , they eat like colewort : there likewise we find great store of seal : whereby it be to be presume and certain to be believe , that there be many river , bay , and haven along by those coast to the haven of Acapulco . from thence we run southeast , southeast and by south , and southeast and by east , as we find the Cabo de San wind , to the point call el Cabo de Sant Lucas , which Lucas in 22. js he beginning of the land of California , on the northwest side , lie under two and twenty degree , be five hundred league distant from cape Mendocino . in this way of the aforesaid five hundred league along by the coast , be many hand : and although they be but small , yet without doubt there be in they some haven late good haven , as also in the firm land , where you have find out . these haven follow , now late find out , as that of they he of Sant Augustine , lie under thirty degree and 4. and the hand call Isla de cedros , scarce under eight and twenty deg . and j . and the hand lie beneath saint Martyn , under three and twenty degree and J. all this coast and country , as i think , be inhabit , and show to be a very good country : for there by night we see fire , and by day smoke , which be a most sure token that they be inhabit . from the point or hook of saint Lucas , to the southeast side of California , we hold our course eastsoutheast , for the space of 80. league , to the point call el cabo de las corriente , that be , the cape of the stream lie under 19 degree and f . And run this course , northward about a league from we we see 33 < 5 1584. three hand call las tres Maria , ( that be to say , the three Maries ) run the same course . about four league from the other hand , there be other hand , reach about two or three league : all this way from [ he . 447. ] the mouth or gulf of California aforesaid , for the space of the say fourscore league , there be great stream that run westward . from the point or cape de las Corrientes , we run southeast , and sometime southeast and by east , for the space of a hundred and thirty league to the haven of Acapulco . in this way of a hundred and thirty league , be twenty league on the way , we have the haven of Natividad , that be , of the birth of the virgin mary : and other eight league further , the haven of saint Iago , or saint James : and six league further , the sea strand call la Playa de Colima , that be , the strand of Colima . all this coast from California to the haven of Acapulco be Acapulco . inhabit by people that have peace and traffic with the Spaniard , and be of condition and quality like the people of the other place of new Spain . the conclusion of the author of this last voyage . a li this description and navigation have i my self scene , prove , and well note in my voyage make and end in the year of our lord 1584. from great china out of the haven and river of Canton , as i will more at large set it down unto your honour , with the longitude and latitude thereof , as God shall permit i time and leisure , who i beseech to send you long and happy day . and the same be true translate out of spanish into low dutch verbatim out of the originali copy , ( which be send unto the viceroy of the Portugal Indies ) by John huyghen van Linschoten . 