a relation of the commodity of Nova Hispania , and the manner of the inhabitant , write by Henry Hawks merchant , which live five year in the say country , and draw the same at the request of m. Richard Hakluyt esquire of Eiton in the county of Hereford , 1572. aint John de ullua be a island not high above the water , where as now the Spaniard upon m. John Hawkins be there , be in make a strong fort . in this place all the ship that come out of Spain with good for these part , do unlade : for they have none other port so good as this be . the come into this place have three channel , and the best of all be the northermost , which go by the main land : and on every side of the channel there be many small rock as big as a small barrel : they will make man stand in doubt of they , but there be no fear of they . there be another island there by , call the island of sacrifice , whereas the Spaniard do in time past unlade their good : and for that , they say , there be upon it spirit or devil , it be not frequent as it have be . in these place the north wind have so great dominion , that oftentimes it destroy many ship and bark . this place be give to great sickness . Theise island stand in 18 degree and a half , and about the same be great plenty of fish . five league from saint John de ullua be a fair river ; it lie northwest from the port , and go to a little town of the Spaniard call Vera Cruz , and with small vessel or bark , which they call frigate , they carry all their merchandise which come out of Spain , to the say town : and in like manner bring all the gold , silver , cochinilla , hide , and all other thing that the ship carry into Spain unto they . and the good being in 378 Vera Cruz , they carry they to Mexico , and to Pueblo de los angel , Sacatecas , and saint Martin , and diverse other place so far within the country , that some of they be 700 mile off , and some more , and some less , all upon horse , mule , and in wain draw with ox , and in car draw with mule . in this town of Vera Cruz within these twenty year , when woman be bring to bed , the child new bear incontinent die ; which be not so now in these day , God be thank . this town be incline to many kind of disease , by reason of the great heat , and a certain gnat or fly which they call a musquito , which bite both man and woman musquito . in their sleep ; and assoon as they be bite , incontinent the flesh swell as though they have be bite with some venomous worm . and this musquito or gnat do most follow such as be new come into the country . many there be that die of this annoyance . this town be situate upon the river aforesaid , and compass with wood of diverse manner and sort , and many fruit , as orange and limon , guiave , and diverse other , and bird in they , popinjay both small popinjay . and great , and some of they as big as a raven , and their tail as long as the tail of a fezant . there be also many other kind of bird of purple colour , and small monkey , marvellous proper . monkey . this hot or sick country continue five and forty mile towards the city of Mexico ; and the five and forty mile be pass , than there be a temperate country , and full of tillage : but they water all their corn with river which they turn in upon it . and they gather their wheat twice a year . and if they shall not wheat twice water the ground where as their corn be sow , the in a yeere-country be so hot it will burn all . before you come to Mexico , there be a great town call Tlaxcalla , which have in it above 16000 house - Tlaxcalla a hold . all the inhabitant thereof be free by the king free aty - 379 of Spain : for these be the occasion that Mexico be win in so short time , and with so little loss of [ three . 463. ] man . wherefore they be all gentleman , and pay no tribute to the king . in this town be all the cochinilia grow . Mexico . Mexico be a great city ; it have more than fifty thousand household , whereof there be not pass five or six thousand house of Spaniard : all the other be the people of the country , which live under the Spaniard law . there be in this city stately building , and many monastery of friar and nun , which the Spaniard have make . and the build of the Indians be somewhat beautiful outward , and within full of small chamber , with very small window , which be not so comely as the build of the Spaniard . this city stand in the midst of a great lake , and the water go through all or the most part of the street , and there come small boat , which they call canoas , and in they they bring all thing necessary , as wood , and coal , and grass for their horse , stone and lime to build , and corn . this city be subject to many earthquake , which oftentimes cast down house , and kill people . this city be very well provide of water to drink , and with all manner of victual , as fruit , flesh and fish , bread , hen and capon , guiny cock and hen , and all other fowl . there be in this city every week three fair or market , which be frequent with many people , aswell Spaniard as the people of the country . there be in these fair or market all manner of thing that may be invent , to sell , and in especial , thing of the country . the one of these fair be upon the Monday , which be call saint hypolitos fair , and saint James his fair be upon the Thursday , and upon Saturday be saint Johns fair . in this city be always the king governor or viceroy , and there be keep the term and parliament . and although there be other place of justice , yet this be above all : so that all man may appeal unto this 380 ! 572 , place , and may not appeal from this city , but only into Spain before the king : and it must be for a certain sum : and if it be under that sum , than there be no appellation from they . many river fall into this lake which the city stand in : but there be never any place find whither it go out . the indian know a way to drown the city , and way10 within these three year they will have practise the same : but they which shall have be the doer of ' it be hang : and ever since the city have be well watch both day and night , for fear lest at some time they may be deceive : for the indian love not the Spaniard . round about the town there be very many garden and orchard of the fruit of the country , marvellous fair , where the people have great recreation . the man of this city be marvellous vicious ; and in like manner the woman be dishonest of their body , more than they be in other city or town in this country . there be near about this city of Mexico many river crocodile . and stand water which have in they a monstrous kind of fish , which be marvellous raven , and a great devourer of man and cattle . he be wont to sleep upon the dry land many time , and if there come in the mean time any man or beast and wake or disquiet he , he speed well if he get from he . he be like unto a serpent , save that he do not fly , neither have he wing . there be west out of Mexico a port town which navigation be on the south sea , call Puerto de Acapulco , where as there be ship which they have ordinary for the navigation of China , which they have new find . this port be threescore league from Mexico . there be another port town which be call culiacan , on the south sea , which lie west and by north out of Mexico , and be 200 league from the same : and there the Spaniard make two ship to go seek the strait the northor gulf , which , as they say , be between the newfound - west-strei&ht . land and Greenland ; and they call it the Englishman 381 1572. straight : which as yet be never full find . they say , that straight lie not far from the main land of China , which the Spaniard account to be marvellous rich . towards the north from Mexico there be great store the more northward , the rich silver mine . of silver mine . there be great quantity of silver find in these mine towards the north , than there be any other part : and as the most man of experience say always , they find the rich mine the more northerly . Theise mine be common upon great hill and stony ground , marvellous hard to be labour and wrought . out of some of the mine the Indians find a certain paint earth . kind of earth of diverse colour , wherewith they paint themselves in time of their dance , and other pastime which they use . in this country of Nova Hispania there be also gold mine . mine of gold , although the gold be common find in river , or very near unto river . and now in these day there be not so much gold find as there have be heretofore . there be many great river , and great store of fish in they , not like unto our kind of fish . and there be marvellous great wood , and as fair tree as may be see , of diverse sort , and especial fir tree , that [ three . 464. ] NLesquiquez . may mast any ship that go upon the sea , oak and pineapple , and another tree which they call Mesquiquez : it bear a fruit like unto a peascod , marvellous sweet , which the wild people gather , and keep it all the year , and eat it in stead of bread . seven city by witchcraft not find of the seeker . the Spaniard have notice of seven city which old man of the indian show they shall lie towards the northwest from Mexico . they have use and use daily much diligence in seek of they , but they can find any one of they . they say that the witchcraft of the Indians be such , that when they come by these town they cast a mist upon they , so that they can see they . 382 they have understanding of another city which they call Copalla : and in like manner , at my be in the country , they have use much labour and diligence in the seek of it : they have find the lake on which it shall stand , and a canoa , the head whereof be wrought with copper curious , and can not find nor see any man nor the town which to their understanding shall stand on the same water , or very near the same . there be a great number of beast or cow in the country of Cibola , which be never bring thither by the Spaniard , but breed natural in the country . they be like unto our ox , save that they have long hair like a lion , and short home , and they have upon their shoulder a bunch like a camel , which be high than the rest of their body . they be marvellous wild and swift in run . they call they the beast or cow of Cibola . This Cibola be a city which the Spaniard find now of late , without any people in the same , goodly bnilding , fair chimney , window make of stone and timber excellent wrought , fair well with wheel to draw their water , and a place where they have bury their dead people , with many fair stone upon the grave . and the captain will not suffer his soldier to break up any part of these grave , say , he will come another time to do it . they ask certain people which they meet , whither the people of this city be go : and they make answer , they be go down a river , which be there by , very great , and there have build a city which be more for their commodity . this captain lack thing necessary for himself and his man , be fain to return back again , without find any treasure accord to his expectation : neither find they but few people , although they find beat way , which have be much haunt and frequent . the captain at his come back again , have a great 383 A.D. 1572. PedroMorales Eif Nicolas Burgignon write the like of Copalla . the strange ox of Cibola . Cibola abandon . a great river near Cibola . water congeal to salt . dog of India describe . Cacao a fruit currant as money . fruit . hot spring . the english voyage check of the governor , because he have not go forward , and see the end of that river . they have in the country , far from the sea side , stand water , which be salt : and in the month of April and may the water of they congeal into salt , which salt be all take for the king use and profit . their dog be all crooked back , as many as be of the country breed , and can run fast : their face be like the face of a pig or a hog , with sharp nose . in certain province which be call Guatimala , and Soconusco , there be grow great store of cacao , which be a berry like unto a almond : it be the best merchandise that be in all the Indies . the indian make drink of it , and in like manner meat to eat . it go current for money in any market or fair , and may buy any flesh , fish , bread or cheese , or other thing . there be many kind of fruit of the country , which be very good , as plantan , sapotes , guiave , pina , aluacatas , tunas , mamios , limon , orange , walnut very small and hard , with little meat in they , grape which the Spaniard bring into the country , and also wild grape , which be of the country , and be very small , quinse , peach , fig , and but few apple , and very small , and no pear : but there be melon and Calabasas or gourd . there be much honey , both of bee and also of a kind of tree which they call magueiz . this honey of magueiz be not so sweet as the other honey be , but it be better to be eat only with bread , than the other be ; and the tree serve for many thing , as the leaf make thread to sow any kind of bag , and be good to cover and thatch house , and for diverse other thing . they have in diverse place of the country many hot spring of water : as above all other , i have see one in the province of mechuacan . in a plain field without any mountain , there be a spring which have much water , and it be so hot , that if a whole quarter of beef be cast into it , within on half hour it will be as well sodden as it will be over a fire in half a day . i have see half a sheep 384 cast in , and immediate it have be sodden , and i have eat part of it . there be many hare , and some cony . there be no partridge , but abundance of quail . they have great store of fish in the south sea , and many oyster , and very great . the people do open the oyster , and take out the meat of they , and dry it as they do any other kind of fish , and keep they all the year : and when the time serve , they send they abroad into the country to sell , as all other fish . they have no salmon , nor trowt , nor peel , nor carp , tench , nor pike in all the country . there be in the country mighty high mountain , and hill , and snow upon they : they common burn ; and twice every day they cast out much smoke and ash at certain open place , which be in the top of they . there be among the wild people much manna . i have gather of the same , and have eat it , and it be good : for the apothecary send their servant at certain time , to gather of the same for purgation , and other use . there be in the mountain many wild hog , which all man may kill , and lion and tiger ; which tiger do much harm to man that travel in the wilderness . in this country , not long since , there be two poor man that find a marvellous rich i ; and when these man go to make a register of the same ( accord to the law and custom ) before the king officer , they think this mine not meet for such man as they be : and violent take the say mine for the king ; and give no part thereof unto the two poor man . and within certain day the king officer resort thither to labour in the i , and they find two great hare and cony . sea fish . [ he . 465. ] burn mountain . manna . wild hog , lion , and tiger . Mines discover , not find again . mighty hill be come together ; so they find no place to work in . and in the time while i be among they , which be five year , there be a poor sheep - the mthour hear , who keep his sheep , happen to find a well ^levaEs ™ of quicksilver ; and he go in like manner to manifest panna . the same , as the custom and manner be ; the king ix 385 2 b description of the indian person and manner . the people of Nueva espagna great coward . officer deal in like order as they do with the two poor man that find the rich i , take it quite from the shepherd : but when they go to fetch home the quicksilver , or part thereof , they can never find it again . so these thing have be declare unto the king , who have give commandment , that nothing be find in the field , as mine , and such like , shall be take away from any man . and many other thing have be do in this country , which man may count for great marvel . there be great abundance of sugar here , and they make diverse conserves , and very good , and send they into Peru , where as they sell they marvellous well , because they make none in those part . the people of the country be of a good stature , tawny colour , broad face , flat nose , and give much to drink both wine of Spain and also a certain kind of wine which they make with honey of magueiz , and root , and other thing which they use to put into the same . they call the same wine Puleo . they be soon drink , and give to much beastliness , and void of all goodness . in their drunkenness they use and commit sodomy ; and with their mother and daughter they have their pleasure and pastime . whereupon they be defend from the drink of wine , upon pain of money , aswell he that sell the wine as the indian that drink the same . and if this commandment be not , all the wine in Spain and in France be not sufficient for the west Indies only . they be of much simplicity , and great coward , void of all valour , and be great witch . they use diverse time to talk with the devil , to who they do certain sacrifice and oblation : many time they have be take with the same , and i have see they most cruel punish for that offence . the people be give to learn all manner of occupation and science , which for the most part they learn since the come of the Spaniard : i say all manner of 386 art . they be very artificiali in make of image with feather , or the proportion or figure of any man , in all kind of manner as he be . the fineness and excellency of this be wonder , that a barbarous people as they be , shall give themselves to so fine a art as this be . they be goldsmith , blacksmith , and coppersmith , carpenter , mason , shoemaker , tailor , saddler , embroiderers , and of all other kind of science : and they will do work so good cheap , that poor young man that go out of Spain to get their live , be not set on work : which be the occasion there be many idle people in the country . for the indian will live all the week with less than one groat ; which the Spaniard can do , nor any man else . they say , that they come of the lineage of a old man the Indians which come thither in a boat of wood , which they call a i&ioran ™ canoa . but they can tell whether it be before the ame* flood or after , neither can they give any reason of the flood , nor from whence they come . and when the Spaniard come first among they , they do certain sacrifice to a image make in stone , of their own invention . the stone be set upon a great hill , which they make of brick of earth : they call it their Cowa . and certain day in the year they do sacrifice , certain old man , and young child ; and only believe in the sun and the moon , say , that from they they the sun and have all thing that be needful for they . they have in m°one these part great store of cotton wool , with which they ^g0fC0ttm make a manner of linen cloth , which the Indians wear , ' both man and woman , and it serve for shirt and smock , and all other kind of garment , which they wear upon their body : and the Spaniard use it to all such purpose , especial such as can buy other . and if it be not for this kind of cloth , all manner of cloth that [ in . 466. ] go out of Spain , i say linen cloth , will be sell out of all measure . the wild people go naked , without any thing upon the wild in-them . the woman wear the skin of a dear before dian - 387 the pomp of owner of mine . the english voyage their privity , and nothing else upon all their body . they have no care for any thing , but only from day to day for that which they have need to eat . they be big man , and likewise the woman . they shoot in bow which they make of a cherry tree , and their arrow be of cane , with a sharp flint stone in the end of the same ; they will pierce any coat of mail : and they kill dear , and crane , and wild goose , duck and other foul , and worm , and snake , and diverse other vermin , which they eat . they live very long : for i have see man that have be a hundred year of age . they have but very little hair in their face , nor on their body . the indian have the friar in great reverence : the occasion be , that by they and by their mean they be free and out of bondage ; which be so ordain by Charles the emperor : which be the occasion that now there be not so much gold and silver come into Europe as there be while the indian be slave . for when they be in bondage they can not choose but do their task every day , and bring their master so much metal out of their mine : but now they must be well pay , and much entreat to have they work . so it have be , and be a great hindrance to the owner of the mine , and to the king quinto or custom . there be many mine of copper in great quantity , whereof they spend in the country as much as serve their turn . there be some gold in it , but not so much as will pay the cost of the fine . the quantity of it be such , and the mine be so far from the sea , that it will not be worth the fraught to carry it into Spain . on the other side , the king officer will give no licence to make ordinance thereof ; whereupon the mine lie unlaboured , and of no valuation . there be much lead in the country ; so that with it they cover church , and other religious house : wherefore they shall not need any of our lead , as they have have need thereof in time past . the pomp and liberality of the owner of the mine 388 be marvellous to behold : the apparel both of they and of their wife be more to be compare to the apparel of noble person then otherwise . if their wife go out of their house , as unto the church , or any other place , they go out with great majesty , and with as many man and maid as though she be the wife of some noble man . i will assure you , i have see a miner wife go to the church with a hundred man , and twenty gentlewoman and maid . they keep open house : who will , may come to eat their meat . they call man with a bell to come to dinner and supper . they be prince in keep of their house , and bountiful in all manner of thing . a good owner of mine must have at the least a thing neces-hundred slave to carry and to stamp his metal ; he sap‘°mines must have many mule , and man to keep the mine ; he must have mill to stamp his metal ; he must have 6 many wain and ox to bring home wood to fine the oar ; he must have much quicksilver , and a marvellous quantity of salt-brine for the metal ; and he must be at many other charge . and as for this charge of quicksilver , it be a new invention , which they find more profitable than to fine their oar with lead . howbeit the same be very costly : for there be never a hundred of quicksilver but cost at the least threescore pound sterling . and the mine fall daily in decay , and of less value : and the occasion be , the few Indians that man have to labour their mine . there be in new Spain a marvellous increase of cattle , the plenty of which daily do increase , and they be of a great growth catteli-then we be . you may have a great steer that have a hundred weight of tallow in his belly for sixteen shilling ; and some one man have 20000 head of cattle of his own . they sell the hide unto the merchant , who lade into Spain as many as may be well spare . they spend many in the country in shoe and boot , and in the mine : and as the country be great , so be the increase of the cattle wonder . in the island of Santo Domingo they common kill the beast for their hide 389 and tallow ; and the fowl eat the carcase : and so they do in Cuba and Porto Rico , whereas there be much sugar , and cana fistula , which daily they send into Spain . Sheene . they have great increase of sheep in like manner , and daily do intend to increase they . they have much wool . wool , and as good as the wool of Spain . they make cloth . cloth as much as serve the country , for the common people , and send much cloth into Peru. i have see cloth make in the city of Mexico , which have be sell for ten pezo a vare , which be almost four pound English , and the vare be less than our yard . they have wood . woad grow in the country , and alum , and brazil , and Prosili diverse other thing to die withal , so that they make all ‘ colour . in Peru they make no cloth : but hereafter our cloth will be little set by in these part , unless it be some fine cloth . the wool be common four shilling every rove , which be five and twenty pound : and in some place of the country that be far from the place where as they make cloth , it be worth nothing , and do serve but only to make bed for man to lie on . [ Iii . 467. ] they make hat , as many as do serve the country , very fine and good , and sell they better cheap , than they can be bring out of Spain , and in like manner send they into Peru. many people be set on work both in the one and in the other : they spin their wool as we do , and in steed hog grease of oil , they have hog grease : they twist not their thread its stead of oil . so much as we joej neither work so fine a thread . they make no kersy , but they make much cloth , which be course , and sell it for less than 12. penny the vare . it be call Sayall . silk of sun - they have much silk , and make all manner of sort dry sort . thereof , as taffeta , satin , velvet of all colour , and they be as good as the silk of Spain , save that the colour be not so perfect : but the black be better then the black that come out of Spain . Horses . they have many horse , and mere , and mule , which mule . the Spaniard bring thither . they have as good 390 jennet , as any be in Spain , and better cheap than jennet . they be in Spain . and with their mule they carry all their good from place to place . there be rain usual in this country , from the month of May , to the midst of October , every day , which time they call their winter , by reason of the say water . and if it be not for the water which fall in these hot season , their Maiz , which be the great part of their sustenance , will be destroy . This Maiz be the great maintenance which the indian Maize grain have , and also all the common people of the Spaniard . man and . and their horse and mule which labour , can be eat tn without the same . this grain be substantiali , and increases much blood . if the miner shall be without it , they can not labour their mine : for all their servant eat none other bread , but only of this Maize , and it be make in cake , as they make oaten cake , in some place of England . the indian pay tribute , be of the age of 20. year , 4. shilling of money , and a hanege of Maiz , AnHanegais which be worth 4. shilling more unto the king every a year . this be pay in all nova Hispania , of as many m a*e‘ as be of the age of 20. year , save the city of Tlascalla , which be make free , because the citizen thereof be the occasion that Cortes take Mexico in so little a time . and although at the first they be free from payment of tribute , yet the Spaniard now begin to usurp upon they , and make they to till a great field of Maiz , at their own cost every year for the king , which be as beneficial unto he , and as great cost unto they , as though they pay their tribute , as the other doe . the ship which go out of Spain with good for Peru , go to number de dios , and there discharge the say good : and from thence they be carry over the neck of a land , unto a port town in the south sea , call Panama , which be 17. league distant from number de dios . and there they do ship their good 391 again , and so from thence go to Peru. they be in go thither three month , and they come back again in 20. day . they have seidome foul weather , and few ship be lose in the south sea . four year past , to wit 1568 , there be a ship make out of Peru , Salomons to seek Salomons island , and they come somewhat to and^f , m^n t^ie out equinoctial , and find a island with ten south sea many black people , in such number that the Spaniard 1568. dare not go on land among they . and because they have be long upon the voyage , their people be very weak , and so go not on land , to know what commodity be upon it . and for want of victual , they arrive in Nova Hispania , in a port call Puerto de Navidad , and thence return back again unto Peru , whereas they be evil entreat , because they have not know more of the same island . they have in this port of Navidad ordinary their china find ship , which go to the island of China , which be cer-by the west , taine island which they have find within these 7. year . they have bring from thence gold , and much cinamom , and dish of earth , and cup of the same , so fine , that every man that may have a piece of they , will give the weight of silver for it . there be a mariner that bring a pearl as big as a dove egg from thence , 8c a stone , for which the viceroy will have give 3000. ducat . many thing they bring from thence , most excellent . there be many of these island , and the Spaniard have * this be to be not many of they as yet : * for the Portugal disturb understand of they much , and combat with they every day , say , it this discourse l part °* tneir conquest , and to the main land they be write , can come at any hand . there be goodly people in anno 1572. they , and they be great mariner , rich apparel in cloth of gold , and silver , and silk of all sort , and go apparel after the manner of the Turk . this report make such as come from thence . the man of the main land have certain traffic with some of these china ship ylander , and come thither in a kind of ship , which with one sail . they have wjth one saj ] ej anj bring open such marcban 0 392 dize as they have need of . and of these thing there have be bring into new Spain both cloth of gold and silver , and diverse manner of silk , and work of gold and silver , marvelous to be see . so by their say , there be not such a country in the whole world . the main land be from the island 190. league : and the island be not far from the Malucos northwards . and the people of those island , which the Spaniard have , say , that if they will bring their wife and child , that than they shall have among they what they will have . so there go woman daily , and the [ three . 468. ] king pay all the charge of the marry man and their wife , that go to those island . and there be no doubt but the trade will be marvelous rich in time to come . it be my fortune to be in company with one Diego Gutieres , who be the first pilot that ever go to that country of the phillippinas . he make report of many strange thing in that country , aswell riches , as other , and say , if there be any paradise upon earth , it be in that country : and add , that sit under a tree , you shall have such sweet smell , with such great content and pleasure , that you shall remember nothing , neither wife , nor child , nor have any kind of appetite to eat or drink , the odoriferous smell will be so sweet . this man have good live in Nova Hispania , notwithstanding he will return thither , with his wife and child , and as for treasure there be abundance , as he make mention . in this country of Nova Hispania there be many buck and do , but they have not so long home as they have here in England . the Spaniard kill they with handgun and with grayhound , and the Indians kill they with their bow and arrow , and with the skin they make chamoyce , such as we in Eng - chamoue . land make doublet and hose of , as good as the skin that spanish be dress in Flanders , and likewise they make marvelous leather . good spanish leather of they . there be a bird which be like unto a raven , but he have some of his feather white : voure c’ar 0 there be such abundance of they , that they eat all the rion . 393 wrong do to the indian punish . justice you cause of civil tie . the english voyage corrupt and dead flesh which be in the country . otherwise the abundance of carrion be so much , that it will make a marvelous corrupt air in all the country , and be so noisome , that no man can abide it . therefore it be command there shall none of they be kill . Theise bird be always about city , and town , where there be much flesh kill . the Indians be much favour by the justice of the country , and they call they their orphan . and if any Spaniard shall happen to do any of they harm , or to wrong he in take any thing from he , as many time they do , or to strike any of they , be in any town , whereas justice be , they be aswell punish for the same , as if they have do it one Spaniard to another . when a Spaniard be far from Mexico , or any place of justice , think to do with the poor indian what he list , consider he be so far from any place of remedy , he make the indian do what he command he , and if he will not do it , he beat and misuse he , accord to his own appetite . the indian hold his peace , until he find a opportunity , and then take a neighbour with he , and go to Mexico , although it be 20. league off , and make his complaint . this his complaint be immediate hear , and although it be a knight , or a right good gentleman , he be forthwith send for , and punish both by his good , and also his person be imprison , at the pleasure of the justice . this be the occasion that the Indians be so tame and civil , as they be : and if they shall not have this favour , the Spaniard will soon dispatch all the Indians , or the Indians will kill they . but they may call they dog , and use other evil word , as much as they will , and the indian must needs put it up , and go his way . the poor Indians will go every day two or three league to a fair or market with a child upon their neck , with as much fruit or root , or some kind of ware , as cotton wool , or cadis of all colour , as shall be not past worth a penny : and they will maintain they - 394 i572-selve upon the same . for they live with a marvelous small matter . they be in such poverty , that if you need to ride into the country , you shall have a indian to go with you all the day with your bed upon his back , for one royal of plate : and this you shall have from one town to another . here you be to understand , that all man that travel by the way , be always wont to carry their bed with they . they be great thief , and will steal all that they may , and you shall have no recom penny at their hand . the garment of the woman , be in this manner . The the apparel uppermost part be make almost like to a woman smock , of the Indians . save that it be as broad above as beneath , and have no sleeve , but hole on each side one to put out their arm . it be make of linen cloth make of cotton wool , and fill full of flower , of red cadis and blow , and other colour . this garment come down to the knee , and then they have another cloth make after the same manner , and that go round about their waste , and reach to their shoe , and over this a white fine sheet upon their head , which go down half the leg . their hair be make up round with a hair lace about their head . and the man have a small pair of breech of the same cotton wool , and their shirt which hang over their breech , and a broad girdle about their middle , and a sheet with flower upon their back , and with a knot upon one shoulder , and a hat upon their head , and a pair of shoe . and this be all their apparel , although it be a casique , which they use in all the country . the wall of the house of the Indians , be but plain , the house of but the stone be lay so close , that you shall not well Indians . perceive the joint between one stone and another , they be so fine cut : and by the mean that the stone be so workmanly do , and fine join together , there be some beauty in their wall . they be marvelous small [ ill . 469. ] and light , as pumy stone . they make their door 395 Mutezuma , and his riches . the english voyage very little , so that there can go in but one man at a time . their window , and room within their house be small , and one room they have reserve for their friend , when they come to talk one with another , and that be always fair mat , and keep marvelous clean , and hang full of image , and their chair stand there to sit in . they eat their meat upon the ground , and sleep on the ground upon a mat , without any bed , both the gentleman , and other . the indian strike their fire with one stick in another , aswell the tame people , as the wild . for they know not how to do it with a iron , and a stone . in Nova Hispania every io . or 12. league they have a contrary speech , save only about Mexico : so there be a number of speech in the country . Mutezuma which be the last king of this country , be one of the rich prince which have be see in our time , or long before . he have all kind of beast which be then in the country , and all manner of bird , and fish , and all manner of worm , which creep upon the earth , and all tree , and flower , and herb , all fashion in silver and gold , which be the great part of all his treasure , and in these thing have he great joy , as the old indian report . and unto this day , they say that the treasure of Mutezuma be hide , and that the Spaniard have it not . this king will give none of his people freedom , nor forgive any of they that shall pay he tribute , though he be never so poor . for if it have be tell he that one of his tributary be poor , and that he be not able to pay his tribute accord to the custom , than he will have he bind to bring at such time as tribute shall be pay , a quill full of louse , say , he will have none free , but himself . he have as many wife or concubine , as he will have , and such as like he . always whensoever he go out of his court to pass the time , he be bear upon 4. of his noble man shoulder set upon a table , some sav , of gold , and very rich dress with feather of diverse and 396 1572. many colour and flower . he wash all his body every Indians day , be it never so cold . and unto this day so do all tkem the indian , and especial the woman . se^ ever^ the Spaniard keep the indian in great subjection . they may have in their house no sword nor dagger , nor knife with any point , nor may wear upon they any manner of arm , neither may they ride upon any horse nor mule , in any saddle nor bridle , neither may they drink wine , which they take for the great pain of all . they have attempt diverse time to make insurrection , but they have be overthrow immediate by their own great and beastly cowardliness . there remain some among the wild people , that unto cannibal . this day eat one another . i have see the bone of a Spaniard that have be as clean burnish , as though it have be do by man that have no other occupation . and many time people be carry away by they , but they never come again , whether they be man or woman . they have in the sea island of red salt in great abun - island of salt . dance , whereas they lade it from place to place about the sea coast : and they spend very much salt with salt their hide , and fish : and in their mine they occupy great quantity . they have much allume , and as good as allume . any that be in all the Levant , so that they need none of that commodity . they have also of their own grow , much Cana fistula , and much Salsa perilla , which cassia fistula . be marvelous good for many kind of disease . Salsa peri^a - there be in Florida many jarrefalcon , and many Florida . other kind of hawk , which the gentleman of Nova Hispania send for every year . the Spaniard have two fort there , chief to keep out the Frenchman from plant there . 