a resolution of the land-captain , what course they think most expedient to be take . give at Cartagena the xxvij . of February 1585. Hereas it have please the generali to demand the opinion of his captain what course they think most expedient to be now undertake , the land-captain be assemble by themselves together , and have advise hereupon , do in three point deliver the same . the first , touch the keep of the town against the force of the enemy , either that which be present , or that which may come out of Spain , be answer thus . we hold opinion , that with this troop of man which we have present with we in land-service , be victual and munition , we may well keep the town , albeit that of man able to answer present service , we have not above 700. the residue be some 150. man by reason of their hurt and sickness be altogether unable to stand we in any stead : wherefore hereupon the sea-captaine be likewise to give their resolution , how they will undertake the safety and service of the ship upon the arrival of any spanish fleet . the second point we make to be this , whether it be meet to go present homeward , or else to continue further trial of our fortune in undertake such like enterprise as we have do already , and thereby to seek after that bountiful mass of treasure for recompense of our travail , which be general expect at our come forth of England : wherein we answer . that it be well know how both we and the soldier be enter into this action as voluntary man , without any impress or gage from her majesty or any body else : 121 and forasmuch as we have hitherto discharge the part of honest man , so that now by the great blessing and favour of our good god there have be take three such notable town , wherein by the estimation of all man will have be find some very great treasure , know that S. Iago be the chief city of all the island and traffic thereabouts , saint Domingo the chief city of Hispaniola , and the head government not only of that hand , but also of Cuba , and of all the hand about it , as also of such inhabitation of the firm land , as be next unto it , and a place that be both magnificent build , and entertain great trade of merchandise ; and now last the city of Cartagena , which can be deny to be one of the chief place of most especial importance to the Spaniard of all the city which be on this side of the west India : we do therefore consider , that since all these city , with their good and prisoner take in they , and the ransom of the say city be all put together , be find far short to satisfy that expectation which by the generality of the enterpriser be first conceive : and be further advise of the slenderness of our strength , whereunto we be now reduce , as well in respect of the small number of able body , as also not a little in regard of the slack disposition of the great part of those which remain , very many of the better mind and man be either consume by death , or weaken by sickness and . hurt : and last , since that as yet there be not lay down to our knowledge any such enterprise as may seem convenient to be undertake with such few as we be present able to make , and withal of such certain likelihood , as with God good success which it may please he to bestow upon we , the same may promise to yield we any sufficient contentment : we do therefore conclude hereupon , that it be better to hold sure as we may the honour already get , and with the same to return towards our gracious [ three . 544. ] sovereign and country , from whence if it shall please her majesty to set we forth again with her orderly mean and entertainment , we be most ready and willing 122 to go through with any thing that the uttermost of our strength and endeavour shall be able to reach unto ; but therewithal we do advise and protest that it be far from our thought , either to refuse , or so much as to seem to be weary of any thing , which for the present shall|be further require or direct to be do by we from our generali . the three and last point be concern the ransom of this city of Cartagena , for the which , before it be touch with any fire , there be make a offer of some xxvij . or xxviij . thousand pound sterling . thus much we utter herein as our opinion agree ( so it be do in good sort ) to accept this offer aforesaid , rather than to break off by stand still upon our demand of one hundred thousand pound , which seem a matter impossible to be perform for the present by they , and to say truth , we may now with much honour and reputation better be satisfy with that sum offer by they at the first ( if they will now be content to give it ) then we may at that time with a great deal more , inasmuch as we have take our full pleasure both in the uttermost sack and spoil of all their household good and merchandise , as also in that we have consume and ruin a great part of their town with fire . and thus much further be consider herein by we , that as there be in the voyage a great many poor man , who have willing adventure their life and travail , and diverse among they have spend their apparel and such other little provision as their small mean may have give they leave to prepare , which be do upon such good and allowable intention as this action have always carry with it , meaning , against the Spaniard our great and most dangerous enemy : so sure we can but have a inward regard so far as may lie in we , to help either in all good sort towards the satisfaction of this their expectation , and by procure they some little benefit to encourage they and to nourish 123 this ready and willing disposition of they both in they and in other by their example against any other time of like occasion . but because it may be suppose that herein we forget not the private benefit of our self , and be thereby the rather move to incline our self to this composition , we do therefore think good for the clear of our self of all such suspicion , to declare hereby , that what part or portion soever it be of this ransom or composition for Cartagena , which shall come unto we , we do free give and bestow the same whole upon the poor man , who have remain with we in the voyage , mean as well the sailor as the soldier , wish with all our heart it be such or so much as may seem a sufficient reward for their painful endeavour . and for the firm confirmation thereof , we have think meet to subsign these present with our own hand in the place and time aforesaid . captain Christopher Carliell lieutenant generali . captain Goring . captain Samson . captain Powell etc but while we be yet there , it happen one day , that our watch call the sentinel , upon the Churchsteeple , have discover in the sea a couple of small bark or boat , make in with the harbour of Cartagena , whereupon captain moon and captain Varney , with John grant the master of the tiger , and some other seaman , embark themselves in a couple of small pinnace , to take they before they shall come nigh the shore , at the mouth of the harbour , lest by some straggle spaniard from the land , they may be warn by sign from come in : which fall out accord , notwithstanding all the diligence that our man can use : for the spanish boat , upon the sight of our pinnace come towards they , run themselves ashore , and so their man present hide themselves in bush hard by the sea side , among some other that have call they by sign thither . our man present without any due 124 regard have to the quality of the place , and see no man of the Spaniard to show themselves , aboord the spanish bark or boat , and so stand all open in they , be sudden shoot at by a troop of spaniard out of the bush : by which volley of shot there be slay captain Varney , which die present , and captain moon , who die some few day after , beside some four or five other that be hurt : and so our folk return without their purpose , not have any sufficient number of soldier with they to fight on shore . for those man they carry be all mariner to row , few of they arm , because they make account with their ordinance to have take the bark well enough at sea , which they may full easy have do , without any loss at all , if they have come in time to the harbour mouth , before the Spaniard boat have get so near the shore . during our abode in this place , as also at saint Domingo , there pass diverse courtesy between we and the Spaniard , as feast , and use they with all kindness and favour : so as among other there come to see the generali , the governor of Cartagena , with the bishop of the same , and diverse other gentleman of the better sort . this town of Cartagena we touch in the out part , and consume much with fire , as we have do saint Domingo upon discontentment , and for want of agree with we in their first treaty touch their ransom , which at the last be conclude between we , shall be 100 and xoooo . ducat for that which be yet stand , the ducat value at five shilling six penny sterling . this town though not half so big as saint Domingo , give as you see , a far great ransom , be in very deed of far more importance , by reason of the excellende of the harbour , and the situation thereof , to serve the trade of number de dios and other place , and be inhabit with far more rich merchant . the other be chief inhabit with lawyer and brave gentleman , 125 [ hl 545 - ] be the chief or high appeal of their suit in law of all the island about it , and of the main land coast next unto it . and it be of no such account as Cartagena , for these and some other like reason , which i can give you , over long to be now write . the warning which this town receive of our come towards they from saint Domingo , by the space of twenty day before our arrival here , be cause that they have both fortify and every way prepare for their best defence . as also that they have carry and convey away all their treasure and principali substance . the ransom of a hundred and ten thousand ducat thus conclude on , as be aforesaid , the same be write , and express for nothing more than the town of Cartagena , upon the payment of the say ransom , we leave the say town , and draw some part of our soldier into the priory or abbey , stand a quarter of a english mile below the town upon the harbour waterside , the same be wall with a wall of stone , which we tell the Spaniard be yet we , and not redeem by their composition : whereupon they find the defect of their contract , be content to enter into another ransom for all place , but special for the say house , as also the blockhouse or castle , which be upon the mouth of the inner harbour . and when we ask as much for the one as for the other , they yield to give a thousand crown for the abbey , leave we to take our pleasure upon the blockhouse , which they say they be not able to ransom , have stretch themselves to the uttermost of their power : and therefore the say blockhouse be by we undermine , and so with blow up in piece . while this latter contract be in make , our whole fleet of ship fall down towards the harbour mouth , where they anchor the three time , and employ their man in fetch of fresh water aboard the ship for our voyage homeward , which water be have in a great well , 126 gun powder 1586. that be in the island by the harbour mouth : which island the island of be a very pleasant place as have be see , have in cam-it many sort of goodly and very pleasant fruit , as the orange tree and other , be set orderly in walk of great length together . insomuch as the whole island be some two or three mile about , be cast into ground of gardening and orchard . after six week abode in this place , we put to sea the last of march , where after two or three day a great ship which we have take at saint Domingo , and thereupon be call the new year gift , fall into a great leak , be lade with ordinance , hide , and other spoil , and in the night she lose the company of our fleet ; which be miss the next morning by the generali , he cast about with the whole fleet , fear some great mischance to be happen unto she , as in very deed it so fall out : for her leak be so great , that her man be all tire with pump . but at the last have find she and the bark Talbot in her company , which stay by great hap with she , they be ready to take their man out of she , for the save of they . and so the generali be full advertise of their great extremity , make sail direct back again to Cartagena with the whole fleet , where have stay eight or ten day more , about the unlade of this ship , and the bestow thereof and her man into other ship , we depart once again to sea , direct our course towards the cape S. Antony , be the westermost part of Cuba , where we arrive the seven and twenty of April . but because fresh water can not present be find , we weigh anchor , and depart , think in few day to recover the matan^as , a place to the eastward of Havana . after we have sail some fourteen day , we be bring to cape S. Anthony again , through lack of favourable wind : but than our scarcity be grow such , as need make we look a little better for water , which we find in sufficient quantity , be indeed , as i judge , none other then rain water new fall , and gather [ three . 54.6 . ] 127 a most commendable example of diligence in a generali . the english voyage up by make pit in a plot of marsh ground , some three hundred pase from the sea side . i do wrong if i shall forget the good example of the generali at this place , who to encourage other , and to hasten the get of fresh water aboard the ship , take no less pain himself then the mean ; as also at saint Domingo , Cartagena , and all other place , have always so vigilant a care and foresight in the good order of his fleet , accompany they , as it be say , with such wonderful travel ! of body , as doubtless have he be the mean person , as he be the chief , he have yet deserve the first place of honour : and no less happy doe we account he , for be associate with master Carliel his lieutenant generali , by who experience , prudent counsel , and gallant performance he achieve so many and happy enterprise of the war , by who also he be very great assist , in set down the needful order , law , and course of justice , and the due administration of the same upon all occasion . after three day spend in water our ship , we depart now the second time from this cape of S. Anthony the thirteenth of May , and proceed about the cape of Florida , we never touch any where ; but coast alongst Florida , and keep the shore still in sight , the 28. of May early in the morning we descry on the shore a place build like a beacon , which be in deed a scaffold upon four long mast raise on end , for man to discover to the seaward , be in the latitude of thirty degree , or very near thereunto . our pinnace man , and come to the shore , we march up alongst the river side , to see what place the enemy hold there : for none among we have any knowledge thereof at all . here the generali take occasion to march with the company himself in person , the lieutenant generail have the vanguard ; and go a mile up or somewhat more by the river side , we may discern on the other side of the river over against we , a fort which new have 128 be build by the Spaniard : and some mile or thereabouts above the fort be a little town or village without wall , build of wooden house , as the plot do plain show . we forthwith prepare to have ordinance for the battery ; and one piece be a little before the evening plant , and the first shot be make by the lieutenant generali himself at their ensign , strike through the ensign , as we afterward understand by a french man , which come unto we from they . one shot more be then make , which strike the foot of the fort wall , which be all massive timber of great tree like mast . the lieutenant generali be determine to pass the river this night with 4. company , and there to lodge himself entrench as near the fort , as that he may play with his musket and small shot upon any that shall appear , and so afterward to bring and plant the battery with he : but the help of mariner for that sudden to make trench can not be have , which be the cause that this determination be remit until the next night . in the night the lieutenant generali take a little row skiff , and half a dozen well arm , as captain Morgan , and captain Samson , with some other beside the rower , and go to view what guard the enemy keep , as also to take knowledge of the ground . and albeit he go as covert as may be , yet the enemy take the alarm , grow fearful that the whole force be approach to the assault , and therefore with all speed abandon the place after the shoot of some of their piece . they thus go , and he be return unto we again , but nothing know of their flight from their fort , forthwith come a french man be a phipher ( who have Nicholas be prisoner with they ) in a little boat , play on his borsoisnm-phiph the tune of the prince of Orange his song ; and be call unto by the guard , he tell they before he put foot out of the boat , what he be himself , and how the Spaniard be go from the fort , offer either to remain in hand there , or else to return to the place with they that will go . ten 129 i upon this intelligence , the generali , the lieutenant generali , with some of the captain in one skiff , and the viceadmiral with some other in his skiff , and two or three pinnace furnish of soldier with they , put present over towards the fort , give order for the rest of the pinnace to follow . and in our approach , some of the enemy bold than the rest , have stay behind their company , shoot off two piece of ordinance at we : but on shore we go , and enter the place without find any man there . when the day appear , we find it build all of timber , the wall be none other but whole mast or body of tree set up right and close together in manner of a pale , without any ditch as yet make , but whole intend with some more time ; for they have not as yet finish all their work , have begin the same some three or four month before : so as , to say the truth , they have no reason to keep it , be subject both to fire , and easy assault . [ Iii . 547. ] the platform whereon the ordinance lie , be whole body of long pine tree , whereof there be great plenty , lay a cross one on another , and some little earth among . there be in it thirteen or fourteen great piece of brass ordinance , and a chest unbroken up , have in it the value of some two thousand pound sterling by estimation of the king treasure , to pay the soldier of that place , who be a hundred and fifty man . the fort thus win , which they call S. Johns fort , and the day open , . we assay to go to the town , but can not by reason of some river and break ground which be between the two place : and therefore be enforce to embark again into our pinnace , we go thither upon the great main river , which be call as also the town , by the name of saint Augustin . at our approach to land , there be some that begin to show themselves , and to bestow some few shot 130 1586. upon we , but present withdraw themselves . and in their run thus away , the sergeant Major find one of their horse ready saddle and bridle , take the same to follow the chase ; and so overgo all his company , be ( by one lay behind a bush ) shoot through the head : and fall down therewith , be by the same and two or three more , stab in three or four place of his body with sword and dagger , before any can come near to his rescue . his death be much lament , be in very deed a honest wise gentleman , and a soldier of good experience , and of as great courage as any man may be . in this place call S. Augustin , we understand the king do keep , as be before say , one hundred and fifty soldier , and at another place some dozen league beyond to the northward , call S. Helena , he do there likewise keep a hundred and fifty more , serve there for no other purpose , than to keep all other nation from inhabit any part of all that coast ; the government whereof be commit to one Pedro Melendez marquess , nephew to that Melendez the admiral , who have overthrow master John Hawkins in the bay of Mexico some seventeen or eighteen year ago . this governor have charge of both place , but be at this time in this place , and one of the first that leave the same . here it be resolve in full assembly of captain , to undertake the enterprise of saint Helena , and from thence to seek out the inhabitation of our english countryman in Virginia , distant from thence some six degree northward . when we come thwart of saint Helena , the shold Santa Helena , appear dangerous , and we have no pilot to undertake the entry , it be think meet to go hence along . for the admiral have be the same night in four fathom and a half , three league from the shore : and yet we understand by the help of a know pilot , there may and do go in ship of great burden and draught then any we have in our fleet . 131 we pass thus alongst the coast hard aboard the shore , which be shallow for a league or two from the shore , and the same be low and break land for the most part . the nine of June upon sight of one speciali great fire ( which be very ordinary all alongst this coast , even from the cape of Florida hither ) the generali send his skiff to the shore , where they find some of our english countryman ( that have be send thither the year before by sir Walter Ralegh ) and bring they aboard : by who direction we proceed along to the place which they make their port. but some of our ship be of great draught unable to enter , anchor without the harbour in a wild road at sea , about two mile from shore . from whence the general write letter to master Ralph lane , be governor of those english in Virginia , and then at his fort about six league from the road in a island which they call Roanoac , wherein especial he show how ready he be to supply his necessity and want , which he understand of , by those he have first talk withal . the morrow after , master lane himself and some of his company come unto he , with the consent of his captain he give they the choice of two offer , that be to say : either he will leave a ship , a pinnace , and certain boat with sufficient master and mariner , together furnish with a month victuali , to stay and make far discovery of the country and coast , and so much victuali likewise as may be sufficient for the bring of they all ( be a hundred and three person ) into England , if they think good after such time , with any other thing they will desire , and that he may be able to spare . or else if they think they have make sufficient discovery already , and do desire to return into England , he will give they passage . but they , as it seem , be desirous to stay , accept very thankful and with great 132 gladness , that which be offer first . whereupon the ship be appoint and receive into charge by some of their own company send into she by master lane , before they have receive from the rest of the fleet the provision appoint they , there arise a great storm ( which they say be extraordinary and very strange ) that last three dayes'together , and put all our fleet in great danger , to be drive from their anchor upon the coast . for we break many cable , and lose many anchor : and some of our fleet which have lose all ( or which number be the [ three . 548. ] ship appoint for master lane and his company ) be drive to put to sea in great danger , in avoid the coast , and can never see we again until we meet in England . many also of our small pinnace and boat be lose in this storm . notwithstanding after all this , the generali offer they ( with consent of his captain ) a other ship with some provision , although not such a one for their turn , as may have be spare they before , this be unable to be bring into their harbour . or else if they will , to give they passage into England , although he know we shall perform it with great difficulty than he may have do before . but master lane with those of the chief of his company which he have then with he , consider what shall be best for they to do , make request unto the general under their hand , that they may have passage for England : the which be grant , and the rest send for out of the country and ship , we depart from that coast the 18. of June . and so , God be thank , both they and we in good safety arrive at Portesmouth the 28. of July 1586. to the great glory of God , and to no small honour to our prince , our country , and our self . the total value of that which be get in this voyage be esteem at three score thousand pound , whereof the company which have travel in the voyage be to have twenty thousand pound , the adventurer ! 33 the other forty . of which twenty thousand pound ( as i can judge ) will redound some six pound to the single share . we lose some seven hundred and fifty man in the voyage ; above three part of they only by sickness . the man of name that die and be slay in this voyage , which i can present call to remembrance , be these . captain Powel . ) ( captain Bigges . captain Varney . ( ) captain Cecill . captain moon . ( ) captain Hannam . captain Fortescue . ) ( captain Greenefield . Thomas Tucker a lieutenant . Alexander Starkey a lieutenant . master Escot a lieutenant . master Waterhouse a lieutenant . master George candish . master Nicholas winter . master Alexander Carliell . master Robert Alexander . master Scroop . master James Dier . master Peter duke . with some other , who for haste i can sudden think on . the ordinance get of all sort brass and iron , be about two hundred and forty piece , whereof the two hundred and some moor be brass , and be thus find and get . at saint Iago some two or three and fifty piece . in saint Domingo about fourscore , whereof be very much great ordinance , as whole cannon , demi-canon , culverin , and such like . in Cartagena some sixty and three piece , and good store likewise of the great sort . in the fort of S. Augustin be fourteen piece . the rest be iron ordinance , of which the most part be get at saint Domingo , the rest at Cartagena . 