a relation of the port , harbour , fort and city in the west Indies which have be surveyed , edify , finish , make and mend , with those which have be build , in a certain survey by the king of Spain his direction and commandment : write by Baptista Antonio , surveyor in those part for the say king . anno 1587. Santa Marta . make of cane , irst Santa Marta the principali city of nta Marta the bishopric or diocese of the coast s^mte w ’°-of Tierra firma , or the firm land , lie Mfe* m a in 10. degree and i , the city be situate upon a sandy bay adjoin unto the sea side , contain in it about 30. household ; all the house be and cover over with Palmito tree , and some of they be cover with tile . they have traffic with none , but with the Indians of the say country , which do bring unto the city for to [ three . 549. ] sell earthen pot and pipkin , and coverlit of Cotton wool , and great earthen jar . also they do traffic to Cartagena . it be a country which have but small store of cattle , because it be all mountainous , and have small store of people . there be a very good harbour before the say town , environ with mighty hill and great rock , which reach even unto the sea side , the which high land do great succour the harbour , as also two hand which lie about of a league on the north side : so that although they be subject to easterly wind , and that with great storm , yet they do no great harm to go on land . within this harbour there be a place which be call la Caldera , where in time past they be wont to trim and carene their ship . as touch the harbour , there be no cause to fortify it , nor to make 135 any account of it , by reason there be no trade nor tramque to this place from any other place , accord as i have certify your majesty thereof . and also because here be but few dweller or inhabitant , and loose every day so many as it do , by reason that it be every day rob a new course and spoil by the enemy . but if your majesty will an't^b the command that the fleet of Nova Hispania may direct way1 of'santa t^le^r course to this harbour be in their way , and here Marta less to water and refresh themselves , all the pilot do say subject to that the fleet may proceed on their voyage from this danger then place , still go before the wind , and so go to the tnarS cape of saint Anthony which lie on the hand of Cuba , and from thence go their direct course to Nova Hispania ; and by this mean the fleet shall have no occasion to pass so many danger as they do , by reason of the Huricanos or stormy wind which many time do come upon they , when they be upon the coast of Hispaniola : and this be the cause that there be so many ship cast away , as your majesty do well know . and as concern this course accord as i have certify your majesty , they shall come into no danger at all , nor shall make any further way about ; so by this mean both the fleet may come from Spain in company , and then come to saint Marta , and the fleet of Nova Hispania may come into this harbour , and the fleet which do go unto the firm land , may go direct to Cartagena as they do . than your majesty may send to fortify the say harbour , and the fortification must be thus : that on the morro or mount which be in the enter in of the say harbour , there be build a little fort , and so to plant some small quantity of ordinance . and hard by on the south side , there to build a little tower , and another sconce , where we may plant some more ordinance . so by this mean not only the ship may ride here in security , but also it will be a defence for those which dwell here in the town : and the better to effect this purpose , there be hard by the town great 136 store of Lyme , stone , sand , and timber , if occasion shall serve . Cartagena . CArtagena be a city , and the principali place of the bishopric ; it lie fourty league from Santa Marta : it stand in scant u . degree . the say city Cartagena be situate upon a sandy bank or bay like unto a hand : sljuate m both it have about 450. dweller therein . there be very fair ' building therein : as concern their house , they be make of stone , and there be three monastery , of which two of they be of friar which be within the city , the one call Santo Domingo , and the other call Santo Augustin , and the other which be call saint Francis , which stand without the city about 30. pace off . and for to go unto the say friary , you must go upon a Causey make of stone , and water on both side . this city have great trade out of Spain , and out of the new kingdom of Granada , and out of the hand there adjoin , from Peru , and from all the coast of this firm land , and of the fish of the pearl of Rio de la Hacha , and of Margarita : it be a very sound country . this city have a very good harbour , and sufficient to receive great store of ship : this say harbour have two entrance in , the one of they lie half a league from the city , where all the ship do enter into the say harbour : the mouth or enter in of the say harbour be 1400. yard or pace in breadth , and very deep water . the other enter in which be call la boca chica , or little mouth , lie a league beyond this place to the westwards . it be 900. yard in breadth , and in the enter in thereof there lie a channel in the midst of it , which be 200. yard broad , and 20. or 15. fathom water , some place more , some less . and to enter into the harbour you must go through this channel , and the land do double in and out . and at the enter in of the say harbour , after you have pass this channel , you must bear up to the shoareward near unto the hand of care , and look 137 how much be overplus more than the two hundred yard of the channel , all the rest be certain ledge of rock , cover with two or three foot water upon the top of they , some place more , and some less . So the ship [ three . 550. ] which must enter in at the mouth , must bring very good pilot with they , which must be very skilful : yet all this will not serve , but they must carry their boat before , and sound with their lead to know where the best place of the channel lie for they to go in , so it will be small hindrance to any ship that shall enter , neither yet danger at all of sink . there be three place about the say city , where the Francis enemy may give a attempt by land the one of they drake . js where the enemy do enter in and land , which be a sandy bay , and on the other side of the bay be the sea , and on the other side a great lake which go towards the harbour . the sandy bay or bank , on the one side be 500 yard broad , all sandy ground without any tree . so that the enemy which give the assault in this place must be constrain to march all alongst this sandy bay , the enemy lie open these 500 yard , which reach until you do come to the trench : and on the backside other 500 yard , till you do come unto the city . the say sandy bay or bank be 130. yard broad , where the trench be build . and in this place this city have be take by the enemy twice . wherefore here we have drive in a great many of wooden stake , which go down into the sea 50. yard deep : and this we have do , because this be a very dangerous and filthy coast . and below in the bottom of the valley there we have build a little sconce , where we may plant 3. or 4. piece of ordinance . and likewise we have make a deep ditch , which do answer to both part of the sea ; so on this side the city be very strong and sufficient . for this be the place whereof the citizen be most afraid . the other enter be lower down by the say sandy 138 bay , which be call Cienaga , or the fen deal Roreado . this be another place which be on the say sandy bay , which be 300. yard broad from the one place down to the sea . and on the other side there lie the Cienaga , which be a certain plat of ground that be overflow with water all the year long . so that the enemy which shall come this way to win the city , must come march over land a good way upon a sandy bank or bay , where the sea lie on the one side , and a grove or bosk of wood on the other side , and through a plat of ground which be overflow with water , but not all cover . so in this place we have make a fort or sconce with certain flanker belong thereunto . and i have cause a deep ditch to be dig of 60. foot in breadth , so that the sea do come to that plat or place which be overflow . and in this order we have stop this passage , so that the city stand in manner like unto a hand . there be 2600. yard distance from this place to the other trench where the enemy Francis Drake do land last . the enter in of this harbour be by the bridge and Causey which do go from the city to saint Francis ; the say Causey be 300. yard in length , and 12. yard in breadth : and the water be on both the side of the say Causey : so this be the strong place of all the rest of the three place . also in this place there be order take to make a draw bridge , and upon the top of the say bridge to build a platform , and plant ordinance upon it : and on both side of the bridge there be certain trench make , where our man may be close keep . at the point of this land call ycaco , which be in the enter in of the harbour towards saint Anna , we have make a fort of timber foursquare of 300. foot every way , and trench , where we may plant 15. or 16. piece of ordinance , and keep 50. man in garrison , and behind the bourd on the backside of the timber , a barricade of earth or mud wall be four foot in thickness , and behind the mudwall , sand : so this fort will be of 139 great importance for safeguard of this harbour , because all the ship which do enter into this harbour do come close to this place where it be strong , so that sometime one may cast a stone into the ship when they be come in : and when any ship of war or pirate will give any attempt to enter into this harbour , there be the galres tf order give that the two galley shall go forth , and put Cartagena . themselves behind the fort with their prow to the sea , and so shoot at their enemy in the forepart of the ship , and then the fort answer likewise with their ordinance at the side of the ship , and at their tackle , so the enemy be in the harbour all unrip , they must of necessity be constrain to lie hover within the harbour , or else they must drive upon the rock call the ismo , or else upon those rock which be cover with the sea at the hand of care . And put case that in this place we can do no good by this mean , and that the enemy will venture to come in with their long boat and pinnace through this narrow mouth ; then we be to have in a readiness 4. frigate to aid and help the galley , and to row with oar , and so to go to the narrow mouth , and there to stay in the channel . and forasmuch as the enter in be so dangerous , accord as i have certify your majesty , there can no ship come into this harbour , but we must needs sink they ; so that these defence shall not only be [ three . 551. ] annoyance to the enemy , but also animate and encourage the inhabitant of this city : for they have be and be in such fear of the enemy , and pirate , that if we have not make these fortification , strengthen the city in this order , and put some soldier in garrison , the citizen will have flee , and forsake this city : for all the persuasion make to they by the governor can not persuade they to the contrary , but they will be go , if it have not be for this fortification , and yet for all this we have much to do to make they to stay here : so now by reason of these soldier which shall come hither , the people of the city have take 140 heart of grass : so i have tell they that your majesty will command that this city and the harbour shall be better fortify and make strong , and all this which i have cause to be build , be with that money which i have borrow of the citizen . as touch the safeguard and defence of this harbour , thepoyntof if your majesty so please , here may we build a very fair and strong castle with four bulwark , on the point of the ycaco which do lie on the side where the city be build , because all the ship which do come to this harbour , must come close aboard this shore , so near , that we may cast a stone into they , and so overtake any ship .. so likewise if the ship will go on the other shore , than they do go in great danger , because of those shoald and ledge of rock , and so be often cast away . and forasmuch as those ship which here do arrive be bring hither by easterly wind , and sometime with those wind which come out from the sea , and therefore perforce must give a good birth off , otherwise they can enter into this harbour , therefore of necessity they must come so close to the shore : and on the other side where the island of care stand , there may we build another tower foursquare , and plant some four or five piece of ordinance , and this will serve for the night , if occasion be offer that any small ship or bark shall come in here , or any pinnace in the night , to do any harm , or to attempt to burn any fleet which shall ride here at a anchor within this harbour : so the fort be on the one side , and the tower on the other side , keep good watch , there can no ship nor bark come into this harbour , but they will be espy . in the narrow mouth at the enter in the other way towards the island of care , where the channel ! do run near the shore , as i have already certify your majesty , there may another castle be make , and there four or five piece of ordinance plant , and some six or eight man to keep watch and ward : this be do , 141 your majesty shall have this city very well fortify , by reason it be of such importance for the service of your majesty , and the trade of all Spain and Peru , and all the Indies : for this be the principali fort of all this country . over against this point of the ycaco , in the isle of care , hard by the water side , there be great store of stone , free stone , and other stone to make lime , and wood to burn the stone withal for the lime , and great part of the stone do lie about the water : so the wood will cost but the cut of it down , and the work of it , and with little pain take it will be bring to good perfection , for we have already make trial thereof , for there be never building that go to decay after it have be make , nor perish by the sea : so the charge hereof will be but little or nothing . and for to put this in practice to build a fort , it be needful that your majesty shall send hither and to many other place , where any fort shall be make , some store of negro , and to this place will be send 150 negro bring from Guyney : and if the negro of Havana be not to be employ there , nor those which be in Sant Juan de ullua , it may please your majesty to cause they to be send for to this place , for most of they be artificer , some mason , bricklayer , smith and sawyer , and to send some mason from Spain to teach our man these occupation . and after these fortification be end and all furnish , than the negro may be sell to great profit , for a negro that be of any occupation be sell here for 600. and 700. pezo . number de Dios. number de Dios be build upon a sandy bay hard by the sea side , it be a city of some thirty household or inhabitant : their house be build of timber , and most of the people which be there be foreigner , they be there to day and go to morrow : it be full of wood and some place of the land be overflow 142 with water continual by reason of much rain which do fall upon the hill . it be a very bad harbour , neither be there any good water : and it be subject to northerly wind and easterly wind , which continual do blow upon this coast : many of the great ship which do come to this place do unlade half their commodity between the two ledge of rock , for that there be but little water in the harbour : and after that a ship have unlade half of her good , than she go to the second rock , as it do appear by the platform , but the small ship come near unto another rock on the west side . if the wind chance to come to the north and northwest , and that it overblow , than such great ship as then be in the road must of force more themselves with six cable a head , especial in a storm , and yet nevertheless sometime they be drive ashore and so cast away , and all because they dare not vier cable enough , because of so many shelf and rock which be in both those place : also the ship do roll very much in the harbour , by reason in foul weather the sea will be mighty grow , which be the cause that their cable do oftentimes break , and their ruther be unhanged , the cause thereof be by reason the ship do ride but in little water , yet go there a great sea . the city be build and situate very well if it be a good harbour , it stand upon the Eastside upon a rock where they may build a very good fort , accord to the platform for the safeguard of this harbour : but see it be but a bad haven and shallow water , therefore i do think that it be not needful for your majesty to be at any charge in fortify that place , but only a trench to be make of earth or clay , so that these townsman may defend themselves from danger of 3. or 4. ship . the city of Panama be eighteen league from number de dios , the way be exceed bad thitherwards ; yet notwithstanding all the silver be bring this way to number de dios , as well your majesty treasure 143 [ three . 552. ] number de dios in 9 deg . and one tierce . the english voyage as other merchandise ; so likewise the most part of those commodity which be carry to Peru , and the rest of the merchandise be carry to the river of Chagre which be some 18 league from this city and it be bring up by this river within five league of Panama unto a inn or lodge call Venta de cruze , and from this place afterward they be transport to Panama upon mule . the high way which go from number de dios to Panama may be very well mend , only to remove this way and to stop it quite up , and so to make it again upon the side of a mountain . this city lie in nine degree and one tierce , and if your majesty will give order that this city shall be pluck down and new build again in Puerto bello , than you be to make a new way through the mountain of Capira , by reason it may not be frequent and because the high way be very bad : with little charge they may be break and so shut up , and the channel of this harbour may be stop with the timber of those old ship which be lay up here every year , and then afterward may be cast a great number of stone into the same , and so by this mean to dam up the harbour : and here be great want of stone to ballast the ship : wherefore they be fain to go to a island three league from Cartagena call Isla de los bastimentos , and this be a thing very needful for this country , as by experience i have see . Puerto bello . puerto bello lie five league from number de dios westward : it be a very good harbour and sufficient to receive great store of ship , and have very good ankering , and fresh water : for near the shore you shall find some six fathom water , and in the midst of the same harbour you shall find twelve fathom , very good and clean ground or sand , without either bank or rock . there be twelve small river or brook of water which do belong to this harbour , and so do meet all together : 144 so that the fleet may at all time provide themselves off fresh water so much as shall serve their turn . and like wise there be in this place great store of timber to build ship , and stone to ballast ship . also the harbour have no danger at all in come in , but only when the wind be westerly , which be seidome see upon this coast . the wind which do most blow upon this coast be northerly wind , and they be more dangerous and hurtful than the easterly wind be . within this harbour there lie a small creek safe from all wind that can blow . this creek be about five hundred yard long , and so many in breadth , and in the enter in of this creek mouth it be some 300. yard broad , and four fathom and a half of water : and enter further in , six fathom , all oaze and muddy ground : so that if a ship shall chance to strike or come aground , she can take no harm be soft oaze ; also it do ebb and flow accord as i have certify your majesty already . and likewise the come in and go out of this harbour be very good ; and with all kind of weather a ship may set sail from this place except with a westerly wind : and all this coast be very clean where a ship at all time may come to anchor without the harbour mouth . this harbour be environ round about with wood : and at the end of this harbour there be certain land which be overflow with water : it may be easy dry up and wall round about , so this land will serve very well to feed cattle . for that be the chief thing which do belong to any city or town , and of this pasture ground there be great want in number de dios , for there be no pasture at all to breed cattle , for all kind of flesh which be spend in this place be bring from Panama : so towards the south there be a very good place , where the city may be new build on a certain plain ground which lie at the foot of certain mountain , which be not very high ; and in this place there run three little river of fresh water very sweet and good , and here be good arable ground to till and to ten 145 king [ in . 553. ] sow Maiz and other kind of grain . also in this circuit there be great stone to make lime , and these stone must needs prove very good as i do think , but we never have any trial thereof . this harbour have all thing necessary to build a. city , where your majesty may have your army and fleet of ship to ride at a anchor in safety without danger of loose : and it be a very healthful country , and where the city shall be build it be all stony ground : and forasmuch as the rain water which do fall from the mountain may do hurt unto the city , there at the foot of the mountain we will make a great pond to receive in all the water which do fall from the mountain , and so from thence to go into the sea , as more at large your majesty may see by my platform . if it will please your majesty , it be good that the city of number de Dios may be bring and build in this harbour : it will not be very chargeable unto the citizen by reason that all their house be make of timber , and they may benefit themselves with the same again , and likewise with the tile of their house : the great charge will be to land timber and to cut down the mountain of wood . if it please your majesty that the say city of number de Dios shall be build in this harbour the first thing which must be finish be to make up this high way , and so to pull down the church which be in number de dios , and the contractation house , and so new build it in this harbour : and then to command all the fleet of ship from time to time to come and unlade their good in this say Puerto bello : and that those merchant and factor of Spain which be lyger in Panama and number de dios , shall come to this harbour and build anew their warehouse for receive of their good . so by these mean in short time it will be great inhabit with people : also the fleet shall not pass so many danger as they daily do in number de dios : neither will there so many people die as there daily doe in number de 146 Dios : and the cause thereof be , that those labour man which do use to unlade those merchandise , be all the whole day wade in the water up to the armpit to bring the pack of cloth and other commodity aland ; for there be no land place where there can come any boat to land any good close to the shore , so this wade and the parch of the sun be the cause why so many do dye of a burn fever . there be but 60. dwell house in number de dios , and but thirty dweller which do continual dwell there , and the rest do go to Panama after the fleet be go , and then this town do remain desolate , every man forsake it because it be so full of disease . in the enter in of this harbour for the more security thereof and defence of the town it be needful to build upon the top of the mount which lie to the northward , a little fort foursquare that will hold four or five piece of ordinance , and to appoint six man to watch and ward ; and this be do we shall have no occasion to make any more defence , by reason the country be full of rock and filthy way , and all full of wood round about the harbour . and so likewise on the other side to build a little tower in manner of a fort , with eight piece of ordinance and five and twenty soldier to keep it . and this will be of more importance because it must be build on the town side . and a little beyond this place on the northside there lie a creek , where there be a very good anker in eight fathom water : so this fort be build in this place it will defend the harbour and offend the enemy : and will defend the coast along and a point of the land which do run from the east to the west , and reach to the hand of buena Ventura . And put case that the fort which be build on the other side do decay , or be take by the enemy , with this other fort we may defend the city very well , if the enemy shall chance to come into the harbour , and be succour and help by the 147 citizen , and twenty musketeer be plant upon a mount which lie over the fort , will be sufficient to defend we from a good many of our enemy , that shall come to assault we , because all the country be full of rock and stone , and full of mountain . so from this wood there may a way be make to go to the city , and to join with that way which shall go to Panama ; and this may be do with small charge . this harbour do lie in nine degree and one tierce , and if occasion shall serve we may stop up the way which do go to Capira , and the rest of the way which go from number de dios to Venta de cruze , accord as it be certify i by the negro call Simerons ; for they tell i that this way will not be very troublesome . although in the winter it be report that here be good store of water in this place , which in the summer be all dry up , and where these water be , there we may build a causey , to which purpose there be great quantity of stone and timber very serviceable : so this way may be make with that treasure which your majesty do receive of the average and custom of number de dios and Panama , which do amount unto twelve or fourteen thousand pezo yearly : and a order may be take for the same , that the say money may serve for the building and repair of these way . Panama . PAnama be the principali city of this diocese : it lie 18. league from number de dios on the south sea , and stand in 9 degree . there be 3. monastery in this say city of friar , the one be of dominick , the other be of augustines , and the three be of saint Francis friar : also there be a college of Jesuit , and the royal audience or chancery be keep in this city . this city be situate hard by the sea side on a sandy bay : the one side of this city be environ with the sea , and on the other side it be enclose with a arm of the sea which run up into the land 1000 yard . 148 this city have three hundred and fifty house , all Panama have build of timber , and there be six hundred dweller and 35° tone . eight hundred soldier with the townsman , and four hundred negro of Guyney , and some of they be freeman : and there be another town which be call Santa Cruz la real of Negros Simerons , and most of negro sime-them be employ in your majesty service , and they rons ™ rtaU be ioo . in number , and this town be a league from this pan^ar^s city upon a great river side , which be a league from the sea right over against the harbour of Pericos . but there be no trust nor confidence in any of these negro , and therefore we must take heed and beware of they , for they be our mortali enemy . there be three sundry way to come to this city , beside the sea , where the enemy may assault we . the one be at the bridge which be build upon the river : and on the one side of this , there lie a creek : so on this side the city be very strong , because it be all soft muddy ground , for in no way they can go upon it . and right over against it there lie a river which be in manner like unto a ditch or moat ; and on the other side of the river there lie a great lake or pond which be full of water all the winter , and part of the summer , so that on this side the city be very strong , for with very small store of soldier this place may be keep very well . the great danger for the surprise of this city be the way that do come from number de dios : for all this way be plain ground and no wood : and 2000 yard from this city there lie a river call Lavanderas , where the woman do use to wash their linen : and this river do go into the creek , accord as i have certify your majesty : and be once pass this river , there be a causey which go direct unto they . the other way which do go towards the city be low down towards the sea at a stone bridge lie upon the way which go to the harbour of Perico . Theise two way can be keep nor resist , because it be all plain ground and meadow . 149 the best way to take Panama . Perico . upon the east side of this city there be your majesty royal house build upon a rock join hard to the sea side , and they do aswell lean towards the sea as the land . the royal audience or chancery be keep here in these house , and likewise the prison . and in this place all your majesty treasure be keep . there dwell in these house your majesty treasurer , the lord precedent , and 3. judge , and master attorney . all these do dwell in these house , and the rest of your majesty officer : which be six house beside those of the lord precedent , the which be all dwell house , and all adjoin together one by another along upon the rock . and they be build all of timber and bourd , as the other house be . so where the prison stand and the great hall , these two place may be very well fortify , because they serve so fit for the purpose , by reason they be build towards the sea , and that there lie certain small rock , which at a low water be all discover and dry , and some of they be a island in see at a high water . right over these house to the tpanamaur astwardes there lie a island about five hundred ’ yard from these house , and the island be in form of a half moon ; and in this order it run all alongst very near the main land : so over against these house [ three . 555. ] there lie the harbour where all the ship do use to ride at a anchor , after that they have discharge and unlade their merchandise . for when they have their lade aboard , there can come in none but small bark , and at a low water the ship be all aground and dry , and so be all the space some thirty yard from those house . right over against they stand the city . when news be bring to this city of those pirate which be come upon this coast , the lord precedent and judge command that there shall a sconce be make , and trench round about , make all of timber for the defence of this city against the enemy , place good to and to keep your majesty treasure . so your officer land tn . cause Venta de cruze to be fortify , and likewise 150 Chagre , and quebrada , and fortify the garrison of Ballano : for all these be place where the enemy may land , and by this mean spoil all this country . there be three sundry place where this city may without difficulty be take , and spoil by the pirate . the first be on the north sea in a certain place which 1. place . lie fourteen league from number de dios , the place be call aele to the eastwards , where once before certain man of war have enter into those sea . the other place be number de dios , although this be a bad 2 - flueplace and naughty way , and full of water and a very as dirty way : for three part of the year the country people do travel upon those water , and a other very bid way , which be the go up of certain rock and mountain which they must climb , call the mountain of Capira , which be of height three quarter of a league , so in this place with very small store of soldier we can defend our self from the fury of the enemy , so these dweller do say that in summer the way be very good without either dirt or water . the other entrance be up the river of Chagre , which 3 - place . river mouth lie eighteen league from number de dios to the westwards fall into the north sea , and this be the place which the citizen of Panama do most fear , for they may come up this river to Venta de the place of cruze , and so from thence march to this city , which be but five league offi so up this river there go boat and bark which do carry 320. quintals weight . these be they which carry the most part of the merchandise which do come from Spain to be transport to Peru , and from Venta de cruze it be carry to Limaret which be three league off that place , and the dweller do report that it be a very good way : and if any man of war will attempt to come into these sea , they may very easy come up this river as far as Venta de cruze , and from thence march unto this city , and if the enemy will , they may bring their pinnace ready make in four quarter , and so take in sunder , may 151 rebellion fear , in the west Indies . the english voyage afterward set they together again : as it be report that Francis Drake have use it once before when he come that voyage ; and so he may attempt we both by sea and land . and forasmuch as the most part of these people be merchant , they will not fight , but only keep their own person in safety , and save their good ; as it have be see heretofore in other place of these Indies . so if it will please your majesty to cause these house to be strong fortify , consider it stand in a very good place if any sudden alarm shall happen , than the citizen with their good may get themselves to this place , and so escape the terror of the enemy : and so this will be a good security for all the treasure which do come from Peru. so all the pirate and rebel , which have rob in these part , have go about what they can to stop this passage , and so by this mean to stop the trade of Spain , and to set soldier in this place , for to intercept and take your majesty treasure , whereby none may be carry into Spain . therefore it behoove your majesty to fortify these place very strong . Theise place be fortify in this manner , your majesty shall have all your gold and silver bring home in safety which come from Peru. and all those commodity which be lade in Spain may come safe to this place . and if perchance any rebel shall rise in these part , which will rebel against your majesty , which God forbid , and if they shall chance to join with any of these pirate , have this place so well fortify , and Puerto bello in the north part , and so to send some garrison your majesty need not to fear : for here in this harbour be always 10 or 12 bark of 60 or 50 ton apiece , which do belong to this harbour . so if any of these place shall|be intercept , than your majesty have no other place fit than this to land your majesty soldier , for than they have but 18. league to march by land , and present they may be 152 ship to supply these place which shall stand in most need of they . in all the coast of Peru there be no harbour that have any ship but only this place , and the city of Lima , where there be some ship and bark . the harbour be thus open without any defence , a man of war may very easy come to this place , as i have certify your majesty , through the streit of magellane , and arrive at that instant , when those bark , do come from Peru with your majesty gold and silver , for sometime they bring 5 or 6 million in those bark ; so the enemy may come and take all their treasure , and not lose one man , because here be not one man to resist he , therefore this place be thus fortify , the treasure may be keep in the fort . there be a trench make round about your majesty house which be build of timber : the precedent and judge do cause it to be make , for that here be news bring that there be certain man of war , and pirate come for these part . so this trench be thus maintain until such time as your majesty pleasure be to the contrary , and in such wise that your soldier may fight lie behind the trench ; so there be order give to build a platform upon the plain ground , and so to plant such ordinance in those place , as shall be think most convenient . if it will please your majesty , here we may make a sconce or fort towards the land side , and so trench it round about and build it with stone , because here be a place and all thing ready for the same purpose ; and by this mean the ci tie will be secure keep : as for the sea there be no danger at all , by reason that the water do ebb and flow twice a day , and then when it be ebb water it will be all ozy and muddy ground and rock , so that in no wise at a low water the enemy can wade over the mud to come to this city , and it reach from the island till you come to the bridge call Paita . two league from this city there lie a harbour call Perico down to the westward : this be 153 5. or 6. million of gold wonderful silver . [ HL 556-1 the harbour of Perico . sea . the english voyage a very sure harbour by reason of 3. Islands which do join in manner of a half moon , they lie half a league from the main , the island do enclose the harbour round about , the harbour be a very high land , and the hand be but reasonable high , there be good store of fresh water : also there have never any ship be cast away in this harbour , for there be 7. fathom water at full sea , and 3 or 4 fathom at low water , and very good ground for their anker , and when they will trim their ship , they may hale they ashore . all those ship and bark which come from Peru with gold , silver or any other kind of commodity , do first come to a anchor in this harbour , and if they have a contrary weather they can come into the harbour of Panama ; and for so much as the harbour have no defence for the safeguard of the ship , if a man of war shall chance to come into the harbour , all the bark with the treasure may be very easy take . and likewise these bark and ship which do navigate in the south sea carry not so much as one piece of ordinance or a rapier to defend they withal . from this place to Venta de cruze be not pass 5 league ; so that if any pinnace shall happen to arrive there , no doubt but they may rob and take all your treasure which be in those bark , by reason that from the shore they can be rescue nor help , because it be a island and refuge for all ship and bark . if it will please your majesty here may some fort or defence be make in the middlemost island , and some ordinance plant , and this may be make with little charge , because in the say island there be all kind of necessary fit for that purpose , so by this mean your majesty may have both the harbour and the city very well keep . and likewise there be another enter into the south sea which be call the river of Francisca , which lie on this side of the Cabe ? a de Cativa , and this river do come into another river which be call Caracol , and be 154 five league from this city ; and once before these Simerons bring into this place certain Frenchmen . the river of Chagre . the river of Chagre lie in 9 degree and one tierce . the mouth of this river be in the north sea 18. league from number de dios , and 13. league Thue five from Puerto bello : there be carve up this river certain 8* " a , e quantity ot those merchandise which be unlade at ground or number de dios which come from Spain . from the champion mouth of this river to Venta de cruze be eighteen eountrey . league . from this place where the bark unlade their commodity , they be carry upon mule to Panama , which be but five league off from this place . this river have great store of water in the winter . and the bark which belong to this river be common of 320. quintals that be of 16. ton in burden : but in the summer there be but small store of water : so than the bark have much to do to get up this river : and in many place these bark be constrain to unlade their commodity ; and be draw by man strength and force a good way up the river , and therefore if it will please your majesty to command that all those good may be first unlade in Puerto bello , and there to build a little castle in the mouth of the say river , and at the foot of the castle to build a storehouse to unlade and keep all the say good , and there to build other bark of less burden : than these will serve for summer , and the great bark for the winter . if it will please your majesty , there may a very good high way be make on the one side of the river , and so they may be tow , for it may be make and not with much cost because it be all plain ground , and there be grow upon the say river great store of timber and tree which do lie over - [ three . 557. ] thwart the say river ; so that they be very cumbersome and great annoyance unto the say boat , aswell those 155 that go up the say river , as also that do come down the say river . and therefore if it may please your majesty to command , that Puerto bello may be inhabit , and the town make near the river side , every thing will be a great deal better cheap , if the commodity be carry up the river : for it be a great danger to carry they up by land , for it be daily see that the mule do many time fall and break their neck with their lade upon their back , as well the treasure as other kind of commodity , because it be such a bad way . and your majesty may be at this charge and spend your revenue of number de dios and Panama , which do yearly yield 12 or 14 thousand pezo , and this be once do it will be a great aid and benefit to those , which do trade and traffic , and to those merchants which do send their good overland , and ease they much of pain and purse , because the-oth be a most filthy way , as any be in the world . 