a principal ruttier contain most particular direction to sail from saint Lucar in andalusia by the isle of the canary , the small isle call las Antillas , along the south part of the isle of S. Juan de Puerto rico , Hispaniola and Cuba : and from Cabo de Corrientes , or Cabo de S. Anton without and within the little isle call los Alacranes , to the port of saint Juan de ullua in nueva espanna : and the course from thence back again by Havana , and through the channel of Bahama to Spain : together with the speciali mark of all the cape , island , and other place by the way ; and a brief declaration of their latitude and longitude . Punta de Naga . f you depart from the bar of saint Lucar de Barameda towards the west India in the summer time , you must stir away southwest until you come to the headland call Punta de Naga upon the isle of tenerif . but if your departure be from the say bar in the winter , you must stir away Southwest and by south , until you come to the height of cape Cantin on the coast of Barbary : the mark and sign whereof be these follow . [ in . 614. ] the mark to know cape Cantin . cape Cantin be a low cape and small to the sea ward , and make a snout like the nose of a galley , and have upon the top of the point a heath or shrubby place , and on the top thereof stand two hammock , that to the seaward be high than the other ; but that on the Souther side show like a tower : and his cape be in 32. degree and J. 306 and he that will seek from this cape to discover Punta de Naga beforesaid , must stir away Southwest and by west , until he bring himself north-east and Southwest with the same point , and then he must stir away south to fetch the say point . the sign of Punta de Naga . the say point or headland be a high point of land , and plain upon the top like a table , and without it there be two little rocky island ; and upon the north side of the say point be another point call Punta de hidalgo , and upon the top thereof be 2. pick p ™ 1 ? and rock like unto the ear of a hare . 1 a ' the course from the canary to the west Indies . f you set sail from any of the island of the canary for the west India , you must stir away 30. or 40 league due south , to the end you may avoid the calm of the island of Fierro : calm off and be so far distant from the say pterr°-island , then must you stir away west Southwest , until you find your self in 20. degree , and then sail west and by south until you come to 15. degree and and from thence stir away west and by north ; and so shall you make a west way by reason of the northwest of the compass : which west variation way will bring you to the island of Deseada . °^the i ° i compass . the mark of the island of Deseada . this island Deseada lie east Northeast , and west Southwest , have no tree upon it , and it be proportion like a galley , and the north-east end thereof make a low nose like the snout of a galley ; and by come near it , and pass by the norther end thereof , you shall perceive white break patch like heap of sand with red strike in they : and the southwest 3°7 Deseada in 15. degree and a half . end of this island make like the tilt of a galley . and this island stand in 15. degree and J. mark off the island of monserate . monserate be a high island , and round , full of tree , and upon the east side thereof you shall perceive certain white spot like sheet : and be upon the south side at the very point of the island , somewhat off the land , it make like a little island , and put your self either east or west from that point , in the midst thereof will appear a great break land . mark off the island of Marigalanta . MArigalanta be a smooth island , and full of wood or tree , and as it be of the fashion of a galley upon her deck : and be on the southeast side about half a league off you shall make certain hammock of black stone , and certain white patch : but on the west side appear fair white sandy shore or plain . mark off the isle of Dominica . the island of Dominica lie northwest and southeast , and upon the northwest side it show more high : and if you come near it at full sea , it will show like two island , but by come near unto it , you shall perceive it to be but one : and upon the southeast side you shall make or see a plain and long point , and upon the same point appear a cliff like to the cliff of cape Tiburon ; and upon the north side a little from the land it show like a little island , and upon the top thereof be , as it be , a high steeple , and upon the norther side you shall perceive it like many white sheet . mark off the island of Guadalupe . the island of Guadalupe lie on the west of Deseada , and upon the southwest part thereof appear many high mountain , but upon the east side it make certain table , which be call the high part of guada-308 lupe . and this island be cut north and south ; so that the canoas of India do pass from the north to the south of it , as if it be two island . mark off the isle of Matalina , or Martinino . [ ill . 615. ] the isle of Matalina be high and full of mountain , have in the midst thereof 3. hammock : the middlemost homocke be high show like the great bowl of a hat . and upon the north side it appear like three little island . and in this island there be warlike Indians like those of Dominica . mark off the three small island call Islas de los santos , or the island of Saintes . warlike and dangerous Indians like those of Dominica . los Santos be 3. Islandes lie one close by another upon the south side of Guadalupe . for to go with saint Juan de Puerto rico you must stir away northwest , until you fall with the isle of Saba . mark to know the isle of Saba . SAba be a little island , and round about it you shall see the bottom ; but fear not , for there be no danger but that which you shall see ; and round about it , it make as it be certain heap of white sand ; and by the side thereof it show like a ship under sail : but follow that direction that i have give , and you shall see la virgin gorda . mark to know the isle call la virgin gorda . la virgin gorda be a high island and round , and see it , you shall espy all the rest of the virgin which lie east and west one from another , and be bare without any tree . you may go about by they until Theise z . the white and the grey island be rather bare rock in the sea , fir so do far-rallon the spanish word signify . but 1 interpret it island , because all the rock separatedfrom the big island be say to be little island . this white y bare island be make white by the dung of bird and sea you see the little grey island , which you shall see by it self by the virgin ; and come near to the say island , over that you shall by and by raise sight of the white that little island , which seem like a ship under sail . and if resort unto it . 3°9 you will pass between this little white island or bare rock , and the green island , you must beware that you leave the white island on the larbourd side of you , and come no near it then a caliever-shot , and so shall you pass through 12. fathom-water : and then stir away northnorthwest , and so shall you enter into the haven of Puerto rico : and if you chance to pass the say island by night , go by the foresay direction , until the first watch be out , and then take in your sail , and so drive until it be near day : and then hoist sail , and stir away Southwest , seek the say port : and when you come to the enter within , you must stay till 10. of the clock for the sea-turne . and know , that have the Loguilo at Southwest , then shall the harbour be off you north and south . direction from monserate to Santa Cruz. he that depart from monserate to Santa Cruz , must stir away westnorthwest : and by the same course you shall seize upon saint Juan de Puerto rico . ' mark to know the isle of Santa Cruz. santa Cruz be a island not very high , all full of hammock : and come with it at full sea , it will show like the virgin : and upon the east side there be two hammock high than all the rest . and by this course you may go to the isle of S. Juan de Puerto rico ; and have find it , you may sail along the south coast east and west , until you come to Cabo roxo . mark to know cape Roxo . cape Roxo be a low cape and trail to the seaward , have certain heap of break ground thereon , which be like a homocke , and at full sea the same show like a little island from the land by it self , but come near unto it , it will make all a whole land . 310 direction from Cabo roxo to the isle of Mona . if you will seek Mona from cape roxo , you must stir away west and by north . mark off the isle of Mona . the isle of Mona be a low , round , and smooth island , lie low by the sea , and full of tree : and to go from thence to the isle of Saona you must stir away west ; and if you fall with it in the night season , and come any thing near the land , then stir away west and by south , until it be near day , that you may keep your self by the land ; and if so be that in the morning you see it not , then stir away northwest , and so shall you find it : and if it be fair weather , and you perceive that the current have set you to the southwest , then stir away northnorthwest , and so shall you go clear off the land . mark off the isle of Saona . [ ill . 616. ] if you chance to see the isle of Saona , it be a island smooth with the sea , and lie north-east and Southwest , and you shall see the tree before you see the island : and on the southwest end of this island appear a great high bank of white sand which be call the head of Saona . and if you will come to a anchor , you may , for all be clear ground . and to go from this island to Santa Catelina , you must stir away northwest . mark off the isle of Santa Catelina . santa Catelina be a little low island all full of low rock even from the water , and have not any tree , and it be close by the land ; and if you do not run along the coast of Hispaniola , you shall not see it : and from that island to go to saint Domingo , you shall sail along as the land lie , west and by north : ^11 and before you come to the point call causedo , you shall see certain hole in rock , which lie alongst as these rock the rock do that cast up the water , which will show be call los to spout of whale . and a little ahead off the mute ’ °r that » y°u shah see the point of Andresa : and ahead the point of thereof the point of causedo . this point or causedo causedo . lie low close by the water , and pass thereby , the coast will make to thou northwest and southeast ; and San Domingo , from thence to saint Domingo be 5. league . and if the wind chap up at north upon you , by mean whereof you shall be cast off from the coast or port , and that Sierras de las you happen to see the old mine ( call Sierras de las mina mejas . mjnas viejas ) bear northwest off you , and the teat which be within the land be open of you , then shall you be north and south with the harbour ; and if the old mine bear north off you , then shall you be below the harbour . the point of Hisao . the isle of Beata . Ocoa . Puerto hermoso . the isle of Alto velo . direction from saint Domingo to Nueva Espanna . if you will sail from saint Domingo in Hispaniola to Nueva Espanna , stir away southsouth west , until you come up as far as the point of Nizao : and from thence stir away westsouth west , and so you shall find the isle of Beata . and if you sail from this point of Nizao for Ocoa , you must pass along the coast west and by north , until you come to Puerto Hermoso , or the beautiful haven , which be 18. league distant from saint Domingo : and if you proceed from Puerto Hermoso for Nueva Espanna , you must stir away southsouthwest , until you look out for Beata and Alto velo . mark off the isle of Beata . BEata be a small island and not very high : you may pass along the outside thereof , and there be no danger but that you may see ; and by and by you shall raise alto velo : and from thence you must stir away 312 west and by south , to give a birth from the island call los frail , or the friar . and when you los frail . be as far ahead as the frail , then must you stir away west and by north , and so shall you go right with Bacoa , and before you come to it , you shall see bacon . high craggy cliff , and at the descend of they white path like great sheet ; these high craggy mountain be call las sierras de donna maria . and before you alas ster^s de come to the say point of Bacoa , you shall discover a anam ' little low island even with the sea and full of tree , which be call Isla Baque . Ida Baque . direction from Isla Baque to cape Tiburon . if you will go from the island Baque , or from the ape point of Bacoa for cape Tiburon , or to the isle of gf Navaza , you must stir away westnorthwest , and edge jqavaza 0 in somewhat to the northwest , and you shall pass between Navaza and cape Tiburon . mark of cape Tiburon , which be the western cape of Hispaniola . cape Tiburon lie slide down to the seaward , and make a sharp cliff like the snout of a tiburon or shark-fish ; and upon the top thereof it appear like white way with certain gullet or drain upon it , which be cause by the passage of the water from the mountain in the winter time . mark off the isle of Navaza . NAvaza be a little round island full of low tree or shrub , and it lie east and west from cape Tiburon , and from this small island to go for Sierras de Cobre , or the mountain or mine of copper upon the southeast part of Cuba , you must stir away northnorthwest . [ direction from 3*3 [ in . 617. ] direction from cape Tiburon to Cabo de Cruz in Cuba . Sierras de Cobre . Sierras de tarquino . if you will sail from cape Tiburon to cape de Cruz in Cuba , you must stir away northwest , and you shall see the Sierras or mountain de Cobre ; and from thence you may go along the coast west towards Cabo de Cruz ; and before you come at it you shall see the great tarquino , and from this tarquino you shall have to cape de Cruz 30. league , and this great tarquino be the high land upon all that coast ; and then by and by you shall see the lesser tarquino , from whence to the foresay cape you have 12. league , and so shall you go discover the coast , until you come to Cabo de Cruz. mark of Cabo de Cruz. cape de Cruz be a low cape full of shrub ; and from thence westward you shall see no land ; for the distance or bay be great between the say cape and the isle call los Jardines . direction from cape de Cruz to Isla de Pinos . if you sail from cape de Cruz to seek the island of Pinos , you must stir away westnorthwest . and note , that if in this course you happen to sound , do not fear ; for you have nine fathom . if also go this course , you meet with certain little island upon los Caimanes . the larboard side , which be call the caimanes , or the crocodile , have sight of they , stir away northwest , and so shall you find the island of Pinos . and if by see the say island call Caimanes you be amaze , you shall know by the latitude , whither they be the Jardines or no : for if you find your self in one and twenty degree , then be you sure they be loss Jardines . the Jardines , and then stir out again south , till you be 314 clear of they ; and when you have bring they north of you , then may you stir away west , if it be by day ; if it bee’by night , west and by south , till you see the island of Pinos . the mark of Isla de Pinos . the island of Pinos stretch it self east and west , and it be full of hammock , and if you chance to see it at full sea , it will show like 3. Islands , as though there be diverse sound between they , and that in the midst be the great ; and in row with they , it will make all a firm land : and upon the east side of these three hammock it will show all ragged ; and on the west side of they will appear unto you a low point even with the sea , and oftentimes you shall see the tree before you shall discern the point . direction from the isle of Pinos to cape de Corrientes . if you sail from the foresay isle of Pinos to cape de Corrientes , stir away west and by north ; and before you come to the say cape upon the northside of you , you shall see certain mountain all full of hammock , which be call las Sierras de Guanaguarico , las sierras de and that upon the west part have more hammock than that on the other . mark of cape de Corrientes . cape de Corrientes be a low cape , though not so low as the other part of the land that lie along by it ; for it be more low , and have upon it 4. or 5. great splat like unto ox , and the very point of the cape be all white sand : and from thence westward you shall discern no land , for it make a great bay : and from hence you must sail to cape de Sant Anton. [ mark of 315 the cape of Sant Anton be low by the sea , and all full of shrub or tree ; and you shall see within the land a lake of fresh water ; and if you want water , there you may water : and upon the north side of the say cape you shall discern a palm tree high than the rest of the tree , and it show round like a bowl at the top , like to the top of a ship : and north from the cape be certain sholde which be 2. or 3. league long . direction from the cape de S. Anton to Nueva Espanna on the outside of the small island call los Alacranes or the scorpion . if you will sail from cape Sant Anton to Nueva Espanna with a north wind , then stir away westnorthwest from 21. to 22. degree , and then sound upon the pracel or flat ; and if you see by this direction , that you hold water , then stir away northwest , [ three . 618. ] until you lose the ground ; and then follow your course again , until you have bring your self into 24. degree and J. and then sail west until you the isle bring your self north and south with the isle of Vermeja . Vermeja , or the red isle : then stir away Southwest , Villa rica . and by this way you shall find villa rica on the coast of Nueva Espanna . and if by go this course you be in 19 degree and J. and chance not to see the land , then stir away west until you see villa rica , and from thence sail you south for the harbour of 8. Juan de S. Juan de ullua : and if you shall be near the ullua - land you must stir south and by west towards they a volcan or same harbour . and if you chance to see the Volcan urmng 1. or burn bill to bear west and by south from you , then know , that the harbour of saint Juan de ullua shall|be east and west off - you . 316 villa rica stand in 19 degree and J. and the sign thereof be certain high hill full of hammock of many head , which have on the top of they certain white patch after the manner of white beat way ; and these hill lie north-east and Southwest . and if you doubt whether these be the Sierras Sierras de or hill of saint Martin , wet your lead or sound , and if Sant Martin . you find bottom , they be the Sierras of Villa rica : Sierras de and sail you to the landward , and look by how much rica‘ you come near the land , so much will they seem low unto you : but so do not the hill of saint Martin ; for the near you come to they , the high will they appear to you : and likewise if they be the hill of saint Martin , you shall not find bottom , but even at land it self . mark of Rio de las palmas , and of the river of mountain call Rio de las montannas . Rio de las palmas . Rio de las montannas . Rio de panuco . Rio Hermoso , or the beautiful river . the current of the bay of Mexico { the wind be at the east ) set to the north , and 40. league from the shore to the north-east . f you shall chance to fall with Rio de las palmas , or the river of palm , or else with the river of mountain , it be all a plain land , and full of tree and certain woody hammock , and among they certain heap of sand , and all this along by the sea side : and if you go by land to the river of Panuco , you shall have many mouth or opening of plaias or strand , where also be many liza or oazy place , which stretch to Rio Hermoso . you must beware what part soever you happen of this coast to fall withal , to discover it , and although you know it , you must sound the depth ; because if the wind be easterly , the current set there much to the north : but if you shall be 40. league at sea , than this current set to the north-east . [ mark of 3'7 S. Luis de tampice . mark of Rio Hermoso or the beautiful river . if you will seek the river call Rio Hermoso , look well within the land , you shall see three hammock of a high hill , and those two which be to the landward within , be round than the other which be near the sea , for that it be long and big , and lie north and south , and you shall be 4. league at sea when you shall see they : and they be call the sierras , or mountain of Tamaclipa ; and from thence to the river of Panuco there be no high land , but all low and even with the sea , and full of palm tree and other tree . mark off the river of Panuco . if you fall with the river of Panuco ( between which and the foresay villa rica stand the island call Isla de Lobos or the isle of seal ) the mark be these . from the mouth of the river it make a great bay without , and at the end of this bay upon the northside there be oazy , low , and bare ground altogether without tree , and at the out end of the oazy low place upon the west side it make a low homock like to a lizards head : and when you see the aforesaid cliff , you shall be in the open of the mouth of the say river , and then shall you see a little low tower have on the top of it a cross , which the fisherman call Marien : and this bar have on it 2. fathom water , and 2. and and you need not to stay for the tide , for that it flow not there : and that you may the better know whether you be in this bay which i have mention , or not , you shall see certain hill at west Southwest , which be call las sierras de tarquia ; and forthwith also you shall see the oazy place that i speak of , which go to the mouth of the river where stand a town call S. Luis de tampice , and from thence to Panuco you have 9 league by land . 318 the mark of Isla de lobos , or the isle of seal . i Sia de lobos be a small island nothing so big as the card do show it , and in it be a little grove or wood of palm tree , and all the rest of the island be without tree , and round about it be sundry playa or [ in . 619. ] strand , and it be enclose round about with arrazife or shoald , and chief towards the main land . and from thence to cape Roxo or the red cape be 3. Cabo roxo . league . and if you will come to anchor at this island to a water water , for that there be water in it , you may ride on all the south side close by the point that stretch to the westward , and you may pass by the east side of it , and ride in 22. fathom , and until you come to 15. fathom , all be clean ground . mark off the river of Tuspa . if you fall with the river of Tuspa , you must beware the sholde which run 5. or 6. league into the sea : and upon this river of Tuspa within the land there be high hill which lie north-east and Southwest , and have their end upon the bay of cassone : and the bay of upon the river you shall perceive a white cliff , which cassone . will show unto you like the castle of saint Juan de ullua . mark off the river of saint Peter and S. Paul . if you chance to fall with the bay of cassone , and upon the river of saint Peter and S. Paul , take heed : for the say bay be a deep bay , and the hill of Tuspa have their end upon this bay . and in the mouth of this river of saint Peter and S. Paul be two hammock of white sand , the westermost be big than that on the north-east . and by and by you shall perceive the water to change white which come out of the river , and sound you shall find sand mix with clay upon your lead ; and look upon the west 319 all these be upon the coast of Tabasco . Las sierras de s. Pablo . Punta delgada , or the slender point . Cabezas anegada be sink head or rock under water . Comedera de pescado . the english voyage side , and you shall see the Sierras or mountain of saint Paul , which be two , and that on the north side be high than the other . mark of Almeria . if you shall chance to fall or come upon the plain of Almeria , it be a land full of many hammock , some with tufte of tree on they , and some bear with white sand , and in 60. fathom you shall have clay or oaze , and in 30. fathom to the landward sand . and from thence to Punta de hidalgo or Punta delgada the coast lie north-east and Southwest . sounding of Villa rica . if you fall with villa Rica in 30. fathom , you shall find clay or oaze , and in some place stone , and near the land you shall have sand : and upon the port of saint Juan de ullua you shall have in some place clay or oaze , and in some place herring bone , and in other place maze and , and upon the rock call Cabezas anegada you shall have small black sand at 17. fathom two league from land . and if you see a coast that lie north-east and Southwest , and another northwest and southeast , you shall be upon saint Paul : and if you shall be upon Cabezas anegada , you shall find in 30. fathom great sand and black , and in 28. fathom you shall have the sand white like the shave of free stone : and from saint Paul to the bar of Vera Cruz it be clay or oaze , and from thence to saint Juan de ullua you have many deep , which at one sound bring you clay , and at another sand , and at another clay and maze together , and herring bone : and in some 35. or 40. fathom you shall find rocky ground , and in some place sand , and in some other place herring bone : and we call this comedera de pescado , or the food of fish . 320 the course from Cabo de Corrientes and Cabo de S. Anton upon the west end of Cuba , towards Nueva Espanna , within the isle call los Alacranes , or the scorpion . f you sail from cape de Corrientes toward Nueva Espanna on the inside of the alacranes , you must stir west : and when you think you have sail 35. or 40. leag . you shall sound upon the pracel , and you shall come upon » = = = ^ = = 1 many bristling of water , which , if it be fair weather , will seem a skull of fish . and before you come out of the bristling , if you sound you shall have depth as i have say . if you go from cape de S. Anton by the inside of the alacranes , you must stir away west and by south , and you shall find sound in the same order as i have say : you shall have white sand , and near the land you shall find it like the shave and pecking of free stone , and white sand like houre-glasse-sand , and sometime periwinkle or small shell . also if you sound in deep water , and on the sudden find rock , then know that you be upon the alacrane , and then stir away westsouthwest until you find clean ground , and till you bring your self into 18. or 20. fathom . and if you go deep your water , then stir away west , and by these depth you shall go sound ; and then take your heighth by sun or star , you must beware that you pass not 21. degree and J. or 21. degree and J. at the most ; and in this heighth , and at 18. or 20. fathom you shall follow your way : and if you deepen water , edge to the northwestward , and if you alter more your depth , edge to the southwestward , until you have get so far ahead as cape sisal , and discover the coast of campeche , which coast lie north and south , and you shall take up on your lead ten 321 ten Cabo de Corrientes . Cabo de S. Anton. [ Iii . 620. ] cape sisal upon the coast of campeche in Yucatan or Isla de Arenas . white sand like hourglass sand , and sometime periwinkle or small shell ; and by and by you shall go increase depth , until you lose it , and so shall you pass between the triangle and the sandy hand . the course between the triangle and the sandy island to saint Juan de ullua . when you have lose your depth , stir away south 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 west to fetch the Sierras or hill of saint Martin : Martin . and to know the hill of saint Martin , there be 2. hill stretch north-east and Southwest , and the southwest be great than that on the north-east , but the northermost hill be high , and make on the top a flat point and very high , and without it , it have a island which Roco partida . be call Roca partida , or the cleave rock : and if it be clear , on the southwest side a high land like a topsail will appear , and then shall you be north and or minsapa . south with the pan or loaf of Nisapa . note , that these Sierras or hill of Sant Martin be all black and full of tree , and make no show as villa rica do : and mark this , that by how much you come near they , so much the high will they show unto you : neither shall you find any bottom till you be at the very shore . the course from Roca partida or the cleave rock to saint Juan de ullua . if you depart from Roca partida or the cleave rock for Sant Juan de ullua , you must stir away westnorthwest , and so shall you fetch or fall with or Antoni - the point of Anton Mislardo : and if you happen to serro ' sound upon the sink rock call Cabezas anegada , you shall have black sand and 17. fathom water , and you shall be but a league from the land , and if you be 2. league from the land , you shall have 34. fathom . 322 the course from Sant Juan de ullua in the bay of Mexico to Spain in Europe . god's you depart from saint Juan de ullua to Havana , you must stir away north-east until you bring your self in 25. degree , and from thence you must stir away east from the little island call las Tortugas , until you have the sound of they ; and if you find white sand very small , you shall be east and west with they , and if your sound bee shel ground and periwinkle , or small shell or scale , then shall you be Northeast and Southwest , and the shell or scale must be read , and if at some time you take up black sand , then be you north and south with the say Tortugas . mark off the Tortugas . if you chance to fall with the Tortugas , they be 5. or 6. little island of white sand , low and close by the sea , save one which have on it some shrub or bush of tree : and they be in 25. degree . the course from the Tortugas towards Havana . if you depart from the Tortugas towards Havana with a fresh wind , you must stir away Southwest : and if it be fair weather , and a small gale of wind , then stir south , that the current may not draw you in , nor set you too much to the westward : and if you fall with los organos , they be a rank of high and low hill with many sharp head like unto organ pipe and at the enter thereof on the south side be Rio de puercos , or the river of hog ; and at the further end be the deep bay call Baya honda , and there be the round loaf or heap call el pan de baya honda , that be to say , the loaf of the deep bay : and from this place until you come to cape 323 Las Tortugas , the hill call los organo upon Cuba near Havana . Rio de puercos . Baya honda . [ Iii . 621. ] the tower of Havana . de saint Anton all be sholde and flat 4. or 5. league into the sea , even as far as the say cape : and from Baya honda or the deep bay to Havana , all the coast be full of high and low hill , which they call la quadrilla de sierras , which be as much to say , as a company of hill together like soldier on a heap ; and more to the eastward you shall descry a high hill which be call el pan de Cabannas . and if you fall with Havana , you shall see on the southwest side a hill call la meza de Marien , or the table of Marien ; and if it be clear , you shall see low to the westward the heap or loaf that be call el pan de Cabannas . you must note , that about Havana it be all low land even with the sea , till you come to Mesa de Marien , and then look well within the land , and you shall see 2. little round tree like to the teat of woman breast ; and bring your self north and south , you shall be with the harbour of Havana , and then shall you soon perceive the tower that be upon the cliff of Havana . mark off the haven or port call Puerto de Marien . puerto de Marien be a harbour that you may enter into without any danger or fear , but at the entrance thereof you must borrow on the west side , by reason of the rock and shelf , and when you be within , then borrow on the east shore , and leave the note . other side , and so shall you enter safe : and from this place to Havana be all low land . note , that if you overpass the harbour of Havana to the eastward , or if the current have set you past it by mean of calm , then shall you perceive at full sea upon the Chipiona a coast certain break place like the entrance of har-towne stand bour , because the land be low ; and come near ^fAndalu^ia shore you shall see in some place of the coast next unto saint Playas or strand of sand which show like unto Lucar . Chipiona : and look eastward along the sea coast , 324 you shall see a round loaf which be call el pan de ElPan Matanzas : and also you shall perceive in certain tanz^ ' place round white heap of sand call Barrancas , if you will recover Havana , go along the coast close creek or by the land , for the current run very swift in the break channel , and there be no fear but of that which you may see ; for all the coast be clean ground . * the course from Havana to Spain . if you will sail from Havana to Spain , you must stir away Northeast , till you come to the head of the martyr call la Cabeza de los martyr . if it chance before you come to the say head , that the wind shall chap up at north on you , then stand to the eastward , until you bring your self as far ahead as Matanzas ; then cast about to the west , to discover the land of the martyr , or of Florida , that the current may not set you on the mimbre : and if by chance you see the pan de Matanzas at full sea , it have these mark follow . it be a round heap or loaf , and high withal , and on the western side thereof , appear a rock like to the head of a tortoise : and between this pan and the hill of Seluco , there will appear unto you a great break land , like as it be sink place , and upon the east side of this pan towards Punta de los puercos it be all low land , and you shall see no high land at all : and be so far shoot , that this pan de Matanzas shall bear westnorthwest and southsoutheast off you , and be desirous also to avoid the fury of the current of the channel of Bahama , stir away northnortheast , and by this course you shall pass the channel , and win the coast of Florida . Cabeza de los MarAres . which MarAres be a number of small hand lie ahead the cape of Florida . los mimbre . the mark of pan de Matanzas . Punta de los puercos . the furious current in the channel of Bahama . mark off the head of the martyr call Cabeza de los martyr . the head of the martyr be three heap of white sand full of tree , and that in the midst have on the top a crown , as it be of white sand , and be high 325 direction to and big than the other two : and to know whether you know whether be entrej ; unto the channel , mark well how the coast lie chaneuof you ; and if you perceive that the coast bear off Bahama or no . you east and west , you be not in the channel ; but if the coast shall bear off you north-east and Southwest , then be you in the channel ; and take your heighth you shall know : for if you find your self in 24. degree and then be you east and west with the head of the martyr : and if you see the coast bear off you north-east and Southwest , ( as i have say ) stir away 4. or 5. league from the landward right off ; and then stir away Northeast : and be in 28. degree and a Cabo de half , you shall be shoot out of the channel , and then shall Cannaveralin you he gast anj west with cape de cannaveral , or ahalfi : the cape of reed . the course to come through the channel of Bahama homeward for Spain . the course in t f in winter you shall pass through the channel of winter . i [ Bahama for Spain , stir away the first Sangradura or course Eastnortheast , and afterward east and by north , and so shall you pass by the south side of Bermuda : and you must take heed that you go these four hundred or five hundred league , because you shall the isle of not come near the say isle of Bermuda ; and when Bermuda . you be go this course , then put your self in what heighth you will , and make your way as you will your the course in self . but if you pass the channel in the summer time over ™ 1 ™ ? towards Spain , stir away eastnortheast , and you shall northerly . pass by the north side of Bermuda ; and when you have bring your self in 35. degree , stir east and by north until ! you bring your self to 25. degree and and from thence stir away east for the isle of Fayal or of Flores . [ in . 622. ] mark to know the isle of Fayal . the island call Fayal upon the southwest side , make a high hill or loaf like to the top of Brasilia in the island of Terzera ; and behind that 326 high pike or loaf be a harbour call Puerto Pini , Puerto Pint. and upon the east side it make a little plain island ; and upon the north side there stand a rock or island by it self . and from this island be one of the azore , you may shape your course to which of the island you please , or to any other place which you know . mark to know the isle of Flores . if you happen to fall with Flores first , by this you shall know it : the island lie Northeast and Southsouthwest , and the west end thereof make a rock or cliflfe like the cliff of Tiburon ; and come near the land , you shall see two little island near the point of the land ; and to the northward of this cliff or rock a little from the land you may ride and water ; and between that and the village , in every bay you may likewise ride and water : and you shall see the water run into the sea in every part that you look on . now follow the course and direction to sail from passage on the north-east part of saint Juan de Puerto rico , unto Havana , by the north side of the isle of Hispaniola , and by the old channel . f you depart from saint Juan de Puerto rico to seek Cabo deal Enganno , you must stir away westnorthwest , and so shall you see a round heap or loaf in the sea , which lie on the southwest side of the gulf of Semana ; and from thence it begin about the hill of the cape deal Enganno , and this be the mouth of the gulf . and if it shall be near night when you see this land , stir away northwest with a small sail , because of certain rock el passaje a place on the north-east part of the isle of S. Juan de Puerto rico . Cabo deal Enganno the most easterly cape of Hispaniola . or Samana . call alas ovejas , or the sheep : and in the morning cast alas ovejas . about to see the land to the southwestward ; and if when 327 Isla de tortuga : otherwise call Hinagua . the isle of Jaico . Las sierras de cabanca . Cayo Romano . this word Cayo in the biscaian tongue signifies a flat or a shall . Cabo de Cruz. the english voyage you see the land , it seem unto you a small island at full sea like a round mountain , then be it the cape deal Enganno : and from thence stir away west and by north towards Cabo Franco . mark of Cabo Franco . CAbo Franco be a low cape even with the sea , and have these markes* and from thence stir away west , and you shall see a high mountain , and on the top thereof a cloudy homock like the top of a hat : and at the foot of this hill be the haven or harbour call el puerto de plata . and if you will go into this port , you must leave the island on the west side , and then take heed of that which you see , and borrow on the castle side . and from thence to go with the old channel , you must stir away northwest , until you come out of sight of land , and then stir away west and by north , and so shall you go with the land of Baracoa , and here be hill very high , which make the teat which look like 3. crown . and you shall pass between the isle of Tortugas , or Hinagua , and the island of Jaico : and from thence run alongst the coast Northeast and Southwest ; and have double the outmost high hill or mountain , you shall see in the midst thereof a round hill , and upon the southwest side by the sea you shall see a low even land four or five league long , and a low point , and this point of the hill be call la sierras de cabanca ; and then begin the bay of Cayo Romano : and ahead the sierras you shall see a round loaf which be in the midst of the same bay , and ahead of that you shall see a hill flat on the top like a table six or seven league , which hill be not very high , and from these hill to Cayo Romano you have five and thirty league , and you must stir the one half of the course northwest , and the other half northwest and by west , and so shall you make or see the say Cayo Romano upon the larboard side of you . note , that from Cayo Romano to Cabo de Cruz you have three league , and they lie north and south one from another . 328 Romano be a high island , and lie north-east Southwest , and stretch it self as it be 4. league : and come on it north-east and Southwest , it make a loaf or round heap or homock ; in the midst this island lie ioo . league from Havana . there be two saddle , as we term they , or low partition , the one on the one side , and the other on the other side ; and come with it north and south , it make all one low send or saddle in the midst . and if night shall come on you at this Cayo Romano , enter not the [ he . 623. ] channel , because in the mid way be a isle , flat , or Cayo , which lie north and south with Cayo Romana , and it be call Cayo de la Cruz : and at full sea you shall discern a heath , which this Cayo have in the midst of it , which be like to a sail ; but all night bear but your foresail a glass one way and another glass the other way until it be day , and then enter the channel , and leave these Cayos , on the larbourd side of you . note , that if you be within sight of the parcel , and the g-eat see two little island of white sand , that than you be parcel-on the cantle of the parcel : and if you go more a head coast the parcel , about fifteen league , you shall see three island full of tree , which be call las lasanguiuas . Anguillas and all these three island bear north and south one from another . item from Cayo de Cruz to Havana , if it be by day , stir away west northwest ; but if it be by night , then stir a point more to the westward : and if in this course you chance to see the parcel , fear not ; for in the low water there be six fathom ; then cast about to the southwestward to get out about two glass , and then stir away westnorthwest until it be day and so shall you go by the Cayos : and in this course you must keep twenty four league or thereabouts . and from this Cayo the another Cayo Cruz six or seven league lie another Cayo upon and °r 7 segue the north-east and by north , which be great and white , e and all even ; but the point on the southwest be 329 el puerto de Matanzas or the haven of slaughter . Las Sierras de Guana . Cruz deal Padre . la Bata de Conel . la Baia de chaos , or Cayos . or Cameloquea . small , and upon the say point be a shrub or bush which show like a sail : also there be a bank of white sand along by the seaside , which in the midst thereof make a cliff full of tree that seem like a saddle : and upon the north-east side ( for on this manner the coast lie along from the cape ) go by the channel you shall see certain hill eighteen or twenty league long lie north-east and Southwest be all saddle-like : and bring the point Southwest off you , you shall be in the midst of the channel : and from thence you have as far to Matanzas as to Cayo Romano . likewise from thence on the side of Havana you shall see certain hill which show to be three , and lie Northeast and Southwest , and that on the southwest be high : they be call las Sierras de Guana : and north and south from they lie a flat , which be call Cayo de Nicola , which stretch out two league into the sea , and in the middle of the say flat there be a little island of white sand : and from thence you must sail to Cruz deal Padre . mark of Cruz deal Padre . cruz deal Padre be a cape all break in piece : and from thence you must stir away Northeast , because of the bay that be there , call the bay of Conell , and this bay stretch to the bay of chaos , which be within 20 league of the say point : and then stir away west northwest to go with the port of Matanzas , and with the hill of Camoniaca . mark off the hill of Camoniaca . the hill of Camoniaca lie northwest and southeast , and the southeast side be low land and even : also upon the north-east side it be even land , and run towards the bay of Matanzas , and in the middle of these hill there be one high hill , and upon the north-east side there appear a round heap : and 330 if you see this hill at west Southwest , the pan or round heap of Matanzas will bear off you west and by south . mark off the round hill call el pan de Matanzas . this pan be a round heap stand on a low land and if you bring your self north and south with it , it will make you two saddle ; and on the west side it make a great part land as it be sink with the sea . note that wheresoever you shall go to seek the Tortugas , and shall come with the coast and find it bear off you north-east and Southwest , i advise you to go along the coast to the southwestward : you may not deepen more than forty five fathom , for if you do , you shall cast your self without the Tortugas . also you must note , that if by chance you find your self shoot between the Tortugas , and the martyr , and that you can go on the outside of the say Tortugas , then cause one to go to the top , to see if you can descry they ; and if you can see they , stir away southwest until you see they ; and have get sight of they , sound , and you shall find eighteen or nineteen fathom : and so shold stir away south and by west , and go by this course . and fear you not the shold , for you shall meet with 12 fathom , and shall have black sand in your sound . And go near to the end of the say Tortugas ( for he that be on the top shall see they all ) as you pass by , you shall find but eight fathom , and stony ground , and that be the shall water you shall have . and you shall pass by a bustle of a tide , that shoules out of the chanel that way : but you need not fear any thing for you shall have no less than eight fathom water : and be past the say bustle but a minion shoot , you shall loose the ground and be in the channel . 331 note . [ Iii . 624. ] when you shall pass this course , go not out of sight of the Tortugas . and if you will go from thence to Havana , have a fair wind , stir away Southwest because the current may not set you off : and if with a fresh wind and northerly , then stir away southerly . 