the letter of George Burien Britton from the say the canary unto his cousin a Frenchman dwell in saint Lucar , concern el Dorado . sir , and my very good cousin , there come of late certain letter from a new discover country not far from Trinidad , which they write , have gold in great abundance : the news seem to be very certain , because it pass for good among the best of this city . part of the information of the discovery that go to his majesty , go enclose in Alonsos letter ; it be a thing worth the see . the report of Domingo Martinez of Jamaica concern el Dorado . he say that that in 1593. being at Carthagena , there be a generali report of a late discovery call Nuevo Dorado , and that a little before his come thither , there come a frigate from the say Dorado , [ three . 666. ] bring in it the portraiture of a giant all of gold , of weight 47. kintal , which the Indians there hold for their idol . but now admit of Christianity and obedience to the king of Spain , they send their say idol unto he in token they be become Christians , and hold he for their king . the company come in the say frigate , report gold to be there in most abundance , diamond of inestimable value , with great store of pearl . [ the report 439 the report of a french man call Bountillier of Sherbrouke , concern Trinidad and Dorado . I591 - t te say that be at Trinidad in 1591. he have . l a of a indian there a piece of gold of a quarter of a pound in exchange of a knife ; the say Indian tell he he have it at the head of that river which Paracoa . come to Paracoa in Trinidad : and that within the river of Orenoque , it be in great abundance . also in 1593. be take by the Spaniard , and bring prisoner into the hand of Madera ( the place for his prison ) there come in this mean time a bark of forty ton from a new discovery , with two million of gold ; the company whereof report gold in that place to be in great abundance , and call it el Nuevo Dorado . This Frenchman pass from Spain in the bark , and have a cabben near a gentleman , one of the discoverer that come from that place in the say bark , have diverse time conference with he , and among other thing , of the great abundance of gold in the say Dorado , be as they say within the river of Orenoque . Reportes of certain merchant of Rio de Hacha , concern el Nuevo Dorado . they say ( advance the king great treasure in the Indies ) that Nuevo Reyno yield very many gold mine , and wonderful rich ; but late be discover a certain province so rich in gold , as the report thereof may seem incredible , it be there in such abundance , and be call el Nuevo Dorado : Antonio de Berreo make the say discovery . 440 the report of a Spaniard , captain with Berreo in the discovery of el Nuevo Dorado . that the information send to the king be in every point true say , that the river Orenoque have seven mouth , or outlet into the sea , call Las Siete bocas de dragon , that the say river run far into the land , in - many place very broad , and that a th . de Berreo lie at Trinidad , make head to go to conqu and people the say Dorado . 