to the reader . ecause there have be diverse opinion conceive of the gold oar bring from Guiana , and for that a Aiderman of London and a officer of her majesty mint , have give out that the same be of no price , i have think good by the addition of these line to give answer aswell to the say malicious slander , as to other objection . it be true that while we abide at the island of Trinidad , i be inform , by a indian , that not far from the port , where we anchor , there be find certain mineral stone which they esteem to be gold , and be thereunto persuade the rather for that they have see both english and Frenchmen gather , and imbark some quantity thereof : upon this likelihood i send 40. man and give order that each one shall bring a stone of that mine to make trial of its goodness : which be perform , i assure they at their refurne that the same be marcasite , and of no riches or value : notwithstanding diverse , trust more to their own sense , then to my opinion , keep of the say marcasite , and have try thereof since my return in diverse 343 place . in Guiana it self i never see marcasite , but all the rock , mountain , all stone in you plain , wood , and by the river side be in effect throughshining , and seem marvelous rich , which be try to be no marcasite , be the true sign of rich mineral , but be no other than el madre del oro ( as the Spaniard term they ) which be the mother of gold , or as it be say by other the scum of gold : of diverse sort of these many of my company bring also into England , every one take the fair for the best , which be not general . for my own part i do not countermand any man desire , or opinion , 8c i can have afford they little if i shall have deny they the please of their own fancy therein : but 1 be resolve that gold must be find either in grain separate from the stone ( as it be in most of the river in Guiana ) or else in a kind of hard stone , which we call the white spar , of which i see diverse hill , 8c in sundry place , but have neither time nor man , nor instrument fit for labour . near unto one of the river i find of the say white spar or flint a very great ledge or bank , which i endeavour to break by all the mean i can , because there appear on the outside some small grain of of gold , but find no mean to work the same upon the upper part , seek the side and circuit of the say rock , i find a clift in the same from whence with dagger , and with the head of a axe , we get out some small quantity thereof , of which kind of white stone ( wherein gold engender ) we see diverse hill and rock in every part of Guiana , wherein we travel . of this there have be many trial , and in London it be first assay by m. Westwood a refine dwelling in Woodstreet , and it hold after the rate of 12000. or 13000. pound a ton . another sort be afterward try by m. Bulmar 8c m. Dimock assay-master , 8c it hold after the rate of 23000 livre . a ton . there be some of it again try by m. palmer comptroller of the mint , and m. Dimock in goldsmith hall , 8c it hold after 26900. livre . a tun . there be also at the same time , 8c by the same person a trial 344 make of the dust of the say mine which hold 8 livre . 6. ounce weight of gold in the 100 : there be likewise [ he . 630. ] at the same time a trial of a image of copper make in Guiana , which hold a three part of gold , beside diverse trial make in the country , and by other in London . but because there come ill with the good , and belike the say Aiderman be not present with the best , it have please he therefore to scandali all the rest , and to deface the enterprise as much as in he lie . it have also be conclude by diverse , that if there have be any such oar in Guiana , and the same discover , that i will have bring home a great quantity thereof : first i be not bind to satisfy any man of the quantity , but such only as adventure , if any store have be return thereof : but it be very true that have all their mountain be of massy gold , it be impossible for we to have make any long stay to have wrought the same : and whosoever have see with what strength of stone the best gold oar be environ , he will not think it easy to be have out in heap , and especial by we , who have neither man , instrument , nor time ( as it be say before ) to perform the same . there be on this discovery no less than 100 person , who can all witness , that when we past any branch of the river to view the land within , and stay from our boat but 6. hour , we be drive to wade to the eye , at our return : and if we attempt the same , the day follow it be impossible either to ford it , or to swim it , both by reason of the swiftness , and also for that the border be so pester with fast wood , as neither boat nor man can find place , either to land or to embark : for in June , July , August and September , it be impossible to navigate any of those river : for such be the fury of the current , and there be so many tree and wood overflow , as if any boat but touch upon any tree or stake , it be impossible to save any one person therein : and year we depart the land it run with such swiftness , as we drive down most common against the wind , little less 345 then ioo . mile a day : beside our vessel be no other than whirry , one little barge , a small cockboat , and a bad Galiota , which we frame in haste for that purpose at Trinidad , and those little boat have 9 or 10. man a piece , with all their victual , and arm . it be further true , that we be about 400. mile from our ship , and have be a month from they , which also we leave weak man in a open road , and have promise our return in 15. day . other have devise that the same oar be have from Barbary , and that we carry it with we into Guiana : sure the singularity of that device i do not well comprehend : for my own part , i be not so much in love with these long voyage , as to devise , thereby to cozen my self , to lie hard , to fare worse , to be subject to peril , to disease , to ill savour , to be parch and wither , and withal to sustaine'the care and labour of such a enterprise , except the same have more comfort , than the fetch of marcasite in Guiana , or buy of gold oar in Barbary . but i hope the better sort will judge i by themselves , 8c that the way of deceit be not the way of honour or good opinion : i have herein consume much time , 8c many crown , 8c i have no other respect or desire then to serve her majesty and my country thereby . if the spanish nation have be of like belief to these detractor , we shall little have fear or doubt their attempt , wherewith we now be daily threaten . but if we now consider of the action both of Charles the 5. who have the maidenhead of Peru , and the abundant treasure of Atabalipa , together with the affair of the spanish king now live , what territory he have purchase , what he have add to the act of his predecessor , how many kingdom he have endanger , how many army , garrison , and navy he have and do maintain , the great loss which he have repair , as in 88 above 100 sail of great ship with their artillery , 8c that no year be less unfortunate but that many vessel , treasure , and people be devour , and yet not - 346 withstand he begin again like a storm to threaten shipwreck to we all : we shall find that these ability rise not from the trade of sack , and Sivil oringe , nor from aught else that either Spain , Portugal , or any of his other province produce : it be his indian gold that indanger and disturb all the nation of Europe , it purchase intelligence , creep into counsel , and set bind loyalty at liberty , in the great monarchy of Europe . if the spanish king can keep we from foreign enterprize , and from the impeachment of his trade , either by offer of invasion , or by besiege we in Britain , Ireland , or elsewhere , he have then bring the work of our peril in great forwardness . those prince which abound in treasure have great advantage over the rest , if they once constrain they to a defensive war , where they be drive once a year or often to cast lot for their own garment , and from such shall all trade , and intercourse be take away , to the general loss and impoverishment of the kingdom and common weal so reduce : beside when our man be constrain to fight , it have not the like hope , as when they be press and encourage by the desire of spoil and riches . Farther , it be to be doubt how those that in time of victory seem to affect their neighbour nation , will remain after the first view of misfortune , or ill success ; to trust also to the doubtfulness of a battle , be but a fearful and uncertain adventure , see therein fortune be as likely to prevail , as [ hl 631. ] virtue . it shall not be necessary to allege all that may be say , and therefore i will thus conclude , that whatsoever kingdom shall|be enforce to defend it self may be compare to a body dangerous disease , which for a season may be preserve with vulgar medicine , but in a short time , and by little and little , the same must needs fall to the ground , and be dissolve . i have therefore labour all my life , both accord to my small power , and persuasion , to advance all those attempt , that may either promise return of profit to our self , or at least be a let and impeachment to the quiet course and plentiful trade 347 of the spanish nation , who in my weak judgement by such a war be as easy endanger and bring from his powerfulness , as any prince of Europe , if it be consider from how many kingdom and nation his revenue be gather , and those so weak in their own being , and so far sever from mutual succour . but because such a preparation and resolution be not to be hope for in haste , and that the time which our enemy embrace , can be have again to advantage , i will hope that these province , and that empire now by i discover shall suffice to inable her majesty and the whole kingdom , with no less quantity of treasure , than the king of Spain have in all the Indies east and west , which he possess , which if the same be consider and follow , ere the Spaniard enforce the same , and if her majesty will undertake it , i will be content to lose her highness favour and : good opinion for ever , and my life withal , if the same be not find rather to exceed , than to equal whatsoever be in this discourse promise or declare . i will now refer the reader to the follow discourse , with the hope that the perilous and chargeable labour and endeavour of such as thereby seek the profit and honour of her majesty , and the english nation , shall by man of quality and virtue receive such construction , and good acceptance , as themselves will look to be reward withal in the like . W. R. 