a discourse of the west Indies and South sea write by Lopez Vaz a Portugal , bear in the city of Elvas , continue unto the year 1587. wherein among diverse rare thing not hitherto deliver by any other writer , certain voyage of our Englishman be true report : which be intercept with the author thereof at the river of plate , by captain Withrington and captain Christopher Lister , in the fleet set forth by the right honourable the earl of Cumberland for the south sea in the year 1586. Rancis Drake a Englishman be on the sea , and have knowledge of the small strength of the town of number de dios , come into the harbour on a night with four pinnace , and land a hundred and fifty man : and leave one half of his man with a trumpet in a fort which be there , he with the rest enter the town without do any harm till he come at the market place : and there his company discharge their caliver , and sound their trumpet ( which make a great noise in the town ) be answer by their rellowe in the fort , who discharge and sound in 227 this voyage vias make in the year 1572. like manner . this attempt put the townsman in such extreme fear , that leave their house , they flee into the mountain , and there bethink themselves what the matter shall be in the town , remain as man amaze at so sudden a alarm . but the Spaniard be man for the most part of good discretion join fourteen or fifteen of they together with their piece , to see who be in the town : and get to a corner of the marketplace they discover the Englishman , and perceive that they be but a few , discharge their piece at they ; and their fortune be such , that they slay [ three . 779. ] the trumpeter , and shoot the captain ( who name be Francis Drake ) into the leg : who feel himself hurt retire towards the fort , where he have leave the rest of his man : but they in the fort sound their trumpet , and be not answer again , and hear the caliver discharge in the town , think that their fellow in the town have be slay , and thereupon flee to their pinnace . now Francis Drake ( who his man carry because of his hurt ) when he come to the fort where he leave his man and see they flee , he and the rest of his company be in so great fear , that leave their furniture behind they , and put off their hose , they swim and wade all to their pinnace , and depart forth of the harbour , so that if the Spaniard have follow they , they may have slay they all . thus captain Drake do no more harm at number de dios , neither be there in this skirmish any more than one Spaniarde slay , and of the Englishman only their trumpeter , who they leave behind with his trumpet in his hand . from hence the coast lie all along till you come to Cartagena . between number de dios and Cartagena be a great sound or gulf , where the first Spaniard that ever dwell upon the firm land build and inhabit the town of Dariene : howbeit they abide not long there , because of the unholesomenesse of the place . but captain Drake be discontent with the repulse 228 that the man of number de dios give he , go with his pinnace into the say bay or sound of Dariene , where have conference with certain negro which be run away from their master of Panama and number de dios , he be inform that at the very same time many mule be come from Panama to number de dios lade with gold and silver . upon this news Francis Drake take with he a hundred shot , and the say negro , stay in the way till the treasure come by , accompany and guard only by those that drive the mule , who mistrust nothing at all . when captain Drake meet with they , he take away their gold : but the silver he leave behind , because he can not carry it over the mountain . and two day after this he go to the house of cross call by the Spaniard Venta de cruze , Venta de where all the merchant leave their good , where he slay cruzes-sixe or seven of the merchant , but find neither gold nor silver , but great store of merchandise : and so he fire the say house , with all the good , which be judge to be worth above two hundred thousand ducat . thus not find gold in this house to satisfy his mind , he burn the merchant good , and forthwith recover his pinnace : where fortune so favour his proceed , that he have not be aboard half a hour , but there come to the sea side above three hundred soldier , which be send of purpose to take he : but God suffer he to escape their hand , to be a far plague unto the Spaniard . also another Englishman name John Oxenham hear - JohnOxenham ing what spoil captain Drake have do upon that coast , anno make a voyage thither to enterprise the like . his ship be of burden about a hundred and twenty ton , and he be accompany with seventie person : he have conference also with the foresay negro , but be advertise that the treasure be conduct by soldier , he determine with himself to do that which never any man before dare undertake to do . for be most resolute of his purpose , and not look nor forecast what danger may ensue of this bold enterprise , he land his 229 man in the same place where captain Drake be , and hail his ship to shore , cut down bough of tree , and cover his ship with they , and hide up his great ordinance in the ground . thus leave not one man in his ship , he take two small piece of ordinance , and his caliver , and good store of victual , with all other necessary for his intend voyage . and he go with the negro above a fwer run - twelve league up into the main land , unto a river that seuti ” ea run into the south sea : and by this river in a wood he ’ cut down timber , and build a pinnace , which be 45 foot long by the keel ; which pinnace be finish , he go down the river and pass into the south sea , carry six negro with he for his guide , and he arrive at the hand of pearl be 25 league distant from Panama . this hand lie in the south sea as they sail from Peru to Panama , and here he stay ten day , before he can take any ship , but at length there come a small bark from a place call Quito in Peru : this bark he take , and find in her 60000 pezo of gold , with much wine and bread : and not be content with this , he stay a long while , before he will send away his prize or any of his man . Shortly after he take another bark that come from Lima , wherein he find 100000 pezo of silver in bar , which be all aboard his pinnace , he shape his course towards the river from whence he come : but before his departure he land on the foresay hand to find pearl , and go to a small town of the hand inhabit by negro for the same purpose : where find but small store , he return to his pinnace , and come near unto the river he send away his two prize , and with his pinnace enter up the river . the negro of the hand of pearl , so soon as the Englishman be depart , [ three . 780. ] post in their canoas to Panama , to signify unto the governor what they have do . whereupon the governor within two day after send out four bark and a hundred soldier , and negro to row , the captain of which soldier be call Juan de Ortega : who go first to the hand of pearl , and there have knowledge which way 230 the Englishman do take , and in pursue they he meet with the two prize take by the Englishman , which tell he that they be go up the river . but when he be come to the entrance of the river , he know not which way to take , because the river run into the sea by three mouth , and not all at one . therefore be determine with himself to pass up the great of the three , he see come down with the stream many feather of hen out of one of the lesser mouth : which mouth he enter , and sail four day up the same , he descry the Englishman pinnace lie upon the sand , and come to board she , they find in she no more but six Englishman , of which they kill one , and the other 5 flee , and have thorough ransack the say pinnace , they can find nought in she , but victual . the Spaniard see this , determine to seek out the Englishman by land , and leave about twenty man to keep their bark they march with eighty shot up into the country , and half a league from the river they find a little house make with bough , where the Englishman have leave all their treasure ; which the Spaniard take and carry back to their bark , mean not to follow the Englishman any further ; but the english captain with all his man , and above 200 negro follow the Spaniard unto the river side , and set upon they with great fury : howbeit the Spaniard lie behind the bush do easy put the english to flight , and they take seven of they alive , and slay eleven and five negro : so the Spaniard return with the loss of two man and five or six hurt . than they ask those Englishmen which they have take prisoner , why they depart not with their treasure , have fifteen day liberty ? they answer , that their captain have command they to carry all that gold and silver unto the place where their ship be , and they be agree to carry it , although they make three or four journey , for he promise to give they part of the treasure beside their wage , but the mariner will needs have it by and by : whereat the captain be angry because they put so 231 A.D. 1572-87 . small trust in his word , will not suffer his sailor to carry it , but say he will get negro to serve his turn , and so these be the negro aforesaid , who he have bring to carry away the gold and silver : but by the way he meet with the five Englishman which flee from the pinnace , who tell he of the Spaniard ; and than he make friend with all his man , and get the negro to take his part : but have the overthrow , and his best man be slay and take prisoner , he think to have return to his ship , and so to have go for England . the spanish captain have hear this discourse of the english prisoner , bury the dead body , embark all thing , and with the Englishman and their pinnace return back unto Panama . thus be the Englishman voyage overthrow . now so soon as the four bark and the pinnace be arrive at Panama , the governor of that place send a messenger overland to number de dios , to advertise the townsman , where the Englishman ship lie : whereupon they of number de dios man out four ship and go into the bay of Dariene where the Englishman have leave their ship , which they take away with they to number de dios , with all her ordinance ; so that the poor Englishman be leave in the mountain very naked and destitute of all comfort : for the Spaniard have take out of the foresay house of bough all their tool and other necessary , so that they can by no mean have any succour : whereas otherwise they may have build another pinnace , and provide better for themselves to have return for their own country . Theise news come to the ear of the viceroy of Peru , he think it not convenient to suffer those fifty Englishman which be yet alive , to continue in the mountain among the say negro . wherefore he send a servant of his call Diego de Frees with 150 shot to seek they , who at length find they make of canoas to take some one small bark or other that sail to and again in the north sea , whereby they may the 232 better shift for themselves : but before they have finish their pretend work , the spanish soldier set upon they , and take fifteen of they that be sick : but the rest flee , who the Spaniard pursue among the mountain , and in the end the negro betray they , and they be all take and carry to Panama . where the justice ask the english captain , whither he have the queen licence , or the licence of any other prince or lord ? and he answer that he have none , but that he come of his own proper motion . which be know to the justice , the captain and his company be condemn and be all put to death at Panama , save the captain himself , the master , and the pilot , and five boy , which be carry to Lima , where the captain and the two other man be execute , but the boy be yet live . the king of Spain have intelligence of these matter , Warn make send 300 man of war against those negro who have a£a ™ sttlie assist the Englishman , which negro before be slave [ hl 781. ] unto the Spaniard , and ( as be aforesaid ) flee from their master into those mountain , and so join themselves to the Englishman , think by that mean to be revenge of the Spaniard cruelty . at the first come of these three hundred soldier they take many of the negro , and do great justice on they accord to the quality of their offence . but after a season the negro grow wise and wary , and prevent the Spaniard so , that none of they can be take . whereof the king be advertise by his captain , as also how the country be full of mountain and river , and very unhealthfiill , insomuch that his soldier die , he write unto his say captain to make a agreement with those negro , to the end the country may be in quiet . and so they come to agreement with the captain of the negro , and all be appease . afterwards the negro inhabit two place which the Spaniard allot unto they , the king pardon be proclaim unto all those which before the day of the proclamation thereof have run from their master , 233 seven french ship take by the galley . sir Francis drake voyage to saint Iago , Sant Domingo , Cartagena , and saint Augustine . Cartagena . the english voyage upon condition that from that day forward , whatsoever other fugitive negro shall resort unto they , they shall return they home either dead or alive , if not , that they shall pay for they . upon these condition , and to make all quiet in the mountain , all thing be conclude and agree upon . so that now the negro dwell in great town , where they have Spaniard for their teacher , and a Spaniard for their judge , and with this they hold themselves very well content , and be obedient unto their ruler . the Spaniard since they conquer those part have see many Frenchman on that coast , but never any Englishman in that place , save those two only which i have before mention . and although the Frenchman have come strong , yet dare they never put foot on shore as the english do . but the king of Spain hear that Englishman as well as Frenchmen begin to haunt that coast , cause two galley to be make and well appoint , to keep the coast . the first year that they be make they take six or seven french ship . so soon as this be know there use few english or french man of war to come on the coast , until this year 1586. when as the aforesaid Francis Drake come with a strong fleet of about four and twenty ship , and do such harm as be well know unto all Christendom . but ( God spare the king of Spain life ) he will sufficient provide to keep his subject from the invasion of other nation . now to go forward with our begin discourse , the next town upon this coast beyond number de Dios be Cartagena : it stand in a more healthful place , and be a great town than the other , border upon a better country , which abound with plenty of victual , and have a very good port for the harbour of ship : and it be call Cartagena , because it resemble very much the city of Cartagena in Spain . it contain above four hundred household . it be very rich by reason of the ship stay there , when they go or come from 234 Spain . and if the ship chance to winter before they go home into Spain , than they lie at Cartagena . also it be great enrich by the merchandise , which be there discharge to be carry to the new kingdom of Granada , from which kingdom much gold be bring unto Cartagena . this new kingdom of Granada be two hundred reyn0 league within the land : neither can they travel from Granada . Cartagena to this kingdom by land , because of the mountain and stand water , which lie in the way , so that they be fain to carry their good up a river call the great river of Magdalen . they can go with grande there bark but two hundred league up this river ; for magaa-although it be large and very deep , yet there run it so swift a current , that the bark be constrain to discharge their good at a place in the river call Branco Branco de de Malambo , into small canoas which row close by the Salambo . shore side . in this river be great abundance of crocodile , so huge and terrible to behold , that such as never see they before be very fearful at the first sight of they , for if a man chance to put his hand or foot into the water , they will straightway catch at they . in some place this river be very unhealthful and full of noisome worm ; but the first place thereupon which the Spaniard do inhabit call mompox be exceed healthful . the mompox . country adjoin upon this river they call the new kingdom of Granada , because the captain call Cesada which first conquer the same , and inhabit there , be bear at Granada in Spain : for it be the use of the spanish captain , when they have conquer any province of the Indies , to call it after the name of the place where they themselves be bear . this new kingdom of Granada be very fruitful , and bring forth much corn and other victual , and have many gold-mine , and great quantity of emerald , whereof they send so many into Spain , that now they be become little worth : but before these country be find , they be in great estimation . here be also dwell many of the indian people so meek and gende of nature , that they be 235 call fly . this land be very plain and wholesome , and the inhabitant be give to peace . [ Iii . 782. ] from this kingdom they travel to another country Popayan . call la governacion de Popayan ; it be rich of gold , and withal very fruitful , but full of mountain than the new kingdom of Granada , and have few Indians dwell in it , but those that be there be full of courage and very valiant , which cause the Spaniard to make great war before they can overcome they . in this province there be 13 town of Spaniards , and in the new kingdom of Granada there be nine town of Spaniards . from this country of Popayan they travel along till they come to the first inhabitant of Peru dwell in Quito . a town which join upon the south sea call Quito . this town i will leave any further to speak off till i come particular to entreat of Peru. only i have speak of the two foresay province , to the intent you a passage may know , that there be a passage by land from car-ove land from tagena to perUj which be about five hundred league Peru^ ™ t0 through : so that beside the two hundred league which they go up the river , the other three hundred league be a country well inhabit and without danger to travel in , insomuch that oftentimes post be send too and fro . but because it be so long a journey , merchant use not to travel that way , but when they be enforce so to do . if any foreign nation shall become lord of the south sea , the king of Spain may have his treasure convey unto this town of Cartagena from Peru , and so into Spain . for in time pass there be a rebellion in Peru make by the Spaniard against their king , he send his power to suppress they through these province . this i write only for that i know some Englishman have think , that in take the south sea , or Panama or number de dios from the king of Spain , his treasure of Peru can not be convey unto he , and that the king can not succour Peru , if it want help . howbeit i do here most certain assure you , that there be many way to Peru. 236 but now i will return to my former discourse . upon the seacoast of Tierra firma eastward from Cartagena stand a little town call Santa Martha , between which town and Cartagena the mighty river of Magdalen before name fall into the sea with such a strong current , that by reason thereof it be know 20 league from the shore . Santa Martha be a very poor town , because it have often be rob by the Frenchman , and have no trade but with a few Indians that dwell thereabouts . here begin that wonderful long ridge of high mountain cover with snow , which stretch through many country , run along the kingdom of Peru and Chili , and continue to the very strait of Magellan . Theise mountain be see with snow upon their top above thirty league into the sea . at the foot of these wild mountain there be a valley call Tagrona , which be the rich place that be know thereabouts : but because the country adjoin be so mountainous , and the inhabitant so many and of so good a courage , shoot poison arrow which be present death to such as be wound with the same ; therefore it lie as yet unconquered , notwithstanding it have cost many spanish captain their life . pass along the coast of Tierra firma to the east of Santa Martha , where be a other small town of above a hundred house call Rio de Hacha . this town be somewhat rich by reason of the pearl which they get there . also they have a trade with the indian for some small quantity of gold . from hence they go along the coast to Cabo de la Vela , which because it be of the same property with Rio de Hacha before mention , i omit to speak of it . upon this coast there be a lake or gulf which open into the sea , at the mouth whereof they gather great store of pearl . beyond this place there be another poor town , which have six or seven time be spoil by the Frenchman . from hence there lie a high way to the new kingdom of Granada , but it be above seven hundred league in length , A.D. 1572-87 . SantaMartha . a mighty ridge of mountain . the rich •valley of Tagrona . Rio de Hacha . Cabo de la Vela . great store of pearl . 237 A.D. 1572-87 . the english voyage this way be travel very seidome , because the Indians will usual set upon the traveller . moor up into the land the country lie plain , and there be some gold , and a few town inhabit with Spaniard , whereof i have have but small notice , and therefore i let they the lie of Margarita . pass . the next place of any account be the hand of Margarita , where there be but few Spaniard inhabitant . this island of Margarita be very small , and lie four league from the main land : it have heretofore be very rich of gold and pearl , and so will have continue till this present day , have it not be spoil by man of war , because it stand so far from the main land , notwithstanding they yet gather good store of excellent horse and mule . pearl . upon this island be breed better horse and mule then in any other part of the Indies , therefore they carry they from hence to Peru , albeit they have great store of horse in Peru , but not so good . and because we have begin to speak of the hand of Margarita , you be to understand , that to the north more than 70. Hands . of the foresay coast of Tierra firma lie above seventie hand be all very little , except Cuba , Hispaniola , and boriquen , or Sant Juan de Puerto rico , which he [ hl 783. ] of boriquen , although it be not very great , yet be it inhabit by the Spaniard . the other small hand have be inhabit by the Indians , and have have good store of gold , pearl , and emralde ; but the Spaniard have destroy most of those Indians from off the earth , and in many of those hand there be nothing of any value , wherefore i have small cause to entreat any Hispaniola . further of they . but Hispaniola be a hand of great bigness , and have be very full of people , and abound with mine of gold and with pearl , but now all be the Indians kill themselves , rather than they will serve the tyrannous Spaniards . waste away . it be at the Spaniard first come thither , as full of inhabitant as any place of that bigness in the whole world , yet now there be none left : for they be man of so hard a heart , that they murder themselves rather then they will serve the Spaniard : for be man under so small civil governe-238 1572-87 . mean as they be , never be there any people know of so resolute and desperate mind : for oftentimes a great number of they be together over night , they shall be find all dead before the morning : such extreme hate do this brutish people bear against the Spaniard , that they choose rather to die the death , than to endure their insolence . it happen on a time , that a Spaniard call certain Indians to work in the mine ( which labour of all other do most grieve they ) they , rather than they will go , offer to lay violent hand on themselves : which the Spaniard perceive say unto they : see you will hang your self rather than go a pretty jest . and work , i likewise will hang my self and will bear you company , because i will make you work in a other world : but the Indians hear this , reply , we will willing work with you here , to the intent you may not go with we into another world : so unwilling be they of the Spaniard company . so that of all the inhabitant of this hand there be none that escape death , save only these few , which come to pass by the mean of this one Spaniarde , otherwise they will have hang themselves also . some of these people be yet live , but very few . this hand of Hispaniola be for the most part call the he of Sant Domingo , because the chief city thereof be so call , which be the first city in all the west Indies that be inhabit . there be in this city above eight hundred fire-house of good building inhabit by gentleman of great wealth . this hand be unhealthful , for it rain here the most part of the year . the riches that now this hand afford be sugar ( for sugar , hide , here be many ingenios or sugar-house ) and great coppermine . store of hide by reason of the abundance of cattle ; there be copper mine also , which be the cause that they have such store of copper-money , for their gold mine be all ' exhaust , and the gold which they have come from other place . this hand be ( as be beforesaide ) destitute of the first inhabitant , and the 239 Spaniard lack man to work in their ingenios , and to look unto their cattle , they be force to bring negro negro thither out of Guinea , where they have so ' increase increase , that the hand be now as full of they , as ncreas .. t be of natural inhabitant ; so that the Spaniard carry negro from this hand to the main land and there sell they . the chief victuali that they have i root call in this hand , be a kind of root call Juca , which be juca ' eat as it come new out of the ground be present death : but first they boil it and after press it , and the liquor that be strain therefrom be deadly poison : howbeit this root be press so dry , that there remain no moisture in it , they mingle and temper the same with water and so make cake thereof , which be very savoury and good to eat , and this be all the bread which they have in those hand . there go from hence yearly into Spain 7 or 8 ship at the least full freight with sugar and hide . the we off near unto Hispaniola lie another great hand Cuba - call Cuba , it be like unto Hispaniola , although there be not so much sugar . the principali town of this island be call Havana , which have a excellent harbour belong thereunto . the townsman be very rich by reason of the fleet that come from Nueva Espanna , and Tierra firma which touch there ; for the safeguarde of which fleet and of the town it self there be a castle build near the say harbour keep with spanish soldier ; neither be there any castle or soldier in all the hand but only here . there be also another hand saint Juan de inhabit with Spaniards call boriquen or Sant Juan Puerto neo . je puerto rico . p be but little , yet every way as plentiful ! as the other two be ; and therefore i omit to speak thereof . but now to prosecute my discourse of the port-town upon the main land : eastward and southward from Margarita there be no town inhabit by Spaniard or Ternambuck . Portugal , till you come to Fernambuck upon the coast of Brasil ; notwithstanding that between the say hand 240 the material original position here be too large for reproduction in this reissue . a pdf can be download from the web address give on page iv downloadeflkrfomhttps^www . cambndge.orga^^ Nofa flatWn 30 Aug 2021 at 14 : 09 : 32 , subject to the 1572-87 . and Fernambuck run the mighty river of Marannon , the great whereof ( both because of the greatness and the riches ww °f contain therein ) i must needs make some relation , in marmnon-regarde i have promise to speak of every place that be of any value in all the Indies . this river be one of the great in the world , and be first find when as the Spaniard seek out the other coast : but none can pass up this river because of the greatness of the current which come down , as also there be many shelf of sand lie in the mouth thereof : whereby it be long [ three . 784. ] before the riches in and about this river be know , until such time as the kingdom of Peru be conquer : at which time a captain call Gonsalo Pizarro pass through the country of Peru come at length into a land which they name la Canela , because there grow great store of Sinamome , but not altogether so good as that which come from the east Indies . the say captain proceed far into the country come at length to a mighty river , where he see the country people row in their canoas , and bring gold to buy and sell with the Spaniard . captain Pizarro see this , be desirous to find out the end of this river , but he can not travel by land because of the high mountain : wherefore he make a small bark or pinnace to go and discover from whence the say Indians bring their gold , and send in the say pinnace a captain under he call Orellana , who with fifty man go down the river , but can not return to their generali Pizarro , because of the great current 0 0 which be very strong against they , force they to fifty man . pass along the river , and to enter into the sea , and so they sail on forward to the foresay he of Margarita : but as they pass down this river they find it well inhabit with Indians , which be possess of great store of gold . Theise man with their pinnace be pass down this river eight month , for the river lie very crooked , which make a long way by water , neither dare the Spaniard ever land , because they see xi 241 q the great river of Marannon or Orellana . Orellana send down the river of Mar - the country so full of people , but they take many canoas , wherein they have great store of victual and some gold . now this Orellana come unto Margarita with these good news and riches , determine not to return unto his captain Pizarro which send he , but take his way from thence to the king of Spain , and present he with the gold that he bring out of the river : whereupon the king send he with a fleet of ship and six hundred man to inhabit the say river : but because of the great current and sholde that be therein , he leave the most part of his man and ship , and with those that remain he go unto certain island hard by the river , and build he pinnace ; but the country be very unhealthful , himself and many of his man die , and the residue go every man which way please he best . the fame of this river be straightway spread through Spain and Portugal , insomuch that a gentleman of Portugal call Lewis de Melo ask licence of don Juan the three , than king of Portugal to go and conqu the say river : for from the mouth of this river to the mouth of the river of plate , be that part of America which the king of Portugal ( accord to the partition make between they and the king of Spain ) do hold : so that the king of Portugal have this river in his part give it to the say Lewis de Melo to conquer : who take ten ship and eight hundred man ( among which many be gentleman ) and come to the mouth of this river , lose all the say ship save two , in one of the which two be Lewis the Melo himself : also the most part of the man that be in the ship cast away be save and get to the shore , and so go by land to the hand of Margarita ; from whence they be disperse throughout all the Indies . thus these two fleet of ship be so unfortunate cast away , never dare any captain afterward attempt by sea to conquer the say river . howbeit from the kingdom of Nueva Granada before mention there have 242 go two or three captain by land to discover it , for a rumour go over all the country of the great riches contain in this river ; whereupon the Spaniard name it el Dorado , that be to say , the golden river . it be el Dorado . thought that God will not have this river to be know , for that one captain by land have most of his people slay by those of the country , and other for want of victual return . so that none of all these come to any plain discovery , till a few year past a captain of the country of Navarre call Pedro de Orzua , who Pedn de go from Peru almost the same way that Gonsalo Orzua-Pizarro have before discover , and be accompany with about some seven hundred Spaniard , it be a great marvel how he can get so many , among who be many gentleman and old soldier of Peru , who cause diverse mutiny and insurrection , as hereafter i will more at large declare , which mutinous soldier be the cause of their captain death . howbeit with all these man captain Pedro de Orzua come unto the head of the say river : but you must understand , that this river be nourish not only with the water and freshet that come from the mountain of Peru , but also by all the river between the equinoctial and sixteen degree of southerly latitude , which fall thereinto and cause it to be so great . now at the head of this river the say captain Pedro de Orzua make fifteen pinnace with many canoas , wherein he carry above two thousand Indians to help he , with many horse and other provision , as mean to inhabit there : for it be not possible for he to carry all his provision by land , because the mountain be very great , there be also between they many small river which fall into this [ three . 785. ] great river above twenty league out of the land . so this captain have all his thing in good order go down the river wjth his whole company , and at length come from among the mountain to a plain country where the Indians dwell ; and there he hold a council , determine in the same place to build a town and to fortify 243 Lopez de jdgira . his dangerous conspiracy . Pedro de Orzua murdered . the english voyage it very strong , to the end he may leave all his stuff there , and such man as be not soldier . and so they begin to build the say town , and wrought upon it all the winter : where because it rain much , and withal be very hot , sickness and want of victual begin to prevail among they , whereupon the soldier fall a murmur among themselves . for come out of Peru , which be one of the fruitful and rich country of the world , they be more incline to have their fill of bread and meat then to apply their body to labour : which be the cause that albeit the country in which they now be , be exceed fruitful , and that they see with their eye most evident appearance of gold , and also that up into the country it seem to be much better ; yet for all this they murmur and will needs return for Peru from whence they come . in the company of these man there be a soldier of Biskay call Lopez de Agira , a very little man of body and lame of one of his leg , but very valiant and of good experience in the war . this man have be one of the principali mutineer in Peru , can not here give over his old wont , but ask his fellow-soldier , what they go to seek for in those wild desert whither they be bring : for ( say he ) if you seek riches , there be enough in Peru , and there be bread , wine , flesh , and fair woman also ; so that it be better to conquer that , and to take it out of the hand of the Spaniard , and that it be no hard enterprise , because all the soldier and poor man of Peru will turn unto they , and that that be a better course , than to go and conquer the savage people in those mountain : so that once have the government of Peru , the king of Spain shall be enforce to agree with they : if not ( say he ) we shall not lack they that will succour we , to have the riches of Peru. by these persuasion he bring many soldier to be of his mind , and conspire also with a young gentleman of Seville call don Fernando de Gusman ( who be in love with a young woman which the captain Pedro de Orzua have , and therefore do the 244 don Ferdinando de Gusman proclaim kin Lopez VAZ soon agree unto the wicked intent of Agira ) to murder the captain . who on a night be asleep in his bed , the say conspirator and their faction enter into his bedchamber , and there stab he with their dagger ; which be do , they slay also all the captain that be his friend , and therewithal ! make a great outcry , say , God save the king , God save the king : whereupon all the camp be in a uproar . then Lopez de Agira make unto the soldier a long oration , and get they all to consent unto he , some by force , and some because they dare not say to the contrary , and other of their good will , and so in the end they all agree unto his determine purpose . then make they Fernando de Gusman their head , 8c Agira be make a captain . this do , because the people shall the better hold their opinion , he do as great a villainy as ever any Spaniard commit : for he make a altar , whereon he and all the soldier renounce their service unto the king of Spain , 8c so as people without a king , choose the say don Fernando to be their king , and do homage unto he . Theise matter be thus finish they consult among themselves which shall be the best way for they to go of Peru. “ to Peru ? for they can not go up the river , by which they come down , in regard of the strong current , and go back overland they shall be very weak for want of horseman : wherefore they determine to go down the river . then say Lopez de Agira , that they will carry nothing with they but the pinnace and soldier which shall fight , and that it be best to leave behind they all the Indians which they bring from Peru , with the woman and the sick man . whereunto the generali don Ferdinando will not agree , because he know that when they be go the people of the country will kill they all . Lopez de Agira hear this , and long to be chief governor himself , take unto he 30 of his own countryman of his Fernando and disposition , and on the sudden slay don Fernando , Gusman who not many day before he have swear to obey : 8c slay . 245 now by his subtle practise , be withal eloquent in his talk , he cause the soldier to appoint himself their governor , and make they believe that all the cruelty commit be for their saveguard : neither do the tyrannic of this wretched man here end . he be bear in Biskay a country near unto France , wherefore i believe he rather to have be a Frenchman than a Spaniard , for that in the heart of a Spaniard can not be a new mass - so much cruelty as this man show . now be ready sacre ’ to go his way , he determine not to carry with he any gendeman or person of quality , and therefore he slay all such person ; and then depart only with the common soldier , he leave behind he all the spanish woman and sick man , with all other creature . if i shall rehearse all the cruel murder of this wicked man one by one , i shall be over tedious unto you . only in few word i say , that this man proceed down the river , have with he only four hundred man : but before he pass the [ three . 786. ] river , and be come to Margarita , he have no more leave but two hundred and thirty man , for the rest he have put to death , and leave on shore among the people of the country : all which tyranny he use , because he ever stand in fear of his life : for have he see at any time but two soldier talk together , he will straight suspect that they be conspire of his death , and therefore he use the practise abovesaid . and he never go any way , but that he have in his company thirty Biscayne of his own will and mind ready to execute his cruel purpose . great store of as these soldier with their captain come down gild in the the r [ verj they see many canoas with gold in they nver of Mar - passjn „ too a j fro and people on both side of the river , and in their passage many time they land , and get good store of gold and victual . now also do they amazmes find that to be true which Orellana have report , namely at there be Amazon , that be to say , woman that husband^in fight in the war with bow and arrow : but these the war . woman fight to aid their husband , and not by they - 246 self alone without the company of man , as Orellana report . there be of these woman upon diverse part of this river , who see the Spaniard fight with their husband come in to succour they , and show themselves more valiant than their husband ; for which cause it be name , the river of Amazones . the Spaniard intent be only to pass down the river , neither seek they at all to discover the inland , and yet they take good store of gold , put it into one of their pinnace , where Lopez de Agira himself be embark , which pinnace at the mouth of the river be cast away , but he himself escape , because he have not as yet fulfil his bloody mind . and when he be come to the island of Margarita , the governor thereof suppose he have be one of the king loyal captain , receive he with pinnace , and bring good store of victual unto he . but he put the say governor immediate to death , land on the hand , and take it and two ship that be there , and constrain likewise a hundred and fifty man , which he good store of gold . Lopez de Agira arrive at Margarita 1568. there find , to go with he , beside other that go voluntary , carry from thence good store of victuales , and many horse also . and then he return to the main land , say , that with his small force he will subdue the whole India : imagine belike that all the old soldier and poor people , at the first sight of he , will turn to his side and take his part . howbeit he be foul deceive : for before he have march two day journey up into the land , the governor of Nueva Granada come against he with a power of man : but Lopez de Agira hope that other soldier will have join themselves unto he , whereby his strength may have be the more , be quite frustrate of his expectation : for even his own man leave he , and take part with the king captain . now see himself thus leave destitute of his soldier , and void of all help , he commit a more unnatural bloody act then ever Nero the tyrant do , for he murder his own 247 great riches hide within the river of Marannon . the coast of Brasill , why it be so call , and by who it be at the first discover . the english voyage daughter be but sixteen year of age , which he have bring with he out of Peru : the cause why he kill she be , that she may not become a concubine to villain , nor be call the daughter of a traitor : and these word he use unto she , so soon as he have give she her death wound : but before he can finish this cruel act , the soldier come upon he , and cut he in piece , also his daughter die of her wound in that place . thus have you hear the miserable end of this bloody caitiff : in regard of who treacherous and mischievous deal the king will never since suffer this river to be thorough discover ; so that the riches and treasure of the say river remain unknown even until this present day . now leave to discourse any long of this river of Marannon , all the coast between the say river and the river of plate , be call the coast of Brasill , take that name from a kind of wood in the same country , call brasill-wood , whereof there be great store in those part . this coast of Brasill be first discover by Pedro Alvarez Cabral , in the second voyage which the king of Portugal cause to be make to the east Indies : and the foresay Pedro Alvarez take possession of this land for the king of Portugal : whereupon the king don Emanuel hear news thereof send present ship to discover the whole country , and find it to be part of America otherwise call the west Indies : for which cause there grow some controversy between he and the king of Spain : but be kinsman and great friend one to another , they agree in the end , that the king of Portugal shall hold all the country that he have discover , the which be ( as i have say ) from the river of Marannon to the river of plate ; albeit the Spaniard affirm , that it stretch no further than the hand of Santa Catelina ; whereupon there have rise many controversy between the Portugal and Spaniard , which have cost many man their life . 248 there come into the say river of plate in the year 1587 two english ship and a pinnace of the right honourable the earl of Cumberland , which be bind for the strait of Magellan , and ankor ten league [ three . 787. ] within the say river before a little hand lie hard by another call seal-hand . on which hand the captain of one of the ship call Christopher Lister , and his whole company land , find the king of Portugal arm grave on a rock by the sea side ; which be think to have be there engrave by one Martin Alonso de Souza , who be send by the king don Emanuel to discover this coast . therefore i think the Portugal have reason for that which they allege concern the extension of the say coast of Brasil . wherefore the king of Portugal ! give this land to diverse of his gentleman to inhabit . most of the naturali inhabitant of this country be very rude , and go stark naked both man and woman , and be maneater ; for which cause they make war one against another to get man to eat ; they be stout and good bowman . the first place inhabit on this coast beyond the river of Maran non be call Fernambuck so name by the Indians , but in Portugal ! it be call Villa de Olinda . before you come to this place there be a port call Parajua , unto which port not many year past the Frenchman hear of the trouble which be then in Portugal resort , and build there a fort ; whereunto certain french ship make yearly voyage to lade brasill-wood . but they of Fernambuck , with the help of the Spaniard , go and burn five french ship within the port , and take the fort it self , and the Frenchman that be there flee part into the mountain , and part of they be slay ; so that since that time the Spaniard have inhabit there till this present . now to return to Fernambuck inhabit by a Portugal captain call Duarte Coelio , it be the great town in all that coast , and have above three thousand house in it , with seventie ingenios for sugar , and great store Fernambuck . a fort build by the Frenchman at Parajua . Parajua now inhabit by Spaniards . Fernambuck contain 3000 house . 249 of brasill-wood and abundance of cotton , yet be they in great want of victual : for all their victual come either from Portugal or from some place upon the coast of Brasill . the harbour of this town be a bar harbour , and fit only for small bark : this place belong as yet unto the son of Duarte Coelio . cape S. au - beyond this town lie the cape of Sant Augustin , , and next thereunto be the river of Sant Francisco , which Francisco . 1S a great nver . between this river and naya it be all a wilderness inhabit with cruel savage , for whosoever they take they kill and eat he . the bayhaatowne town of Bayha belong to the king , and therefore ofvcoohmue . governor of all the coast keep his residence in the same , as also the bishop . it contain xooo house , and 40 ingenios for sugar , and have much cotton , but no brasill-wood at all . the sea run up into the country here 14 or 15 league , where they get some year good store of amber-griese . here be great plenty of victual , and although the country be hot , yet be it healthful , and the air wholesome . the next town upon as Ilhas . the coast call as Ilhas , or the isle , be but a small town , contain not above 150 house , and but three ingenios for sugar . most of the inhabitant be labour man , which use to carry victual in their small bark unto Fernambuck : their lord be call Lucas Giraldo . Puerto seguro . the next place unto this be call Puerto seguro : it consist of 4 small town , which contain not in all above 300 house . the inhabitant of this town also live by carry of victual along the coast ; and the town it self belong to the duke de Avero . hard the sholde by this port begin the sholde which they call Abrolhos ; call Abrol - anj these sholde lie above 25 league into the sea . ’ the next habitation of Christians beyond these sholde Espirito Santo , be Espirito Santo which consist of two town , both of they contain about 300 house : and they belong to a gentleman call Vasques Fernandes de Coutinho . RiodeJenero . from hence you pass along the coast to the river of Jenero , which have about three hundred house . in 25° this place the Frenchman first inhabit , who captain be call Monsieur de Villegagnon . the say captain make here a fort , and plant good ordinance thereon , and jade every year great store of brasill-wood from hence , and have great friendship with the savage people , who do he good service , by reason whereof the Frenchman reap much benefit out of this country . but the king of Portugal send out a power against the Frenchman , who first take the french ship by sea , and then land and besiege the fort , and at length take it , and the captain thereof : unto who , because he be a gentle person , and never hurt the Portugal , they give thirty thousand ducat for his ordinance , and for all other thing that be in the fort , and so send he for France . since which time the Portugal have inhabit this river . there be at this present only two ingenios , but great store of brasill-wood , with plenty of victual . from this river of Jenero they pass along the coast four town to Sant Vincente , which have 4 town , the great whereof be call Santos , and consist of four hundred ymcente , i ’ house , there be also three ingenios . a few year these english pass there come two english ship into this harbour man be m. which be go for the strait of Magellan . who be in this port , there come thither three of the king ’ of Spain ship , and fight with the Englishman , but the Englishman sink one of their ship , and therefore the t111 - 788 - ] king command a fort to be make , to the end that - afirtbuilt no English ship that be bind for the strait of Magellan shall victuali there , the which fort stand on against the the mouth of the harbour . this country belong to a english . gentleman call Martin Alonso de Souza : this be the last inhabit place upon all the coast of Brasill . this coast of Brasill be very full of mountain , and have much rain fall upon it , for which cause they can go from town to town by land : all the habitation of this . country be by the sea side . from Sant Vincente the §anta qate 0 coast be all mountainous , till you come to the he of Santa Una . 251 Catelina , and from this hand till you come even to the straight of Magellan , the coast be very plain and without wood . Having proceed thus far , it will not be amiss to Rio de laPlata , speak somewhat of the river of plate , which be one of the great river in all the world : for at the mouth it be above five and twenty league from land to land : and the Spaniard have go up in it above six hundred league , and can not attain to the head thereof . the first Spaniard that enter this river , and inhabit the same be call Solis , who pass up 100 league into it , and call it by . the name of Rio de la plata , that be to say , the river of silver , because of the fine and clear water that be in it , for i have not hear of any silver that ever be find there . the say Solis return into Spain , without any further search into this river : howbeit another Sebastian ca - captain call Sebastian Cabota go up this river 150 b°ia ' league , and build a fort , which fort stand until this present : where leave his ship , he go high up the river in small pinnace , and all along as he go he find many Indians : but find neither gold nor silver , nor ought else of any great value , he return to his ship , and sail for Spain . not many year after a certain gentleman call don Pedro de Mendoza furnish forth a great fleet of ship , wherein be ship a thousand man , forty mere , and twenty horse , with all other creature to inhabit this river : and come thither he go up into the country to see what riches he can there find , leave all his stuff , cattle , and provision Buenos at a place call Buenos ayere , so name in regard of the ayere . freshness of the air , and the healthfiilnesse of his man , during their abode there : this place be eighty league within the river , and here he land first : at this place the river be above seven league broad , and very low land on both side without tree . this river be very often subject to great and sudden storm , so that with a storm this don Pedro lose eight of his ship , and in the rest he return for Spain , say to his man , that he will go 252 seek victual , and so leave the great part of they behind . in his way homeward he die , and the poor man which he leave behind he , for the most part of they die for hunger also , because in that place there be very few Indians , and therefore but small store of victual , only they live by hunt of deer , and by fish . of all the man that don Pedro leave behind he there be but two hundred remain alive , who in the ship boat go high up the river , leave in the place call Buenos ayere their mere and horse : but it be a wonder the wonderful to see , that of thirty mere and seven horse which the Spaniard leave there , the increase in forty year be so jmares-great , that the country be 20 league up full of horse ; whereby a man may conjecture the goodness of the pasture , and the fruitfulness of the soil . the Spaniard that go up this river pass three hundred league , and find the country full of Indians : who have great plenty of victual , among who the Spaniard dwell as their friend , and the Indians bestow their daughter in marriage upon they , and so they dwell altogether in one town , which the Spaniard it call la ascension , and it la ascension stand on the north side of the river . the foresay Spaniard be twenty year in this place , before any pi^er news of their inhabit upon this river be bring into Spain : but wax old , and fear that when they be dead , their son which they have beget in this country be very many , shall live without the knowledge of any other Christians : they determine among themselves to build a ship , and to send news into Spain with letter unto the king of all thing that have pass among they , upon that river . Theise news be bring to the king , he send three ship , with a bishop and certain priest , and friar , and more man and woman to inhabit , with all kind of cattle , when this succour be come , they inhabit in two place more on the north side of the river , and travel three hundred league beyond the ascension ; but find neither gold nor silver , they return back again unto the ascension . the people be so 253 multiply in this city , that now it be one of the great in all the India , and contain above two thousand house . the country adjoin be exceed fruitful , abound with all kind of victual , and with sugar and cotton . from this city of ascension 150 league towards the mouth of the river stand another town which Santa Fe. they call Santa fe , on the south side of the say river , from which town there lie a open high way lead into the land of Peru , so that when i come to entreat of Peru i will speak of this way , and declare who first find it . also five year past they have inhabit anew the town of Buenos air on the south side of the river , to [ three . 789. ] the end they may have trade from the coast of Brasill , but their fortune be such , that the very first time they go to Brasill , and will have return again two english to the river of plate , they be take by two ship of ^^fenton^ England that be go for the strait of Magellan . be generali the coast along from this river to the strait of 1582. Magellan have not be perfect discover , either by sea or land , save only certain port which they have find , sail to the strait . wherefore pass they over , i will here entreat of the say strait , and declare who be the first finder of they , as likewise what be the cause why they be seek for . the Portugal therefore have first find and conquer the east Indies , and discover the coast of China , with the hand of the Malucos , ( all which place abound with gold , precious stone , silk , and other rich commodity ) and bring home the foresay riches in their ship into Portugal : there grow by this mean great envy between the Portugal and their neighbour the Spaniard ; insomuch that the council of Spain say unto the emperor Charles the five be then their king , that the Portugal will be lord of all the riches of the world . upon which word begin a controversy between the emperor and the king of Portugal : but they be great friend before , and also kinsman , agree immediate to part the whole world between they , in such wise as i for 254 my part can never understand the certainty thereof . the world be thus divide , a portugal-gentleman call Fernando magellane bear in a place of Portugal call Fernando Punta de la barte , be of a good house , and very well masellanes-seene in cosmography , and a excellent pilot , as also be offend with don Emanuel his sovereign , depart out of Portugal into Spain , and affirm to the council of Spain , that the isle of the Malucos be in that part of the world which be allot to the king of Spain , and that he will find a short way thither then the Portugal take , and lay before they such infallible reason , that the council give credit unto his word , send he to sea with five ship and 400 man all very well appoint . with these five ship set sail from saint Lucar , he come to the coast of Brasill , where at that time two place be inhabit by Portugal , and so sail on along that coast he pass by the river of plate , which river be discover a little before by Solis . and notwithstanding many storm , and great mutiny among his company , he come at length unto 48 degree , to the southward of the river of plate : where he find a har - bour , which he name Puerto de Sant Julian , and port . Julian . winter there : and there also he hang 5 man , and put on shore a priest , because they will have make the company to stand against their captain , and so to have return back again . but in the end have pacify his man , he put to sea , and within 5 day after he find the discovery the strait , which by he be so much desire : but^f^r^r‘s before he enter the say strait there befall such a i it mutiny in one of his ship , that the same ship return back again . and so himself with the other four ship enter the strait , one of they say four with all the man therein be cast away at the very entrance : which loss notwithstanding he proceed on with the other three ship , and pass many trouble and danger in this long discovery , cease not to prosecute his intend voyage . this discovery be at the first think very profitable unto the Spaniard , but of late 255 it have prove very hurtful unto they by mean of certain coaster which have sail the self same course . the southerly these strait stand in 52 degree and a half of st^htfof1 southerly latitude . also here be to be note , that it Magellan . be cold to the southward of the line then to the northward : in such wise , that in forty degree to the southward the cold be more sharp , then in fifty degree to the north : experience do always show the same : for it be as cold even in the strait of Magellan , as it be in sixty degree of northerly latitude . howbeit the cold be not the cause why navigator frequent not the same , but the westerly and southerly wind , which blow most furious on that coast , and that oftentimes out of the very mouth of the straight , and so continue for the most part of the year . also there run sometime such a strong current , that if the wind and it go all one way , the cable can hold , neither can the ship withstand the force thereof . for which cause , and also for that there be no harbour , till you be pass 30 league into the say strait , most part of the ship that have go thither have endure many trouble before they can come to the strait , and be come to the mouth thereof they have be hinder by the current and wind , and so have be put back again . and to the end you may understand the truth , i will declare unto you all the ship that have pass through the say strait , since Magellan first find they , unto this present year of 1586 , when i have once end my discourse of Magellan his own voyage . now you be by the way to understand , that the north side of the entrance of these strait be plain land without any wood or tree : Patagpnes . here be likewise some Indians though not many , yet be they very mighty man of body of ten or eleven foot high , and good bowman , but no man-eater , neither have they any victual , but such as they get by hunt [ three . 790. ] and fish ; they cover their body with the skin of beast that they kill , to defend they from the cold : neither be there ever to this day any silver or gold 256 find among they or in their country . Theise Streights the length of ( they say ) extend in length from east to west about the strait of a hundred and twenty league . at the middle of these mighty ridg strait on the north side be many mountain cover of mountain . with snow , which mountain stretch from thence along the frontier of Chili , Peru , and Nuevo reino de Granada , even unto the shore of the north sea at Santa Martha , as i have before signify . it be a wonder to behold the exceed heighth of these mountain , and the way which they continue cover with snow , for even under the equinoctial line they have as much snow upon their top as in 52 degree . also it be worthy the remembrance , that all this country toward the south sea be very fruitful , and the people very discreet and gentle : but all the coast towards Brasill upon the north sea be poor , whereas never yet be find any commodity of account , and the people themselves be very cruel and savage ; for the will of God be , that good and civil man shall inhabit fruitful country . and for the better understanding hereof you must note , that all the land lie between the say ridge of mountain and the south sea be call by the name of Chili , Peru , and Nuevo Chili , Peru , reino de Granada , which be the best and rich country an Nuevo in all the world : and most part of the land from the rQ%^a say mountain to the north sea be call Brasill , be ' a mountainous country , * where as yet be never find * but of late either gold or silver . from the say mountain in there be find the middle of the strait the land rise high , till you d'werse rich come to the end or the strait where you enter into the south sea , in which place next the south sea the strait be very dangerous , by reason of the sholde and rock that lie on the north side . thus Magellan after he have enter the south sea , within 60 day come to the isle of the Malucos , without touch at any land until he come thither : and so seek there to the death of lade his ship at a hand inhabit by Moores , he be Magellan . by they treacherous slay . now the Spaniard be too few for the manage of all three ship , because xi 257 r many of they be dead , partly with sickness , and partly with the hardness of the voyage , determine to abandon one of their say ship , and so man the other two : which two be lade with spice and other riches know not what course they be best to take : howbeit at length it be determine , that one of these two ship shall go for Nueva Espan na , and the other for the cape of buena esperanza , and so for Spain . the ship that go for Spain be call the victory , the pilot Sebastian deal whereof be a Biscain name Juan Sebastian deal canon , man thatever to w^om king gay great reward , and appoint sail about globe for his arm , whereon be write : the world . Primus omnium circunde disti i ; that be , thou be the first man that ever sail about i . and albeit this voyage be so long and troublesome as be before mention , yet many other have attempt the same . and the next that seek to pass the say two ship of strait of Magellan be two ship of Genoa , which Genoa . come as far as the mouth of the strait be by a mighty storm drive back again , and one of they , who master be call Pancaldo , put into the river of plate , and be cast away about Buenos Aeres , where to this day part of the say ship be to be see , and some of the man be yet live in the river among the Spaniard : and the other ship return to Genoa again . a three voyage also there be a bishop of Placencia in Spain , who to you strait . covetjng riches , set forth a fleet of four sail , to pass the strait , and so to go for the Malucos : and get licence of the emperor he send his say 4 ship towards the strait which have very fair wind till they come thither : but be enter 20 league within the strait , a storm of westerly wind take they , and drive 3 of they on shore , 8c the four back into the sea , which ( the storm be pass ) return into the strait to seek for his consort , 8c find many man go on the shore side , but the ship be beat all to piece . so they on land call unto the ship ; but 258 the captain thereof , consider that his ship be but little , and that he have but small store of victual , will not go to they on shore , but proceed on his voyage , and pass the strait . and because he be alone he will not sail to the Malucos , but go for the coast of Peru to the city of Lima , where the ship remain unto this day . the man of the other three ship , which be leave in the strait be to the number of two hundred and fifty ( who captain be kinsman to the bishop of Placencia be call * Queros ) be never hear of until this present day , it be forty year since they be leave there . a year after this , certain merchant of the groin in Galicia set forth other three ship , which ship also come to the strait mouth , where one of they be cast away with all the man , and the other two return for Spain . also i have have intelligence of certain Portugal ship , which be come to the mouth of the strait lose two of their pinnace which they send to discover the land , and then return back . and after these , two french ship be send from the river of Jenero by monsieur de Villegagnon , but be come to the latitude of 45. degree , they be drive back by a storm of contrary wind . after all this the governor of Chili call don Garcia de Mendoza son to the mark of Cannette determine to discover the say strait from the south sea , send from Chili two ship under the conduct of a captain call Latherelio : but the danger to seek these strait by the south sea be more than by the north sea , because all the storm of the north sea come from the land , but in the south sea all the wind and storm come off the sea , and force the ship to run upon the leeshore , insomuch that the say two ship be cast away in fifty degree . the seek of these strait of Magellan be so dangerous , and the voyage so troublesome , that it seem a matter almost impossible to be perform , insomuch that for the space of thirty year no man make account 259 * Gonsalvo de Oviedo , part 2. lib . 20. call this captain Camargo . a four voyage to the strait . a fiftandsixt voyage to the strait of Magellan . two french ship send for the stir eight of Magellan . [ Iii . 791. ] A.D. 1572-87-sir Francis drake voyage aboutyeworld . the cause why m. Douty be behead . sir Francis Drake drive into degree of southerly latitude . la Mocha in 38 deg . 30 min. over against the province of Arauco . the english voyage thereof ; until of late one Francis Drake a Englishman ( of who i have before speak ) see he can do no good on the main land of the west Indies to benefit himself , because of the galley of Cartagena that keep the coast , determine to seek the strait of Magellan , and to pass into the south sea . and so have provide two ship and three pinnace in England , he proceed on his voyage , and come to the island of cape Verde take a Portugal ship lade with wine , the pilot whereof be a Portugal call Nuno da Sylva , he carry along with he , who be a great help and furtherance unto he in his voyage . and this which i shall here say , i have in write of the Portugal pilot himself . from the island of cape Verde the say Francis Drake sail unto port Sant Julian , where he winter : and there also he put to death a gentleman of his company , because he will have return home . this port i take to be accurse , for that Magellan likewise put some to death there for the like offence . This Francis Drake put out of the say port , enter the strait , and within twelve day get into the south sea . and two day after there arise such a storm of westerly wind ( which be usual in those part ) that he lose his pinnace , and his vice-admiral master John winter be drive back again into the strait , who pass many danger return home into England . but Francis Drake himself run with this storm into seven and fifty degree of southerly latitude , where he find a island with a good harbour , and fresh water , and stay at the same island two month to repair his ship : and then , the weather be fair , he proceed on his voyage , and come to the coast of Chili to a island call la Mocha ; where he go on shore , and talk with the Indians : but when he will have return unto his boat they shoot their arrow at he , and kill two of his man , and he himself be wound in the face . 260 go from thence he pass by the town of Con - town of cepcion not know the place , and so to Valparizo which be the port of Sant Iago , where he find a ship lade afanzo-with a kind of victual and wine , and have in she beside threescore thousand pezo of gold , every pezo be worth eight shilling sterling : and take this ship with he he go from thence to another port call coquimbo : the port of where see many cattle on the land , he send present some of his man with caliver to kill of the say cattle : mi „ , but be espy of the Spaniard that dwell in the town , they send twelve horseman to see what they be that kill their cattle , for they know they not : and come near unto they , the Englishman flee to their boat , but the horseman overtake one of they who have a halberd in his hand , who the Spaniard think to have take : but he with his halberd kill one of their horse be himself run through with a lance , and so the Spaniard carry he dead with they into the town . the next day the news come to Sant Iago , that they be Englishman , and how they have take the ship out of the harbour of Valparizo : whereupon they of Sant Iago send a post by land to give warning unto they of Peru. howbeit by reason that the country between this place and Peru be not inhabit for the space of two hundred league , and many huge and cold mountain cover with snow lie in the way , the post be so long in performance of this journey , that captain Drake be upon the coast of Peru a month before the say post come thither : neither can they send any news by sea , because they be destitute of ship . captain Drake depart from coquimbo sail to another port not inhabit , where he set up a pinnace . And go from thence , the next place where he touch be a port upon the coast of Peru call los Pescadores : lospescadore . and there he land , and in one of the fishermen house find of a Spaniard three thousand pezo of silver in little bar . Arica in 18 from hence he go to another port call Arica , which deg . 261 be the next town to Chili that the Spaniard have in all Peru , contain a hundred house : and this be the port [ three . 792. ] where they discharge their merchandise that pass from Lima to Potossi , and to all other city within the land , and likewise at this place they be wont to embark all the silver which they carry for Panama . at this port of Arica he find a ship that have in her thirteen thousand pezo of silver , which have take out , he burn the say ship , and after think to have land , but see both horseman and footman on shore he will not , but proceed on his voyage . since captain Drake be at this port they carry their silver by land to Lima , and lade no more treasure here , but only discharge the merchant good that come from Spain hither . also they have build a fort at this place for the better safety of the inhabitant , and have plant it with ten piece of ordinance , and every summer there lie in garrison a hundred soldier beside the townsman . * from hence Chuli . he sail to another port call Chuli : in which port be a ship that have three hundred thousand pezo of silver in bar : but they have send horseman from Arica to give advertizement of drake be on the coast , which news come but two hour to the town before his arrival at the say port : whereupon the master of the ship have no leisure to carry his silver on shore , be force to throw it into the sea in six fathom water , where his ship road , and so to run on shore in the ship boat . and captain Drake come aboard the ship be tell by a indian , that the master have throw the silver overboard . wherefore see that news begin to run of he from town to town he stay not here , but run along the coast : and because he will have no let , he cast off the ship which he have take at Sant Iago , with never a man in she , which ship be never hear of after . and so without stay any where he shape his course el Callao de for Lima , and come to the harbour of Lima call £ » « < ? . pi Callao , be two league distant from Lima it self , ( for Lima stand up into the land ) he arrive there one 262 day , before the news of he be bring to Lima , and find the man in the ship without suspicion . and as he enter into the port , there come in also a ship from Panama lade with merchandise , and he send his pinnace to take she : but the man forsake the ship betake they to their boat , and go on shore : and as the Englishman follow the boat , a Spaniard that be therein shoot a piece , and slay one of captain drake man in the pinnace . wherefore he follow the boat no far , but go with his pinnace into the harbour among fourteen sail of ship that lie there , in all which ship there be not a man that have so much as a sword or a piece to molest he , wherefore he do with less fear go from ship to ship , ask they if there be any ship go for Panama ; for he know well , that the ship which go for Panama carry both silver and gold , neither seek he for any thing else , for there be marchan dize enough for he in those ship , if he have be desirous to have have the same . so they tell he that three day pass there be a ship go for Panama which carry all the merchant silver thither . whereupon he present set sail towards Panama ; for when he come into this port it be about midnight , so that the Spaniard can not see what ship he have . at last the news come to Lima unto the viceroy of Peru , that there be enemy in the harbour , but they know not what they be . wherefore the viceroy and all the people be in great fear , lest some Spaniards have make a mutiny , and put themselves in arm : and so the next morning himself accompany with 2000 horseman and footman come from the city down to the water side , and find some of the Englishman arrow that be shoot at the boat , out of which their man be slay , they know they to be Englishmen : and then they be all in quiet , see it be but one ship , for as yet the ship lie becalm 3 day before the town . whereupon they forthwith provide 2 ship with 200 man in they , to board captain Drake or else to burn his ship ; and after the ship go 2 small pinnace , because that if any of the 263 ship shall be sink , they may save the man . but it be a day and a half before these thing can be make ready , and in the end go forth they find the english ship still becalm , and the calm be such , that the Spaniard can not come at they . the same night , the wind blow a fresh gale , the Spaniard return into the harbour , and captain Drake set forward to Panama . the cause of the Spaniard return be , for that they have no ordinance , nor victual to tarry any long out . then the viceroy cause six piece of ordinance to be make , neither can he make any more , in regard of the shortness of time : so with these three ship piece of ordinance , and three ship , and two hundred send after anj ££t man jn tjjgm he send after captain drake ; who captatne r . Drake . after he have wind stay no where , nor take any ship at all , notwithstanding he meet with many come from Panama lade with merchandise , but still he inquire after the ship that be go to Panama before he : of a rich prize which ship he have sight about the cape of Sant Francisco , eandsdrake master whereof be a biskaine , call Juan de Anton : at cape S. wh° see this ship of the Englishman , think that Francisco the viceroy of Peru have send he some message , and situate one therefore strike all his sail : but so soon as he may ‘ north of the discern the ship somewhat better , he will then fain equinoctial . have go his way > f°r he know that it be none of that coast , and then he begin to hoist his sail , but can by [ three . 793. ] no mean get from captain drake because he be within the reach of his great ordinance , for the Spaniard not have so much as a rapier to defend themselves , read Nuno be soon constrain to yield . there be in this da Sylva con - ship above eight hundred and fifty thousand pezo ‘ treeuree of sdver , and forty thousand pezo of gold , all which silver and gold be custom ; but what store of treasure they have beside uncustomd i know not , for many time they carry almost as much more as they pay custom for ; otherwise the king will take it from they , if they shall be know to have any great sum ; wherefore every ship carry his bill of custom , that the king may 264 see it . all this treasure that captain Drake take be merchant and other man good , save one hundred and eighty thousand pezo of the king . he have also out of this ship good store of victual with other necessary , which be to be carry for Panama and be five day take out of such thing as he need . this do , he sail from hence to the coast of Nueva Espanna without go to Panama . Surely this be a great plague of God just inflict upon we for our sin : for the take of these ship be a especial cause of all the dangerous war that be likely to ensue between Spain and England . now the ship that be send by the viceroy of Peru from Lima after Francis drake , arrive at cape Sant Francisco twenty day after he have take the foresay ship , and have intelligence by a ship come from Panama , which they meet at the say cape , that Francis Drake have take the ship with silver , and be not go for Panama . whereupon the captain of the three ship think that captain Drake have be go for the strait of Magellan , direct his course that way to seek he . captain Drake carry from the coast of Peru eight hundred sixty six thousand pezo of silver , which be as much as eight hundred sixty six quintal , at 100 pound weight the quintal , every quintal be worth one thousand and two hundred ducat of Spain ; all which sum amount to a million and thirty nine thousand and two hundred ducat . beside this silver he carry away a hundred thousand pezo of gold , that be ten quintal , each quintal be value at a thousand five hundred Spanish ducat , which last sum amount to a hundred and fifty thousand ducat : over and beside the treasure in the say ship which be uncustomd ( the value whereof i can learn ) consist of pearl , precious stone , real of plate , and other thing of great worth . with all this purchase he sail towards Nueva Espanna ; and at a island lie before that coast 265 Pedro Sarmiento send from Lima to the streit of Magellan . 58 degree of southerly latitude discover . many island discover to the south of the strait . the english voyage call the island of canon he discharge all thing out of his ship and grave she , and remain there ten day . from thence he go along the coast of Nueva Espanna , where he take certain ship lade with spice , silk , and velvet , but no gold nor silver , for there be none to be have on this coast . and here at Guatulco he set on shore his portugal-pilot , which he take at one of the island of cape Verde . but what course he keep from this coast till he come into England i know not of certainty , and therefore i will not meddle therewithal ! . the foresay three ship which be send in pursuit of captain drake , return back again to Lima without do of aught . all which notwithstanding , the viceroy of Peru determine to send two ship to the strait of Magellan , either to meet with captain drake there , or else to see if they can fortify the say strait against such ship as may afterward attempt to pass through the same . and albeit this be think a most dangerous voyage , and impossible to be perform , by reason of the shold on that side of the strait , yet send he forth the two say ship . the admiral be a ship of a hundred ton , and the other of eighty ton , and have one hundred and twenty man in they both , sail from Lima under the conduct of Pedro Sarmiento , who be then account the best navigator in all Peru. Theise ship after their departure touch on the coast to take in victual , be nine month before they come to the latitude of the strait , and there be they encountered with a cruel storm : but Pedro Sarmiento be a man of good courage , bear in with the land in this storm , and in a night he be put into the streit , not know how nor which way ; and the other ship run far into the sea , sail to 58 degree of southerly latitude . the storm be pass , this other ship find many island near unto the main land , and so return with fair weather all along the shore , neither can they find any other way to enter the strait , but only that 266 which Magellan discover : notwithstanding that other affirm the contrary , say that the strait be full of island to the southward : but they may be deceive , for if there be any other strait , it be beyond 58 degree , and have never be see of any man : for this ship be far to the southward of all that ever i hear of : for Francis Drake be drive by tempest no far than 57 degree can not know so much as this other ; which ship from hence return back to Lima. but Pedro Sarmiento enter the strait , where his man fall - ing into a mutiny will have return to Lima ; where - [ three . 794. ] upon hang one of they he proceed on his voyage for Spain . where be arrive , he tell the king that e^ro sarmi-there be two narrow place in the strait where he ent^ter^d-might build a fort , and that there be a very good s^ine to for-countrey abound with great store of riches and other tifie the necessary , and very well inhabit with Indians . upon strait of who word , and for that there be more ship make Magellan . ready in England to pass the say strait , the king send Diego flores de Valdez with 23 ship and 3500 man , and a new governor to Chili with five hundred old soldier new come out of Flanders . Theise ship have the hard hap of any that ever go out of Spain since the India be first discover : for that before they can get clear of the coast of Spain , a storm take they , and cast away five of they , and above eight hundred man , and the residue of the fleet put into Cadiz . notwithstanding which hard success , the king send they word that they shall proceed : and so they do with sixteen sail only , for two other of their ship be so shake with the storm , that they can not go forth . in these sixteen sail of ship Pedro Sarmiento be send to be governor in the strait : he carry with he all kind of artificer , to build fort , and other necessary , with great store of ordinance and munition . this fleet because it set late forth , winter on the coast of Brasil in the river of Jenero . Winter be pass , they set sail from hence , and about the height 267 two english ship under the conduct ofM . Fenton andm . Luke ward . the english voyage of 42 degree they have such a storm , that Diego Flores be fain to beat it up and down about 22 day ; in which storm be sink one of his best ship , and in her three hundred man and twenty woman that go to inhabit the strait , and most part of the munition that shall have be leave in the strait be all cast away . in the end the storm grow so intolerable , that the ship not be able to endure it any long be constrain to put back again unto a island call Santa Catelina : and there he find a bark wherein be certain friar go for the river of plate , which friar tell he of two great english ship and a pinnace that have take they , but take nothing from they , nor do they any harm , but only ask they for the king of Spain ship . now Diego Flores suppose that these english ship will go to the strait , be himself determine to go to the strait also , though it be in the month of February ; and choose ten ship of the fifteen that be leave , he send three of the residue that be old and shake with the storm ( wherein he put all the woman and sick man that be in the fleet ) back again to the river of Jenero ; leave the other two ship , which be not able to brook the sea , at the foresay island ; and so himself with the say ten ship return again for the strait . now the three ship wherein the sick man and the woman be embark , come to the port of Sant Vincent : where find the two foresaid english ship , and urge they to avoid the harbour , the english enter combat with they : and by reason that these three ship be weaken with former tempest , and be man with the refuse of all the spanish fleet , the Englishman easy put they to the worst , and sink one of they , and may also have sink another , if they have be so mind ; but they desire not the destruction of any man : and doubtless it be the great valour that any man can show , that when he may do hurt , he will not . hereupon the Englishman depart from this port unto 268 Espirito Santo , where they have victual for their mer - Espirito Santo . chandize : and so they return home to England without do any harm in the country . the cause why these english captain go not to the strait i know not : some say , that they be put back by foul weather , other suppose that it be for fear of the king ship : but the pinnace that belong to these ship wherein John Drake go as captain , depart from they : the cause why he do so , be unknown : but this pinnace John Drake . enter the river of plate , and within five league of seal-island , not far from the place where the earl of cumberland ship take in fresh water , it be cast away upon a ledge of rock ; but the man be all save in the boat . who be eighteen in number go on shore upon the northside of the island , and pass ten day journey up into the land , they meet with certain savage people , which be no man-eater , but take all the Christians that they can get , and make they their slave : howbeit the Englishman fight with they , and be too few in number , five of they be slay , and the other thirteen take prisoner , who remain with the savage about fifteen month . but the master of the pinnace call Richard fair-weather , be loath any long to induce that misery wherein he be , and have knowledge of a town of Christians on the other side of the river , call on a night John Drake , and another young man which be with they , and take a Canoa be very little , and have but two oar , and pass therewith on the other side of the river , which be full nine league broad ; and be three day before they can get over , they be much pine for lack of meat . but come to land , they hit upon a high way that go towards the Christians : and spy the foot of horse , they follow it , and at last come to a house , near unto [ he . 795. ] the which corn be sow . and there they meet with Indians that be servant to the Spaniard , who give they food , and clothes to cover they withal , for they 269 the governor of Chili pass thither by the river of plate : the english voyage be all naked . and one of the say Indians go to the town , and carry news of the Englishman : whereupon the captain of the town send out four horseman , which bring they to the town behind they , and the say captain clothe they , and provide lodging for they , and John Drake sit at the captain own table , and he entreat they all very well , think to send they for Spain . but the viceroy of Peru hear this news send for they , and they send he John drake ; but the other two they keep , because they be marry in the country . thus much concern their affair . upon these news also there be prepare fifty horseman to go over the river , both to seek the rest of the Englishman , and certain Spaniard which be among those savage people ; but i be not assure whether they go forward or no . now let we return to Diego Flores : who pass from the island of Santa Catelina towards the strait of Magellan in the middle of February , and come to the height of the river of plate , send the governor of Chili with three ship up the river to Buenos air , that he may from thence pass overland to Chili . of these three ship two be lose , but the man and provision be save ; and the three return for Spain . then Diego Flores with the other seven ship proceed on to the latitude of 52. degree , whereas the mouth of the strait begin : but because it be the end of march , which there be the latter end of summer , the country be so full of snow , and withal there arise such a sudden storm , that he can not set Sarmiento and his man on shore , but be constrain the second time to return unto the river of Jenero upon the coast of Brasil ; where he hear news of the english ship by the two spanish ship that escape from they . upon which news he leave his lieutenant Diego de Ribera , and Pedro Sarmiento , that they may the next year return for the strait . and so Diego Flores himself with four » 70 ship which be yet remain unto he , and other four which the king send to succour he , set forth to four ship seek the Englishman ; but have run along all the m& . e se^t0 coast of Brasil he can not find they , because they °res ' be go direct for England . whereupon shape his course unto a port call Parajua , and find there french five french ship , he burn three and take two , and s&s ken at the tort also which the £ renchman have build , and put Spaniard therein , but the Frenchman flee into the mountain to the savage . this do he return for Spain . in the mean season his lieutenant Diego de Ribera , and Pedro Sarmiento have the next year so good fedr0 arm^-fortune , that they arrive safe in the strait with all their ship , and set on shore four hundred man : but Magellan because the ship boat can not land , be once with 400 man lade , they run that ship , which have all the victual 3° woman . and munition in she , on shore in a bay , and as the water do ebb they take all thing out of she . This be do , Diego de Ribera leave Sarmiento with four hundred man , thirty woman , and a ship , with victual for eight month : and with the other three ship he return , have remain in the strait but eight day . now Pedro Sarmiento build a town hombre de at the mouth of the strait on the north side , place Jesus therein a hundred and fifty man : and from thence he go by land , and send the ship further into the strait , and fifty league within the strait , at the narrow place of all , where there be a very good port , he build another town , which he name the town Ciudad deal of king Philip ; and will also have make a fort , and plant ordinance for the defence of the strait : ’ but the snow and winter be so intolerable , that he can not bring it to perfection . whereupon take about 25 mariner with he into the foresay ship , he say he will go see how his other people do , and so he sail to the strait mouth , unto the town which be first build ; where have continue a day 271 or two , he say that a storm put he from the strait by force and break his cable ; but his man affirm the contrary , that himself cut his cable ( God know the truth ) and so he pass to the river of Jenero ; and not find there any succour come from the king , he sail to Fernambuck , crave aid of the captain to furnish he with victual . and so the captain present freight his ship with victual and clothes for his people leave in the strait , and so sail thitherward . but between cape S. Augustin and Baya the wind come off the sea with such violence , that it force the ship to run on shore ; where Sarmiento have three of his man drown , and he with the rest hardly escape : and so this ship be lose with all the provision in she . from thence he pass by land to Baya where the governor of Brasil buy he a bark that lie in the harbour , lade the same with victual and clothes for sarmientos colony . with this provision and diverse other necessary for his people he take his voyage for the strait , and come to the height of four and forty degree , he meet on the sudden with such a [ three . 796. ] furious storm , that he be force to throw his fraught overboard , and also to return to the river of Jenero . where stay a whole year for succour from the king , there come not so much as a letter from he . for the king be sore displease at Pedro Sarmiento , because he make he believe that the narrow place of the strait be but a mile over : and that it may be fortify so that a boat can not pass : whereas Diego de Ribera , and other certify the king , that it be above a league broad , and that if a ship come with wind and current , all the ordinance in the world can not hurt it . wherefore the king think that Pedro Sarmiento have deceive he , in make he to lose so many man , and so much charge to no effect . and the governor of Baya see that the king write not unto he , will give he no more succour : so that Sarmiento be constrain to make a voyage for Spain 272 in the same ship , wherein he last sail towards the strait : and it be say that he be take in the sar-way by Englishman , and carry into England . This Sarmiento have carry the name to be the best navigator wait ? ra-in all Spain , and that he have sail the further of legh bark all other . after all this the captain of the river of is86-jenero send a small ship with victual for the straight , which be put back also in forty degree . and this be all the discovery of the strait of Magellan , make as well by Spaniards as other nation unto this present year 1586. it be four year since these poor and blaster can-miserable Spaniard be leave in the strait , from which time there have no succour go unto they , so oftkem , 6 god he know whether they be dead or alive . thus accord to my promise i have declare unto you to the uttermost of my knowledge , all thing concern the India , as far as the very strait of Magellan ; think to have proceed along the coast , as at the first ; but that the do of captain Drake and other captain which attempt to pass the say strait have cause i to be the long in this my pretend work . howbeit now let we proceed on forward from the strait to the coast of Chili : the distance between which two place no man have travel by land , in regard of the huge mountain cover with snow that lie in the way : yea i may well say , that it have not often be travel by sea ; for that all the ship which have pass that way have at the least go thirty league off the shore , to avoid the shold and many little island that lie near the main land ; and therefore the inland of that coast remain as yet unknown . the first town after you have pass the strait stand on the coast of Chili , and be call Castro , Castro upon be situate upon the worst place of all the coast , for there be but small store of gold with scarcity of victual , * ’ and a sharp cold air . the harbour belong to this town be compass about with so many sholde , xi 273 s that it will serve but to receive small bark only . Baldivia . the next town to this be Baldivia . a description 