 in the mean while there come about descrip of the country people down to the sea side : and fanofuriaine when they be within 100 pase of our man , they set * ’ J55 themselves in array very orderly cast their company into the form of a ring , every man have his bow and arrow : who ( when they have pight a staff on the ground , with certain glass , bead , and other trifle ) return back . then the country people come and take they and afterward approach near to our man , show themselves very pleasant , insomuch that m. winter dance with they . they be exceed delight with the sound of the trumpet , and vialy . they be of a mean stature , well lim , and of a duskish , tawny , or brown colour . some of they have their face spot with diverse colour , as red , white , and black . their apparel be a certain skin ( wherein they wrap themselves ) not reach so low as to cover their privy member , all the rest of their body be naked , save that they be certain roll upon their head , who end hang over their shoulder . every one bear his bow , be a ell in length , and arrow make of reed , have head , frame very strange and cunning of a flint stone . they be much give to mirth and jollity , and be very sly , and ready to steal any thing that come within their reach : for one of they snatch our general cap from his head ( as he stoop ) be of scarlet with a golden band : yet he will suffer no man to hurt any of they . they eat raw flesh , for we find seal bone , the raw flesh whereof they have gnaw with their tooth like dog . in this bay we water , and victual with seal : for there be such plenty that we slay above 200 in the space of one hour upon a little island . the 3 of June we depart from thence , and be at sea we be put back again to cape hope , where we discharge our canter and let she float in the sea . afterwards we run to the 50 degree of the south pole , where we meet with the wind southerly , and so turn back again to the northward . and as we run along the shore , we meet with our prize the 19 of June , which we lose the 13 of May . the day follow we find 156 a harbour , into the which we enter with all our fleet the same day . this port be 49 degree and a half in latitude , and i suppose it to be the same which Magellan name port S. Julian : for we find a gibbet on a the port of hill , whereupon they be execute that do conspire ant Julian . against Magellan , and certain bone also of their dead body . the 22 of this month our generali go to shore upon the main with 7 or 8 of his man , meet with 3 of the patagon , have bow and arrow , who come near to our man make they sign to depart . where - two 0^jur , upon a gentleman be there present , and have a bow p^g^ and arrow , make a shot to the end to show they the force of our bow , with the which shoot his string break : whereupon the patagon presume to encounter they , direct their arrow first at our m. gunner , who have a caliver ready bend to shot at they but it will not take fire : and as he level his piece one of they shoot he through the breast , and out at the back , wherewith he fall down stark dead . also the gentleman that shoot the arrow be so wound that he die the 2 day after and with the other be bury in a little island lie in the say port . our man leave the slay man on shore till night , and then fetch he in a boat . in the mean time the patagon have strip he of all his clothes , and view his body lay his clothes under his head , and so leave he untouched , save that they have stick the english arrow in his left eye . Theise man be of no such stature as the Spaniard report , be but of the height of english man : for i have see man in England tall than i can see any of they . but peradventure the Spaniard do not think that any english man will have come thither so soon to have disprove they in this and diverse [ three . 752. ] other of their notorious lie : wherefore they presume more bold to abuse the world .