but before i pass any far i will here describe unto you situation and quality of Chili . this ' country stretch in length from north to south above two hundred league , contain in breadth but five and twenty league at the most . from the great ridge of mountain lie to the east of Chili run very many river into the sea , which river be the cause of diverse valley the fruitful in all the world , where bread , wine , and other victual river rich of mighty abound : and the say river also be very rich of gold . but to declare in few word the excellency of this province , i say that it may well be call a earthly paradise , save that it lack one only commodity , and that be peace . it be first discover on this manner : the Spaniard have conquer the kingdom of Peru , ( as i will hereafter show unto you ) find in the say kingdom great store of gold ; and ask the indian from whence it come , they answer , from Chili . upon which news don Diego de Almagro be one of the principali captain that conquer Peru make a voyage with three hundred horseman towards Chili , be constrain in his way to go over part of the snowy mountain , which way his indian guide conduct he , to the end that himself and all his company may die for cold . howbeit the Spaniard , though they lose some of their horse , Copiapo then come to the first town of Chili call Copiapo be next town of situate upon the first plain at the entrance of the say Peru province . but have news that the Indians be rise against the Spaniard of Peru and have enclose they , he return back without go any far . now this captain don Diego de Almagro be slay in the war of Peru , another call don Pedro de Baldivia march into Chili with four hundred horse , easy conquer that half of the country which be subject to the king of Peru. for know that Peru , be the chief country of their emperor , be over-274 i572-87-come by the Spaniard , they also immediate yield their land unto they . but the other half as it be Bl esta^Q the rich and the fruitful part , so God have people arauco-it with the most valiant and furious people in all America . the province which they inhabit call el Estado de PJ1 - 797 - ] arauco be but a small province about 20 league in ° length , and be govern by ten principali man of the country , out of which ten they choose the valiant man for the generali in the war . the king of Peru in time past can never conquer this part of Chili , nor yet any other king of the Indians . the weapon use by these people of Arauco be long pike , halberd , bow and arrow : they also make they jack of seal-skin , and head-piece : in time past the head of their halberd and pike be of brass , but now they have get store of iron . they pitch their battle in manner like the Christians : for put their pikeman in rank , they place bowman among they , and marshal their troop with discretion and great valour . now the Spaniard come unto this province send word unto they by other Indians , say that they be the child of God , and come to teach they the word of God , and that therefore they ought to yield themselves unto they : if not , they will shoot fire among they and burn they . Theise people not fear the great word of the Spaniard , but desire to see that which they have hear report , meet they in the field , and fight a most cruel battle : but by reason of the Spaniard great ordinance and caliver , they be in the end put to flight . now these Indians think very that the Spaniard be the child of God , because of their great ordinance which make such a noise , and breathe out such flame of fire , yield themselves unto they . So the Spaniard have divide this province make the Indians to serve their turn for get of gold out of the mine , which they enjoy in such abundance , that he which have least have 20000 pezo , but captain Baldivia himself have 300000 pezo 275 villa neuva de la Serena , la Concepcion , Sant lag ) , la imperial , Baldivia , la villa rica , the first six town that wereinhdbit in Chili . a stratagem of the Indians of Chili against the Spaniard . the death of Baldivia . the english voyage by the year . the fame of these riches in the end be spread as far as Spain ; from whence soon after resort many Spaniards to the land of Chili , who captain Baldivia cause to inhabit six town : to wit , villa nueva de la Serena call in the indian tongue coquimbo ; the second sant Iago which the Indians call Mapocha ; the three la Concepcion call by the indian penco ; the four la Imperial ; the five Baldivia ; and the sixth la villa Rica . also he build a fort in the middle of all the land , wherein he put ordinance and soldier ; howbeit all this their good success continue not long : for the indian in short time perceive that the Spaniard be but mortali man as well as they , determine to rebel against they : wherefore the first thing that they do , they carry grass into the say fort for the Spaniard horse , and wood also for they to burn , among which grass the Indians convey bow and arrow with great club . this do , fifty of the indian enter the fort , betake themselves to their bow , arrow , and club , and stand in the gate of the say fort : from whence make a sign unto other of their nation for help , they win the fort , and slay all the Spaniard . the news of this overthrow come to the town of Concepcion where captain Baldivia be , he present set forth with two hundred horseman to seek the Indians , take no more man with he , because he be in haste . and in a plain he meet the indian , who come of purpose also to seek he , and compass he about , slay most part of his company , the rest escape by the swiftness of their horse : but Baldivia have his horse slay under he be take alive . who the Indians wish to be of a good courage , and to fear nothing ; for the cause ( say they ) why we have take you , be to give you gold enough . and have make a great banquet for he , the last service of all be a cup full of melt gold , which the Indians force he to drink , say , now glut thy self with gold , and so they kill he . This Baldivia be a most valiant man , who have be a 276 old soldier in the war of Italy , and at the sack of Rome . upon this discomfiture the Spaniard choose for their captain one Pedro de Villa grande : who assemble Pedro de all the Spaniard in Chili , and take with he ten s " ande-peece of ordinance , march against those Indians ; but with so bid success , that he lose not only the field and many of his man , but also those ten piece of ordinance which he bring . the Indians have thus get the victory , go straightway against the town of Concepcion , from whence the Spaniard flee for fear , and leave the town desolate . and in this manner be the Spaniard chase by the Indians out of the country of Arauco . but news hereof be bring to the mark of Cannete viceroy of Peru , he send his sdnne don d°n Garda de Garcia de Mendoza against those Indians , with a great power of horseman , and footman , and store of artillery . the nobleman have subdue Chili again , and slay in diverse battle above 40000 Indians , and bring they the second time under the Spaniard subjection , new erect the say fort that stand in the midst of the land , inhabit the town of Concepcion again , and build other town for the Spaniard : and so leave the land in peace , he return for Peru. but year he be clean depart out of the land the indian rebel again , but can not do so much mischief as they do before , because the Spaniard take better heed unto they . from that time until this present there have be no peace at all : for notwithstanding many captain and soldier have do their uttermost , yet can they not bring that people whole in subjection . and although the Spaniard have in this province eleven town and two bishopric , yet have they little enough to maintain themselves , by reason of the war ; for they spend all the gold that the land yield in the maintenance of their soldier : which will not be so , if they have peace , for than they may work in all their mine . [ Iii . 798. ] Eleventowns , andtwobishop-ricks in Chili . 277 description thus have speak somewhat of the situation of ^ofchil^ ™ Chili , and of the troublesome conquest thereof , i will Baldivia . return to my former discourse where i leave . Baldivia therefore be of 150 house have twice be burn and spoil by the Indians ; so that now it be wax poor , but before the indian sack it , it be very rich : and it stand up a river four league from the tie province sea . pass from hence you come to the plain country insethe'* Arauco be situate over against the island la Mocha , island la on wbich island the Indians that inhabit belong to the Mocha situate main land . in 38 deg . and have pass this plain of Arauco , the next town a hayi . of the Spaniard that you come unto be la Concepcion which have be the great and the rich town in all Chui : but by reason that the Indians have burn the same four time , it be now grow very poor , and have small store of people : it contain about some two hundred house . and because it adjoin upon the plain of Arauco , where these valiant Indians be , therefore this town be environ about with a strong wall , and have a fort build hard by it : and here be 500 soldier continual in garrison . between this place Valparizo anJ Valparizo , the Indians call the coast by the name WortofS^Ia 0 Mapocha . Sant Iago it self stand 25 league up into the country , be the principali town of all Chili , deg . 40 min. and the seat of the governor : it consist of about 800 house . the port of Valparizo whither the good come from Lima by ship , have about twenty house stand by it . the next town near the sea side coquimbo beyond this be coquimbo , which stand two league standethtm^ . up jnto janj ; anj contain about 200 house . next C%'iapo . mtn ' unt0 coquimbo stand a port-town call Copiapo inhabit altogether by Indians which serve the Spaniard : and here a gentleman which be governor of the town have a ingenio for sugar : at this place end the whole province of Chili . here also the mountain join hard upon the sea be the cause why all the land between Copiapo and Peru , contain 160 league , lie desolate . 278 the first town on the coast of Peru call Atacama be a description inhabit by Indians which be slave unto the Spaniard . °fperu-but before i pass any far i will here also declare unto you the first discovery of Peru with other matter thereto belong , and then will i return to the seacoast again : and to the end you may understand i the better , i will begin with Panama . after that the Spaniard have inhabit the north side of this main land , pass over the mountain they discover the south sea : where because they find indian people with gold and pearl , they build a town eighteen league to the west of number de dios hard upon the seaside , and call it Panama . from hence they discover along the coast of Nueva Espanna : and for that Nueva Espanna be at the same time inhabit by Spaniards , there begin a trade from thence to Panama : but from Panama by sea to the coast of Peru they can not trade in a long time , because of the southerly wind blow on this coast almost all the year long , which be a hindrance to ship sail that way : and by land the passage be impossible , in regard of mountain and river : yea it be fifteen year before they pass the island of pearl , which be but twenty league from Panama . there be at this time in Panama two man , the one call Francisco Pizarro bear in the city of Truxillo in Spain , a valiant man , but withal poor : the other call Diego de Almagro be very rich . Theise man get a company unto they , and provide two caravel to discover the coast of Peru : and . have obtain licence of the governor of that place , Francisco Pizarro set forth with the two foresay caravel and 100 man , and Diego de Almagro stay in Panama to send he victual and other necessary . now Francisco Pizarro sail along the coast meet with much contrary wind and rain , which put he to great trouble ; and he begin also after a while to lack victual , for he be sail of that in eight month which they now pass in fifteen day , and not know the right course he run into every river and bay that he see along the coast : which 279 be the chief cause that he stay so long on his voyage : also thirty of his company die by reason of the unhealthfulness of the coast . at last he come to a Isla deal Gallo . Island call by he Isla deal Gallo , be situate from the main land six league . from hence he send one of his ship to Panama for a new supply of victual and of man : which ship be depart , 40 of his man that remain behind make a mutiny , and pass up into the country , mean to return by land to Panama , but in the way they all perish , for they be never hear of until this day . so that Francisco Pizarro be leave upon the say island only with thirteen man : who although [ three . 799. ] he have his ship there in which he may have return , yet will he rather die than go back ; and his 13 man also be of his opinion , notwithstanding that they have no other victual , but such as they have from the main land in the night season . thus he continue nine month , before any succour be bring he from Panama : but in the end his ship return with 40 man only and victual : whereupon he prosecute his voyage till he come to the first plain country of Peru call Tumbez , where he find a fort make by the king of Peru against the Indians of the mountain . wherefore Pizarro and his man be very glad in that they have find a people of so good understanding and discretion , be rich also in gold and silver and well apparel . at this port of Tumbez he take 30000 pezo of gold in truck of merchandise : and have too few man to proceed any further he carry two Indians with he to learn the language and return back for Panama . upon this discovery Francisco Pizarro think it expedient to travel into Spain to crave of the king the conquest of this land . whither be come , the king grant his request . and with the money which he carry over with he he hire a great number of man with a fleet of ship , and bring also along with he four of his brethren very valiant and hardy man . And be come to Panama he straightway go on his voyage 280 for Peru , be accompany with his partner Diego de Almagro . they sail first to the island call Isla deal Gallo ; where Francisco pizarroand his brethren go on land , and leave Diego de Almagro in the ship . and the whole number which afterward land on the main land be 60 horseman and 120 footman , with two great fieldpiece . but before we proceed any far , we think it not tir river of amiss to describe unto you the situation of Peru , and the naturali disposition of the inhabitant : this country be call Peru by the Spaniard , of a river so name by the Indians , where they first come to the sight of gold . from which river stand under the line , till you come to Copiapo the first town on the coast of Chili , stretch the land of Peru , for the space of eight hundred league : upon six hundred whereof from Atacama to Tumbez do never drop of rain fall , since the flood of Noah : and yet it be the fruitful land for all kind of victual and other necessary for the sustentation of man life that be to be find in all the world beside . the reason why it the cause why rain not in this land be because it be a plain coun - ^mth not trey and very narrow and low , situate between the ' equinoctial and the tropic of Capricorn , there run on the west frontier not above twenty league from the sea call mar deal Sur eastward thereof , a mighty ridge of high mountain cover with snow , the height of which mountain so draw the moisture of the cloud unto it self , that no rain fall upon the valley of Peru. from these mountain issue great store of river into the south sea , with the water whereof draw by certain sluice and channel they moisten their vineyard and cornfield , and by this mean the land be so exceed fruitful . between these mountain and the mountain of Chili that stretch unto the streit of Magellan , lie a plain of 60 league over , be so cold that it yield no wheat , but good store of other victual . this country of Peru be full of people well apparel and of civil behaviour . it have many mine 281 gold , silver , of gold and moor of silver , as also great store of copper , aft-peur^nd and tinne-mine , with abundance of salt peter , and of brimstone . brimstone to make gunpowder . there be likewise cattle the sheep of of all sort , among which there be a beast in shape some-Peru call what resemble a camel , but no big than a steer of a Llamas . year old ; they serve to carry burden , their flesh be good to eat , and their wool apt for many purpose . this beast be account the most profitable of all other for the use of man : howbeit the Spaniard since their first come have replenish this country with horse , cow , sheep , and goat , and likewise with plenty of wheat . so that in few word this land have abundance of riches and victual , and be the healthfull place in the world . there be in time past king of this land which be mighty monarch , who dominion stretch 1200. league , and their law be very civil , save that they be worshipper of the sun . at what time the Spaniard first enter this land there be two brethren of Atabalipa and the blood royal which strive who shall have the king-^rethren^com d°me > the one call Guascar , and the other Atabalipa . petitoursfor ' now Guascar have possession of all the mountain and the empire of the land within they : and Atabalipa be lord of all the pen . sea coast , and of the valley situate between the say mountain and the sea . the Indians see the Spaniard at the first arrive upon their shore call they vera coach , which in their language signify , the foam of the sea . also Atabalipa the indian prince send unto they to know what they do in his land , and what they seek for : the Spaniard make answer that they be the messenger of a great lord , and that they come to speak with the prince himself : who send they word that they shall come with a very good will ; and so Atabalipa stay for they at a city call Caxamalca , be thirty league distant from the sea side . whither be come , they find the indian prince sit in a chariot of gold , carry upon [ three . 800. ] man shoulder , and accompany with above 60000 Indians all ready arm for the war . then the Spaniard tell they that they be send from a 282 emperor ( unto who the pope have give all that land ) to convert they unto the christian faith . whereunto Atabalipa answer , that he will glad be friend with the emperor , because he be so great a monarch , but in no case with the pope , because he give to another that which be none of his own . A.D. 1572-87 . now while they be thus in talk , the Spaniard discharge their two field piece , and their caliver , set upon the Indians , cry Sant Iago . the Indians hear the noise of the ordinance and small shot , and see the fire , think that flame of fire have be come down from heaven upon they : whereupon they flee , and leave their prince as a booty for the Spaniard . who they at the first entreat very gentle , wish he not to fear , for that their come be only to seek for gold and silver . during the time of Atabalipas imprisonment , his captains have slay his brother Guascar , and have subdue all the mountain and plain country . upon which news Atabalipa tell the Spaniard , that if they will release he , he will give they all that they shall demand . this communication have continue a whole day , at length a soldier name Soto say unto Atabalipa : what will thou give we to set thou free ? the prince answer , i will give whatsoever you will demand . whereunto the soldier reply , thou shall give we this house full of gold and silver thus high , lift up his sword , and make a stroke upon the wall . and Atabalipa say , that if they will grant he respite to send into his kingdom , he will fulfil their demand . whereat the Spaniard much marvelling , give he three month time , but he have fill the house in two month and a half , a matter scarce credible , yet most true : for i know above twenty man that be there at that time , who all aflirme , that it be above ten million of gold and silver . howbeit for all this they let not the prince go , but think that in kill of he they shall become lord of the whole land , and so the Spaniard on a night strangle he . but 283 God the righteous judge see this villainous act , suffer none of those Spaniard to dye by the course of nature , but bring they to evil and shameful end . upon the news of these great riches there come store of people out of Spain , and inhabit many place in this country . the king in recompense of the good service of the two foresay partner , appoint Diego de Almagro governor of half the land , and Francisco Pizarro of the other half , who also he make a mark . but these two consort in part of a land belong unto other man , fall at variance and sharp war between themselves : and at length Pizarro have slay Almagro get all the land into his own hand . howbeit this prosperity of Pizarro continue not long : for a bastard-sonne of Diego de Almagro , to be revenge of his father death , slay Pizarro , for which act he lose his head . in this controversy between these two partner be slay also two brother of Pizarro , and the three be carry prisoner into Spain and there die in prison ; but the four call Gonsalvo Pizarro rebel with the whole country and become a cruel tyrant , vanquish many of the emperor captain in battle , and possess the country in peace for two year : howbeit be in the end overcome he lose his head like a traitor . and thus die they all a evil death that be cause of the death of that innocent king Atabalipa . and yet there be mutiny raise oftentimes by the Spaniard , but the Indians never rebel , after they have once peace grant unto they . the indian people of this land be part among the Spaniard , some be slave unto the gentleman that conquer their land , other some to other , and the residue to the king : and these Indians pay each man for his tribute seven pezo of fine gold , which be about ten ducat and a half . there be in this ricks^and’one country above forty city and town inhabit by archbishopric Spaniards : also they have here erect nine bishopin Peru. rick and one archbishopric . 284 now after this country be full conquer and bring in good order , certain Spaniards be desirous to discover the land on the other side of the snowy mountain , find a very wholesome country and there inhabit . the say province situate behind the mountain be call the province of Tucuman , wherein the province be five town inhabit by the Spaniard , the last of °ftucuman-them call Cordova , from which town unto Santa fee Cordova . situate upon the river of plate it be seventie league . this town of Santa fee be build in that place , to seek a way to Peru by the river of plate . and from hence down the say river to Buenos air be 120 league , and from Buenos air unto Sealisland you have 40 league . now have put down all that i know concern the country of Peru , and of the way from the river of plate unto Tucuman , i will return unto Atacama the Atacama . southermost town upon the coast of Peru , where i leave . from this town of Atacama till you come to Arica , all the coast be inhabit by Indians subject unto the Spaniard . but since captain Drake be here they [ three . 801. ] have build tower by the sea side , whereon , see any sail that they do mistrust , they presently'make smoke , and so from tower to tower they warn all the country . have before speak of Arica all that i can , i will now proceed to the next port call Camena be a Camena . town of Spaniards and contain about two hundred house . here they make store of wine , and have abundance of fig and reisin . the next town call Acari Acari . contain about three hundred house , and here be make the best and great store of wine in all Peru. from hence pass along the coast you come to el Calao el Calao . the port of Lima consist of about two hundred house : and here be a strong fort build since captain Drake be upon the coast . the city of Lima stand Lima. two league within the land , and contain two thousand house , be very rich , and of more trade than all the city of Peru beside : and this city be the seat of the viceroy , the archbishop , and the inquisition . 285 Paita . Guaiaquil . Tumbez . Salsaperilla . ship build at Guaiaquil . Puerto Viejo a place where emrald abound . la Buenaventura . la governacion de Popaian . Negros flee from their master . Panama . the english Voyages next unto this stand a small town of the Spaniard by the sea side call Santa : and next unto Santa be another small town of Christians call Cannete . from hence they sail unto a rich city call Truxillo , be one of the principali town of Peru , and contain about five hundred house . then follow Paita which have to the number of two hundred house . leave this town they pass to Guaiaquil which stand forty league up into a great bay or river , at the entrance of which river stand Tumbez a town of the Indians . all this coast along from Atacama to Tumbez it never rain , as i have before say : so that all the house in their town be not tile , but cover with bourd to keep off the heat of the sun , for they fear no rain at all . Guaiaquil be the first place where it rain , and here they gather Salsaperilla ; here be also great store of timber , and at this place they build many ship . hence they sail along the coast to a small and poor town call Puerto Viejo , which in time pass have be rich with emrald : but now since these stone in regard of their plenty be grow nothing worth , this town likewise be wax very poor . below this village stand another call la buena Ventura : but whosoever go thither must needs meet with evil fortune , the place it self be so waterish and unwholesome . here abide not above 20 man , who serve only to transport good unto a city stand fifty league within the main , in a province call la governacion de Popaian . from buena ventura and Popaian till you come to Panama there be no other town , by reason of the high mountain , the manifold river , and the unholesomenesse of the country . in this place do inhabit the negro that run from their master , and upon these mountain be Oxnam the english captain and his man take , as be before mention . beyond these mountain stand the city of Panama , be a rich place , by reason that all the treasure which come from Peru 286 be bring thither , and it consist of about four hundred house . the coast run along between this city and Nueva Espanna be call Costa rica . Costa rica . next unto Costa rica , which be a mountainous and the province desolate place , lie the coast of Nicaragua , be inhabit by the Spaniard , and have many good port belong to it , and be frequent with trade of merchandise ; but have no knowledge of the situation thereof , nor of the town therein contain , i surcease to speak any more of it . a certain viceroy of Nueva Espanna call don Luis de Velasco cause certain ship to be build for the discovery of the Malucos and of the coast of China : which ship in sail thitherward find certain the discovery island 80 league distant from the main land , which pmip-the Spaniards , accord to the name of their king , call * mass ' the philippinas : and have conquer one of these island call manilla , inhabit with a barbarous kind the isle of of people , they build a fort and a town thereupon , manilla . from whence they have trade with the people of China . unto these island they have four great ship that usual trade , two of they continual go , and two come : so that such spice and silk as the Portugal bring home out of the east Indies , the very same do the Spaniard bring from these island and from China , for Mexico the chief city of Nueva Espanna . the principali port-town of the coast of Nueva Espanna be Guatulco , and Acapulco . all the viceroy and governor that the king of Spain send for Peru and Nueva Espanna have a custom , for the obtain of his favour , to seek and discover new country . but the great and most notable discovery that have be from those part now of late , be that of the isle of Salomon , which be the discovery find in manner follow . the licenciate Castro be governor of Peru send forth a fleet of ship to ’ discover certain island in the south sea upon the coast of Peru , appoint as generali of the same fleet 287 a kinsman of his call Alvares de Mendanio , and Pedro Sarmiento as lieutenant , and in the vice-admiral go Pedro the Ortega . this fleet depart forth of the haven of Lima , and sail 800 league westward [ three , 802. ] off the coast of Peru , find certain island in eleven degree to the south of the equinoctial inhabit with a kind of people of a yellowish complexion , and all naked , who weapon be bow and arrow , and dart . the beast that they see here be hog and little dog , and they find some hen . here also they ckmes^ing / ir , find a muster of clove , ginger , and cinnamon , although andsinamon . the cinnamon be not of the best ; and here appear unto they likewise some show of gold . the first island that the Spaniard discover , they name Santa Izabella ; and here they build a small pinnace , with the which and with their ship boat they find out between nine and fifteen degree of southerly latitude eleven great island be one with another of 80 league in compass . the great island that they discover the isle of be according unto the first finder call Guadalcanal , Guadalcanal . on t^e coast whereof they sail 150 league , before they can know whither it be a island or part of the main land : and yet they know not perfect what to make of it , but think that it may be part of that continent which stretch to the strait of Magellan ; for they coast it to eighteen degree and can not find the end thereof . the gold that they find be upon this island or main land of Guadalcanal , whereas they land and take a town , find small grain of gold hang up in the house thereof . but because the Spaniard understand not the language of the country , and also for that the indian be very stout man , and fight continual against they , they can never learn from whence that gold come , nor yet what store be in the land . Theise Indians use to go to sea in great canoas that will carry 100 man a piece , wherein they have many conflict one against another : howbeit unto the Christians 288 they can do no great hurt ; for that with a small pinnace and two falcon a few may overcome 100 of they . at this place fourteen man mistrust nothing , row to land , to take in fresh water , who on the sudden certain Indians in four canoas set upon , take the ship boat , and slay all the man therein : wherefore a man can go on shore too strong , nor yet be too wary in a strange land . hereupon the Spaniard go on shore in their pinnace , and burn the town , a town burn . and in this town they find the small grain of gold before mention . they be discover of these island from one to another about fourteen month , at the end of which time ( because that upon the coast where they be , the wind continue still in one place , may be a occasion of long tarry ) they consult which way to return . southward they dare not go for fear of great tempest which be that way usual : wherefore sail to the north of the line , they fall with the coast of Nueva Espanna ; on which coast they meet with such terrible storm , that they be force to cut their main mast over-bourd , and to lie nine month beat it up and down in the sea , before they can get into any harbour of the Christians . in which time by reason of evil government , and for lack of victual and fresh water , most of the man in their admiral die ; for five whole day together they have neither water nor meat : but in the other ship they behave themselves so well , that the great part of they come safe unto the land . he that pass the strait of Magellan , or sail from the coast of Chili direct for the Malucos must needs run in sight of some of these island before speak of . at which island lie so furnish hen , excellent almond , potatos , sugar-cane , with diverse other sort fit for the sustenance of man in great abundance . also among these island you shall have some quantity of gold , which the Indians will give you in truck for xi 289 t abundance of good victual upon the isle of Salomon . convenient in the way to the Malucos you may your self with plenty of victual , as hog , A.D. 1572-87 . a new rich trade for gold , clove , ganger , and cinnamon . why these isle be call the isle of Salomon . [ in . 803. ] other commodity . for the Spaniard in their discovery of these island not seek nor be desirous of gold , bring home notwithstanding 40000 pezo with they , beside great store of clove and ginger , and some cinnamon also which be not so good as in other place . the discoverer of these island name they the isle of Salomon , to the end that the Spaniard suppose they to be those isle from whence Salomon fetch gold to adorn the temple at Jerusalem , may be the more desirous to go and inhabit the same . now the same time when they think to have send colony unto these island , captain Drake enter the south sea : whereupon commandment be give , that they shall not be inhabit , to the end that such Englishman , and of other nation as pass the strait of Magellan to go to the Malucos may have no succour there , but such as they get of the indian people . 