the most ancient discovery of the west Indies by Madoc the son of Owen guyne prince of North - wales , in the year 1170 : take out of the history of wale , late publish by m . David Powel doctor of divinity . B ' ter the death of Owen guyne , his son fall at debate who shall inherit after he : for the elder son bear in matrimony , Edward or jorw drwy - dion , be count unmeet to govern , because of the maim upon his face : and Howell that take upon he all the rule be a base son , beget upon a irish woman . therefore David gather all the power he can , and come against Howel , and fight with he , slay he ; and afterward enjoy quiet then whole land of North - wales , until his brother jorwerths son come to age . Madoc another of Owen guyne his son leave the land in contention betwixt his brethren , and prepare T33 Madoc the son of Owen guyne . certain ship , with man and munition , and seek adventure by sea , sail west , and leave the coast of Ireland so far north , that he come unto a land unknown , where he see many strange thing . Humf . Lloyd . this land must needs be some part of that country of which the Spaniard affirm themselves to be the first finder since hannos time . whereupon it be manifest that that country be by Britain discover , long before Columbus lead any Spaniard thither . of the voyage and return of this Madoc there be many fable feign , as the common people do use in distance of place and length of time rather to augment then to diminish : but sure it be there he be . and after he have return home , and declare the pleasant and fruitful country hat he have see without inhabitant , and upon the contrary part , for what barren and wild the second ground his brethren and nephew do murder one voyage of ma - another , he prepare a number of ship , and get with doc the son of , .. r , 1 . ° . Owen he such man and woman as be desirous to live in gu ^ neth . quietness : and take leave of his friend , take his journey thitherward again . therefore it be to be suppose that he and his people inhabit part of those Gomara . lib . country : for it appear by Francis Lopez de Gomara , » • cap . 16 . that in Acuzamil and other place the people honour the cross . whereby it may be gather that Christians have be there before the come of the Spaniard . but because this people be not many , they follow the manner of the land which they come unto , and use the language they find there . m . Powels this Madoc arrive in the western country , unto addition . the whjch he camejn the year 1170 , leave most of his people there , and return back for more of his own nation , acquaintance and friend to inhabit that fair and large country , go thither again with ten sail , as Gutyn Owen . i find note by Gutyn Owen . i be of opinion that the land whereunto he come be some part of the west Indies . 134 offer of Christopher Columbus a . d . 1488 . .