article set down by the committee appoint in the behalf of the company of Moscovian merchant , to confer with m . Carlile , upon his intend discovery and attempt into the hithermost part of America . the name of the committee . master Aiderman hart master Aiderman Spencer . master Hoddesden . master William Burrough . master slany . ' master towerson . master staper . < master John Castelin . master Leake . irst the committee be well persuade , that the country whereunto this action be intend , be very fruitful , inhabit with savage people of a mild and tractable disposition . and that of all other place which be unfrequented at this day , it be the only most fit and most commodious for we to intermeddle withal . the convenient manner of attempt this enterprise be think to be thus : that there shall be one hundred man convey thither to remain there one whole year : who with friendly intreaty of the people , 147 may enter into better knowledge of the particular estate of the country , and thereby gather what commodity may be hereafter , or present look for . the famish - the charge to transport these hundred man , to victuali they , and to furnish they of munition and other neede - one year will thing , will not be less than four thousand pound : cost 4000 U . whereof have be very ready offer by the city of Bristol one thousand pound , the residue be three thousand pound , remain to be furnish by this city of London , or any other who will adventure their money in this first preparation . the committee think it convenient that a privilege shall be procure by master Carlile from her majesty , by virtue whereof these condition and article follow may be effectual provide for . first , that they who shall disburse their money for the first preparation , shall be name adventurer , and shall have the one half of all such land , territory , town , mine of gold and silver , and other metal whatsoever , as shall be find , get , obtain , as conquer by this discovery : yield to her majesty the five part of all such gold and silver , as shall happen to be have out of any mine that so shall be find . that those party which do employ themselves personal in the present discovery , shall be name enterpriser , and shall have the other half of all the land , territory , town , mine of gold and silver , and other metal , yield to her majesty the five part of the gold and silver , as the adventurer do : the same to be distribute by the general , with the consent of the great part of twelve discreet person to be choose out of the whole number of