a brief note of the morsse and the use thereof . n the first voyage of Jaques Carthier , wherein he discover the gulf of saint Laurence and the ------ say isle of Ramea , in the year 1534 , as you may read in page . 205 of this present volume , he meet with these beast , as he witness in these word . about the say island be very great beast as great as ox , which have two great tooth in their mouth like unto elephant tooth , and live also in the sea . we see one of they sleep upon the bank of the water , and think to take it , we go to it with our boat , but so soon as he hear we , he cast himself into the sea . touch these beast which Jaques Carthier say to be as big as ox and to have tooth in their mouth like elephant tooth : true it be that they be call in latin boves Marini , or Vaccas Marinas , and in the russian tongue morss , the hide whereof i have see as big as any ox hide , and be dress i have yet a piece of one thick than any two ox or Buis hide in England . the leatherdresser take they to be excellent good to make light target against the arrow of the savage ; and i hold they far better than the light leather target which the moor use in Barbary against arrow and lance , whereof i have see diverse in her majesty stately armoury in the tower of London . the tooth of the say fish , whereof i have see a dryfat full at once , be a foot and some time more in length : and have be sell in England to the comb and knife - maker , at 8 groat and 3 shilling the pound weight , whereas the best ivory be sell for half the money : the grain of the bone be somewhat more yellow than the ivory . one m . Alexander Woodson of Bristol my old friend , a excellent mathematician and skilful physician , show i one of these beast tooth which be bring from the isle of Ramea in the first prize , which be half a yard long or very little less : and assure i that he have make trial of it in minister medicine to his patient , and have find it as sovereign against poison as any unicorn horn . .