the voyage of the grace of Bristol of m . rice Jones , a bark of thirty five ton , up into the bay of saint Laurence to the northwest of Newefoundland , as far as the isle of Assumption or Natiscotec , for the barb or fynne of whale and train oil , make by Silvester Wyet , shipmaster of Bristol . ee depart with the aforesaid bark man with twelve man for the place aforesaid from ----- Bristol the 4 of April 1594 . and fall with cape d ’ espere on the coast of Newefoundland the nineten of may in the height of 47 . we go thence for cape Raz , be distant from thence 18 or 19 league , the very same day . 162 * 594 - the 20 . day we be thwart of cape Raz . cape Raz . then we set our course northwest for cape S . marie , cape S . which be distant from cape Raz 19 league , and be on the Marie - Eastside of the great bay of Placentia almost at the entry thereof . from thence we shape our course for the island of s . Pedro pass by the break island of the martyer : the island of and when we be thwart of the say isle of the martyer the martym - our course to the isle of S . Pedro be west and by the isle of north . in these isle of S . Pedro there be a fair harbour , s - Peter ' which we go into with our bark , and find there 2 ship of Sibiburo fish for cod : where we stay 2 day , and take in bale for our ship . there be as fair and tall fir tree grow therein , as in any other part of Newfoundland . than we depart thence , and as we come out of the harbour mouth we lay the ship upon the lee , and in 2 hour space we take with our hook 3 or 4 hundred great cod for our provision of our ship . then we depart from the isle of S . Pedro to enter into the gulf of saint Laurence between cape Briton and the say isle , and set our course west north west , and fall with cape de Rey which we find to be distant from cape de Rey . the isle of S . Pedro 42 league . from cape de Rey to cape de Angullie we set our course northnorthwest be cape the an - distant thence 12 or 13 league . from the cape de Angullie into the bay of S .