, if their saying be true , it can be but six league by land to pass the say fault . here after follow the figure of the three fault . after that we have be advertise by the say people , of the thing abovemention , both because the day be far spend , and we have neither drink nor eat the same day , we conclude to return unto our boat , and we come thither , where we find great store of people to the number of 400 . person or thereabouts , which 400 person seem to give we very good entertainment and to rejoice of our come : and therefore our captain give ‘ each of they certain small trifle , as comb , brooch of tin and copper , and other small toy , and unto the chief man every one his little hatchet and hook , tike ° f whereat they make certain cry and ceremony of joy . new ^ ibim . but a man must not trust they for all their fair ceremony and sign of joy , for if they have think they have be too strong for we , then will they have do their best to have kill we , as we understand afterward . the savage this be do , we return with our boat , and pass by the dwell of the lord of hochelay , with who the ’ captain have leave the two youth as he come up the river , think to have find he : but he can find no body save one of his son , who tell the captain that he be go to Maisouna , as our boy also tell we , say , that it be two day since he depart . but the § avages in truth he be go to Canada to conclude with Agona , conspire towhat they shall do against we . and when we be gether against arrive at our fort , we understand by our people , that the trench . 271 a very great number of savage assemble together . the fault be in 44 . deg . a penny easy to pass . but 5 . league journey to pass the 3 fault . the savage of the country come not any more about our fort as they be accustom , to bring we fish , and that they be in a wonderful doubt and fear of we . wherefore our captain , have be advertise by some of our man which have be at Stadacona to visit they , that there be a wonderful number of the country people assemble together , cause all thing in our fortress to be set in good order : etc the rest be want . .