the description of the aforesaid river and haven . the say river be small , not past 50 . pase broad , and ship draw three fathom water may enter in at a full sea : and at a low water there be nothing but a channel of a foot deep or thereabouts . on both side of the say river there be very good and fair ground , full of as fair and mighty tree as any be in the world , and diverse sort , which be above ten fathom high than tree above ■ $. the rest , and there be one kind of tree above three fathom fathm abqut - about , which they in the country call Hanneda , which have the most excellent virtue of all the tree of the world , whereof i will make mention hereafter . Moreover there be great store of Okes the most excellent that ever i see in my life , which be so lade with mast that they crack again : beside this there be fair arable , cedar , beech , and other tree , then grow in France : and hard unto this wood on the south side the ground be all cover with vine , which we find lade with grape as black as mulberry , but they be not so kind as those of France because the vine be not till , and because they grow of their own accord . Moreover there be many white thorn , which bear leave as big as oaken leaf , and fruit like unto meddler . to be short , it be as good a country to blow and manure as a man shall find or desire . we sow seed here of our country , as cabbage , naveau , lettuce and other , which grow and spring up out of the ground in eight day . the mouth of the river be towards the south , and it wind northward like unto a snake : and at the mouth of it towards the east there be a high and steep cliff , where we make a way in manner of a pair of stair , and aloft we make a fort to keep the nether fort and the ship , and all thing that may pass aswell by the great as by this small river . Moreover a man may behold a great extension of ground apt for tillage , strait and handsome and somewhat inclining towards the south , as easy to be bring to tillage as 267 Hanneda the most excellent tree of the