rest on land perceive this , haste to those three sail which be appoint to be leave there ; and for fear they shall be leave behind they leave all thing confuse , as if they have be chase from thence by a mighty army : and no doubt so they be ; for the hand of God come upon they for the cruelty and outrage commit by some of they against the native inhabitant of that country . immediate after the depart of our english colony out of this paradise of the world , the ship abovemention send and set forth at the charge of sir Walter Ralegh and his direction , arrive at Hatorask ; who after some time spend in seek our colony up in the country , and not find they , return with all the aforesaid provision into England . about fourteen or fifteen day after the departure of the aforesaid ship , sir Richard Grinvile general of Virginia , accompany with three ship well appoint for the same voyage , arrive there ; who not find the aforesaid ship accord to his expectation , nor hear any news of our english colony there seat , and leave by he anno 1585 , himself travel up into diverse place of the country , aswell to see if he can hear any news of the colony leave there by he the year before , under the charge of master lane his deputy , as also to discover some place of the country : but after some time spend therein , not hear any news of they , and find the place which they inhabit desolate , yet unwilling to loose the possession of the country which Englishmen have so long hold : after good deliberation , he determine to leave some man behind to retain A . D . 1586 . this ship arrive in Virginia . sir Richard grinvil three voyage . 347 fifteen man possession of the country : whereupon he land more left tn fifteen man e of Roanoak , furnish plentiful ‘ with all manner of provision for two year , and so depart for England . not long after he fall with the isle of azore , on some of which island he land , and spoil the town of all such thing as be worth carriage , where also he take diverse Spaniard . with these and many other exploit do by he in this voyage , aswell outward as homeward , he return into England . .