less bloody , and our France become fat with their blood which they lose . these be the effect and reward of all such as be prick forward with this roman and tyrannical ambition will go about thus to subdue strange people : effect , i say , contrary to the profit which those shall receive , which only be affection to the common benefit , that be to say , to the general policy of all man , and endeavour to unite they one with another as well by traffic and civil conversation , as also by military virtue , and force of when force of arm , when as the savage will not yield unto their a ™ s be t0 endeavour so much tend unto their profit . ' for this cause prince have send forth out of their dominion certain man of good activity to plant themselves in strange country , there to make their profit to bring the country to civility , and if it may be , to reduce the inhabitant to the true knowledge of our god : a end so much more commendable , as it be far from all tyrannical ! and cruel government : and so they have always thrive in their enterprise , and by little and little gain the heart of they which they have conquer or win unto they by any mean . hereof 447 we may gather that sometime it be good , yea very expedient to send forth man to discover the pleasure twocondition a ( j commodity of strange country : but so , that the n ^ uests * ? country out of which these company be to pass country remain not weaken , nor deprive of her force : and new do - again in such sort that the company send forth be off cover . so just and sufficient number , that it may not be defeat ° ta ‘ by stranger , which every foot endeavour nothing else but to surprise the same upon the sudden . as within these few day past the french have prove to my great grief , be able by no mean possible to withstand the same , consider that the element , man , and all the favour which may be hope for of a faithful and Christian alliance fight against we : which thing i purpose to discover in this present history with so evident truth , that the king majesty my sovereign prince shall in part be satisfy of the diligence which i have use in his service , and my adversary shall find themselves so discover in their false report , that they shall have no place of refuge . but before i begin , i will brief set down the situation and description of the land whereunto we have sail and where we have inhabit from the year 1561 . unto sixty five , to the end that those thing may the more easy be bear away , which i mean to describe in this discourse . .