then come out the two galley , have 27 bank on a side , and fight with we another hour ; which for that time leave we by reason of the increase of the wind . then pass alongst nine league to the westward we find out a excellent harbour , have three fathom water at the flood , able within to receive a thousand sail , where we find hog - house , which they term coralle , and take away certain hog and pig . as we come out of this harbour , the weather be calm , we be encounter by the galley , which have follow we , and fight with they three hour , oftentimes within caliver shoot : but we make such spoil of their man and oar , that they begin to be weary , and give we over , with their great loss . here within four day after , as we lay to the northward six league off this harbour of Cavannas , we meet with 192 I592 > master captain lane , general of master wat his fleet , and captain Roberts , in the exchange , a ship of Bristol , of a hundred and forty ton , and master Benjamin wood with his four ship which be set out by my lord Thomas Howard with captain Kenel of Limehouse captain of the Cantar of Weymouth . all we be here together espy a ship of some 50 ton , which we chase with their boat ; but my shallope first board she , and take she : which have in her sack , canary - wine , muscadel , tent in jar , and good store of oil in jar . the ship we unlade and burn : the man run on shore . hence we come all together , be about 13 sail , before Havana ; but pass by we give chase to a ship of 60 tun , which enter into a harbour a league to the northwest of Havana , which with boat be board , and find to be of Puerto de Cavallos in the bay of Honduras , lade with tan hide , salsa perilla , indigo , raw hide , and good store of balsamum : and she have four chest of gold , which they get on land before we can come to they . we bring this ship into England . thus spend a sevennight in lie off and on for purchase , and find nothing come , i set sail for England , and arrive at Dover about the ten of November 1592 . ten .