fall of water which they call el pongo , which el pongo . be one of the most dangerous place in the world : for be restrain between two exceed hie divide mountain , it make a fall of terrible depth where the water with the great descent make such whirlpool that it seem impossible but that it shall sink it self there into the ground . for all this the boldness of man have attempt to pass the say el Pongo for the greediness to come to that so famous renown Dorado . they suffer themselves to be carry from aloft , be throw down headlong with the fury of the river , and sit fast in their canoas or boat in which they sail , although they be overturn in the fall , and they and xi 17 b their canoas sink down to the bottom , yet they rise up again above the water , and at length with their hand , and force get out of the whirlpool . the whole army in a manner escape , save a very few which be drown : and which i most marvel at , they handle the matter so well , that they lose not their victual and powder which they carry with they . in their return ( for after great travel and danger they return that way again ) they climb up over one of those aforesaid exceed high mountain , creep up upon their hand and foot . captain Pedro de Orsua make another entrance by the self same river , and after he be slay by a mutiny of his people , other captain follow the discovery , by the arm that fall into the north sea one of our company tell i ( who while he be a secular man be in all that expedition ) that they enter up the river almost a hundred league with the tide , and that when the fresh water and the salt meet , which be either almost under or very near the equinoctial line , the river be 70 league broad , a thing incredible , and which exceed the breadth of the Mediterran sea . howbeit other in their description make it not past 25 or 30 league broad at the mouth . the three testimony out of Josephus de Acosta , lib . 3 . cap . 25 . in that part of America , whereof the coast be thorough know , the great part of the inland be not know , which be that which fall between Piru and Brasil , and there be diverse opinion of some , which say , that it be all sink land full of lake and bog , and of other , which affirm that there be great and flourish kingdom there , and there they place the country of paytity , and Dorado , and great emperor , and say , that there be wonderful thing there . i hear of one of our company my self , a man of credit , that he have see great town , and high way as 18 .