of certain Englishman to the river of plate situate in 35 degree of southerly latitude : together with a exact ruttier and description thereof , and of all the main branch , so far as they be navigable with small bark , by which river the Spaniard of late year have frequent a exceed rich trade to and from Peru , and the mine of Potossi , as also to Chili , and other place . a report of a voyage of two Englishman in the company of Sebastian Cabota , intend for the Malucos by the strait of Magellan , but perform only to the river of plate in April 1527 . take out of the information of m . Robert thorn to doctor ley ambassador for king Henry the eight , to Charles the emperor , touch the discovery of the Malucos by the north . n a float of three ship and a caravel this be the that go from this city of Sivil arm wherein by the merchant of it , which depart grg ^ the ^ er in April last pass , i and my partner of plate , have one thousand four hundred ducat i526 - two that we employ in the say fleet , en & slimen principal for that two Englishman , friend of i , which be somewhat learned in Cos - discovery . mographie , shall go in the same ship , to bring i certain relation of the situation of the country , and to be expert in the navigation of those sea , and there to have information of many other thing , and advise that i desire to know especial . see in those quarter be ship and mariner of that country , and card by which they sail , though much unlike we : that they shall procure to have the say card , and learn how they understand they , and especial to know what navigation they have for those island northwards and northeastward . the island of for if from the say island the sea do extend the maltuos . wonderful ; thou | will interposition of land to sail from the north point to the north - east point one thousand seven hundred or one thousand eight hundred league , they then new shall come to the new round island that we dis - found hand cover and so we shall be near to the say spicery the english , by almost 200 league then the emperor , or the king of Portugal be . .