or mule . the say river of plate be so full of sand and danger , and the fresh so fierce sometime , that not ship dart to deal with it , small bark to their knowledge may go up it , and not else . the Portugal here can be suffer to use their mine of treasure in these part , upon pain of death , the contrary be command by the king and the viceroy , who be as their king in place of authority . about twenty league from Santos there be a certain kind of wild savage , lie in the mountain , which be in friendship with the Portugal , and they have continual war with certain other savage that dwell towards the border of Peru , which be distant from Santos about 400 . or 500 league . those savage of Peru have store of gold and silver , but they know not the use of it . look what Savages of their enemy they take , they sell they to the Portugal for knife , comb , axe or hatchet , and other trifle : they will sell one for a penny - knife to a Portugal , and after two year they be worth twenty or thirty ducat to the Portugal . this people have also continual war with the Spaniard : and this be tell we by one of those savage , which have dwell among the Portugal these seven year , with his master call signior Manoel Veloso . and this fellow will willing have come with we for there be certain rock that lie off between the isle of Alcatrarzas and S . Sebastian , about two league , theyleof which be to be take heed of , which a far off in fair Alcatrarzas weather show like the sail of ship . there be other rock that lie off saint Catelina also five league to the east and by south into the sea off the island . at our come up to Santos we find four fathom and a half water in the shallow place , and the like we find within a league after we be depart from saint Catelina , little more or less , but after you have run in the depth of four fathom and a half , about a mile or less , than you shall have it deep again more and more . before the town of Santos we ride in eight and ten fathom water . .