, which bite so fierce , that the place where they bite short after swell and itch very sore . sign of gold they make sign of certain people that be bright from other plate of gold in their forehead , and other place of ' their body . description of the country on both side the strait lie very the country . high with rough stony mountain , and great quantity of snow thereon . there be very little plain ground and no grass , except a little which be much like unto moss that grow on soft ground , such as we get turffe in . there be no wood at all . to be brief there be nothing fit or profitable for the use of man , which that country with root yield or bring forth : howbeit there be great quantity of deer , who skin be like unto ass , there head or horn do far exceed , as well in length as also in breadth , any in these our part or country : their foot likewise be as great as our oxen , which we measure to be seven or eight inche in breadth . there be also hare , wolf , fish bear , and sea foul of sundry sort . as the country be barren and unfertile , so be they rude and of no capacity to culture the same to any perfection : but be content by their hunt , fish , and foul , with raw flesh and warm blood to satisfy their greedy paunch , which be their only glory . a sign oj there be great likelihood of earthquake or thunder : earthquake £ or t ^ at there be huge and monstrous mountain , who great substance be stone , and those stone so shake with some extraordinary mean that one be separate from another , which be discordant from all other quarry . there be no river or run spring , but such as uchatlhe111 trough heat of the sun , with such water as sun do descend from the mountain and hill , whereon cause to come great drift of snow do lie , be engender . of mow . it argue also that there shall be none : for that the earth , which with the extremity of the winter be so 228 1577 - frosen within , that that water which shall have recourse probability within the same to maintain spring , have not his . motion , whereof great water have their originali , as by er experience be see otherwhere . such valley as be riser in the capable to receive the water , that in the summer time ground . by the operation of the sun descend from great abundance of snow , which continual lie on the mountain and have no passage , sink into the earth and so vanish away , without any runnell above the earth , by which occasion or continual stand of the say water , the earth be open , and the great frost yield to the force thereof , which in other place four or five fathom within the ground for lack of the say moisture , the earth ( even in the very summer time ) be freeze , and so combine the stone together , that scarce instrument with great force can unknit they . also where the water in those valley can have no such passage away , by the continuance of time in such order as be before rehearse , the yearly descent from the mountain fill they full , that at the low bank of the same , they fall into the valley , and so continue as fish pond or stagne in summer time full of water , and in the winter hard freeze : as by scar that remain thereof in summer may easy be perceive : so that the heat of summer be nothing comparable or of force to dissolve the extremity of cold that come in winter . nevertheless i be assure that below the force of the frost within the earth , the water have recourse , and empty themselves out of sight into the sea , which through the extremity of the frost be constrain to do the same : by which occasion the earth within be keep the warm , and spring have their recourse , which be the spring nou - onely nutriment of gold and mineral within the same . there be much to be say of the commodity of these country , which be couch within the bowel of the earth , which i let pass till more perfect trial be make thereof . 229 gur departure from those country . how when we lose our i . Barks , which God nevertheless restore . the conclusion . the 24 . of August , after we have satisfy our mind with fraught sufficient for our vessel , though not our covetous desire with such knowledge of the country , people , and other commodity as be before rehearse , we depart therehence . the 17 . of September we fall with the land end of England , and so sail to Milford haven , from whence our general ride to the court for order , to what port or haven to conduct the ship . we lose our two bark in the way homeward , the one the 29 . of August , the other the 31 . of the same month , by occasion of great tempest and fog . howbeit God restore the one to Bristol , and the other make his course by Scotland to Yermouth . in this voyage we lose two man , one in the way by god visitation , and the other homeward cast over board with a surge of the sea . i can declare unto the reader , the latitude and longitude of such place and region as we have be at , but not altogether so perfect as our master and other , with many circumstance of tempest and other accident incident to sea fare man , which seem not altogether strange , but i let they pass to their report as man most apt to set forth and declare the same . i have also leave the name of the country on both the shore touch , for lack of understand the people yet to be declare . country new discover where commodity be to be look for , do better accord with a new name give by the discoverer , than a uncertain name by a doubtful author . our general name sundry island , mountain , cape , and harborough after the name of diverse noble man and other gendeman his friend , aswell on the one shore as also on the other .