a discourse write by sir Humphrey Gilbert knight , to prove a passage by the northwest to Cathaia , and the east Indies . the table of the matter in every chapter of this discourse . Capitulo 1 . o prove by authority a passage to be on the north side of America , to go to Cataia , China , and to the east India . Capitulo 2 . to prove by reason a passage to be on the north side of America , to go to Cataia , Moluccas , etc Capitulo 3 . to prove by experience of sundry man travail the open of this northwest passage , whereby good hope remain of the rest . 158 to prove by circumstance , that the northwest passage have be sail throughout . Capitulo 5 . to prove that such Indians as have be drive upon the coast of Germany come not thither by the southeast , and Southwest , nor from any part of Africa or America . Capitulo 6 . to prove that the indian aforenamed come not by the north - east , and that there be no thorough passage navigable that way . Capitulo 7 . to prove that these Indians come by the northwest , which induce a certainty of this passage by experience . Capitulo 8 . what several reason be allege before the queen majesty , and certain lord of her highness privy council , by m . Anth . Jenkinson a gentleman of great travail and experience , to prove this passage by the north - east , with my several answer then allege to the same . Capitulo 9 how that this passage by the northwest be more commodious for our traffic , than the other by the north - east , if there be any such . Capitulo 10 . what commodity will ensue , this passage be once discover . [ to prove 159 to prove by authority a passage to be on the northside of America , to go to Cathaia , and the east India . chapter 1 . when i give my self to the study of Geographic , after i have peruse and diligent scan the description of Europe , Asia and Africa , and confer they with the map and globe both antique and modern : i come in fine to the four part of the world , common call America , which by all description i find to be a hand environ round about with sea , have on the southside of it the frete or straight of Magellan , on the west side mar deal Sur , which sea run towards the north , separate it from the east part of Asia , where the dominion of the cathaians be : on the east part our west ocean , and on the north side the sea that sever it from Groneland , through which northern sea the passage lie , which i take now in hand to discover . Plato in Timaeo , and in the dialogue call Critias , discourse of a incomparable great hand then call Atlantis , be great than all Africa and Asia , which lie westward from the strait of Gibraltar , navigable round about : affirm also that the prince of Atlantis do aswell enjoy the governance of all Africa , and the most part of Europe , as of Atlantis it self . also to prove Plato opinion of this hand , and the inhabit of it in ancient time by they of Europe , to be of the more credit ; Marinseus Siculus in his chronicle of Spain , report that there have be find by the Spaniard in the gold mine of America , certain piece of money engrave with the image of Augustus Caesar : which piece be send to the pope for a testimony of the matter , by John Rufus archbishop of Consentinum . moreover , this be not only think of Plato , but by Marsilius Ficinus , and excellent florentine philosopher , 160 Crantor the grecian , and Proclus , and Philo the famous pnclut page . Jew ( as appear in his book de mundo , and in the 24 - commentary upon Plato ) to be overflow and swallow up with water , by reason of a mighty earthquake , and stream down of the heavenly fludgate . the like whereof happen unto some part of Italy , when by the forciblenes of the sea , call Superum , it cut off Sicilia from the continent of Calabria , as appear in Justine , in the begin of his four book . also Justine Lib . there chance the like in Zetland a part of Flanders . and also the city of Pyrrha and Antissa , about Pliny . Meotis palus : and also the city Burys , in the corynthian bosom , common call Sinus Corinthiacus , have be swallow up with the sea , and be not at this day to be discern : by which accident America grow to be unknown of long time , unto we of the late age , and be late discover again , by Americus Vespucius , in the year of our lord 1497 . which some say to have be first discover by Christophorus Columbus a genuois , anno 1492 . the same calamity happen unto this isle of Atlantis 600 . and odd year before Plato his time , which some of the people of the southeast part of the world accounted as 9000 . year : for the manner then be to reckon the moon her period of the zodiak for a year , which be our usual month , depend a Luminari minori . so that in these our day there can no other main or island be find or judge to be parcel of this Atlantis , than those western island , which bear now the name of America : countervail thereby the name of Atlantis , in the knowledge of our age . then , if when no part of the say Atlantis be oppress by water , and earthquake , the coast round about the same be navigable : a far great hope now remain of the same by the northwest , see the most part of it be ( since that time ) swallow up with a minore ad water , which can not utter take away the old deep mai ^- and channel , but rather , be a occasion of the enlarge seven 161 l of the old