entice the people to some familiarity against other year . thus have finish all thing we depart the [ three . 44 . i country , as i say before : but because the buss have not lade enough in she , she put into bear sound to take in a little moor . in the mean while the admiral , and the rest without at sea stay for she . and that night fall such a outrageous tempest , beat a outragwus on our ship with such vehement rigor , that anchor and temfest - cable avail nought : for we be drive on rock and island of ice , insomuch that ( have not the great goodness of God be miraculous show to we ) we have be cast away every man . this danger be more doubtful and terrible , than any that precede or go before : for there be not any one ship ( i think ) that escape without damage . some lose anchor and un 241 Q our enter the coast dangerous . also cable , some boat , some pinniss : some anchor , cable , boat and pinniss . this boisterous storm so sever we from one another , that one ship know not what be become of another . the admiral know not where to find the vice - admiral or rearadmiral , or any other ship of our company . our general be on land in bear sound can not come to his ship , but be compel to go aboard the Gabriel where he continue all the way homeward : for the boisterous blast continue so extreme and so long a time , that they send we homeward ( which be God favour towards we ) will we , will we , in such haste , as not any one of we be able to keep in company with other , but be separate . and if by chance any one ship do overtake other , by swiftness of sail , or meet , as they often do : yet be the rigour of the wind so hideous , that they can not continue company together the space of one whole night . thus our journey outward be not so pleasant , but our come thither , enter the coast and country , by narrow strait , perilous ice , and swift tide , our time of abode there in snow and storm , and our departure from thence the 31 . of August with dangerous bluster wind and tempest , which that night arise , be as uncomfortable : separate we so as we sail , that not any of we meet together , until the 28 . of September , which day we fall on the english coast , between Sylley and the land end , and pass the channel , until our arrival in the river of Thames . 242 the report of Thomas wiars passenger in the Emanuel , otherwise call the buss of Bridgewater , wherein James Leech be master , one of the ship in the last voyage of master Martin Frobisher 1578 . concern the discovery of a great island in their way homeward the 12 . of September . he buss of Bridgewater be leave in bear sound at Meta incognita , the second day of September behind the fleet in some distress , through much wind , ride near the lee shore , and force there to ride it out upon the hazard of her cable and anchor , which be all aground but two . the three of September be fair weather , and the wind north northwest she set sail , and depart thence , and fall with Frisland on the 8 . day of September at six of the clock at night , and then they set off from the southwest point of Frisland , the wind be at east , and east southeast , but that night the wind vear southerly , and shift oftentimes that night : but on the ten day in the morning , the wind at west northwest fair weather , they steer southeast , and by south , and continue that course until the 12 . day of September , when about 11 . a clock before noon , they descry a land , which be from they about five league , and the southermost part of it be southeast by east from they , and the northermost next , north Northeast , or Northeast . the master account that the southeast point of Frisland be from he at that instant when he first descry this new island , northwest by north , 50 . league . they account this island to be 25 . league long , and the long way of it southeast , and northwest . the southern part of it be in the latitude of 57 degree and 1 . second part , or there about . they continue in sight of it , from the 12 . day at a 11 . of the clock , till the 243 the island in length z 5 . league . this hand be in the latitude of ^ . degree and 1 second pars . 13 . day three of the clock in the after noon , when they leave it : and the last part they see of it , bear from they northwest by north . there appear two harborough upon that coast : the great of they seven league to the northward of the southermost point , the other but four league . there be very much ice near the same land , and also twenty or thirty league from it , for they be not clear of ice , till the 15 . day of September after noon . they ply their voyage homeward , and fall with the west part of Ireland about Galway , and have first sight of it on the 25 . day of September . note frame by m . Richard Hakluyt of the middle temple esquire , give to certain gentleman that go with m . Frobisher in his northwest discovery , for their direction : and not unfit to be commit to print , consider the same may stir up consideration of these and of such other thing , not unmeet in such new voyage as may be attempt hereafter . hat the first seat be choose on the seaside , so as ( if it may be ) you may have your own navy within bay , river or lake , within your seat safe from the enemy : and so as the enemy