4 . month in the whole year to go by the north - east : the passage be at such elevation as it be former express , for it can be any near than south . 4 furthermore , it can be finish without diverse wintring by the way , have no haven in any temperate climate to harbour in there : for it be as much as we can well sail from hence to saint Nicholas , in the trade of Moscovia , and return in the navigable season of the year , and from saint Nicholas to Cerimissi Tartari , which stand at 80 degree of the septentrionali latitude , it be at the least 400 league , which amount scarce to the three part of the way , to the end of your voyage by the north - east . 5 and yet after you have double this cape , if then there may be find a navigable sea to carry you southeast accord to your desire , yet can you not winter convenient , until you come to 60 degree , and to take up one degree run southeast , you must sail 24 league and three four part , which amount to 495 league . 6 furthermore , you may by the northwest sail thither with all easterly wind , and return with any westerly wind , whereas you must have by the north - east sundry wind , and those proper , accord to the lie of the coast and cape , you shall | be enforce to double , which wind be not always to be have , when they be look for : whereby your journey shall be great prolong , and hardly endure so near the pole . as we be teach by sir Hugh Willoughbie , who be freeze to death far near the south . 7 moreover , it be very doubtful , whether we shall 184 long enjoy that trade by the north - east , if there be any such passage that way , the commodity thereof once know to the Moscovite , what privilege soever he have grant , see policy with the mass of excessive gain , to the enrich ( so great ) of himself and all his dominion will persuade Kim to presume the same , have so great opportunity to utter the commodity of those country by the narve . but by the northwest , we may safe trade without danger or annoyance of any prince live , Christian or heathen , it be out of all their trade . 8 also the queen majesty dominion be near than northwest passage than any other great prince that may pass that way , and both in their go and return , they must of necessity succour themselves and their ship upon some part of the same , if any tempestuous weather shall happen . further , no prince navy of the world be able to encounter the queen majesty navy , as it be at this present : and yet it shall be great increase by the traffic ensue upon this discovery , for it be the long voyage that increase and maintain great ship . now it seem necessary to declare what commodity will grow thereby , if all these thing be , as we have heretofore presuppose , and think they to be : which next adjoin be brief declare . what commodity will ensue , this passage once discover . Cap . 10 . first , it be the only way for our prince , to possess the wealth of all the east part ( as they term they ) of the world , which be infinite : as appear by the experience of Alexander the great , in the time of his conquest of India , and other the east part of the world , allege by Quintus Curtius , which will be a great advancement to our country , a wonderful enrich to 185 our prince , and a unspeakable commodity to all the inhabitant of Europe . 2 for through the shortness of the voyage , we shall be able to sell all manner of merchandise , bring from thence , far better cheap than either the Portugal or Spaniard do or may do . and further , we shall share with the Portugal in the east , and the Spaniard in the west , by trade to any part of America , through mar deal Sur , where they can no manner of way offend we . 3 also we may sail to diverse very rich country , both civil and other , out of both their jurisdiction , trade and traffic , where there be to be find great abundance of gold , silver , precious stone , cloth of gold , silk , all manner of spice , grocery ware , and other kind of merchandise of a inestimable price , which both the Spaniard and Portugal , through the length of their journey , can well attain unto . 4 also we may inhabit some part of those country , and settle there such needy people of our country , which now trouble the common wealth , and through want here at home be enforce to commit outrageous offence , whereby they be daily consume with the gallows . 3 moreover , we may from all the aforesaid place have a yearly return , inhabit for our staple some convenient place of America , about Sierra Nevada , or some other part , whereas it shall seem best for the shorten of the voyage . 6 beside utter of our country commodity , which the Indians , etc much esteem : as appear in Hester , where the pomp be express of the great king of India , Assuerus , who match the colour clothes , wherewith his house and tent be apparel , with gold and silver , as part of his great treasure : not mention either velvet , silk , cloth of gold , cloth of silver , or such like , be in those country most plentiful : whereby it plain appear in what great estimation they will have the clothes of this our country , so 186 1576 . that there will be find a far better vent for they by this mean , then yet this realm ever have : and that without depend either upon France , Spain , Flanders , Portugal , Hamborow , Emden , or any other part of Europe . 7 also ,