here we shall increase both our ship and mariner , without burden of the state . 8 and also have occasion to set poor man child to learn handy craft , and thereby to make trifle and such like , which the Indians and those people do much esteem : by reason whereof , there shall be none occasion to have our country cumber with loiterer , vagabond , and such like idle person . all these commodity will grow by follow this our discovery , without injury do to any christian prince , by cross they in any of their use trade , whereby they may take any just occasion of offence . thus have i brief show you some part of the ground of my opinion , trust that you will no long judge i fantastic in this matter : see i have conceive no vain hope of this voyage , but be persuaded thereunto by the best cosmographer of our age , the same be confirm both by reason and certain experience . also this discovery have be diverse time heretofore by other both offer , attempt , and perform . it have be offer by Stephan Gomes unto Carolus the five emperor , in the year of our lord God 1527 , as Alphonso Ullva testify in the story of Carolus life : who will have set he forth in it ( as the story men - tioneth ) if the great want of money , by reason of his long war have not cause he to surcease the same . and the king of Portugal fear least the emperor will have persevere in this his enterprise , give he to this discovery leave the matter unattempted , the sum of 350000 crown : and it be to be think that the king of Portugal will not have give to the emperor such sum of money for egg in moonshine . 187 the labour of this discovery shorten by other man travel . why you king of Spain and Portugal will not persevere in this discovery . it have be attempt by Sebastian Cabota in the time of king Henry the seven , by Corterialis the Portugal , and Scolmus the Dane . and it have be perform by three brethren , the indian aforesaid , and by Urdaneta the friar of Mexico . also diverse have offer the like unto the french king , who have send two or three time to have discover the same : the discoverer spend and consume their victual in search the gulf and bay between Florida and terra de Labrador , whereby the ice be break to the after comer . so that the right way may now easy be find out in short time : and that with little jeoperdie and less expense . for America be discover so far towards the north as cape Frio , which be at 62 degree , and that part of Grondland next adjoin be know to stand but at 72 degree . so that we have but 10 degree to sail north and south , to put the world out of doubt hereof : and it be likely that the king of Spain , and the king of Portugal will not have fit out all this while , but that they be sure to possess to themselves all that trade they now use , and fear to deal in this discovery , lest the queen majesty have so good opportunity , and find the commodity which thereby may ensue to the common wealth , will cut they off , and enjoy the whole traffic to her self , and thereby the Spaniard and Portugal , with their great charge , shall beat the bush , and other man catch the bird : which thing they foresee , have command that no pilot of they upon pain of death , shall seek to discover to the northwest , or plat out in any sea card any thorough passage that way by the northwest . now , and if you will indifferent compare the hope that remain , to animate i to this enterprise , with those likelihood which Columbus allege before Ferdinando the king of Castilia , to prove that there be such island in the west ocean , as be after by he 188 and other discover to the great commodity of Spain and all the world : you will think then this northwest passage to be most worthy travel therein . for Columbus have none of the west Islands set forth unto he , either in globe or card , neither yet once mention of any writer ( Plato except , and the commentary upon the same ) from 942 year before Christ , until that day . moreover , Columbus himself have neither see America nor any other of the island about it , neither , understand he of they by the report of any other that have see they , but only comfort himself with this hope , that the land have a beginning where the sea have a end : for as touch that which the Spaniard do write of a Biscaine , which shall have teach he the way thither , it be think to be imagine of they , to deprive Columbus of his honour , be none of their country man , but a stranger bear . and if it be true of the Biscaine , yet do he but rove at the matter , or ( at the least ) gather the knowledge of it , by conjecture only . and albeit my self have not see this passage or any part thereof , but be ignorant of it as touch experience ( as Columbus be before his attempt make ) yet have i both the report , relation , and authority of diverse most credible man , which have both see and pass through some and every part of this discovery , beside sundry reason for my assurance thereof : all which Columbus want . these thing consider , and indifferent weigh togeth , with the wonderful commodity which this discovery may bring , especial to this realm of England : i must needs conclude with learned Baptista Ramusius , and diverse other learned man , who say , that this discovery have be reserve for some noble prince or worthy man , thereby to make himself rich , and the world happy : desire you to accept in good part this brief and simple discourse , write in haste , which