with the fur side inward two or three pair on at once , and especial the woman . in those hose they put their knife , needle , and other thing needful to bear about . they put a bone within their hose , which reach from the foot to the knee , whereupon they draw their say hose , and so in place of garter they be hold from fall down about their foot . they dress their skin very soft and souple with the hair on . in cold weather or winter they wear the fur side inward : and in summer outward . other apparel they have none but the say skin . those beast , fish , and fowl , which they kill , be their meat , drink , apparel , house , bed , hose , shoe , thread , and sail for their boat , with many other necessary whereof they stand in need , and almost all their riches . their house be tent make of seal skin , pitch up with 4 . fir quarter four square meeting at the top , and the skin sew together with sinew , and lay thereupon : they be so pitch up , that the entrance into they be always south or against the sun . they have other sort of house which we find not their house of seal skin and fir . seven 225 to be inhabit , which be raise with stone and whale bone , and a skin lay over they , to withstand the rain , or other weather : the entrance of they be not much unlike a oven mouth , whereto i think they resort for a time to fish , hunt , and foul , and so leave they until the next time they come thither again . their weapon their weapon be bow , arrow , dart , and sling . of defence . their bow be of wood of a yard long , sinew at the back with strong sinew , not glue too , but fast gird and tie on . their bow strings ' are likewise sinew . their arrow be three piece nocked with bone , and end with bone , with those two end , and the wood in the midst , they pass not in length half a yard or little moor . they be feather with two feather the pen end be cut away , and the feather lay upon the arrow with the broad side to the wood ; insomuch that they seem when they be tie on , to have four three sort of feather . they have also three sort of head to those head to their arrow . one sort of stone or iron , proportion like to ’ a heart : the second sort of bone , much like unto a stop head , with a hook on the same : the three sort of bone likewise make sharp at both side , and sharp point . they be not make very fast but light tie to , or else set in a knock , that upon small occasion the arrow leave these head behind they : and they be of small force , except they be very near when they shoot . two sort of their dart be make of two sort : the one with many rt ' fork of bone in the fore end and likewise in the midst : their proportion be not much unlike our toast - ing iron but long : these they cast out of a instrument of [ wood , very ready . the other sort be great than the first aforesaid , with a long bone make sharp on both side not much unlike a rapier , which i take to be their most hurtful weapon . two sort of they have two sort of boat make of leather , set out ather ^ on * nner s ^ e quarter ° f wood , artificial tie together with thong of the same : the great sort be not much unlike our wherry , wherein sixteen or 226 twenty man may sit : they have for a sail dress the gut of such beast as they kill very fine and thin , which they sew together : the other boat be but for one man to sit and row in with one oar . their order of fish , hunt , and foul be with these say weapon : but in what sort , or how they use they we have no perfect knowledge as yet . i can suppose their abode or habitation not to be here , for that neither their house or apparel , be of such force to withstand the extremity of cold , that the country seem to be infect with all : neither do i see any sign likely to perform the same . those house or rather den which stand there , have no sign of footway , or any thing else tread , which be one of the chief token of habitation . and those they use ft foul , fish , and hunt . it be to be suppose that their inhabit be elsewhere .. tent which they bring with they , when they have sufficient hunt and fish , they remove to other place : and when they have sufficient store they of such victual , as the country yield or bring forth , they return to their winter station or habitation . this conjecture do i make , for the infertility which i conjecture to be in that country . they have some iron whereof they make arrow head , t ^ ir ttse it knife , and other little instrument , to work their boat , bow , arrow , and dart withal , which be very unapt to do any thing withal but with great labour . it seem that they have conversation with some other people , of who for exchange they shall receive the same . they be great delight with any thing that be bright , or give a sound . what knowledge they have of God , or what idol anthropophagi . they adore , we have no perfect intelligence , i think they rather anthropophagi , or devourer of man flesh then otherwise : for that there be no flesh or fish which they find dead ( smell it never so filthy ) but they will eat it , as they find it without any other dress . a loathsome thing , either to the beholder or hearer . there be no manner of creep beast hurtful , except 227 signet of gold some spider ( which as many affirm , be sign of great eure - store of gold ) and also certain sting gnat