set forward towards our wish port : by the 30 . day we obtain our expect desire , where we find the Judith , and the Michael : 238 which bring no small joy unto the general , and great consolation to the heavy heart of those weary wight . the 30 . day of July we bring our ship into the countess of Warwick sound , and moar they , namely these ship , the admiral , the rearadmiral , the Francis of Foy , the bear Armenel , the Salomon , and the buss of Bridgewater : which be do , our general commanded we all to come a shore upon the countess hand , where he set his miner to work upon the mine , give charge with expedition to dispatch with their lade . our general himself , accompany with his gentleman , diverse time make road into sundry part of the country , as well to find new mine , as also to find out and see the people of the country . he find out one mine upon a island by bear sound , and name it the countess of Sussex island . one other be find in countess winter furnace , with diverse other , to which the ship ° f ^ sjex be send sunder to be lade . in the same rodes winter he meet with diverse of the people of the country at furnace . sundry time , as once at a place call David sound : who David sound . shoot at our man , and very desperate give they the onset , be not above three or four in number , there be of our country man above a dozen : but see themselves not able to prevail , they take themselves to flight : who our man pursue , but be not use to such craggy cliff , they soon lose the sight of they , and so in vain return . we also see of they at bear sound , both by sea the politic of and land in great company : but they will at all time the people fir keep the water between they and we . and if any of our ship chance to be in the sound ( as they come diverse time , because the harbour be not very good ) the ship jade , and depart again : then so long as any ship be in sight , the people will not be see . but when as they perceive the ship to be go , they will not only show themselves stand upon high clifle , and call we to come over unto they : but also 239 will come in their boat very near to we , as it be to brag at we : whereof our general have advertisement , send for the captain and gentleman of the ship , to accompany and attend upon he , with the captain also of the anne Francis , who be but the night before come unto we . for they , and the Fleebote have lose we the 26 . day in the great snow , put into a harbour in the queen foreland , where they find good oar , wherewith they jade themselves , and come to seek the general : so that now we have all our ship , save one bark , which be lose , and the Thomas of Ipswich , who ( compel by what fury i know not ) forsake our company , and return home without lade . our general accompany with his gentleman , ( of who i speak ) come all together to the countess of Sussex island , near to bear sound : where he man out certain pinniss , and go over to the people : who perceive his arrival , flee away with all speed , and in haste leave certain dart and other engine behind they , which we find : but the people we can not find . the next morning our general perceive certain of they in boat upon the sea , give chase to they in a pinnace under sail , with a fresh gale of wind , but can by no mean come near unto they : for the long he sail , the further off he be from they : which well show their cunning and activity . thus time wear away , and the day of our departure approach , our general command we to lade with all expedition , that we may be again on Seaboard with our ship : for while we be in the country , we be in continual danger of freeze in : for often snow and hail often fall , the water be so much freeze and congeal in the night , that in the morning we can scarce row our boat or pinnace , especial in dyer sound , which be a calm and still water : which cause our general to make the more haste , so that by the 30 . day of August we be all lade , and make all thing ready to depart . 240 but before i proceed any further herein , to show what gentleman fortune befall at our departure , i will turn my pen a little to m . captain Fenton , and those gentleman which ' c ^^ gy * it shall have inhabit all the year in those country , who valiant mind be much to be commend : for doubtless they have do as they intend , if luck have not withstand their willingness . for the bark dionise which be lose , have in her much of their house which be prepare and shall have be build for they , with many other implement . also the Thomas of Ipswich which have most of their provision in she , come not into the strait at all : neither do we see she since the day we be separate in the great snow , of which i speak before . for these cause , have not their house , nor yet provision , they be disappoint of their pretence to tarry , and therefore jade their ship , and so come away with we . but before we take ship , we build a little house a house in the countess of Warwick island , and garnish it trick and with many kind of trifle , as pin , point , lace , iverstrin ^ s glass , kombe , babe on horseback and on foot , with innumerable other such fancy and toy : thereby to allure and