have be think but simple : consider that this navigation be write so many year past , in so barbarous a tongue by one only obscure author , and yet we in these our day find by our own experience his former report to be true . how much more than ought we to believe this passage to Cataia to be , be verify by the opinion of all the best , both antique , and modern geographer , and plain set out in the best and most allow map , Charts , globe , cosmographical table and discourse of this our age , and by the rest not deny , but left as a matter doubtful . 164 to prove by reason , a passage to be on the northside of America , to go to Cataia , etc Chap . 3 . first , all sea be maintain by the abundance of experiment water , so that the near the end any river , bay or haven be , the shallower it wax , ( although by some er ' accidentali bar , it be sometime find otherwise ) but the far you sail west from island towards the place , where this fret be think to be , the more deep be the sea : which give we good hope of continuance of the same sea with mar deal Sur , by some fret that lie between America , Groneland and Cataia . 2 also if that America be not a island , but a part of you continent adjoin to Asia , either the people which inhabit Mangia , Anian , and quinzay , etc be borderer upon it , will before this time have make some road into it , hope to have find some like commodity to their own . 3 or else the scythian and tartarian ( which often time heretofore have seek far and near for new seat , drive thereunto through the necessity of their need make cold and miserable country ) will in all this time have the old we t0 find the way to America , and enter the same , have the ’ passage be never so strait or difficult ; the country be so temperate , pleasant and fruitful , in comparison of their own . but there be never any such people find there by any of the Spaniard , Portugal , or Frenchmen , who first discover the inland of that country : which Spaniards , or Frenchmen must then of necessity have see some one civil man in America , consider how full of civil people Asia be : but they never see so much as one token or sign , that ever any man of the know part of the world have be there . 4 furthermore it be to be think , that if by reason of mountain , or other craggy place , the people neither 165 motum fluxus y refluxus . 3 motum circularem . ad coeli motum elementa omnia ( excepta terra ) moventur . of Cataia or Tartary can enter the country of America , or they of America have enter Asia if it be so join : yet some one savage or wander beast will in so many year have pass into it : but there have not any time be find any of the beast proper to Cataia , or Tartary etc in America : nor of those proper to America , in Tartary , Cataia , etc or any part of Asia . which thing prove America , not only to be one island , and in no part adjoin to Asia : but also that the people of those country , have not have any traffic with each other . 5 moreover at the least some one of those painful traveller , which of purpose have pass the confine of both country , with intent only to discover , will as it be most likely have go from the one to the other : if there have be any piece of land , or Isthmos , to have join they together , or else have declare some cause to the contrary . 6 but neither Paulus Venetus , who live and dwell a long time in Cataia , ever come into America , and yet be at the sea coast of Mangia , over against it where he be embark , and perform a great navigation along those sea : neither yet Verarzanus , or Franci scus Vasques de Coronado , who travel the north part of America by land , ever find entry from thence by land to Cataia , or any part of Asia . 7 also it appear to be a island , insomuch as the sea run by nature circular from the east to the west , follow the diurnal motion of primum Mobile , which carry with it all inferior body movable , aswell celestial as elemental : which motion of the water be most evident see in the sea , which lie on the southside of Africa , where the current that run from the east to the west be so strong ( by reason of such motion ) that the Portugal in their voyage eastward to Calicut , in pass by Cap . de buona speranda be enforce to make diverse course , the current there be so swift as it strike from thence all along westward 166 1576 . upon the fret of Magellan , be distant from thence , near the four part of the longitude of the earth : and not have free passage and entrance through the fret towards the west , by reason of the narrowness of the say strait of Magellan , it run to salve this wrong ( nature not yield to accidentali restraint ) all along the eastern coast of America , northwards so far as cape Fredo , be the far know place of the same continent towards the north : which be about 4800 league , reckon therewithal ! the trending of the land . 8 so that this current be continual maintain with such force , as Jaques Cartier affirm it to be , who meet with the same be at baccalaos , as he sail along the coast of America , then either it must of necessity have way to pass from cape Fredo , through this fret , westward towards Cataia , be know to come so far , only to salve his former wrong , by the authority before name : or else it