other , than they may yield rosin , turpentine , etc and all for trade and traffic , and cask for wine and oil may be make , likewise ship and house , etc and because traffic be a thing so materiali , i wish that great observation be take what every soil yield natural , in what commodity soever , and what it may be make to yield by endeavour , and to send we notice home , that thereupon we may devise what mean may be think of to raise trade . now admit that we may not be suffer by the savage to enjoy any whole country or any more than the scope of a city , yet if we may enjoy traffic , and be assure of the same , we may be much enrich , our navy may be increase , and a place of safety may there be find , if change of religion or civil 247 war shall happen in this realm , which be thing of great benefit . but if we may enjoy any large territory of apt soil , we may so use the matter , as we shall not depend upon Spain for oil , sack , resign , orange , lemond , spanish skin , etc nor upon France for woad , baysalt , and Gascoyne wine , nor on Eastland for flax , pitch , tar , mast , etc so we shall not so exhaust our treasure , and so exceed enrich our doubtful friend , as we do , but shall purchase the commodity that we want for half the treasure that now we do : and shall by our own industry and the benefit of the soil there cheap purchase oil , wine , salt , fruit , pitch , tar , flax , hemp , mast , board , fish , gold , silver , copper , tallow , hide and many commodity : beside if there be no flat to make salt on , if you have plenty of wood you may make it in sufficient quantity for common use at home there . if you can keep a safe haven , although you have not the friendship of the near neighbour , yet you may have traffic by sea upon one shore or other , upon that firm in time to come , if not present . if you find great plenty of timber on the shore side or upon any portable river , you be best to cut down of the same the first winter , to be season for ship , bark , boat and house ; and if near such wood there be any river or brook upon the which a saw mill may be place , it will do great service , and therefore consideration will be have of such place . and if such port and choose place of settle be in possession and after fortify by art , although by the land side our Englishman be keep in , and may not enjoy any traffic with the next neighbour , nor any victual : yet may they victuali themselves of fish to serve very necessity , and enter into amity with the enemy of their next neighbour , and so have vent of their merchandise of England and also have victual , or by mean hereupon to be use , to force the next neigh - 248 hour to amity . And keep a navy at the settle place , they shall find out along the tract of the land to have traffic , and at diverse island also . and so this first seat may in time become a stapling place of the commodity of many country and territory , and in time this place may become of all the province round about the only governor . and if the place first choose shall not so well please our people , as some other moor late find out : there may be a easy remove , and that may be raze , or rather keep for other of our nation to avoid a ill neighbour . if the soil adjoin to such convenient haven and settle place be find marshy and boggy , than man skilful in drain be to be carry thither . for art may work wonderful effect therein , and make the soil rich for many use . to plant upon a island in the mouth of some notable river , or upon the point of the land enter into the river , if no such island be , be to great end . for if such river be navigable or portable far into the land , then will arise great hope of plant in fertile soil , and traffic on the one or on the other side of the river , or on both , or the link in amity with one or other petty king contend there for dominion . such river find , both barge and boat may be make for the safe passage of such as shall pierce the same . these be to be cover with double of course linen artificial wrought , to defend the arrow or the dart of the savage from the rower . since every soil of the world by art may be make to yield thing to feed and to clothe man , bring in your return a perfect note of the soil without and within , and we shall devise if need require to amend the same , and to draw it to more perfection . and if you find not fruit in your plant place to your like , we shall in five drifat furnish you with such kind of plant to be carry thither the winter after your plant , as shall the very next summer follow yield you some fruit , and 249 the year next follow , as much as shall suffice a town as big as Calais , and that short after shall be able to yield you great store of strong durable good sider to drink , and these tree shall be able to increase you within less than seven year as many tree present to bear , as may suffice the people of diverse parish , which at the first settle may stand you in great stead , if the soil have not the commodity of fruit of goodness already . and because you ought greedy to hunt after thing that yield present relief , without trouble of carriage thither , therefore i make mention of these thus special , to the end you may have it special in mind .