, and bring safe home into their own native country that wealth and riches , which they in foreign region with adventure of good , and danger of their life have seek for . by the north - east there be no way , the southeast passage the Portugal do hold as the lord of those sea . at you southwest magellans experience have partly teach we , and partly we be persuade by reason , how the eastern current strike so furious on that straight , and fall with such force into that narrow gulf , that hardly any ship can return that way into our west ocean out of Mar deal Zur . the which if it be true , as true it be , than we may say that the aforesaid eastern current or levant course of water continual * 95 follow after the heavenly motion , lodse not altogether his force , but be double rather by a other current from out the north - east , in the passage between America and the north land , whither it be of necessity carry : have none other way to maintain it self in circular motion , and consequent the force and fury thereof to be no less in the strait of Anian , where it strike south into mar deal Zur , beyond America ( if any such straight of sea there be ) than in Magellans fret , both straight be of like breadth : as in Belognine zalterius table of new France , and in don Diego Hermano de Toledo his card for navigation in that region we do find precise set down . nevertheless to approve that there lie a way to Cathayo at the northwest from out of Europe , we have experience , namely of three brethren that go that journey , as gemma Frisius record , and leave a name unto that strait , whereby now it be call Fretum trium fratrum . we do read again of a Portugal that pass this straight , of who master Frobisher speak , that be imprison therefore many year in Lisbon , to verify the old spanish proverb , i suffer for do well . likewise Andrew Urdaneta a friar of Mexico come out of Mar deal Zur this way into Germany : he card ( for he be a great discoverer ) make by his own experience and travel in that voyage , have be see by gentleman of good credit . Cic . 1 . de now if the observation and remembrance of thing he breed experience , and of experience proceed art , ea ? ' and the certain knowledge we have in all faculty , as the best philosopher that ever be do affirm : true the voyage of these aforesaid traveller that have go out of Europe into mar deal Zur , and return thence at the northwest , do most evident conclude that way to be navigable , and that passage free . so much the Lib . i Geog . moor we be so to think , for that the first principle Cap . 2 . and chief ground in all geographic , as Ptolome say , 196 be the history of travel , that be , report make by traveller skilful in geometric and astronomic , of all such thing in their journey as to Geographic do belong . it only then remain , that we now answer to those argument that seem to make against this former conclusion . the first objection be of no force , that general table Sol . i . of the world set forth by Ortelius or Mercator , for it great skill not , be unskilful draw for that point : as manifest it may appear unto any one that confer the same with gemma Frisius his universali map , with his round quarter card , with his globe , with Sebastian Cabota his table , and Ortelius his general map alone , worthy prefer in this case before all Mercator and Ortelius other do : for that Cabota be not only a skilful sea man , but a long traveller , and such a one as enter personal that straight , send by king Henry the seven to make this aforesaid discovery , as in his own discourse of navigation you may read in his card draw with his own hand , that the mouth of the north wester ne straight lie near the 318 . Meridian , between 61 . and 64 . degree in the elevation , continue the same breed that about 10 . degree west , where it open southerly moor and more , until it come under the tropic of cancer , and so run into mar deal Zur , at the least 18 . degree more in breadth there , than it be where it first begin : otherwise i can as well imagine this passage to be more unlikely than the voyage to Moscovia , and more impossible than it for the far situation and continuance thereof in the frosty clime : as now i can affirm it to be very possible and most likely in comparison thereof , for that it neither coast so far north as the moscovian passage do , neither be this straight so long as that , before it bow down southerly towards the sun again . the second argument conclude nothing . Ptolome Sol . 2 . know not what be above sixteen degree south 197 beyond the equinoctial line , he be ignorant of all passage northward from the elevation of 63 . degree : he know no ocean sea beyond Asia , yet have the Portugal trend the cape of good hope at the south point of Africa , and travel to Japan a island in the east ocean , between Asia and America : our merchant in the time of king Edward the sixth discover the moscovian passage far north than Thyle , and show Greenland not to be continent with Lappeland and Norway : the like our northwestern traveller have do , declare by their navigation that way , the ignorance of all cosmographer that either do join Greenland with America , or continue the west Indies with that frosty region under the north pole . as for Virgil he sing accord to the knowledge of man in his time , as a other poet do of the hot zone . Ovid . 1 . Quarum quae media est , non est habitabilis aestu . etam ' imagine ,