shall | be force to lie in open road abroad without , to be disperse with all wind and tempest that shall arise . thus seat you shall be least subject to annoy of the enemy , so may you by your navy within pass out to all part of the world , and so may the ship of England have access to you to supply all want , so may your commodity be carry away also . this seat be to be choose in a temperate climate , in sweet air , where you may possess always sweet water , wood , seacole or turf , with 244 fish , flesh , grain , fruit , herb and root , or so many of those as may suffice very necessity for the life of such as shall plant there . and for the possess of mine of gold , of silver , copper , quicksilver , or of any such precious thing , the want of those needful thing may be supply from some other place by sea , etc stone to make lime of , ' slate stone to tile withal , or such clay as make tile , stone to wall withal , if Brycke may not be make , timber for building easy to * be convey to the place , reed to cover house or such like , if tile or slate be not . be to be look for as thing without which no city may be make nor people in civil sort be keep together . the people there to plant and to continue be either to live without traffic , or by traffic and by trade of merchandise . if they shall live without sea traffic , at the first they become naked by want of linen and woollen , and very miserable by infinite want that will otherwise ensue , and so will they be force of themselves to depart , or else easy they will be consume by the Spaniard , by the Frenchman , or by the natural inhabitant of the country , and so the enterprise become reproachful to our nation , and a let to many other good purpose that may be take in hand . and by trade of merchandise they can not live , except the sea or the land there may yield commodity . and therefore you ought to have most speciali regard of that point , and so to plant , that the natural commodity of the place and seat may draw to you access of navigation for the same , or that by your own navigation you may carry the same out , and fetch home the supply of the want of the seat . such navigation so to be employ shall , beside the supply of want , be able to encounter with foreign force . 245 and for that in the ample vent of such thing as be bring to you out of England by sea , stand a matter of great consequence , it behoove that all humanity and courtesy and much forbear of revenge to the inland people be use : so shall you have firm amity with your neighbour , so shall you have their inland commodity to maintain traffic , and so shall you wax rich and strong in force . diverse and several commodity of the inland be not in great plenty to be bring to your hand , without the aid of some portable or navigable river , or ample lake , and therefore to have the help of such a one be most requisite : and so be it of effect for the disperse of your own commodity in exchange into the inland . nothing be more to be endeavour with the inland people than familiarity . for so may you best discover all the natural commodity of their country , and also all their want , all their strength , all their weakness , and with who they be in war , and with who confederate in peace and amity , etc which know you may work many great effect of great consequence . and in your plant the consideration of the climate and of the soil be matter that be to be respect . for if it be so that you may let in the salt sea water , not mix with the fresh into flat , where the sun be of the heat that it be at rochel , in the bay of Portugal , or in Spain , then may you procure a man of skill , and so you have win one noble commodity for the fish , and for trade of merchandise by make or if the soil and climate be such as may yield you the grape as good as that at Bordeaux , as that in Portugal , or as that about Sivil in Spain , or that in the island of the canary , then there rest but a workman to put in execution to make wine , and to dress resign of the sun and other , etc or if you find a soil of the temperature of the south part of Spain or Barbary in the which you 246 find the olive tree to grow : than you may be assure of a noble merchandise for this realm , consider that our great trade of clothing do require oil , and weigh how dear of late it be become by the vent they have of that commodity in the west Indies , and if you find the wild olive there it may be graft . or if you can find the berry of cochenile with which we colour stammelle , or any root , berry , fruit , wood or earth fit for die , you win a notable thing fit for our state of clothing . this cochenile be natural in the west Indies on that firm . or if you have hide of beast fit for sole leather , etc it will be a merchandise right good , and the savage there yet can not tanne leather after our kind , yet excellent after their own manner . or if the soil shall yield fig , almond , sugar cane , quince , orange , lemon , potato , etc there may arise some trade and traffic by fig , almond , sugar , Marmelade , sucket , etc or if great wood be find , if they be of cypress , chest may be make , if they be of some kind of tree , pitch and tar may be make , if they be of some