, and also a enforce of a great many new : why then shall we now doubt of our northwest passage and navigation from England to India ? etc see that Atlantis now call America , be ever know to be a island , and in those day navigable round about , which by access of more water can not be diminish . also Aristotle in his book de mundo , and the learned germane Simon Gryneus in his annotation upon the same , say that the whole earth ( mean thereby , as manifest do appear , Asia , Africa , and Europe , be all the country then know ) be but one island , compass about with the reach of the sea Atlantine : which likewise prove America to be a island , and in no part adjoin to Asia , or the rest . Strabo lib . 15 . also many ancient writer , as Strabo and other , call both the ocean sea , ( which lie east of India ) Atlanticum pelagus , and that sea also on the west coast of Spain and Africa , mare Atlanticum : the distance between the two coast be almost half the compass of the earth . so that it be incredible , as by Plato appear manifest , that the east indian sea have the name Atlanticum pelagus of the mountain Atlas in Africa , or yet the sea adjoin to Africa , have the name Oceanus Atlanticus Valerius of the same mountain : but that those sea and the anselmus in mountain Atlas be so call of this great island rum Orin Atlantis , and that the one and the other have their name dpium . folio 6 . for a memorial of the mighty prince Atlas , sometime king Gen . 9 10 . thereof , who be Japhet young son to Noah , in who time the whole earth be divide between the three brethren , Sem , cam , and Japhet . wherefore i be of opinion that America by the northwest will be find favourable to this our enterprise , and be the rather embolden to believe the same , for that i find it not only confirm by Plato , Aristotle , and other ancient philosopher : but also by all the best [ two modern geographer , as gemma Frisius , Munsterus , Appianus , Hunterus , Gastaldus , Guyccardinus , Michael 162 Tramasinus , Franciscus Demongenitus , Bernardus Puteanus , Andreas Vavasor , Tramontanus , Petrus martyr , and also Ortelius , who do coast out in his general map set out anno 1569 , all the country and cape , on the northwest side of America , from Hochelaga to cape de Paramantia : describe likewise the sea coast of Cataia and Gronland , towards any part of America , make both Gronland and America , island disjoin by a great sea , from any part of Asia . all which learned man and painful traveller have affirm with one consent and voice , that America be a island : and that there lie a great sea between it , Cataia , and Grondland , by the which any man of our country , that will give the attempt , may with small danger pass to Cataia , the Moluccas , India , and all other place in the east , in much short time , then either the Spaniard , or Portugal do , or may do , from the near part of any of their country within Europe . what move these learned man to affirm thus much , wh i know not , or to what end so many and sundry traveller of both age have allow the same : but i reverent conjecture that they will never have so constant opinion of affirm , or notify their opinion therein to the world , worthy man . if they have not have great good cause , and many probable reason , to have lead they thereunto . now lest you shall make small account of ancient writer or of their experience which travel long before our time , reckon their authority among fable of no importance : i have for the better assurance of those proof , set down some part of a discourse , write in the saxon tongue , and translate into english by m . Nowell servant to sir William Cecil , lord Burleigh , and lord high treasurer of England , wherein there be describe a navigation , which one ochther make , in the time of a navigation king Alfred , king of westsaxe anno 871 . the word of ofoneqchther which discourse be these : he sail right north , have always the desert land on the starborde , and on the larboard the main sea , continue his course , until 163 a perfect description ofour Moscovia voyage - by sir Hugh Willouglibie knight , chancellor and borough . he perceive that the coast bow direct towards the east , or else the sea open into the land he can not tell how far , where he be compel to stay until he have a western wind , or somewhat upon the north , and sail thence direct east alongst the coast , so far as he be able in four day , where he be again enforce to tarry until he have a north wind , because the coast there bow direct towards the south , or at least open he know not how far into the land , so that he sail thence along the coast continual full south , so far as he can travel in the space of five day , where he discover a mighty river , which open far into the land , and in the entry of this river he turn back again . whereby it appear that he go the very same way , that we now do yearly trade by saint Nicholas into mos - covia , which way no man in our age know for certainty to be by sea , until it be since discover by our english man , in the time of king Edward the sixth ; but think before that time that Groneland have join to Normoria , Byarmia , etc and therefore be account a new discovery , be nothing so indeed , as by this discourse of ochther it appear . nevertheless if any man shall have take this voyage in hand by the encouragement of this only author , he shall