must needs strike over , upon the coast of island , Norway , Finmarke , and Lappia , ( which be east from the say place about 360 league ) with great force than it do from cape de Posita causa , buona speranda , upon the fret of Magellan , or from effec - the fret of Magellan to cape Fredo , upon which coast ' Jaques Cartier meet with the same , consider the shortness of the cut from the say cape Fredo , to island , Lappia , etc and so the cause efficient remain , it will have continual follow along our coast , through the narrow sea , which it do not , but be digested about the north of Labrador , by some through passage there through this fret . the like course of the water in some respect happen in the mediterrane sea ( as affirm Conterenus ) whereas Conterenus . the current which come from Tanais , and Pontus Euxinus , run along all the coast of Greece , Italy , France , and Spain , and not find sufficient way out through Gibraltar , by mean of the straitness of the fret it run back again along the coast of Barbary , by Alexandria , Anatolia , etc 167 a objection answer . the sea do evermore per - fbrme this circular motion , either in Suprema , or concava superficie aqua . the ice set westward every year from island . Auth . Jona arngrimo . it may ( peradventure ) be think that this course of the sea do sometime surcease , and thereby impugn this principle , because it be not discern all along the coast of America , in such sort as Jaques Cartier find it : whereunto i answer this : that albeit , in every part of the coast of America , or elsewhere this current be not sensible perceive , yet it have evermore such like motion , either in the uppermost or nethermost part of the sea : as it may be prove true , if you sink a sail by a couple of rope , near the ground , fasten to the nethermost corner two gun chamber or other weight : by the drive whereof you shall plain perceive , the course of the water , and current , run with such course in the bottom . by the like experiment , you may find the ordinary motion of the sea , in the ocean : how far soever you be off the land . 9 also there come another current from out the north - east from the scythian sea ( as m . Jenkinson a man of rare virtue , great travail and experience , tell i ) which run westward towards Labrador , as the other do , which come from the south : so that both these current , must have way through this our fret , or else encounter together and run contrary course , in one line , but no such conflict of stream , or contrary course be find about any part of Labrodor , or terra nova , as witness our yearly fisher , and other sailor that way , but be there digest , as aforesaid , and find by experience of Barnard de la Torre , to fall into mar deal Sur . 10 furthermore , the current in the great ocean , can not have be maintain to run continual one way , from the begin of the world unto this day , have there not be some thorough passage by the fret aforesaid , and so by circular motion be bring again to maintain it self : for the tide and course of the sea be maintained by their interchangeable motion : as fresh river be by spring , by ebb and flow , by rarefaction and condensation . 168 so that it rest not possible ( so far as my simple reason can comprehend ) that this perpetuali current can by any mean be maintain , but only by continual reaccess of the same water , which pass through the fret , and be bring about thither again , by such circular motion as aforesaid . and the certain fall thereof by this fret into mar deal Sur be prove by the testimony and experience , of Bernard de la Torre , who be send from P . de la Natividad to the Moluccae , anno domini 1542 . by commandment of Anthony Mendoza , than viceroy of Nova Hispania , which Bernard sail 750 . league , on the northside of the aequator , and there meet with a current , which come from the north - east the which drive he back again to Tidore . wherefore , this current be prove to come from C . de buona speranda to the fret of Magellan , and want sufficient entrance there , by narrowness of the strait , be by the necessity of nature force , bring to terra de Labrador , where Jaques Cartier meet the same , and thence certain know , not to strike over upon island , Lappia , etc and find by Bernard de la Torre in Mar del Sur , on the backside of America : therefore this current ( have none other passage ) must of necessity , fall out through this our fret into mar deal Sur , and so trending by the Moluccae , China , and C . de buona speranda , maintain it self by circular motion , which be all one in nature , with motus ab orient in occidentem . A . D . 1576 . the flow m occasion by reason that the heat of the moon boil , and make the water thin by way of rarefaction . a experience to prove the fall of this current into mar deal Sur . so that it seem , we have now more occasion to doubt of our return , than whether there be a passage that way , yea or no : which doubt , hereafter shall be sufficient remove . wherefore , in my opinion , reason it self , ground upon experience , assure we of this passage , if there be nothing else to put we in hope thereof . but least these may not suffice , i have add in this chapter follow , some further proof hereof , by the experience of such as have pass some part of this discovery : and in the next adjoin to that