that present i find our compass to point . be vary ill . deg . and one 4 . part to the westwards , which be one point . 11 . the 11 day at a southeast sun we have sight of the ne island open janj of FriSeland bear from we west northwest 16 . s a ' league , and rise like pinnacle of steeple , and all cover with snow . i find my self in 61 . degr . of latitude . we sail to the shore and can find no ground at 150 . fathom , we hoist out our boat , and the captain with 4 . man row to the shore to get on land , but the land lie full of ice , they can not get on land , and so they come aboard again : we have much ado to get clear of the ice by reason of the fog . yet from Thursday 8 . a clock in the morning to Friday at noon we sail Southwest 20 . league . 206 the 18 . day at a southwest sun i find the sun 18 . to be elevate 33 . deg . and at a southsoutheast sun 40 . deg . so i observe it till i find it at the high , and then it be elevate 52 . deg . i judge the variation the variation of the compass to be 2 . point and a half to the t ^ o point and westward . , a half to the the 21 . day we have sight of a great drift of ice , west . seem a firm land , and we cast westward to be a great clear of it . of ice . the 26 . we have sight of a land of ice : the latitude the latitude off be 62 . degree , and two minute . 62 . degree z . the 28 . day in the morning be very foggy : but at * the clear up of the fog , we have sight of land , sight of land which i suppose to be Labrador , with great store of t0 ice about the land : i run in towards it , and sound , i ^ nr . but can get no ground at 100 fathom , and the ice be so thick , i can not get to the shore , and so lie off , and come clear of the ice . upon Monday 30 . we come within a mile of the shore , and seek a harborowe : all the sound be full of ice , and our boat row a shore , can get no ground at 100 fathom , within a cable length of the shore : than we sail eastnortheast along the shore , for so the land lie , and the currant be there great , set Northeast , and Southwest : and if we can have get anchor ground , we will have see with what force it have run , but i judge a ship may drive a league and a half , in one hour , with that tide . this day at 4 . of the cloak in the morning , be 31 . fair and clear , we have sight of a head land , as we judge , bear from we north , and by east , and we sail Northeast , and by north to that land , and when we come thither , we can not get to the land for ice : for the ice stretch along the coast , so that we can not come to the land , by five league . Wednesday the first of August it calm , and in the augiist . after noon i cause my boat to be hoist out , be king hard by a great island of ice , and i and four man row 2 ' 207 they enter the strait in the latitude of fit , . deg . ands . min . 12 . ' 3 - [ he - 3i i 14 . ’ s - 16 . to that ice , and sound within two cable length of it , and have sixteen fathom , and little stone , and after that sound again within a minion shoot , and have ground at a hundred fathom , and fair sand : we sound the next day a quarter of a mile from it , and have sixty fathom rough ground , and at that present be aboard , that great island of ice fall one part from another , make a noise as if a great cliff have fall into the sea and at four of the clock i sound again , and have 90 . fathom , and small black stone , and little white stone , like pearl . the tide here do set to the shore . the ten i take four man , and my self , and row to shore to a island one league from the main , and there the flood set southwest alongst the shore , and it flow as near as i can judge so too , i can not tarry to prove it , because the ship be a great way from i , and i fear a fog : but when i come a shore , it be a low water . i go to you top of the island , and before i come back , it be hie a foot water , and so without tarry i come aboard . the 11 . we find our latitude to be 63 . degr . and eight minute , and this day we enter the strait . the 12 . we set sail towards a island , call the gabriels island , which be 10 . league then from we . we espy a sound , and bear with it , and come to a sandy bay , where we come to a anchor , the land bear east southeast off " we , and there we ride all night in 8 . fathom water . it flow there at a southeast moon . we call it prior sound , be from the gabriels island , ten league . the 14 . we weigh , and run into another sound , where we anchor in 8 . fathom water , fair sand , and black oaze , and there calk our ship , be weak from the wale upward , and take in fresh water . the 15 . day we weigh , and sail to prior bay , be a mile from thence . the 16 . day be calm , and we ride still ,