passage , i turn back again , and sail down by the coast of that land towards the equinoctial ( ever with intent to find the say passage to India ) and come to that part of this firm land which be now call Florida , where my victual fail , i depart from thence and return into England , where i find great tumult among the people , and preparation for war in Scotland : by reason whereof there be no more consideration have to this voyage . whereupon i go into Spain to the catholique king , and queen Elizabeth , which be advertise what i have do , entertain i , and at their charge furnish certain ship , wherewith they cause i to sail to dis - 148 cover the coast of Brasile , where i find a exceed great and large river name at this present Rio de la plata , that be , the river of silver , into the which i sail and follow it into the firm land , more than six score league , find it every where very fair , and inhabit with infinite people , which with admiration come run daily to our ship . into this river run so many other river , that it be in manner incredible . after this i make many other voyage , which i now pretermit , and wax old , i give my self to rest from such travel , because there be now many young and lusty pilot and mariner of good experience , by who for - office of wardnesse i do rejoice in the fruit of my labour , and ’ " ‘ mere with the charge of this office , as you see . the foresay Baptista Ramusius in his preface to the third volume of the navigation , write thus of Sebastian Cabot . n the latter part of this volume be put certain relation of John de Vararzana , florentine , and of a great captain a Frenchman , and the two voyage of Jaques Cartier a briton , who sail unto the land situate in 50 . degree of latitude to the north , which be call new France , which land hitherto be not thorough know , whether they do join with the firm land of Florida and Nova Hispania , or whether they be separate and divide all by the sea as hand : and whether that by that way one may go by sea unto the country of Cathaia . as many year past it be write unto i by Sebastian Cabota our country man a venetian , a man of great experience , and very rare in the art of navigation , and the knowledge of cosmography , who sail along and beyond this land of new France , at the charge of king Henry the seven king of England : and he advertise i , that have sail a long time west and by north , the great fro - babilitleofthis northwest passage . 149 beyond those hand unto the latitude of 67 . degree and a half , under the north pole , and at the n . day of June find still the open sea without any manner of impediment , he think very by that way to have pass on still the way to Cathaia , which be in the east , and will have do it , if the mutiny of the shipmaster and mariner have not hinder he and make he to return homeward from that place . but it seem that God do yet still reserve this great enterprise for some great prince to discover this voyage of Cathaia by this way , which for the bring of the spicery from India into Europe , be the most easy and short of all other way hitherto find out . and sure this enterprise will be the most glorious , and of most importance of all other that can be imagine to make his name great , and fame immortali , to all age to come , far more than can be do by any of all these great trouble and war e among the miserable christian people . which daily be use in Europa another testimony of the voyage of Sebastian Cabot to the west and northwest , take out of the sixth chapter of the three decade of Peter martyr of Angleria . crutatus est oras glaciales Sebastianus quidam Cabotus genere Venetus , say a parentibus in . britanniam insulam tendentibus ( uti moris est venetorum , qui commercii causa terrarum omnium sunt hospite ) transportatus pene infans . duo be sibi navigia , propria pecunia in Brit - annia ipsa instruxit , and prim tendens cum hominibus tercentum ad septentrionem donec etiam julio mense vastas repererit glaciales mole pelago natantes , and lucem fere perpetuam , tellure tamen libera , gelu liquefacto : quare coactus fuit , uti ait , vela vertere and occidentem sequi : tetenditque tantum ad meridiem littore seize in - * 5 ° curvante , ut herculei freti latitudinis fere gradus aequarit : ad occidentemque profectus tantum est ut cubam insulam a laeva , longitudine graduum pene parem , habuerit . be ea littora percurren , quae baccalaos appelavit , eosdem se reperisse aquarum , sed lenes delapsus ad occidentem ait , quos Castellani , meridionales suas regiones adnavigantes , inveniunt . ergo non modd verisimilius , sed necessario concludendum est , vastos inter utramque ignotam hactenus tellurem jacere hiatus , qui viam praebeant aquis ab orient cadentibus in occidentem . quas arbitror impulsu coelorum circulariter agi in gyrum circa terrae globum , non autem demogorgo anhelante vomi , absorberique ut nonnulli senserunt , quod influxu , and refluxu forsan assentire daretur . baccalaos , Cabotus ipse terras illa appellavit , eo quod in earum pelago tantam reperierit magnorum quorundam piscium , tynnos aemulantium , sic vocatorum ab indigenis , multitudinem , ut etiam illi interdum navigia detardarent . earum regionum homines pellibus tantum coopertos reperiebat , rationis haudquaquam expertes . Ursorum inesse regionibus copiam ingentem refert , qui and ipsi piscibus vescantur . inter densa namque piscium illorum agmina seize immergunt ursi , and singulos singuli complexos , unguibusque inter squamma immissis in terram raptant and comedunt . propterea minime noxios hominibus visos esse ait . Orichalcum in plerisque locis se vidisse apud incolas praedicat . Familiarem habeo domi cobotum ipsum , and contubernalem intejdum . Vocatus namque ex britannia a rege nostro catholico , post henrici majoris britanniae regis mortem , concurialis noster est , expectatque indies , ut navigia sibi parentur , quibus arcanum hoc naturae laten jam tandem detegatur . the same in english . these north sea have be search by one Sebastian Cabot , a venetian bear , who be yet but in manner a infant , his parent carry with they into England , have occasion to resort thither for trade of mar - the people of island say the sea and ice set also west . Jonas arngrimus . chandise , as be the manner of the venetian to leave no part of the world unsearched to obtain riches . he therefore furnish two ship in England at his own charge , and first with 300