a extract take out of the map of Sebastian Cabot , cut by clement Adam , concern his discovery of the west Indies , which be to be see in her majesty privy gallery at Westminster , and in many other ancient merchant house . nno domini 1497 Joannes Cabotus Venetus , and Sebastianus illius filius eam terram fecerunt perviam , quam nullus prius adire ausus fuit , die 24 Junii , circiter horam quintam bene mane . hanc autem appellavit terram primum visam , credo quod ex mari in eam partem primum oculos injecerat . nam quae ex adverso sita est insula , eam appellavit insulam divi Joannis , hac opinor ratione , qudd aperta fuit eo die qui est sacer divo Joanni Baptistae : huius incolae pelles animalium , exuviasque ferarum pro indumentis habent , easque tanti faciunt , vn 145 king quanti nos vestes preciosissimas . cum bellum gerunt , utuntur arcu , sagittis , hasti , spiculis , clavis ligneis and fundis . Tellus sterilis est , neque ullos fructus aflert , ex quo fit , ut ursis albo colore , and cervis inusitatae apud nos magnitudinis referta sit : piscibus abundat , iisque sane magnis , quales sunt lupi marini , and quos salmon vulgus appellat ; soleae autem reperiuntur tam longae , ut ulnae mensuram excedant . imprimis autem magna est copia eorum piscium , quos vulgari sermon vocant bacallaos . gignuntur in ea insula accipitres ita nigri , ut corvorum similitudinem mirum in modum exprimant , perdices autem and aquilae sunt nigri coloris . the same in english . in the year of our lord 1497 John Cabot a venetian , and his son Sebastian ( with a english fleet set out from Bristol ) discover that land which no man before that time have attempt , on the 24 of June , about five of the clock early in the morning . this land he call prima vista , that be to say , first see , because as i suppose it be that part whereof they have the first sight from sea . that island which lie out before the land , he call the island of S . John upon this occasion , as i think , because it be discover upon the day of John the baptist . the inhabitant of this island use to wear beast skin , and have they in as great estimation as we have our fine garment . in their war they use bow , arrow , pike , dart , wooden club , and sling . the soil be barren in some place , and yield little fruit , but it be full of white bear ; and stag far great than we . it yield plenty of fish , and those very great , as seal , and those which common we call salmon : there be sole also above a yard in length : but especial there be great abundance of that kind of fish which the savage call baccalaos . in the same island also there breed hauk , but they be so black that they be very like to raven , as also their partridge , and eagle , which be in like sort black . 146 a discourse of Sebastian Cabot touch his discovery of part of the west India out of England in the time of king Henry the seven , use to Galeacius Butrigarius the pope legate in Spain , and report by the say legate in this sort . ) e you not understand say he ( speak to certain gentleman of Venice ) how to pass to India towards the northwest , as do of late a citizen of Venice , so valiant a man , and so well practise in all thing pertain to navigation , and the science of cosmography , that at this present he have not his like in Spain , insomuch that for his virtue he be prefer above all other pilot that sail to the west Indies , who may not pass thither without his licence , and be therefore call piloto mayor , that be , the grand pilot and when we say that we know he not , he proceed , say , that be certain year in the city of Sivil , and desirous to have some knowledge of the navigation of the Spaniard , it be tell he that there be in the city a valiant man , a venetian bear name Sebastian Cabot , who have the charge of those thing , be a expert man in that science , and one that can make card for the sea with his own hand , and that by this report , seek his acquaintance , he find he a very gentle person , who entertain he friendly , and show he many thing , and among other a large map of the world , with certain particular navigation , as well of the Portugal , as of the Spaniard , and that he speak further unto he to this effect . this discourse be take out of the second volume of the voyage of Baptista Ramusius . Sebastian Cabota Pilot mayor of Spain . when my father depart from Venice many year since to dwell in England , to follow the trade of merchandises , he take i with he to the city of London , while i be very young , yet have nevertheless some knowledge of letter of humanity , and of the sphere . 147 the second voyage of Cabot to the land of Brasil , and Rio the plat a . and when my father die in that time when news be bring that don Christopher Colonus Genuese have discover the coast of India , whereof be great talk in all the court of king Henry the 7 . who then reign , insomuch that all man with great admiration affirm it to be a thing more divine then humane , to sail by the west into the east where spice grow , by a way that be never know before , by this fame and report there increase in my heart a great flame of desire to attempt some notable thing . And understand by reason of the sphere , that if i shall sail by way of they northwest , i shall by a short tract come into India , i thereupon cause the king to be advertise of my devise , who immediate command two caravel to be furnish with all thing appertain to the voyage , which be as far as 1 remember in the year 1496 . in the begin of summer . i begin therefore to sail towards the northwest , not think to find any other land then that of Cathay , and from thence to turn towards India , but after certain day i find that the land run towards the north , which be to i a great displeasure . nevertheless , sail along by the coast to see if i can find any gulf that turn , i find the land still continent to the 56 . degree under our pole . And see that there the coast turn towards the east , despair to find the