if 189 i may perceive that it shall not sufficient satisfy you in this behalf , i will then impart unto you a large discourse , which i have write only of this discovery . and further , because it suffice not only to know that such a thing there be , without ability to perform the same , i will at leisure make you partaker of another simple discourse of navigation , wherein i have not a little travel , to make my self as sufficient to bring these thing to effect , as i have be ready to offer my self therein . and therein i have devise to amend the error of usual sea card , who common fault be , to make the degree of longitude in every latitude of one like bigness . and have also devise therein a spherical instrument , with a compass of variation for the perfect know of the longitude . and a precise order to prick the sea card , together with certain infallible rule for the shorten of any discovery , to know at the first enter of any fret , whether it lie open to the ocean more way than one , how far soever the sea stretch it self into the land . desire you hereafter never to mislike with i , for the take in hand of any laudable and honest enterprise : for if through pleasure or idleness we purchase shame , the pleasure vanish , but the shame remain for ever . and therefore to give i leave without offence , always to live and die in this mind , that he be not worthy to live at all , that for fear , or danger of death , shun his country service , and his own honour : see death be inevitable , and the fame of virtue immortali . wherefore in this behalf , mutare vel timere sperno . 190 certain other reason , or argument to prove a passage by the northwest , learned write by m . Richard Willes gentleman . four famous way there be speak of to those fruitful and wealthy island , which we do usual call Moluccaes , continual haunt for gain , and daily travel for riches therein grow . Theise Islands , although they stand east from the meridian , distant almost half the length of the world , in extreme heat , under the equinoctial line , possess of infidel and barbarian : yet by our neighbour great abundance of wealth there be painful seek in respect of the voyage . dear buy , and from thence dangerous bring home unto we . our neighbour i call the Portugal in comparison of the molucchians for nearness unto we , for like situation westward as we have , for their usual trade with we , for that the far southeasterling do know this part of Europe by no other name then Portugal , not great acquaint as yet with the other nation thereof . their voyage be very well understand of all man , and the southeasterne way round about 1 by the Africa by the cape of good hope more speak of , better o ^ ttst . know and travel , then that it may seem needful to discourse thereof any further . the second way lie southwest , between the west 2 A ? tJie India or south America , and the south continent , through authwest - that narrow strait where Magellan first of all man that ever we do read of , pass these latter year , leave thereunto therefore his name . the way no doubt the Spaniard will commodious take , for that it lie near unto their dominion there , can the eastern current and levant wind as easy suffer they to return , be a er ' as speedy therewith they may be carry thither : for it the which difficulty , or rather impossibility of strive against the force both of wind and stream , this passage be little or nothing use , although it be very well know . 191 3 by the the three way by the north - east , beyond all Europe Northeast . anj Asia , that worthy and renown knight sir Hugh Willoughbie seek to his peril , enforce there to end his life for cold , congeal and freeze to death . and true this way consist rather in the imagination of geographer , then allowable either in reason , or approve by experience , as well it may appear by the dangerous Ortel . tab . trending of the scythish cape set by Ortelius under • A ™ * the 80 degree north , by the unlikely sail in that northern sea always clad with ice and snow , or at the least continual pester therewith , if happy it be at any time dissolve : beside bay and shelf , the water wax moor shallow towards the east , that we say nothing of the foul mist and dark fog in the cold clime , of the little power of the sun to clear the air , of the uncomfortable night , so near the pole , five month long . 4 by the a four way to go unto these aforesaid happy island Northeast . moluccas sir Humphrey Gilbert a learned and valiant knight discourse of at large in his new passage to Cathayo . the enterprise of it self be virtuous , the fact must doubtless deserve high praise , and whensoever it shall be finish , the fruit thereof can be small : where virtue be guide , there be fame a follower , and fortune a companion . but the way be dangerous , the passage doubtful , the voyage not thorough know , and therefore gainsay by many , after this manner . Ob . 1 . first , who can assure we of any passage rather by the northwest , then by the north - east ? do not both way lie in equal distance from the north pole ? stand not the north cape of either continent under like elevation ? be not the ocean sea beyond America far distant from our meridian by 30 . or 40 . degree west , than the extreme point of Cathayo eastward , if Ortelius InTheatro . general ! card of the world be true ? in the north - east that noble knight sir Hugh Willoughbie perish for cold : and can you then promise a passenger any better hap