the first voyage of m . Martine Frobisher , to the northwest , for the search of the straight or passage to China , write by Christopher hall , master in the Gabriel , and make in the year of our lord 1576 . he 7 . of June be Thursday , the two bark , viz . the Gabriel , and the two Michael and our pinnace set sail at Ratcliff , and bear down to Detford , and there we anchor : the cause be , that our pinnace burst her boultsprit , and foremast aboard of a ship that ride at Detford , else we mean to have pass that day by the court then at Grenewich . the 8 . day be Friday , about 12 of the clock we weigh at Detford , and set sail all three of we , and bear down by the court , where we shoot off our ordinance and make the best show we can : her majesty behold the same , commend it , and bid we farewell , with shake her hand at we out of the window . afterwards she send a gentleman aboard of we , who declare that her majesty have good like of our do , and thank we for it , and also will our captain to come the next day to the court to take his leave of she . the same day towards night m . secretary Woolly come aboard of we , and declare to the company , that her majesty have appoint he to give they charge to be obedient , and diligent to their captain , and governor in all thing , and wish we happy success . the 12 . day be over against Gravesend , by the castle or blockhouse , we observe the latitude , which be 51 . degree 33 . min . and in that place the variation of the compass be 11 . degree and a half . fair island . the 24 . day at 2 . of the clock after noon , i have sight of fair isle , be from we 6 . league north and by east , and when i bring it northwest and by north , 204 it do rise at the southermost end with a little home - mock , and swampe in the mid . the 25 . day from 4 . to 8 . a clock in the forenoon , the wind at northwest and by north a fresh gale , i cast about to the westward , the southermost head of shot - Shotland . land call Swinborne head northnorthwest from i , and the land of fair isle , west Southwest from i . i sail direct to the north head of that say land , sound as i run in , have 60 . 50 . and 40 . fathom , and grey red shell : and within half a mile of that island , there be 36 . fathom , for i sail to that island to see whether there be any roadesteede for a northwest wind , and i find by my sound hard rock , and foul ground , and deep water , within two cable length of the shore , 28 . fathom , and so do not anchor but ply to and fro with my foresail , and mizzen till it be a high water under the island . the tide set there northwest and southeast : the flood set southeast , and the ebb northwest . the 26 . day have the wind at south a fair gale , sail from fair isle to Swinborne head , i do observe the latitude , the island of Fowlay be west northwest from i 6 . league , and Swinborne head east southeast from i , i find my * elevation to be 37 . degr . and my declination 22 . degr . 46 . min . so that my latitude be 59 degr . 46 . min . at that present be near to Swinborne head , have a leak which do trouble we , as also to take in fresh water , i ply room with a sound , which be call saint tronions , and there do anchor in seven fathom water , and fair sand . you have come in the sound mouth in the enter 17 . 15 . 12 . 10 . 9 8 . and 7 . fathom , and the sound lie in north northwest , and there we ride to a west sun , and stop our leak , and have refresh our self with water , at a north northwest sun , i set sail from saint tronions the wind at south south , and turn out till we be clear of the sound , and so sail west to go clear of the island of fowlay . And run olf towards fowlay , 205 * by elevation he mean the distance of the sun from the • zenith . s . tronions . fowlaylstand . i sound , have fifty fathom , and streamy ground , and also i sound fowlay be north from i one league off that island , have fifty fathom at the south head , and streamy ground , like break otmell , and one shell be read and white like mackerel . latitude 59 the 27 . day at a south sun i do observe the erelhe ^ be latitude5 the island of Fowlay be from i two league to sail * east north - east : i find my self to be in latitude 59 west and by degree , 59 min . true observe , the wind at south north . Southwest : i sail west and by north . from 12 . to four a clock afternoon , the wind at south , a fair gale the ship sail west and by north 6 . league , and at the end of this watch , i sound have 60 . fathom , with little stone and shell , the island from we 8 . league east . July the first . the first of July , from 4 . to 8 . a clock , we sail west 4 . glass 4 . league , and at that present we have so much wind that we spoon afore the sea Southwest 2 . league . 3 - the 3 . day we find our compass to be vary one point to the westwards : this day from 4 . to 8 . a clock we sail west and by north 6 . league . the compass from 8 . to 12 . a clock at noon west and by north ards ^ one111 ' 4 ’ league - at