ship can possible come either by the southeast , Southwest or Northeast , have so many sundry cape to double , whereunto be require such change and shift of wind . true , both in 2 and it seem likely that they shall come by oblique northwest , because the coast whereon they be oho indentis drive , lay east from this our passage , and all wind ex diametro do natural drive a ship to a opposite point from spirantibus , whence it blow , not be otherwise guide by art , which the Indians do utter want , and therefore it seem that they come direct through this our fret , which they may do with one wind . 3 for if they have come by the cape de buona speranda , then must they ( as aforesaid ) have fall upon the south part of America . 4 and if by the fret of Magellan , then upon the coast of Africa , Spain , Portugal , France , Ireland or England . 178 5 and if by the north - east , then upon the coast of Ceremissi , Tartarii , Lappia , island , terra de Labrador , etc and upon these coast ( as aforesaid ) they have never be find . so that by all likelihood they can never have come without shipwreck upon the coast of Germany , if they have first strike upon the coast of so many country , want both art and ship to make orderly discovery , and altogether ignorant both in the art of navigation , and also of the rock , flat , sand or haven of those part of the world , which in most of these place be plentiful ! . 6 and further it seem very likely , that the inhabitant of the most part of those country , by which they must have come any other way beside by the northwest , be for the most part anthropophagi , or man eater , will have devour they , slay they , or ( at the least wise ) keep they as wonder for the gaze . so that it plain appear that those Indians ( which as you have hear in sundry age be drive by tempest upon the shore of Germany ) come only through our northwest passage . 7 moreover , the passage be certain prove by a navigation that a Portugal make , who pass through this fret , give name to a promontory far within the same , call it after his own name , Promontorium Corterialis , near adjoin unto Polisacus fluvius . 8 also one Scolmus a Dane enter and pass a great part thereof . 9 also there be one Salvaterra , a gentleman of Victoria in Spain , that come by chance out of the west India into Ireland , anno 1568 . who affirm they northwest passage from we to Cataia , constant to be believe in America navigable . and further say in the presence of sir Henry Sidney ( than lord Deputie of Ireland ) in my hear , that a friar of Mexico , call Andrew Urdaneta , more than eight year before 179 his then come into Ireland , tell he there , that he come from mar deal Sur into Germany through this northwest passage , and show Salvaterra ( at that time be then with he in Mexico ) a sea card make by his own experience and travel in that voyage , wherein be plain set down and describe this northwest passage , agree in all point with Ortelius map . and further , this friar tell the king of Portugal ( as he return by that country homeward ) that there be ( of certainty ) such a passage northwest from England , and that he mean to publish the same : which do , the king most earnest desire he not in any wise to disclose or make the passage know to any nation : for that ( say the king ) if England have know -^ the kin ^ of kdge and experience thereof , it will great hinder Portugal , to both the king of Spain and i . this friar ( as Sal - Andro Urda - vaterra report ) be the great discoverer by sea , neta a friar , that have be in our age . also Salvaterra be touch then nerswade of this passage by the friar Urdaneta , and this northwest then common opinion of the Spaniard inhabit passage from America , offer most willing to accompany i in England to this discovery , which of like he will not have do Cataia . if he stand in doubt thereof . and now as these modern experience can be impugn , so , lest it may be object that these thing ( gather out of ancient writer , which write so many year past ) may serve little to prove this a objection , passage by the north of America , because both America and India be to they then utter unknown : to Aristotle lib . remove this doubt , let this suffice : that Aristotle ( who be 300 . year before Christ ) name mare indi - 5 cum . also Berosus ( who live 330 year before Christ ) have these word , Ganges in India . also in the first chapter of Hester be these word , in the day of Assuerus which rule from India to Aethiopia , which Assuerus live 580 year before Christ . also Quintus Curtius ( where he speak of the conquest of Alexander ) mention India . also , Arianus , Philostratus , 180 and Sidrach in his discourse of the war of the king of Bactria , and of Garaab , who have the most part of India under his government . all which assure we , that both India and Indians be know in those day . these thing consider , we may ( in my opinion ) not only assure our self of this passage by the northwest , but also that it be navigable both to come and go , as have be prove in part and in all , by the experience of diverse , as Sebastian Cabota , Corterialis , the three brethren above name , the Indians , and Urdaneta the friar of Mexico , etc and yet notwithstanding all this , there be some that have a better hope of this passage to Cataia by the north - east