, either to guide his ship , or direct his course . 5 also the compass at such elevation do very 175 quicquid ■ natural loco privatur , quam citissime corrumpitur . Qualls causa talis effectus . quicquid corrumpitur a contrario corrumpitur . omne simile gignit svi simile . sudden vary , which thing must of force have be their destruction , although they have be man of much more skill than the Indians be . 6 moreover , all bay , gulf , and river do receive their increase upon the flood , sensible to be discern on the one side of the shore or the other , as many way as they be open to any main sea , as mare mediterraneum , mare rubrum , Sinus Persicus , Sinus Bodicus , Thamesis , and all other know haven or river in any part of the world , and each of they open but on one part to the main sea , do likewise receive their increase upon the flood the same way , and none other , which mare Glaciale do , only by the west ; as m . Jenkinson affirm unto i : and therefore it follow that this Northeast sea , receive increase but only from the west , can possible open to the main ocean by the east . 7 moreover , the far you pass into any sea towards the end of it , on that part which be shut up from the main sea ( as in all those above mention ) the less and less the tide rise and fall . the like whereof also happen in mare Glaciale , which prove but small continuance of that sea towards the east . 8 also , the further you go towards the east in mare Glaciale , the less salt the water be : which can not happen , if it be open to the salt sea towards the east , as it be to the west only , see every thing natural engender his like : and then must it be like salt throughout , as all the sea be , in such like climate and elevation . and therefore it seem that this Northeast sea be maintain by the river ob , and such like freshet , as mare Goticum , and mare mediterraneum , in the uppermost part thereof by the river Nilus , Danubius , neper , Tanais , etc 9 furthermore , if there be any such sea at that elevation , of like it shall be always freeze throughout ( there be no tide to hinder it ) because the extreme coldness of the air be in the uppermost part , and the extreme coldness of the earth in the bottom , the sea 176 sir Humphrey GILBERT ’ S map of the world , a . d . 1576 the material original position here be too large for reproduction in this reissue . a pdf can be download from the web address give on page iv downlo ^ dedfomthttpsv / www . cambridge . org / core ^ u ^ library , on 30 Aug 2021 at 14 : 06 : 09 , subject to there be but of small depth , whereby the one accidentali coldness do meet with the other , and the sun not have his reflection so near the pole , but at very blunt angel , it can never be dissolve after it be freeze , notwithstanding the great length of their day : for that the sun have no heat at all in his light or beam , but proceed only by a accidentali reflection , which there want in effect . io and yet if the sun be of sufficient force in that elevation , to prevail against this ice , yet must it be break before it can be dissolve , which can be but through the long continuance of the sun above their horizon , and by that time the summer will be so far spend , and so great darkness and cold ensue , that no man can be able to endure so cold , dark , and discomfortable a navigation , if it be possible for he then , and there to live . 11 further , the ice be once break , it must of force so drive with the wind and tide , that no ship can sail in those sea , see our fisher of island , and the new find land , be subject to danger through the great island of ice which fleet in the sea ( to the sailor great danger ) far to the south of that presuppose passage . 12 and it can be that this Northeast passage shall be any near than south , then before recite , for than it shall cut off Ciremissi , and Turbi Tartari , with Uzesucani , Chisani , and other from the continent of Asia , which be know to be adjoin to Scythia , Tartary , etc with the other part of the same continent . and if there be any thorough passage by the north - east , yet be it to small end and purpose for our traffic , because no ship of great burden can navigate in so shallow a sea : and ship of small burden [ three . 19 i be very unfit 8c unprofitable , especial towards the bluster north , to perform such a voyage . [ to prove seven 177 m to prove that the indian aforenamed , come only by the northwest , which induce a certainty of our passage by experience . Cap . 7 . it be as likely that they come by the northwest , as it be unlikely that they shall come either by the southeast , Southwest , Northeast , or from any other part of Africa or America , and therefore this northwest passage have be already so many way prove , by disprove of the other , etc i shall the less need in this place , to use many word otherwise then to conclude in this sort , that they come only by the northwest from England , have these many reason to lead i thereunto . 1 first , the one half of the wind of the compass may bring they by the northwest , bear always between two sheat , with which kind of sail the indian be only acquaint , not have any use of a bow line , or quarter wind , without the which no