common the wind be contrary . and when it be either easterly or southerly , which will serve their turn , then have they so great a fog and dark mist therewith , that either they can not discern way through the ice , or else the ice lie so thick together , that it be impossible for they to pass . and on the other side , when it be calm , the tide have force to bring the ice so sudden about they , that common then they be most therewith distress , have no wind to carry they from the danger thereof . and by the sixth of August be with much ado get up as high as Leicester point , they have good hope to find the Souther shore clear , and so to pass up towards their port . but be there becalm and lie a hull open upon the great bay which come out of the mistake strait before speak of , they be 35 ° so sudden compass with ice round about by mean of the swift tide which run in that place , that they be never afore so hardly beset as now . and in seek to avoid these danger in the dark weather , the anne Francis lose sight of the other two ship , who be likewise hardly distress , signify their danger , as they since report , by shoot off their ordinance , which the other can not hear , nor if they have hear , can have give they any remedy , be so busy occupy to wind themselves out of their own trouble . the fleeboate call the moon , be here heave the moon . above the water with the force of the ice , and receive a great leak thereby . likewise the Thomas of Ipswich , and the anne Francis be sore bruise at that instant , have their false stem bear away , and their ship side strike quite through . now consider the conti nuall danger and contrary , and the little leisure that they have leave to tarry in these part , beside that every night the rope of their ship be so freeze , that a man can not handle they without cut his hand , together with the great doubt they have of the fleet safety , think it a impossibility for they to pass unto their port , as well for that they see themselves , as for that they hear by the former report of the ship which have prove before , who affirm that the strait be all freeze over within : they think it now very high time to consider of their estate and safety that be yet leave together . and hereupon the captain and master of these ship , desire the captain of the anne Francis to enter into the anne consideration with they of these matter . wherefore captain Tanfield of the Thomas of Ipswich , with his pilot Richard Cox , and captain upcote of the moon , the moon c < m - with his master John Lakes come aboard the anne ™ lt . Francis the eight of August to consult of these cause . P11 , 87 - ] and be assemble together in the captain cabin , sundry doubt be there allege . for the fearefull sort of mariner be overtyre with the continual 351 labour of the former danger , covet to return homeward , say that they will not again tempt God so much , who have give they so many warning , and deliver they from so wonderful danger : that they rather desire to lose wage , fraught , and all , than to continue and follow such desperate fortune . again , their ship be so leak , and the man so weary , that to amend the one , and refresh the other , they must of necessity seek into harbour . but on the other side it be argue again to the contrary , that to seek into harbour thereabouts , be but to subject themselves to double danger : if happy they escape the danger of rock in their enter , yet be in , they be nevertheless subject there to the danger of the ice , which with the swift tide and current be carry in and out in most harborough thereabouts , and may thereby gall their cable asunder , drive they upon the shore , and bring they to much trouble . also the coast be so much subject to break ground and rock , especial in the mouth and entrance of every harbour , that albeit the channel be sound over and over again , yet be you never the near to discern the danger . for the bottom of the sea hold like shape and form as the land , be full of hill , dale , and ragged rock , suffer you not by your sounding to know and keep a true guess of the depth . for you shall sound upon the side or hollowness of one hill or rock under water , and have a hundred , fifty , or fourty fathom depth : and before the next cast , year you shall be able to heave your lead again , you shall be upon the top thereof , and come aground to your utter confusion . another reason against go to harbour be , that the cold air do threaten a sudden freeze up of the sound , see that every night there be new congeal ice , even of that water which remain within their ship . and therefore it shall seem to be more safe to lie off and on at sea , then for lack of wind to bring 352 they forth of harbour , to hazard by sudden frost to be shut up the whole year . after many such danger and reason allege , and large debate of these cause on both side , the captain of the anne Francis deliver his opinion unto the company to this effect . First concern the question of return home , he think it so much dishonourable , as not to grow in any far question : and again to return home at length ( as at length they must needs ) and not to be able to bring a certain report of the fleet , whether they be live or lose , or whether any of they have recover their port or not , in the countess sound , ( as it be to be think the most part will if they be live ) he say that it will be so