the form of m . Martin Frobishers letter to the english captive . in the name of God , in who we all believe , who ( i trust ) have preserve your body and soul among these infidel , i commend i unto you . i will be glad to seek by all mean you can devise for your deliverance , either with force , or with any commodity within my ship , which i will not spare for your sake , or any thing else i can do for you . i have aboard , of they , a man , a woman , and a child , which i be content to deliver for you , but the man which i carry away from hence the last year be dead in England . Moreover you may declare unto they , that if they deliver you not , i will not leave a man alive in their country . and thus , if one of you can come to speak with i , they shall have either the man , woman , or child in pawn for you . and thus unto God who i trust you do serve , in haste i leave you , and to he we will daily pray for you . This Tuesday morning the seven of August . anno 1557 . you to the uttermost of my power , Martin Frobisher . i have send you by these bearer , pen , ink , and postscript paper , to write back unto i again , if personal you can come to certify i of your estate . 3 ° 9 the cause why m , Frobisher enter no fur - therwithin the streit this year . best bulwark . their king calledCatchoe . how he be honour . now have the general alter his determination for go any further into the streite at this time for any further discovery of the passage , have take a man and a woman of that country , which he think sufficient for the use of language : and have also meet with these people here , which intercept his man the last year , ( as the apparel and english furniture which be find in their tent , very well declare ) he know it be but a labour lose to seek they further off , when he have find they there at hand . And consider also the short time he have in hand , he think it best to bend his whole endeavour for the get of i , and to leave the passage further to be discover hereafter . for his commission direct he in this voyage , only for the search of the ore , and to defer the further discovery of the passage until another time . on Thursday the nine of August we begin to make a small fort for our defence in the countess island , and entrench a corner of a cliff , which on three part like a wall of good heighth be compass and well fence with the sea , and we finish the rest with cask of the earth , to good purpose , and this be call best bulwark , after the lieutenant name , who first devise - the same . this be do for that we suspect more lest the desperate man may oppress we with multitude , than any fear we have of their force , weapon , or policy of battle : but as wisdom will we in such place ( so far from home ) not to be of our self altogether careless : so the sign which our captive make unto we , of the come down of his governor or prince , which he call Catchoe , give we occasion to foresee what may ensue thereof , for he show by sign that this Catchoe be a man of high stature far then any of our nation be , and he be accustom to be carry upon man shoulder . about midnight the lieutenant cause a false alarm to be give in the island , to prove as well the readiness of the company there ashore , as also what help may be 310 hope for upon the sudden from the ship if need so require , and every part be find in good readiness upon such a sudden . Saturday the eleven of August the people show themselves again , and call unto we from the side of a hill over against we . the general ( with good hope to hear of his man , and to have answer of his letter ) go over unto they , where they present themselves not above three in sight , but be hide indeed in great number behind the rock , and make sign of delay with we to entrap some of we to redeem their own , do only seek advantage to train our boat about a point of land from sight of our company : whereupon our man just suspect they , keep aloof without their danger , and yet set one of our company ashore , which take up a great bladder which one of they offer we , and leave a look glass in the place , come into the boat again . in the mean while our man which stand in the countess island to behold , who may better discern they , than those of the boat , by reason they be on high ground , make a great outcry unto our man in the boat , for that they see diverse of the savage creep behind the rock towards our man , whereupon the general present return without tiding of his man . concern this bladder which we receive , our captive make sign that it be give he to keep water and drink in , but we suspect rather it be give he to swim and shift away withal , for he and the woman seek diverse time to escape , have loose our boat from astern our ship , and we never a boat leave to pursue they withal , and have prevail very far , have they not be very timely espy and prevent therein . after our general come away from they they muster themselves in our sight , upon the top of a hill , to the number of twenty in a rank , all hold