diverse attempt he command his company , if by any possible mean they can get ashore , to bring he whatsoever thing they can first find , whether it be live or dead , stock or stone , in token of christian possession , which thereby he take in behalf of the queen most excellent majesty , think that thereby he may justify then have and enjoy of the same thing that grow in these unknown part . some of his company bring flower , some green grass ; and one bring a piece of black stone much like to a sea coal in colour , which by the weight seem to be some kind of metal or minerali . this 282 be a thing of no account in the judgement of the captain at the first sight ; and yet for novelty it be keep in respect of the place from whence it come . after his arrival in London , be demand of sundry his friend what thing he have bring they home out of that country , he have nothing leave to present they withal but a piece of this black stone . and it fortune a gentlewoman one of the adventurer wife to have a piece thereof , which by chance she throw and burn in the fire , so long , that at the length be take forth , and quench in a little vinegar , it glister with a bright marquesset of gold . whereupon the matter be call in some question , it be bring to certain goldfiner in London to make assay thereof , who give out that it hold gold , and that very rich for the quantity . afterwards , the same goldfiner pro - many adven - mised great matter thereof if there be any store to turers - be find , and offer themselves to adventure for the search of those part from whence the same be bring . some that have great hope of the matter seek secret to have a lease at her majesty hand of those place , whereby to enjoy the mass of so great a public profit unto their own private gain . in conclusion , the hope of more of the same gold over to be find kindle a great opinion in the heart of many to advance the voyage again . whereupon preparation be make for a new voyage against the year follow , and the captain more special direct by commission for the search moor of this gold ore i » than for the search any further discovery of the v ° ya & compassage . And be well accompany with diverse resolute and when me ^ and forward gentleman , her majesty then lie at the fir the bring - right honourable the lord of Warwick house in Essex , mg of ore . he come to take his leave , and kiss her highness hand , with gracious countenance and comfortable word depart towards his charge . [ a true 283 a true report of such thing as happen in the second voyage of captain Frobisher , pretend for the discovery of a new passage to Cataya , China and the east India , by the northwest . Ann . Dom . 1577 . eing furnish with one tall ship of her majesty , name the aid , of two hundred ton , and two other small bark , the one name the Gabriel , the other the Michael , about thirty tun a piece , be fit appoint with man , munition , victual , and all thing niece - sary for the voyage , the say captain Frobisher , with the rest of his company come aboard his ship ride at Blackwall , intend ( with God help ) to take the first wind and tide serve he , the 25 day of May , in the year of our lord God 1577 . the name of such gentleman as attempt this discovery , and the number of soldier and mariner in each ship , as follow . aboard the aid be admiral be the number of 100 man of all sort , whereof 30 or more be gentleman and soldier , the rest sufficient and tall sailor . aboard the Gabriel be vice - admiral , be in all 18 person , whereof six be soldier , the rest mariner . aboard the Michael be 16 person , whereof five be soldier , the rest mariner . 284 ' general of the | whole company for her majesty encage Martin Frobisher . he lieutenant his ensign Corporali of the shot George Best . 1 Richard Philpot . Francis Forder . aboard the aid be the rest of the gentleman ' Henry Carew . Edmund Stafford . John Lee . m . Harvie . Matthew Kinersley . Abraham Lins . Robert Kinersley . Francis Brakenbury . William Armshow . aboard gabrieli aboard Michael than i be | the i be ] the master the mate the pilot - the master gunner ' captain | one gentleman the master 1 captain | one gentleman the master encage ' Christopher hall . Charles Jackman . Andrew Dier . Richard Cox . ' Edward Fenton . William Tamfield . William Smyth . " " Gilbert York . Thomas Chamberlaine . James bear . on Whitsunday be the 26 of may , anno 1577 , early in the morning , we weigh anchor at Blackwall , and fall that tie down to Gravesend , where we remain until Monday at night .. on Monday morning the 27 of may , aboard the aid the ^ mmun - we receive all the communion by the minister of ion 285 thefirst arrival after our departingfrom England . a i of silver find in Orkney . Gravesend , and prepare we as good Christians towards God , and resolute man for all fortune : and towards night we depart to Tilbery hope . Tuesday the eight and twenty of may , about nine of the clock at night , we arrive at Harwitch in Essex and there stay for the take in of certain victual , until Friday be the thirty of May , during which time come letter from the lord of the council , straight command our general , not to exceed his compliment and number appoint he , which be , one hundred and twenty person : whereupon he discharge many proper man which with unwilling mind