the ice begin to congeal and freeze about our ship side a night , which give we a good argument of the sun decline southward , and put we in mind to make more haste homeward . it be not a little worth the memory , to the commendation of the gentleman and soldier herein , who leave all reputation apart , with so great willingness and with courageous stomach , have themselves almost overcome in so short a time the difficulty of this so great a labour . and this to be true , the matter , if it be well weigh without further proof , now bring home do well witness . Thursday the 22 of August , we pluck down our tent , and every man haste homeward , and make bonfire upon the top of the high mount of the island , and march with ensign display round about the island , we give a volley of shot for a farewell , in honour of the right honourable lady Anne , countess of Warwick , who name it bearethi : and so depart aboard . the 23 of August have the wind large at west , we set sail from out of the countess sound homeward , they return . but the wind calm we come to anchor within the point of the same sound again . the 24 of August about three of the clock in the morning , have the wind large at west , we set sail again , and by nine of the clock at night , we leave the queen foreland astern of we , and be clear of the streite , we bear further into the main ocean , keep our course more southerly , to bring our self the soon under the latitude of our own climate . the wind be very great at sea , so that we lay a hull all night , and have snow half a foot deep on the snow a hatch . fauus ? e from the 24 until the 28 we have very much wind , * ' but large , keep our course southsoutheast , and have like to have lose the bark , but by good hap we meet again . the height be take , we be in degree and a half . the 29 of August the wind blow much at Northeast , so that we can bear but only a bunt of our foresail , and the bark be not able to carry any sail at all . the Michael lose company of we and shape her course towards Orkney because that way be better know unto they , and arrive at Yermouth . the 30 of August with the force of the wind , and a surge of the sea , the master of the Gabriel and than the master boatswain be strike both overboard , and hardly be the boatswain recover , have hold on a rope hang overboard in the sea , and yet the bark be lace fore and after with rope a breast high within board . this master be call William smith , be but a young man and a very sufficient mariner , who be all the morning before exceed pleasant , tell his captain he dream that he be cast overboard , and that the 315 boatswain have he by the hand , and can not save he , and so immediate upon the end of his tale , his dream come right evil to pass , and indeed the boatswain in like sort hold he by one hand , have hold on a rope with the other , until his force fail , and the master drown . the height be take we find our self to be in the latitude of degree and a half , and reckon our self from the queen cape homeward about two hundred league . the last of August about midnight , we have two or three great and sudden flaw or storm . the first of September the storm be grow very great , and continue almost the whole day and night , and lie a hull to tarry for the bark our ship be much beat with the sea , every sea almost overtake our poop , so that we be constrain with a bunt of our sail to try it out , and ease the roll of our ship . and so the Gabriel not able to bear any sail to keep company with we , and our ship be high in the poop , and a tall ship , whereon the wind have more force to drive , go so fast away that we lose sight of they , and leave they to God and their good fortune of sea the second day of September in the morning , it please God of his goodness to send we a calm , whereby we perth rudder of ceive the rudder of our ship tear in twain , and almost the aid tome ready to fap away . wherefore take the benefit of the ’ time , we fling half a dozen couple of our best man over board , who take great pain under water , drive plank , and bind with rope , do well strengthen and mend the matter , who return the most part more than half dead out of the water , and as god pleasure be , the sea be calm until the work be finish . how the lati - the September , the height of the sun be tude be take , we find our self to be in the latitude of always take degree and a half . in this voyage common we ' ratte - mth ^^ take the latitude of the place by the height of the sun , staff then because the long day take away the light not only of astrolabe . the polar , but also of all other fix star . and here 316 the north star be so much elevate above the horizon , that with the staff it be hardly to be well observe , and the degree in the astrolabe be too small to observe minute . therefore we always use the staff and the sun as fit instrument for this use . have spend four or five day in traverse of the sea with contrary wind , make our Souther way good as