after the master name of the Michael , and name the hand lecester hand . in one of the small hand here we find a tomb , wherein the bone of a dead man lie together , and our savage captive be with we , and be demand by sign whether his countryman have not slay this man and eat his flesh so from the bone , he make sign to the contrary , and that he be slay with wolf and wild beast . here also be find hide under stone good store of fish , and sundry other thing of the inhabitant ; as sled , bridle , kettle of fish - skinne , knife of bone , and such other like . and our savage declare unto we the use of all those thing . And take in his hand one of those country bridle , he catch one of our dog and hamper he handsome therein , as we do our horse , and with a whip in his hand , he teach the dog to draw in a sled as we do horse in a coach , set himself thereupon like a guide : so that we may see they use dog for that purpose that we do our horse . and we find since by experience , that the lesser sort of dog they feed fat , and keep they as domestical cattle in their tent for their eat , and the great sort serve for the use of draw their sled . the twenty nine of July , about five league from bear sound , we discover a bay which be fence on each side with small hand lie off the main , which break the force of the tide , and make the place free from any indraft of ice , do prove a very fit harbour for our ship , where we come to anchor under a small island , which now together with the sound be call by the name of that right honourable and virtuous lady , anne countess of Warwick . and this be the further place that this year we have enter up 299 bear sound . lecesters hand . a tomb with a dead man bone in it . bridle , knife , and other instrument find hide among the rock . they use great dog to draw sleds , and title dog for their meat . thirty league discover within the strait . a good precedent of a good captain show by captain Frobisher . within the streite , and be reckon from the cape of the queen foreland , which be the entrance of the streite not above 30 league . upon this hand be find good store of the ore , which in the wash hold gold to our think plain to be see : whereupon it be think best rather to load here , where there be store and indifferent good , than to seek further for better , and spend time with jeoperdie . and therefore our general set the miner to work , and show first a good precedent of a painful labourer and a good captain in himself , give good example for other to follow he : whereupon every man both better and worse , with their best endeavour willing lay to their help hand . and the next day , be the thirty of July , the Michael be send over to jackmans sound , for the ay de and the whole company to come thither . upon the main land over against the countess hand we discover and behold to our the manner of great marvel the poor cave and house of those their house in country people , which serve they ( as it shall seem ) t country . por tjjejr winfer dwelling , and be make two fathom under ground , in compass round , like to a oven , be join fast one by another , have hole like to a fox or Conny berry , to keep and come together . they undertrench these place with gutter so , that the water fall from the hill above they , may slide away without their annoyance : and be seat common in the foot of a hill , to shield they better from the cold wind , have their door and entrance whale bone ever open towards the south . from the ground up - timber ^ ward they build with whale bone , for lack of m er ' timber , which bend one over another , be handsome compact in the top together , and be cover over with sealesskinne , which in stead of tile , fence they from the rain . in which house they have only one room , have the one half of the flower raise with broad stone a foot high than the other , whereon straw moss , they make their nest to sleep in . 300 they defile these den most filthy with their beastly feed , and dwell so long in a place ( as we think ) until their sluttishness loathe they , they be force to S ‘ seek a sweet air , and a new seat , and be ( no doubt ) a disperse and wander nation , as the tar - tarians , and live in hold and troop , without any certain abode , as may appear by sundry circumstance of our experience . here our captive be ashore with we , to declare set up the use of such thing as we see , stay himself alone behind the company , and do set up five small stick mean round in a circle one by another , with one small bone thereof . place just in the midst of all : which thing when one of our man perceive , he call we back to behold the matter , think that he have mean some charm or witchcraft therein . but the best conjecture we can make thereof be , that he will thereby his countryman shall understand , that for our five man which they betray the last year ( who he signify by the five stick ) he be take and keep prisoner , which he signify by the bone in the midst . for afterward the savage when we show he the picture of his countreman , which the last year be bring into England ( who countreiman