labour vain , i return again to my boat , the people still follow i , and my company very diligent to attend we , and to help we up the rock , and likewise down : at length i be desirous to have our . man leap with they , which be do , but our man do overleap they : from leap they go to wrestle , we find they strong and nimble , and to have skill in wrestle , for they cast some of our man that be good wrestler . the four of July we launch out pinnace , and have forty of the people to help we , which they do very willing : at this time our man again wrestle with they , and find they as before , strong and skilful . this four of July the master of the mermaid go to certain hand to store himself with wood , where he find a grave with diverse bury in it , only cover with seal skin , have a cross lay over they . the people be of good stature , well in body proportion , with small slender hand and foot , with broad visage , 396 1586 . and small eye , wide mouth , the most part unbearded , Tartar great lip , and close tooth . their custom be as often “ jf ^ arealso as they go from we , still at their return to make a new jialey saint truce , in this sort , hold his hand up to the sun with a loud voice he cry ylyaoute , and strike his breast with like sign , be promise safety , he give credit . these people be much give to bleed , and therefore stop their nose with dear hair , or the hair of a elan . they be idolater and have image great store , which they wear about they , and in their boat , which we suppose they worship . they be witch , and have many kind of enchantment , which they often use , but to small purpose , thanks be to God . be among they at shore the four of July , one of they make a long oration , begin to kindle a fire in this manner : he take a piece of a board wherein be a hole half through : into that hole he put the end of a round stick like unto a bedstaff , wet the end thereof in Trane , and in fashion of a turner with a piece their manner of leather , by his violent motion do very speedy ofkindlingfire produce fire : which do , with turf he make a fire , into which with many word and strange gesture , he a £ re make you put diverse thing , which we suppose to be a sacrifice : turf . my self and diverse of my company stand by , they be desirous to have i go into the smoke , i will they likewise to stand in the smoke , which they by no mean will do . i then take one of they , and thrust he into the smoke , and will one of my company to tread out the fire , and to spurn it into the sea , which be do to show they that we do contemn their sorcery . these people be very simple in all their conversation , great thief . but marvelous thievish , especial for iron , which they have in great account . they begin through our lenity to show their vile nature : they begin to cut our cable : they cut away the moonelight boat from her stern , they cut our cloth where it lie to air , though we do careful look unto it , they steal our oar , a caliver , a boar spear , a sword , with diverse other thing , whereat 397 their weapon . strange net . these islander war with the people of the main . copper oar . their language . the company and master be grieve , for our better security , desire i to dissolve this new friendship , and to leave the company of these thievish miscreant : whereupon there be a caliver shoot among they , and immediate upon the same a falcon , which strange noise do sore amaze they , so that with speed they depart : notwithstanding their simplicity be such , that within ten hour after they come again to we to entreat peace ; which be promise , we again fall into a great league . they bring we seal skin , and salmon peal , but see iron , they can in no wise forbear steal : which when i perceive , it do but minister unto i a occasion of laughter , to see their simplicity , and i will that in no case they shall be any more hardly use , but that our own company shall be the more vigilant to keep their thing , suppose it to be very hard in so short time to make they know their evil . they eat all their meat raw , they live most upon fish , they drink salt water , and eat grass and ice with delight : they be never out of the water , but live in the nature of fish , save only when dead sleep take they , and then under a warm rock lay his boat upon the land , he lie down to sleep . their weapon be all dart , but some of they have bow and arrow and sling . they make net to take their fish of the fin of a whale : they do all their thing very artificial : and it shall seem that these simple thievish islander have war with those of the main , for many of they be sore wound , which wound they receive upon the main land , as by sign they give we to understand . we have kesinyoh , eat some . among they copper oar , black copper , and red copper : they pronounce their language very hollow , and deep in the throat : these word follow we learn from they . paaotyck , a oar . madlycoyte , music . Aginyoh , go fetch . Yliaoute , ! meanenoharme . Ponameg , a boat . Asanock , a dart . ► < Sawygmeg , a knife . Uderah , a nose . Aoh , iron . 398 panygmah , a needle . aob , the sea Mysacoah , wash it . lethicksaneg , a seal skin . Canyglow , kiss i . ugnera , my son . acu , shot . Conah , leap . maatuke , fish . Sambah , below . Maconmeg , will you have this . ' Cocah , go to he . Aba , fall down . Icune , come hither .