the second voyage attempt by m . John Davis with other , for the discovery of they northwest passage , in anno 1586 . he 7 . day of May , i depart from the port of Dartmouth for the discovery of they northwest passage , with a ship of a hundred and twenty ton name the mermaid , a bark of 60 . ton name the sunshine , a bark of 35 . ton name the moonshine , and a pinnace of ten ton name the north star . 393 and the 15 . of June i discover land in the latitude of 60 . degree , and in longitude from the meridian of London Westward 47 . degree , mighty pester with ice and snow , so that there be no hope of land : the ice lie in some place ten league , in some 20 . and in some 50 . league off the shore , so that we be constrain to bear into 57 degree to double the same , and to recover a free sea , which through God favourable mercy we at length obtain . the 29 . of June after many tempestuous storm we again discover land , in longitude from the meridian of London 58 . degr . 30 . min . and in latitude 64 . being east from we : into which course sith it please God by contrary wind to force we , i think it very necessary to bear in with it , and there to set up our pinnace , provide in the mermaid to be our scout for this discovery , and so much the rather because the year before i have be in the same place , and find it very convenient for such a purpose , well store with float wood , and possess by a people of tractable conversation : so that the 29 . of this month we arrive within the isle which lie before this land , lie north northwest , and south southeast , we know not how far . this land be very high and mountainous , have before it on the west side a mighty company of isle full of fair sound , and harborough . this land be very little trouble with snow , and the sea altogether void of ice . the ship be within the sound we send our boat to search for shoal water , where we may anchor , which in this place be very hard to find : and as the boat go sound and search , the people of the country have espy they , come in their canoas towards they with many shout and cry : but after they have espy in the boat , some of our company that be , the year before here with we , they present row to the boat , and take hold on the oar , and hang about the boat with such comfortable joy , as will require a long discourse to be utter : they come with the boat to our 394 ship , make sign that they know all those that the year before have be with they . after i perceive their gentle and joy and small fear of we , my self with the merchant and : other of the company go a shore , bear with ' i twenty knife : i have no soon land , but they leap out of their canoas and come run to i and the rest , and embrace we with many sign of hearty welcome : at this present there be eighteen of they , and to each of they i give a knife : they oflr skin to i for reward , but i make sign that they be not sell , but give they of courtesy : and so dismiss they for that time , with sign that they shall return again after certain hour . the next day with all possible speed the pinnace be ^ » 100 land upon a isle there to be finish to serve our purpose for the discovery , which isle be so convenient mo ^ et for that purpose , as that we be very well able to defend our self against many enemy . during the time that the pinnace , be there set up , the people come continual unto we sometime a hundred canoas at a time , sometime fourty , fifty , more and less , as occasion serve . they bring with they seal skin , stag skin , white hare , seal fish , salmon peal , small cod , dry caplin , with other fish , and bird such as the country do yield . my self still desirous to have a further search of this place , send one of the shipboat to one part of the land , and my self go to another part to search for the habitation of this people , with straight commandment that there shall be no injury offer to any of the people , neither any gun shoot . the boat that go from i find the tent of the image , trane people make with seal skin set up upon timber , where - c > I | will > an ‘ i seal in they find great store of dry caplin , be a little st ^ m tan fish no big than a pilchard : they find bag of Trane oil , many little image cut in wood , seal skin in tan - tub , with many other such trifle , whereof they diminish nothing . 395 a grave with a cross lay over . they also find ten mile within the snowy mountains a plain champion country , with earth and grass , such as our moory and waste ground of England be : they go up into a ri ^ er ( which in the narrow place be two league broad ) about ten league , find it still to continue they know not how far : but i with my company take another river , which although at the first it offer a large inlet , yet it prove but a deep bay , the end whereof in four hour i attain , and there leave the boat well man , go with the rest of my company three or four mile into the country , but find nothing , nor see any thing , save only gripe , raven , and small bird , as lark and linnet . the three of July i man my boat , and go with fifty canoas attend upon i up into another sound where the people by sign will i to go , hope to find their habitation : at length they make sign that i shall go into a warm place to sleep , at which place i go on shore , and ascend the top of a high hill to see into the country , but perceive my