care , we have sail 15 . league south and by west , yet by art and more exact observation , we find our . course to be southwest , so that we plain perceive rend to the a great current strike to the west . west . this land be nothing in sight but isle , which in - 404 crease our hope . this nineteenth of August at six a clock in the afternoon , it begin to snow , and so continue all night with foul weather , and much wind , so that we be constrain to lie at hull all night five league off the shore : in the morning be the twenty of August , the fog and storm break up , we bear in with the land , and at nine a clock in the morning we anchor in a very fair and safe road and lock for all weather . at ten of the clock i go on shore to the top of a very high hill , where i perceive that this land be Islands : at four hand , of the clock in the afternoon we weigh anchor , have a fair north north - east wind , with very fair weather ; at six of the clock we be clear without the land , and so shape our course to the south , to discover the coast , whereby the passage may be through god mercy find . we coast this land till the eight and twenty of they runnel . August , find it still to continue towards the south , ^ 9 " south from the latitude of 67 . to 57 degree : we find 7 ^^ / marvelous great store of bird , gull and mew , incredible upon the coast . to be report , whereupon be calm weather , we lie one glass upon the lee , to prove for fish , in which space we catch 100 of cod , although we be but bad provide for fish , not be our purpose . this eight and twenty have great distrust of the weather , we arrive in a very fair harbour in the latitude of 56 . a harbonugh degree , and sail 10 . league into the same , be two ™ degree . league broad , with very raire wood on both side : in this place we continue until the first of September , in which time we have two very great storm . i land , and go six mile by guess into the country , and find that the wood be fir , pineapple , alder , yew , withy , fair wood . and birch : here we see a black bear : this place yield great store of bird , as fezant , partridge , Barbary hen or the like , wild goose , duck , black bird , jeye , thrush , with other kind of small bird . of the partridge and fezant we kill great store with bow and 405 a perfect hope of the passage about 54 . degree and a half . two of our man slay by the savage . arrow : in this place at the harbour mouth we find great store of cod . the first of September at ten a clock we set sail , and coast the shore with very fair weather . the third day be calm , at noon we strike sail , and let fall a cadge anchor , to prove whether we can take any fish , be in latitude 54 . degree 30 . minute , in which place we find great abundance of cod , so that the hook be no soon overboard , but present a fish be take . it be the large and the best feed fish that ever i see , and diverse fisher man that be with i say that they never see a more suavle or better skull of fish in their life : yet have they see great abundance . the four of September at five a clock in the afternoon we anchor in a very good road among great store of isle , the country low land , pleasant and very full of fair wood . to the north of this place eight league , we have a perfect hope of the passage , find a mighty great sea pass between two land west . the south land to our judgement be nothing but isle : we great desire to go into this sea , but the wind be direct against we . we anchor in four fathom fine sand . in this place be foul and fish mighty store . the sixth of September have a fair northnorthwest wind , have trim our bark we purpose to depart , and send five of our sailor young man a shore to a island , to fetch certain fish which we purpose to weather , and therefore leave it all night cover upon the isle : the brutish people of this country lie secret lurk in the wood , and upon the sudden assault our man : which when we perceive , we present let slip our cable upon the halse , and under our foresail bear into the shore , and with all expedition discharge a double musket upon they twice , at the noise whereof they flee : notwithstanding to our very great grief , two of our man be slay with their arrow , and two grievous wound , of who at this present we stand in very great doubt , only one escape by swim , with a arrow 406 1586 . shoot through his arm . Theise wicked miscreant never offer parley or speech , but present execute their curse fury . this present evening it please God further to increase our sorrow with a mighty tempestuous storm , the wind be north north - east , which last unto the ten of this month very extreme . we unrig our ship , and purpose to cut down our mast , the cable of our shutanker break , so that we only expect to be drive on shore among these cannibal for their prey . yet in this deep distress the mighty mercy of God , when hope be pass , give we succour , and send we a fair lee , so as we recover our anchor again , and new more our ship : where we see that God manifest deliver we : for the strain of one of our cable be break , and we only road by a old junke . thus be fresh more a new storm arise , the wind be westnorthwest , very forcible , which last unto the ten day at night . the eleven day with a fair westnorthwest wind we depart with trust in god mercy , shape our course for England , and arrive in the west country in the begin of October .