board take great pain at this pinch at the Capstone , overcome the most danger thereof , and yet for all that may be do , it strike on our stern such a blow , that we fear lest it have strike away our rudder , and be force to cut our cable in the hawse , we be fain to set our fore sail to run further up within , and if our stirrage have not be strong than in the present time we fear , we have run the ship upon the rock , have a very narrow channel to turn in , but as God will , all come well to pass . and this jackmans be name jackmans sound , after the name of the sound . master mate , who have first like unto the place . smith hand . upon a small hand , within this sound call smith hand ( because he first set up his forge there ) be find a i of silver , but be not win out of the rock without great labour . here our goldfiner make say of such ore as they find upon the Northerland , and find four sort thereof to hold gold in good quantity . 296 i577 - upon another small hand here be also find a great dead fish , which as it shall seem , have be embay with ice , and be in proportion round like to a porpose , be about twelve foot long , and in bigness answerable , have a horn of two yard long grow out of Thejmdingtf the snout or nostril . this horn be wreathe and an " ic ° rnes strait , like in fashion to a taper make of wax , and ’ may true be think to be the sea unicorn . this horn be to be see and reserve as a jewel by the queen majesty commandment , in her wardrobe of robe . Tuesday the three and twenty of July , our general with his best company of gentleman , soldier and sailor , to the number of seventie person in all , march with ensign displayde , upon the continent of the Southerland ( the suppose continent of America ) where , command a trumpet to sound a call for every man to repair to the ensign , he declare to the whole company how much the cause import for the service of her majesty , our country , our credit , and the safety of our own life , and therefore require every man to be conformable to order , and to be direct by those he shall assign . and he appoint for leader , captain Fenton , captain York , and his lieutenant George Beste : which do , we cast our self into a ring , and altogether upon our knee , give God humble thank for that it have please he of his great goodness to preserve we from such imminent danger , beseech likewise the assistance of his holy spirit , so to deliver we in safety into our country , whereby the light and truth of these secret be know , it may redound to the more honour of his holy name , and consequent to the advancement of our common wealth . and so , in as good sort as the place suffer , we march towards the top of the mountain , which be no less painful in climb then dangerous in descend , by reason of their steepness and ice . and have pass about five mile , by such unwieldy way , we return unto our ship with - 297 out sight of any people , or likelihood of habitation . here diverse of the gentleman desire our general to suffer they to the number of twenty or thirty person to march up thirty or forty league in the country , to the end they may discover the inland , and do some acceptable service for their country . but he not content with the matter he seek for , and well consider the short time he have in hand , and the greedy desire our country have to a present savour and return of gain , bend his whole endeavour only to find a i to fraught his ship , and to leave the rest ( by God help ) hereafter to be well accomplish . and therefore the twenty six of July he depart over to the Northland , with the two bark , leave the aid ride in jackmans sound , and mean ( after he have find convenient harbour , and fraught there for his ship ) to discover further for the passage . the bark come the same night to anchor in a sound upon the Northerland , where the tide do run so swift , and the place be so subject to indraft of ice , that by reason thereof they be great endanger , and have find a very rich i , as they suppose , and get almost twenty ton of ore together , upon the 28 of July the ice come drive into the sound where the bark ride , in such sort , that they be therewith great distress . and the Gabrieli ride astern the Michael , have her cable gall asunder in the hawse with a piece of drive ice , and lose another anchor , and have but one cable and anchor leave , for she have lose two before , and the ice still drive upon she , she be ( by God help ) well fence from the danger of the rest , by one great hand of ice , which come a ground hard a head of she , which if it have not so chance , i think sure she have be cast upon the rock with the ice . the Michael more anchor upon this great ice , and ride under the lee thereof : but about midnight , by the weight of it self , and the set of the tide , the ice break within half the bark length , and make 298 unto the company within board a sudden and fearful noise . the next flood towards the morning we weigh anchor , and go further up the straight , and leave our ore behind we which we have dig , for haste leave the place by the name of bear sound