who so long time be miss , and never hear of before , who every man make the last reckon , never to hear of again . here every man great rejoice of their happy meet - 344 ing , and welcome one another after the sea manner with their great ordinance , and when each party have rip up their sundry fortune and peril past , they high praise God , and altogether upon their knee give he due , humble and hearty thanks , and master master wilf - wolfall a learned man , appoint by her majesty a ^ preachei - councell to be their minister and preacher make unto they a godly sermon , exhort they especial to be thankful to God for their strange and miraculous deliverance in those so dangerous place , and put they in mind of the uncertainty of man life , will they to make themselves always ready as resolute man to enjoy and accept thankful whatsoever adventure his divine providence shall appoint . this master Wolfall be well seat and settle at home in his own country , with a good and large live , have a good honest woman to wife and very towardly child , be of good reputation among the best , refuse not to take in hand this painful voyage , for the only care he have to save soul , and to reform those infidel if it be possible to Christianity : and also partly for the great desire he have that this notable voyage so well begin , may be bring to perfection : and therefore he be content to stay there the whole year if occasion have serve , be in every necessary action as forward as the resolute man of all . wherefore in this behalf he may right be call a true pastor and minister of God word , which for the profit of his flock spare not to venture his own life . but to return again to captain fentons company , the adven - and to speak somewhat of their danger ( albeit they be more than by writing can be express ) they report cbm 0 that from the night of the first storm which be about panie . the first day of July until seven day before the general arrival , which be the six and twentieth of the same , they * never see any one day or hour , wherein they be not trouble with continual danger and fear of death , and be twenty day almost together fast 345 extremity cause man to devise nevi art and remedy . hard shift . strange wonder . among the ice . they have their ship strike through and through on both side , their false stem bear quite away , and can go from their ship in some place upon the ice very many mile , and may easy have pass from one hand of ice to another even to the shore , and if God have not wonderful provide for they and their necessity , and time have not make they more cunning and wise to seek strange remedy for strange kind of danger , it have be impossible for they ever to have escape : for among other devise , wheresoever they find any hand of ice of great bigness than the rest ( as there be some of more than half a mile compass about , and almost forty fathom high ) they common covet to recover the same , and thereof to make a bulwark for their defence , whereon have more anchor , they ride under the lee thereof for a time , be thereby guard from the danger of the lesser drive ice . but when they must needs forgo this new find fort by mean of other ice , which at length will undermine and compass they round about , and when that by heave of the billow they be therewith like to be bruise in piece , they use to make fast the ship unto the most firm and broad piece of ice they can find , and bind her nose fast thereunto , will fill all their sail whereon the wind have great power , will force forward the ship , and so the ship bear before she the ice , and so one ice drive forward another , shall at length get scope and searoom e . and have by this mean at length put their enemy to flight , they occupy the clear place for a pretty season among sundry mountain and Alps of ice . one there be find by measure to be 65 fathom above water , which for a kind of similitude , be call Salomons porch . some think those hand eight time so much under water as they be above , because of their monstrous weight . but now i remember i see very strange wonder , man walk , run , leap and shoot upon the main sea 40 . mile from any land , without 346 any ship or other vessel under they . also i see fresh river run amid the salt sea a hundred mile from land , which if any man will not believe , let he know that many of our company leap out of their ship upon island of ice , and run there up and down , do shoot at butt upon the ice , and with their caliver do kill great seal , which use to lie and sleep upon the ice , and this ice melt above at the top by reflection of the sun , come down in sundry stream , which unite together , make a pretty brook able to drive a mill the say captain Fenton recover his port ten day before any man , and spend good time in search for i , and he find good store thereof . he also discover about ten mile up into the country , where he perceive neither town , village , nor likelihood of habitation , but it seem ( as he say ) barren , as the other part which as yet we have enter upon : but their victual and provision go so scant with they , that they have determine to return homeward within seven day after , if the fleet have not then arrive . the general after his arrival in the countess sound , spend no time in vain , but immediate at his first land call the chief captain of his council together , and consult with they for the speedy execution of such thing as than they have in hand . as first , for search and find