they discover the tent of those people , and set Charles Jackman , be the master mate , ashore with a convenient number , for that he can best guide they to the place , they march over land , mean to compass they on the one side , while the captain with his boat may entrap they on the other side . but land at last at the place where the night before they leave they , they find they with their tent remove . notwithstanding , our man which march up into the country , pass over two or three mountain , by chance espy certain tent in a valley underneath they near unto a creek by the sea side , which because it be not the place where the guide have be the night before , they judge they to be another company , and besetting the Savages they about , determine to take they if they can . but have boat of they have quick descry our company , launch one 3 ™ ’ great and another small boat , be about 16 or 18 person , and very narrow escape , put themselves to sea . the english whereupon our soldier discharge their caliver , and " those ^ people of f °^ owed they , think the noise thereof be hear that country . to our boat at sea , our man there will make what speed they may to that place . and thereupon indeed our man which be in the boat ( cross upon ' they in the mouth of the sound whereby their passage be let from get sea room , wherein it have be impossible the swift for we to overtake they by row ) force they to put rowtngof those themselves ashore upon a point of land within the say * e < * e ' sound ( which upon the occasion of the slaughter there , the bloody be since name the bloody point ) whereunto our man five ™ * ' so speedy follow , that they have little leisure leave they 304 to make any escape . but so soon as they land , each of they break his oar , think by that mean to prevent we , in carry away their boat for want of oar . and desperate return upon our man , resist they manful in their land , so long as their arrow and dart last , and after gather up those arrow which our man shoot at they , yea , and pluck our arrow out of their body encounter afresh again , and maintain their cause until both weapon and life fail they . and when they find they be mortal wound , be ignorant what mercy mean , with deadly fury they cast themselves headlong from off the rock into the sea , lest perhaps their enemy shall receive glory or prey of their dead carcaise , for they suppose we belike to be cannibal or eater of man flesh . in this conflict one of our man be dangerous hurt in the belly with one of their arrow , and of they be slay five or six , the rest by flight escape among the rock , save two woman , whereof the one be old and ugly , our man think she have be a devil or some witch , and therefore let she go : the other be young , and cumber with a suck child at her back , hide her self behind the rock , be espy by one of our man , who suppose she have be a man , shoot through the hair of her head , and pierce through the child arm , whereupon she cry out , and our surgeon mean to heal her child arm , apply salve thereunto . but she not acquaint with such kind of surgery , pluck those salve away , and by continual lick with her own tongue , not much unlike our dog , heal up the child arm . and because the day be wellnear spend our man make haste unto the rest of our company which on the other side of the water remain at the tent , where they find by the apparel , letter , and other english furniture , that they be the same company which captain York discover the night before , have remove themselves from the place where he leave they . and now consider their sudden fly from our vn 305 u York sound . a hot skirmish between the english and they of that country . the desperate nature of those people . the take of the woman and her child . a pretty kind of surgery which nature teach . man , and their desperate manner of fight , we begin to suspect that we have hear the last news of our man which the last year be betray of these people . And consider also their ravenous and bloody disposition in eat any kind of raw flesh or carrion howsoever stink , it be to be think that they have slay and devour our man : for the doublet which be find in their tent have many hole therein be make with their arrow and dart . but now the night be at hand , our man with their captive and such poor stufie as they find in their tent , return towards their ship , when be at sea , there arise a sudden flaw of wind , which be not a little dangerous for their small boat : but as God will they come all safe aboard . and with these good news they return ( as before mention ) into the countess of Warwick sound unto we . and between jackmans sound , from whence they come , and the countess of Warwick sound between land and land , be think the narrow the narrow place of the strait be judge nine raius ^ s league over at the least : and jackmans sound be league over . upon the Southerland , lie direct almost over against the countess sound , as be reckon scarce thirty league the queen within the strait from the queen cape , which be the entrance of the streit of the Southerland . this cape be name queen Elizabeth cape , stand in the latitude of 62 degree and a half to the northward of new find land ,