i go on shore with 6 . of our man , and there come to we seven of they when we be on land . we find on shore three dead people , and two of they have their staff lie by they , and their old skin wrap about they and the other have nothing lie by , wherefore we think it be a woman . we also see their house near the sea side , which be make with the house of piece of wood on both side , and cross over with pole gnnland - and then cover over with earth : we find fox run upon the hill : as for the place it be break land all the way that we go , and full of break island . the 21 . of August the master send the boat on shore for wood with six of his man , and there be one and thirty of the people of the country which go on shore to they , and they go about to kill they as we think , for they shoot their dart towards they , and we that be aboard the ship , do see they go on shore to our man : whereupon the master send the pinnace after they , and when they see the pinnace come towards they , they turn back , and the master of the pinnace do shoot off a caliver to they the same time , but hurt none of they , for his meaning be only to put they in fear . diverse time they do wave we on shore to play with they oh « r man play at the football , and some of our company go on shore to play with they , and our man do cast they down as gavage . soon as they do come to strike the ball . and thus much of that which we do see and do in that harbour where we arrive first . the 23 . day we depart from the merchant isle , where we have be first , and our course from thence 411 a skirmish between the savage and out - man . be south and by west , and the wind be Northeast , and we run that day and night about 5 . or 6 . league , until we come to another harbour . the 24 . about eleven of the clock in the fbrenoone we enter into the aforesaid new harbour , and as we come in , we do see dog run upon the island . when we be come in , there come to we four of the people which be with we before in the other harbour , and where we ride , we have sandy ground . we see no wood grow , but find small piece of wood upon the island , and some small piece of sweet wood among the same . we find great heart home , but can see none of the stag where we go , but we find their footing . as for the bone which we receive of the savage i can tell of what beast they be . the stone that we find in the country be black , and some white , as i think they be of no value , nevertheless i have bring example of they to you . the 30 . of August we depart from this harbour towards England , and the wind take we contrary , so that we be fain to go to another harbour the same day at 11 . of the clock . and there come to we 39 of the people , and bring we 13 . seal skin , and after we receive these skin of they , the master send the carpenter to change one of our boat which we have buy of they before , and they will have take the boat from he perforce , and when they see they can not take it from we , they shoot with their dart at we , and strike one of our man with one of their dart , and John filpe shoot one of they into the breast with a arrow . and they come to we again , and four of our man go into the shipboate , and they shoot with their dart at our man : but our man take one of their people in his boat into the shipboate , and he hurt one of they with his knife , but we kill three of they in their boat : two of they be hurt with arrow in the breast , 412 and he that be aboard our boat , be shoot in with a arrow , and hurt with a sword , and beat with staff , who our man cast overboard , but the people catch he and carry he on shore upon their boat , and the other two also , and so depart from we . and three of they go on shore hard by we , where they have their dog , and those three come away from their dog , and present one of their dog come swim towards we hear aboard the ship , whereupon our master cause the gunner to shoot off one of the great piece towards the people , and so the dog turn back to land and within a hour after there come of the people hard aboard the ship , but they will not come to we as they do come before . the 31 . of August we depart from gylberts sound for England , and when we come out of the harbour there come after we 17 . of the people look which way we go . the 2 . of September we lose sight of the land at 12 . of September . the clock at noon . the three day at night we lose sight of the northstarre our pinnace in a very great storm , and lie a hull tarry for they the 4 . day , but can hear no more of the pinnace they . thus we shape our course the 5 . day south - n ^^ returnei southeast , and sail until the 27 . of the say month , ’ we come in sight of cape clear in Ireland . the 30 . day we enter into our own channel . the 2 . of October we have sight of the isle of wight . the 3 . we coast all along the shore , and the 4 . and 5 . the 6 . of the say month of October we come into the river of Thames as high as Ratliffe in safety God be thank .