. 271 the sun never set in 182 day . horizon and equinoctial all one under the pole . heat there to be very great , both for continuance , and also , quia virtus unita crescit , the virtue and strength of heat unite in one increase . if then there be such a moderate heat under the pole , and the same to continue so long time ; what shall move the old writer to say there can be place for habitation . and that the certainty of this temperate heat under both the pole may more manifest appear , let we consider the position and quality of the sphere , the length of the day , and so gather the height of the sun at all time , and by consequent the quantity of his angle , and so last the strength of his heat . those land and region lie under the pole , and have the pole for their zenith , must needs have the equinoctial circle for their horizon : therefore the sun enter into the north sign , and describe every 24 hour a parallel to the equinoctial by the diurnal motion of primum mobile , the same parallel must needs be whole above the horizon : and so look how many degree there be from the first of Aries to the last of virgo , so many whole revolution there be above their horizon that dwell under the pole , which amount to 182 , and so many of our day the sun continue with they . during which time they have there continual day and light , without any hindrance of moist night . yet it be to be note , that the sun be in the first degree of Aries , and last degree of virgo , make his revolution in the very horizon , so that in these 24 hour half the body of the sun be above the horizon , and the other half be under his only centre , describe both the horizon and the equinoctial circle . and therefore see the great declination of the sun be almost 24 degree , it follow , his great height in those country to be almost 24 degree . and so high be the sun at noon to we in London about the 29 of October , be in the 15 degree of Scorpio , and likewise the 21 of January be in the 15 of Aquarius . therefore look what force the sun at noon have in 272 London the 29 of October , the same force of heat it London . have , to they that dwell under the pole , the space almost of two month , during the time of the summer solstitium , and that without intermingle of any cold night ; so that if the heat of the sun at noon can be well measure in London ( which be very hard to do , because of the long night which engender great moisture and cold ) then will manifest appear by express number the manner of the heat under the pole , which certain must needs be to the inhabitant very commodious and profitable , if it incline not to overmuch heat , and if moisture do not want . for as in October in England we find temperate air , and have in our garden herb and flower notwithstanding our cold1 night , how much more shall they have the same good air , be continual without night . this heat of we continue but one hour , while the sun be in that meridian , but they continue a long time in one height . this our heat be weak , and by the coolness of the night vanish , that heat be strong , and by continual access be still increase and strengthen . and thus by a similitude of the equal height of the sun in both place appear they come - commodious modious and moderate heat of the region under the t ^ ngt " ider . ° the pole . pole . 1 and sure i can think that the divine providence have make any thing uncommunicable , but to have give such order to all thing , that one way or other the same shall be employ , and that every thing and place shall be tolerable to the next : but especial all thing in this low world be give to man to have dominion and use thereof . therefore we need no long to doubt of the temperate and commodious habitation under the pole during the time of summer . but all the controversy consist in the winter , for than the sun leave those region , and be no more see for the space of other six month , in the which time all the sun course be under their horizon for seven 273 sister the space of half a year , and then those region ( say some ) must needs be deform with horrible darkness , and continual night , which may be the cause that beast can not seek their food , and that also the cold shall then be intolerable . by which double evil all live creature shall be constrain to die , and be not able to endure the extremity and injury of winter , and famine ensue thereof , but that all thing shall perish before the summer follow , when they shall bring forth their brood and young , and that for these cause the say climb about the pole shall be desolate and not habitable . to all which objection may be answer in this manner : first , that though the sun be absent from they those six month , yet it follow not that there shall be such extreme darkness ; for as the sun be depart under their horizon , so be it not far from they : and not so soon as the sun fall so sudden come the dark night ; but the evening do substitute and prolong the day a good while after by twilight . after which time the residue of the night receive light of the moon and star , until the break of the day , which give also a certain light before the sun rise ; so that by these mean the night be seidome dark ; which be verify in all part of the world , but least in