and very thin beard . for their common drink , they eat ice to quench their thirst withal . their earth yield no grain or fruit of sustenance for man , or almost for beast to live upon : and the people will eat grass and shrub 372 description of Meta incognita a . d . J578 - of the ground , even as our cow do . they have no wood grow in their country thereabouts , and yet we find they have some timber among they , which we think do grow far off to the southward of this place , about Canada , or some other part of new find land : for there belike , the tree stand on the cliff of the sea side , by the weight of ice and snow in winter overcharge they with weight , when the summer thaw come above , and also the sea underfretting they beneath , which win daily of the land , they be undermine and fall down from those cliff into the sea , and with the tide and current be drive to and fro upon the coast further off , and by conjecture be take up here by these country people , to serve they to plank and strengthen their boat withal , and to make dart , bow , and arrow , and such other thing necessary for their use . and of this kind of drift wood we find all the sea over great store , which be cut or saw asunder , by reason of long drive in the sea be eat of worm , and full of hole , of which sort they be find to be . we have not yet find any venomous serpent or a strange land other hurtful thing in these part , but there be a kind of ° f small fly or gnat that stinge and offend sore , leave many red spot in the face , and other place where she stinge . they have snow and hail in the best time of their summer , and the ground freeze three fathom deep . these people be great enchanter , and use many enchanters . charm of witchcraft : for when their head do ache , they tie a great stone with a string unto a stick , and with certain prayer and word do to the stick , they lift up the stone from ground , which sometime with all a man force they can stir , and sometime again they lift as easy as a feather , and hope thereby with certain ceremonious word to have ease and help . and they make we by sign to understand , lie grovel with their face upon the ground , and make 373 the beast and fowl of the country . Ihe length of their day . a noise downward , that they worship the devil under they . they have great store of deer , bear , hare , fox , and innumerable number of sundry sort of wild foul , as seawmewes , guile , Wilmotes , duck , etc whereof our man kill in one day fifteen hundred . they have also store of hawk , as falcon , tassel , etc whereof two alight upon one of our ship at their return , and be bring into England , which some think will prove very good . there be also great store of raven , lark , and partridge , whereof the country people feed . all these fowl be far thick clothe with down and feather , and have thick skin than any in England have : for as that country be cold , so nature have provide a remedy thereunto . our man have eat of the bear , hare , partridge , lark , and of their wild foul , and find they reasonable good meat , but not so delectable as we . their wild foul must be all fleine , their skin be so thick : and they taste best fry in pan . the country seem to be much subject to earthquake . the air be very subtle , pierce and search , so that if any corrupt or infect body , especial with the disease call morbus Gallicus come there , it will present break forth and show it self , and can there by any kind of salve or medicine be cure . their long summer day be of great length , without any dark night , so that in July all the night long , we may perfidy and easy write and read whatsoever have please we , which lightsome night be very beneficial unto we , be so distress with abundance of ice as we be . the sun set to they in the evening at a quarter of a hour after ten of the clock , and rise again in the morning at three quarter of a hour after one of the clock , so that in summer their sun shine to 374 they twenty hour and a half , and in the night be absent three hour and a half . and although the sun be absent these 3 . hour and a half , yet it be not dark that time , for that the sun be never above three or four degree under the edge of their horizon : the cause be , that the Tropic of Cancer do cut their horizon at very uneven and oblique angle . but the moon at any time of the year be in cancer , have north latitude , do make a full revolution above their horizon , so that sometime they see the moon above 24 . hour together . some of our company of the more ignorant sort , think we may continual have see the sun and the moon , have it not be for two or three high mountain . the people be now become so wary , and so circumspect , by reason of their former loss , that by no mean we can apprehend any of they , although we attempt often in this last voyage . but to say truth , we can not bestow any great time in pursue they , because of our great business in lade , and other thing . A . D . 158 ? . a full revolution of the moon above their horizon .