westward . the land trend fi - om this place Southwest and by south . my lord Lumleys inlet . needle and card , they point to the shore , as though they will show we some great friendship : but we little regard their courtesy , give they the gentle farewell , and so depart . the 14 . we have the wind at south . the r 5 . there be some fault either in the bark , or the set of some current , for we be drive six point beyond our course west . the 16 . we fell with the bank of ice west from we . the 17 . and 18 . be foggy . the 19 at one a clock after noon , we have sight of the land which we call mount Raleigh , and at 12 . of the clock at night , we be thwart the strait which we discover the first year . the 20 . we traverse in the mouth of the strait , the wind be at west , with fair and clear weather . the 21 . and 22 . we coast the northern coast of the strait . the 23 . have sail threescore league northwest into the strait , at two a clock after noon we anchor among many isle in the bottom of the gulf , name the same the earl of cumberland isle , where ride at anchor , a whale pass by our ship and go west in among the isle . here the compass set at thirty degree westward variation . the 23 . we depart , shape our course southeast to recover the sea the 25 . we be becalm in the bottom of the gulf , the air be extreme hot . master Bruton and some of the mariner go on shore to course dog , where they find many grave and Trane spill on the ground , the dog be so fat that they be scant able to run . the 26 . we have a pretty storm , the wind be at southeast . The , 27 . and 28 . be fair . the 29 . we be clear out of the strait , have coast the south shore , and this day at noon we be in 62 . degree of latitude . the 30 . in the afternoon we coast a bank of ice , which lie on the shore , and pass by a great bank or inlet , which lie between 63 . and 62 . degree of latitude , which we call lumly inlet . we have oftentimes , as we sail alongst the coast , great rutte , the 420 water as it be whirl and overfal , as if it be the fall of some great water through a bridge . the 31 . as we sail by a Headland , which we name Warwick foreland , we fall into one of those overfal Warwick with a fresh gale of wind , and bear all our sail , we for ^ nd . look upon a island of ice between we and the shore , have think that our bark do make no way , which cause we to take mark on the shore : at length we perceive our self to go very fast , and the island of ice which we see before , be carry very forcible with the set of the current fast than our ship go . a very forcible this day and night we pass by a very great gulf , the c ^^ twest water whirl and roar as it be the meeting of it tide . August . the first of August have coast a bank of ice which be drive out at the mouth of this gulf , we fall with the southermost cape of the gulf , which we name Chidleis cape , which lie in 61 degree and 10 minute of Chldleys cape . latitude . the 2 and 3 be calm and foggy , so be the 4 , 5 , and 6 . the 7 be fair and calm : so be the 8 , with a little gale in the morning . the 9 be fair , and we have a little gale at night . the 10 we have a frisk gale at westnorthwest . the 11 fair . the 12 we see five dear on the top of a island , call by we darcy the lord dar - island . and we hoist out our boat , and go ashore to eye they , think to have kill some of they . but when we come on shore , and have course they twice about the island , they take the sea and swim towards island distant from that three league . when we perceive that they have take the sea we give they over because our boat be so small that it can not carry we , and row after they , they swim so fast : but one of they be as big as a good pretty cow , and very fat , their foot as big as ox foot . here upon this island i kill with my piece a grey hare . the 13 in the morning we see three or four white 421 bear , but dare not go on shore to they for lack of a good boat . this day we strike a rock seek for a harbour , and receive a leak : and this day we be in 54 degree of latitude . the 14 we stop our leak in a storm not very outrageous , at noon . the 15 be almost in 52 degree of latitude , and not find our ship , nor ( accord to their promise ) any kind of mark , token , or beacon , which we will they to set up , and they protest to do so upon every head land , island or cape , within twenty league every way off the fish from their fish place , which our captain appoint to place between between 54 and 55 degree : this 15 i say we shape ^ ■ ee of lati - our course homeward for England , have in our ship tude . but little wood , and half a hogshead of fresh water . our man be very willing to depart , and no man more forward than peerson , for he fear to be put out of his office of stewardship : but because every man be so willing to depart , we consent to return for our own country : and so we have the 16 fair weather , with the wind at Southwest . the 17 we meet a ship at sea , and as far as we can judge it be a biskaine : we think she go a fish abundance of for whale ; for in 52 degree or thereabouts we see very whale in m d € et £€ s . < # e ’ the 18 be fair , with a good gale at west . the 19 fair also , with much wind at west and by south . they arrive at Dartmouth the 15 of September . and thus after much variable weather and change of wind we arrive the 15 of September in Dartmouth anno 1587 , give thank to God for our safe arrival .