, and be joyful welcome of the company with a volie of shot . he bring egg , fowl , and a young seal aboard , which the company have kill ashore , and have find upon those hand begin set to catch foul , and stick new cut , with other thing , he well perceive that not long before some of the country people have resort thither . have therefore find those token of the people access in those part , and be in his first voyage well acquaint with their subtle and cruel disposition , he provide well for his better safety , and on Friday the ninteenth of July in the morning early , with his best company of gentleman and soldier , to the number of forty person , go on shore , aswell to discover the inland and habitation of the people , as also to find out some fit harborowe for our ship . And pass towards the shore with no small difficulty by reason of the abundance of ice which lie alongst the coast so thick together • that hardly any passage through they may be discover , we arrive at length upon the main of hall great hand , and find there also aswell as in the other small hand good store of the ore . and no more gold over find in the first hand . egg y fowl of Meta incognita . snare set to catch bird withal . 291 the build of a column , call mount Warwick . the first sight of the country people , waft with a flag . the meet apart of two Englishman , with two of that country . the order oj there traffic leave his boat here with sufficient guard we pass up into the country about two english mile , and recover the top of a high hill , on the top whereof our man make a column or cross of stone heap up of a good heighth together in good sort , and solemn sound a trumpet , and say certain prayer kneel about the ensign , and honour the place by the name of mount Warwick , in remembrance of the right honourable the lord Ambrose Dudley earl of Warwick , who noble mind and good countenance in this , as in all other good action , give great encouragement and good furtherance . this do , we retire our company not see any thing here worth further discovery , the country seem barren and full of ragged mountain and in most part cover with snow . and thus march towards our boat , we espy certain of the country people on the top of mount Warwick with a flag waft we back again and make great noise , with cry like the mow of Buis seem great desirous of conference with we : whereupon the general be therewith better acquaint , answer they again with the like cry , whereat and with the noise of our trumpet they seem greedy to rejoice , skip , laugh and dance for joy . and hereupon we make sign unto they , hold up two finger , command two of our man to go apart from our company , whereby they may do the like . so that forthwith two of our man and two of they meet together a good space from company , neither party have their weapon about they . our man give they pin and point and such trifle as they have . and they likewise bestow on our man two bow case and such thing as they have . they earnest desire our man to go up into their country , and our man offer they like kindness aboard our ship , but neither part ( as it seem ) admit or trust the other courtesy . their manner of traffic be thus , they do use to lay down of their merchandise upon the ground , so much as they mean to part withal , and 292 so look that the other party with who they make trade shall do the like , they themselves do depart , and then if they do like of their mart they come again , and take in exchange the other merchandise , otherwise if they like not , they take their own and depart . the day be thus well near spend , in haste we retire our company into our boat again , mind forthwith to search alongst the coast for some harbour fit for our ship , for the present necessity thereof be much , consider that all this while they lie off and on between the two land , be continual subject aswell to great danger of fleet ice , which environ they , as to the sudden flaw which the coast seem much subject unto . but when the people perceive our departure , with great token of affection they earnest call we back again , follow we almost to our boat : whereupon our general take his master with he , who be best acquaint with their manner , go apart unto two of they , mean , if they can lay sure hold upon they , forcible to bring they aboard , with intent to bestow certain toy and apparel upon the one , and so to dismiss he with all argument of courtesy , and retain the other for a interpreter . the general and his master be meet with their two companion together , after they have exchange certain thing the one with the other , one of the savage for lack of better merchandise , cut off the tail of his coat ( which be a chief ornament among they ) and give it unto our general for a present . but he present upon a watchword give with his master sudden lay hold upon the two savage . but the ground underfoot be slippery with the snow on the side of the hill , their handfast fail and their prey escape run away and light recover their bow and arrow , which they have hide not far from they behind the rock . And be only two savage in sight , they so fierce , desperate , and with such fury assault and pursue our general and his master , be altogether unarm , and not mistrust their subtlety 293 another meet of two of our man with two of they . the