out good minerail for the miner to be occupy on . than to give good order to be observe of the whole company on shore . and last , to consider for the erect up of the fort and house for the use of they which be to abide there the whole year . for the better handle of these , and all other like important cause in this service , it be ordain from her majesty and the council , that the general shall call unto he certain of the chief captain and gentleman in council , to confer , consult and determine of all occurrent in this service , who name be as here they follow . 347 captain Fenton . 1 icaptaine Carew . captain York . > < captain best . i ^ captaine Philpot . and in sea cause to have as assistant , Christopher hall and Charles Jackman , be both very good pilot , and sufficient mariner , whereof the one be chief pilot of the voyage , and the other for the discovery . from the place of our habitation westward , master Selman be appoint notary , to register the whole manner of proceed in these affair , that true relation thereof may be make , if it please her majesty to require it . the first of August every captain by order , from the general and his council , be command to bring ashore unto the countess hand all such gentleman , soldier , and miner , as be under their charge , with such provision as they have of victual , tent , and thing necessary for the speedy get together of i , and fraught for the ship . the muster of the man be take , and the victual with all pth thing view and consider , every man be set to his charge , as his place and office require . the miner be appoint where to work , arid the mariner discharge their ship . upon the second of August be publish and proclaim upon the countess of Warwick hand with sound of trumpet , certain order by the general and his council , appoint to be observe of the company during the time of their abide there . in the mean time , while the mariner ply their work , the captain seek out new mine , the goldfiner make trial of the ore , the mariner discharge their ship , the gentleman for example sake labour hearty , and honest encourage the inferior sort to work . so that the small time of that little leisure that be leave to tarry , be spend in vain . the second of August the Gabriel arrive , who come from the viceadmiral , and be distress sore with ice , put into harbour near unto mount Oxford . 348 and now be the whole fleet arrive safe at their port , except four , beside the ship that be lose : that be , the Thomas Allen , the anne Francis , the Thomas of Ipswich , and the moon , who absence be some let unto the work and other proceed , aswell for that these ship be furnish with the better sort of miner , as with other provision for the habitation . the nine of August the general with the captain of his counsel assemble together , and begin to consider and take order for the erect up of the house or fort for they that be to inhabit there the whole year , and that present the mason and carpenter may go in hand therewith . First therefore they peruse Consulta tun the bill of lade , what every man receive into his ship , and find that there be arrive only the east - n ‘ t “ side , and the southside of the house , and yet not that perfect and entire : for many piece thereof be use for fender in many ship , and so break in piece while they be distress in the ice . also after due examination have , and true account take , there be find want of drink and fuel to serve one hundred man , which be a hundred the number appoint first to inhabit there , because their great store be in the ship which be not ' yet arrive . then captain Fenton see the scarcity of the necessary thing aforesaid , be content , and ofired himself to inhabit there with sixty man . where - habitatu » upon they cause the carpenter and mason to come ® , jun - before they , and demand in what time they will take upon they to erect up a less house for sixty man . they require eight or nine week , if there be timber sufficient , whereas now they have but six and twenty day in all to remain in that country . wherefore it be full agree upon , and resolve by the general and his counsel , that no habitation shall be there this year . and therefore they will master Selman the register to set down this decree with all their consent , for the better satisfy of her majesty , the lord of the counsel , and the adventurer . 349 the anne Francis , since she be part from the fleet , in the last storm before speak of , can never recover above five league within the strait , the wind be sometime contrary , and most time the ice compass they round about . and from that time , be about the seven and twenty of July , they can neither hear nor have sight of any of the fleet , until the 3 . of August , when they descry a sail near unto mount Oxford , with who when they have speak , they can understand no news of any of the fleet at all . and this be the Thomas of Ipswich , who have lie beat off and on at sea with very foul weather , and contrary wind , ever since that foresay storm , without sight of any man . they keep company not long together , but be force to loose one another again , the moon be consort always with the anne Francis , and keep very good company ply up together into the strait , with great desire to recover their long wish port : and they attempt as often , and pass as far as possible the wind , weather , and ice give they leave , which common they find very contrary . for when the weather be clear and without fog , then