hand over their head , and dance with great noise and song 3 “ a bladder change fir a looking - glass . no news oj the english captive . to what end the bladder be deliver . those people dance upon the hill top . a skirmish show to those people . their flag make of bladder . together : we suppose they make this dance and show for we to understand , that we may take view of their whole company and force , mean belike that we shall do the same . and thus they continue upon the hill top until night , when hear a piece of our great ordinance , which thunder in the hollowness of the high hill , it make unto they so fearful a noise , that they have no great will to tarry long after . and this be do more to make they know our force then to do they any hurt at all . on Sunday the 12 of August , captain Fenton train the company , and make the soldier maintain skirmish among themselves , as well for their exercise , as for the country people to behold in what readiness our man be always to be find , for it be to be think , that they lie hide in the hill thereabouts , and observe all the manner of our proceed . on Wednesday the fourteenth of August , our general with two small boat well appoint , for that he suspect the country people to lie lurk thereabouts , go up a certain bay within the countess sound , to search for ore , and meet again with the country people , who so soon as they see our man make great outcry , and with a white flag make of bladder sow together with the gut and sinew of beast , waft we amain unto they , but show not above three of their company . but when we come near they , we may perceive a great multitude creep behind the rock , which give we good cause to suspect their traitorous meaning : whereupon we make they sign , that if they will lay their weapon aside , and come forth , we will deal friendly with they , although their intent be manifest unto we : but for all the sign of friendship we can make they they come still creep towards we behind the rock to get more advantage of we , as though we have no eye to see they , think belike that our single wit can not discover so bare devise and simple drift of they . their spokesman earnest persuade we with 312 ... I577 > many entice show , to come eat and sleep ashore , with great argument of courtesy , and clap his bare hand over his head in token of peace and innocence , will we to do the like . but the better to allure our hungry stomach , he bring we a trim bait of raw great offer . flesh , which for fashion sake with a boathook we catch into our boat : but when the cunning cater perceive his first cold morsel can nothing sharpen our stomach , he cast about for a new train of warm flesh to procure our appetite , wherefore he cause one of his fellow in halt manner , to come forth as a lame man from behind the rock , and the better to declare his kindness in carve , he hoist he upon his shoulder , and bring he hard to the water side where we be , leave he there limp as a easy prey to be take of we . his hope be that we will bite at this bait , and speedy leap ashore within their danger , whereby they may have apprehend some of we , to ransom their friend home again , which before we have take . the gentleman and soldier have great will to encounter they ashore , but the general more careful by process of time to win they , then wilful at the first to spoil they , will in no wise admit that any man shall put himself in hazard ashore , consider the matter he now intend be for the ore , and not for the conquest : notwithstanding to prove this cripple footmanship , he give liberty for one to shoot : whereupon the cripple have a part blow , light recover a rock and go away a true and no feign cripple , and have learn his lesson for ever halt afore such cripple again . but his fellow which lie hide before , full quick then appear in their likeness , and maintain the skirmish with their sling , bow and arrow very fierce , and come as near as the water suflr they : and with as desperate mind as have be see in any man , without fear of shcrtte or any thing , follow we all along the coast , but all their shot fall short of we , and be of little danger . they have belay all the coast along for we , 313 and be disperse so , be not well to be number , a hundred but we may discern of they above a hundred perSavages . sonsj anj bad cause to suspect a great number . and thus without loss or hurt we return to our ship again . now our work grow to a end , and have , only with five poor miner , and the help of a few gentleman and soldier , bring aboard almost two hundred ton of ore in the space of twenty day , every man therewithal ! well comfort , determine lusty to work a fresh for a bone voyage , to bring our labour to a speedy and happy end . and upon Wednesday at night be the one and twenty of August , we full finish the whole work . and it be now good time to leave , for as the man be well weary , so their shoe and clothes be well wear , their basket bottom tear out , their tool break , and the ship reasonable well fill . some with overstraining themselves receive hurt not a little dangerous , some have their belly break , and other their leg make lame . and about this time