and can not get beyond . within few day after he perceive the ice to be well consume and go , either there ingulf in by some swift current or indraft , carry more to the southward of the same straight , or else convey some other way : wherefore he determine to make proof of this place , to see how far that gut have continuance , and whether he may carry himself through the same into some open sea on the back side , whereof he conceive no small hope , and so enter the same the one and twenty of July , and pass above fifty league therein , as he report , have upon either hand a great main or continent . and that land upon his right hand as he sail westward he judge to be the continent of Asia , and there to be divide from the firm of America , which lie upon the left hand over against the same . this place he name after his name , frobisher strait , like as Magellanus at the southwest end of the world , have discover the passage to the south sea ( where America be divide from the continent of that land , which lie under the south pole ) and call the same straight , magellane strait . after he have pass 60 league into this foresay strait , he go ashore , and find sign where fire have be make . dear . he see mighty dear that seem to be mankind , which run at he , and hardly he escape with his life in a narrow way , where he be fain to use defence and policy to save his life . in this place he see and perceive sundry token of the people resort thither . And be ashore upon the top of a hill , he perceive a number of small thing fleet in the sea afar off , which he suppose to be porpose or seal , or some kind of strange fish ; but come near , he discover they to be man in small the first sight boat make of leather . and before he can descend of you Savages . down from the hill , certain of those people have almost 280 cut off his boat from he , have steal secret behind the rock for that purpose , where he speedy haste to his boat , and bend himself to his halberd , and narrow escape the danger , and save his boat . afterwards he have sundry conference with they , and they come aboard his ship , and bring he salmon salmon . and raw flesh and fish , and greedy devour the same before our man face . and to show their agility , they try many mastery upon the rope of the ship after our mariner fashion , and appear to be very strong of their arm , and nimble of their body . they exchange coat of seal , and bear skin , and such like , with our man ; and receive bell , look glass , and other toy , in recompense thereof again . after great courtesy , and many meeting , our mariner , contrary to their captain direction , begin more easy to trust they ; and five of our man go ashore be by five engrsh - them intercept with their boat , and be never since hear of to this day again : so that the captain be t ^ en destitute of boat , bark , and all company , have scarce sufficient number to conduct back his bark again . he can now neither convey himself ashore to rescue his man ( if he have be able ) for want of a boat ; and again the subtle traitor be so wary , as they will after that never come within our man danger . the captain notwithstanding desirous to bring some token from thence of his be there , be great discontent that he have not before apprehend some of they : and therefore to deceive the deceiver he wrought a pretty policy ; for know well how they great delight in our toy , and special in bell , he ring a pretty lowbell , make sign that he will give he the same that will come and fetch it . and because they will not come within his danger for fear , he fling one bell unto they , which of purpose he throw short , that it may fall into the sea and be lose . and to make take of the they more greedy of the matter he ring a loud bell , firstsava &- so that in the end one of they come near the ship 281 the take possession of Meta incognita . how the ore be find by chance . side to receive the bel ; which when he think to take at the captain hand , he be thereby take himself : for the captain be ready provide let the bell fall , and catch the man fast , and pluck he with main force boat and all into his bark out of the sea . whereupon when he find himself in captivity , for very choler and disdain he bite his tongue in twain within his mouth : notwithstanding , he die not thereof , but live until he come in England , and then he die of cold which he have take at sea . now with this new prey ( which be a sufficient witness of the captain far and tedious travel towards the unknown part of the world , as do well appear by this strange infideli , who like be never see , read , nor hear of before , and who language be neither know nor understand of any ) the say captain Frobisher return homeward , and arrive in England in Harwich the 2 of October follow , and thence come to London 1576 , where he be high commend of all man for his great and notable attempt , but special famous for the great hope he bring of the passage to Cataya . and it be especial to be remember that at their first arrival in those part there lay so great store of ice all the coast along so thick together , that hardly his boat can pass unto the shore . at length , after