, they put over towards the norther shore , which be not a little dangerous for their small boat . * ’ and by mean of a sudden flaw be dry when , and fain to seek harbour in the night among all the rock and break ground of gabriels hand , a place so name gabriel within the strait above the countess of Warwick add . sound : and by the way where they land , they do find certain great stone set up by the country people as it seem , for mark , where they also make many cross of stone , in token that Christians have be there . the 22 . of August they have sight of the countess sound , and make the place perfect from the top of a hill , and keep along the norther shore , perceive the smoke of a fire under a hill side : whereof they diverse deem . when they come near the place , they perceive people which waft unto they , as it seem , with a flag or ensign . and because the country people have use to do the like , when they perceive any of our boat to pass by , they suspect they to be the same . and come somewhat near , they may perceive certain tent , and discern this ensign to be of mingle colour , black and white , after the english fashion . but because they can see no ship , nor likelihood of harbour within five or six league about , and know that none of our man be wont to frequent those part , they can not tell what to judge thereof , but imagine that some of the ship be carry so high with the storm and mist , have make shipwreck among the ice or the break island there , and be spoil by the country people , who may use the sundry colour flag for a policy , to bring they likewise within their danger . whereupon the say captain with his company , resolve to recover the same ensign , if it 359 be so , from those base people , or else to lose their life , and all together . in the end they discern they to be their countryman , and then they deem they to have lose their ship , and so to be gather together for their better strength . on the other side , the company ashore fear that the captain have lose his ship , come to seek forth the fleet for his relief in his poor pinnisse , so that their extremity cause each part to suspect the worst . the captain now with his pinnisse be come near the shore , command his boat careful to be keep aflote , lest in their necessity they may win the same from he , and seek first to save themselves : for every proximus sum man in that case be next himself . they hale one ogomet mihi . another accord to the manner of the sea , and de - mand what cheer ? and either party answer the other , that all be well : whereupon there be a sudden and joyful outshoot , with great fling up of cap , and a brave voly of shot to welcome one another . and true it be a most strange case to see how joyful and glad every party be to see themselves meet in safety again , after so strange and incredible danger : yet to be short , as their danger be great , so their god be great . and here the company be work upon new mine , captainyorke which captain York be here arrive not long before , have find out in this place , and it be name the countess of Sussex i . after some conference with our friend here , the captain of the anne Francis depart towards the countess of Warwick sound , to speak with the general , and to have trial make of such mettle as he have bring thither , by the goldfiner . and so he determine to dispatch again towards his ship . and have speak with the general , he receive order for all cause , and direction as well for the bring up of his ship to the countess sound , as also to fraught his ship with the same oar which he himself have 360 find , which upon trial make , be suppose to be very good . the 23 . of August , the say captain meet together with the other captain ( commissioner in counsel with the general ) aboard the aid , where they consider and consult of sundry cause , which be particular register by the notary , be appoint where and how to be do against another year . the 24 . of August , the general with two pinniss and good number of man go to bear sound , command the say captain with his pinnace to attend the service , to see if he can encounter or apprehend any of the people : for sundry time they show themselves busy thereabouts , sometime with seven or eight boat in one company , as though they mind to encounter with our company which be work there at the mine , in no great number . but when they perceive any of our ship to ride in that road ( be belike more amaze at the countenance of a ship , and a more number of man ) they do never show themselves again there at all . wherefore our man seek with their pinniss to compass about the hand where they do use , suppose there sudden to intercept some of they . but before our man can come near , have belike some watch in the top of the mountain , they convey themselves privy away , and leave ( as it shall seem ) one of their great dart behind they for haste , which we find near to a place of their cave and house . therefore , though our general be very desirous to have take some of they to have bring into England , they be now grow more wary by their former loss , will not at any time come within our danger . about midnight of the same day , the captain of the anne Francis depart thence and set his course over the strait towards hatton Hedland , be about 15 . league over , and return aboard his ship the 25 . of August , to the great comfort of his company , who long expect