Englishman chase to their boat . one of that countryman take . that they chase they to their boat , and hurt the general in the buttock with a arrow , who the rather speedy flee back , because they suspect a great number behind the rock . our soldier ( which be command before to keep their boat ) perceive the danger , and hear our man call for shot come speedy to rescue , think there have be a great number . but when the savage hear the shot of one of our caliver ( and yet have first bestow their arrow ) they run away , our man speedy follow they . but a servant of my lord of Warwick , call Nicholas Conger a good footman , and uncumber with any furniture have only a dagger at his back overtook one of they , and be a Cornishman and a good wrestler , show his companion such a cornish trick , that he make his side ache against the ground for a month after . and so be stay , he be take alive and bring away , but the other escape . thus with their strange and new prey our man repair to their boat , and pass from the main to a small hand of a mile compass , where they resolve to tarry all night ; for even now a sudden storm be grow so great at sea , that by no mean they can recover their ship . and here every man refresh himself with a small portion of victual which be lay into the boat for their dinner , have neither eat nor drink all the day before . but because they know not how long the storm may last , nor how far off the ship may be put to sea , nor whither they shall ever recover they again or not , they make great spare of their victual , as it great behoove they : for they know full well that the best cheer the country can yield they , be rock and stone , a hard food to live withal , and the people more ready to eat they then to give they wherewithal ! to eat . and thus keep very good watch and ward , they lie there all night upon hard clifle of snow and ice both wet , cold , and comfortless . these thing thus happen with the company on land , 294 the danger of the ship at sea be no less perilous . for within one hour after the general depart in the morning by negligence of the cook in overheating , and the workman in make the chimney , the aid be set on fire , and have be the confusion of the whole if by chance a boy espy it , it have not be speedy with great labour and god help well extinguish . this day also be diverse storm and flaw , and by nine of the clock at night the storm be grow so great , and continue such until the morning , that it put our ship at sea in no small peril : for have mountain of fleet ice on every side , we go roomer for one , and loof for another , some scrape we , and some happy escape we , that the least of a m . be as dangerous to strike as any rock , and able to have split asunder the strong ship of the world . we have a scope of clear without ice , ( as God will ) wherein we turn , be otherwise compass on every side about : but so much be the wind and so little be our sea room , that be able to bear only our forecourse we cast so oft about , that we make fourteen horde in eight ' glass running , be but four hour : but God be our best steresman , and by the industry of Charles Jackman and Andrew Dyer the master mate , both very expert mariner , and Richard Cox you master gunner , with other very careful sailor , then within board , and also by the help of the clear night which be without darkness , we do happy avoid those present danger , whereat since we have more marvel then in the present danger fear , for that every man within board , both better and worse have enough to do with his hand to hale rope , and with his eye to look out for danger . but the next morning be the 20 of July , as God will , the storm cease , and the general espy the ship with his new captive and whole company , come happy aboard , and report what have pass a shore , whereupon altogether upon our knee we give God humble and hearty thanks , for that it have please he , the aid set on fire . the great danger of those rock of ice . night without darkness in that country . 295 from so speedy peril to send we such speedy deliverance , and so from this northern shore we strike over towards the Southerland . the one and twenty of July , we discover a bay which run into the land , that seem a likely harbour gur first come - for our ship , wherefore our general row thither with his boat , to make proof thereof , and with his goldfiner fa , " » ™ to search for ore , have never assay any thing on the straight . south shore as yet , and the first small hand which we land upon . here all the sand and cliff do so glister and have so bright a marquesite , that it seem all to be gold , but upon trial make , it prove no better than a i of black - lead , and verify the proverb . all be not gold black lead . tjiat glister . upon the two and twenty of July we bear into the say sound , and come to anchor a reasonable breadth off the shore , where think our self in good security , we be great endanger with a piece of drift ice , which the ebb bring forth of the sound and come thwart we ere we be aware . but the gentleman and soldier within