the relation of the course which the sunshine a bark of fifty ton , and the northstarre a small pinnace , be two vessel of the fleet of m . John Davis , hold after he have send they from he to discover the passage between Greenland and island , write by Henry Morgan servant to m . William Sanderson of London . he seven day of May 1586 . we depart out of Dartmouth haven four sail , to wit , the mermaid , the sunshine , the moonshine , and the northstarre . in the sunshine be sixteen man , who name be these : Richard pope master , mark carter master mate , Henry Morgan Purser , George Draward , John Mandie , Hugh break , Philip Jane , Hugh Hempson , Richard Borden , 408 John philpe , Andrew Madock , William Wolcome , Robert wag carpenter , John bruskome , William Ashe , Simon Ellis . our course be westnorthwest the seven and eight day : and the nine day in the morning we be on head of the tarrose of Silley . thus coast along the south part of Ireland the 11 . day , we be on head of the dorse : and our course be southsouthwest until six of the clock the 12 . day . the 13 . day our course be northwest . we remain in the company of the mermaid and the moonshine until we come to the latitude of 60 . degree : and there it seem best to our general m . Davis to divide his fleet , himself sail to ® avts ™ the northwest , and to direct the sunshine , wherein i be , e and the pinnace call the northstarre , to seek a divide his passage northward between Greenland and island to fleet into 2 . the latitude of 80 . degree , if land do not let we . so farts - the seven day of June we depart from they : and the - j . ofjsme . the nine of the same we come to a firm land of ice , which we coast along the nine , the ten , and the eleven day of June : and the eleven day at six of the clock at night we see land which be very high , which afterward we know to be island : and the twelve island day we harbour there , and find many people : the descr3e , in land lie east and by north in 66 . degree . 66 . degree . their commodity be grefcne fish , and island ling , their commo - and stockfish , and a fish which be call scatefish : of all tity . which they have great store . they have also cow , sheep and horse , and hay for their cattle , and for their horse . we see also their dog . their dwell house be their dwell - made on both side with stone , and wood lay across in & ' over they , which be cover over with turf of earth , and they be flat on the top , and many of these stand hard by the shore . their boat be make with wood their boat , and iron all along the keel like our english boat : and they have nail for to nail they withal , and fishhook and other thing for to catch fish as we have here in England . they have also brazen kettle , and girdle 409 and purse make of leather , and knoppe on they of copper , and hatchet , and other small tool as necessary as we have . they dry their fish in the sun , and when they be dry , they pack they up in the top of their house . if we will go thither to fish more than we do , we shall make it a very good voyage : for we get a hundred green fish in one morning . we find here two english man with a ship , which come out of England about Easter day of this present year 1586 , and one of they come aboard of we , and bring we two m . John roy - lamb . the english man name be m . John Roydon don of Ipswich . of IpSWich merchant : he be bind for London with his ship . and this be the sum of that which i they depart observe in island . we depart from island the ^ northwe ^ f sixteenth day of June in the morning , and our course ’ be northwest , and we see on the coast two small bark go to a harbour : we go not to they , but see they a far off . thus we continue our course unto the end of this month . July . the three day of July we be in between two firm land of ice , and pass in between they all that day until it be night : and then the master turn back again , and so away we go towards Greenland . and gronelanddl - the seven day of July we do see Greenland , and it be cover . high , and it look very blue : we can not come to harbour into the land , because we be hinder by a firm land as it be of ice , which be along the shore side : but we be within three league of the land , coast the same diverse day together . the seventeenth day of July we see the place which our captain m . the land of John Davis the year before have name the land of desolation . desolation , where we can not go on shore for ice . the eighteenth day we be likewise trouble with ice , and go in among it at three of the clock in the Greenland morning . after we have clear our self thereof , we range all along the coast of desolation until the end last of July ° f the aforesaid month . August . the three day of August we come in sight of gilbert 410 1586 . sound in the latitude of 64 . deg . 15 . min . which be the place where we be appoint to meet our general and the rest of our fleet . here we come to a harbour at 6 . of the clock at night . the 4 . day in the morning the master go on shore with 10 . of his man , and they bring we four of the people row in their boat aboard of the ship . and in the afternoon