depart . he also dismiss all his condemn man , which he think for some purpose very needful for the voyage , and towards night upon Friday the one and thirty of May we set sail , and put to the sea again . And sail northward alongst the east coast of England and Scotland , the seven day of June we arrive in saint magnus sound in Orkney hand , call in latin Orcades , and come to anchor on the south side of the bay , and this place be reckon from Blackwall where we set sail first league . here our company go on land , the inhabitant of these island begin to flee as from the enemy , whereupon the lieutenant will every man to stay together , and go himself unto their house to declare what we be and the cause of our come thither , which be understand , after their poor manner they friendly entreat we , and bring we for our money such thing as they have . and here our goldfiner find a i of silver . Orkney be the principali of the isle of the Orcades , and stand in the latitude of fifty nine degree and a half . the country be much subject to cold , answerable for such a climate , and yet yield some fruit , and sufficient maintenance for the people content so poor to live . there be plenty enough of poultrey , store of egg , fish , and foul . 286 for their bread they have oaten cake , and their drink be ewe milk , and in some part ale . their house be but poor without and sluttish enough within , and the people in nature thereunto agreeable . for their fire they burn heath and turf , the country in most part be void of wood . they have great want of leather , and desire our old shoe , apparel , and old rope ( before money ) for their victual , and yet be they not ignorant of the value of our coin . the chief town be call Kyrway . Kyrway the in this island have be sometime a abbey or a cq , fa ™ ne < > f religious house call saint Magnus , be on the west s magnus side of the he , whereof this sound bear name , through find why so which we pass . their governor or chief lord be call . call the lord Robert steward , who at our being there , as we understand , be in durance at Edinburgh , by the regent commandment of Scotland . after we have provide we here of matter sufficient for our voyage the eight of June we set sail again , and pass through saint magnus sound have a merry wind by night , come clear and lose sight of all the land , and keep our course west northwest by the space of two day , the wind shift upon we so that we lay in traverse on the sea , with contrary wind , make good ( as near as we can ) our course to the westward , and sometime to the northward , as the wind shift . and hereabout we meet with 3 sail of english fisherman from Iseland , bind homeward , by who we write our letter unto our friend in England . we traverse these sea by the space of 26 day without sight of any land , and meet with much drift wood , and whole body of tree . we see many monstrous fish and strange fowl , great body of tree drive in the sea . monstrous fish in strange foul live which seem to live only by the sea , be there so far distant from any land . at length God favour we with more prosperous wind , and after we have sail four day with good wind in the poop , the four of July the Michael be foremost a head shoot off a piece sea 287 water be black and smooth signify land to be near . hand ofyce . we first sight of Frisland then . 4 . of July . Frisland describe . a easy kind of fish . of ordinance , and strike all her sail , suppose that they descry land which by reason of the thick mist they can not make perfect : howbeit , as well our account as also the great alteration of the water , which become more black and smooth , do plain declare we be not far off the coast . our general send his master aboard the Michael ( who have be with he the year before ) to bear in with the place to make proof thereof , who descry not the land perfect , but see sundry huge hand of ice , which we deem to be not pass twelve league from the shore , for about ten of the clock at night be the four of July , the weather be more clear , we make the land perfect and know it to be frislande . and the heighth be take here , we find our self to be in the latitude of 60 degree and a half , and be fall with the southermost part of this land . between Orkney and Frisland be reckon league . this Frislande show a ragged and high lahde , have the mountain almost cover over with snow alongst the coast full of drift ice , and seem almost inaccessible , and be think to be a hand in bigness not inferior to England , and be call of some author , west Frislande , i think because it lie more west than any part of Europe . it extend in latitude to the northward very far as seem to we , and appear by a description set out by two brethren venetian , Nicholaus and Antonius Zeni , who be drive off from Ireland with a violent tempest make shipwreck here , and be the first know Christians that discover this land about two hundred year sithence , and they have in their sea - cardes set out every part thereof and describe the condition of the inhabitant , declare they to be as civil and religious people as we . and for so much of this land as we have sail alongst , compare their card with