it far more tolerable , and by use after one year or two , the air will seem to he more temperate . it be count a great matter in the old time , that there be a brass pot break in sunder with freeze water in Pontus , which after be bring and show in Delphis , in token of a miraculous cold region and winter , and therefore consecrate to the temple of Apollo . this effect be wrought in the parallel of fouretie three degree in latitude , it be present count a place very hardly and uneasy to be inhabit for the great cold . and how then can such man define upon other region very far without that parallel , whether they be inhabit or not , see that in so near a place they so gross mistake the matter , and other their follower be content with the invention of the old author , have persist willing in the same opinion , with more confidence than consideration of the cause : so light be that opinion receive , as touch the unhabitable climb near and under the pole . therefore i be at this present to prove , that all the land lie between the last climate even unto the point ° ' direct under either pole , be or may be inhabit , habitable . 369 especial of such creature as be engender and breed therein . for indeed it be to be confess , that some particular live creature can live in every particular place or region , especial with the same joy and felici tie , as it do where it be first breed , for the certain agreement of nature that be between the place and the thing elephant . breed in that place ; as appear by the elephant , which be translate and bring out of the second or three climate , though they may live , yet will they never engender or bring forth young . also we see the like in many kind orange tree , of plant and herb ; for example , the orange tree , although in Naples they bring forth fruit abundant , in room and Florence they will bear only fair green leaf , but not any fruit : and translate into England , they will hardly bear either flower , fruit , or leaf , but be the next winter pinch and wither with cold : yet it follow not for this , that England , Rome , and Florence shall not be habitable . twa cause of ln the prove of these cold region habitable , i shall heat - very short , because the same reason serve for this purpose , which be allege before in the prove the middle zone to be temperate , especial see all heat and cold proceed from the sun , by the mean either of the angle which his beam do make with the horizon , or else by the long or short continuance of the sun presence above ground : so that if the sun beam do beat perpendicular at right angle , than there be one cause of heat , and if the sun do also long continue above the horizon , than the heat thereby be much increase by access of this other cause , and so grow to a kind of extremity . and these two cause , as i say before , do most concur under the two Tropic , and therefore there be the great heat of the world . and likewise , where both these cause be most absent , there be great want of heat , and increase of cold ( see that cold be nothing but the privation and absence of heat ) and if one cause be want , and the other present , the effect will grow indifferent . therefore this be to be 270 understand , that the near any region be to the equinoctial , the high the sun do rise over their head at noon , and so make either right or near right angle , but the sun tarry with they so much the short time , and cause short day , with long and cold night , to restore the damage of the day past , by reason of the moisture consume by vapour . but in such region , over the which the sun rise low ( as in region extend towards either pole ) it make there unequal angle , but the sun continue long , and make long day , and cause so much short and warm night , as retain warm vapour of the day past . for there be find by experience summer hight night night in Scotland and Gothland very hot , when under near t / ie the equinoctial they be find very cold . this benefit of the sun long continuance and increase of the day , do augment so much the more in cold region as they be near the pole , and cease not increase until it come direct under the point of the pole arcticke , where the sun continue above ground the space of .. six month or half a year together , and so the day ? ' be half a year long , that be the time of the sun be in the north sign , from the first degree of Aries until the last of virgo , that be all the time from our io day of march until the 14 of September . the sun their - ° f fore during the time of these six month without any six monet , is - offence or hindrance of the night , give his influence upon those land with heat that never cease during that time , which make to the great increase of summer , by reason of the sun continuance . therefore it follow , that though the sun be not there very high over their head , to cause right angle beam , and to give great heat , yet the sun be there sometime almost 24 degree high do cast a convenient and mean heat , which there continue without hindrance of the night the space of six month ( as be before say ) during which time there follow to be a convenient , moderate and moderate heat temperate heat : or else rather it be to be suspect then under you pole