the coast , we find it very agreeable . this coast seem to have good fish , for we lie becalm let fall a hook without any bait and present 288 catch a great fish call a hollibut , who serve the whole company for a day meat , and be dangerous meat for surfeit . And sound about five league off from the shore , our lead bring up in the tallow a kind of coral almost white , and small stone as bright as crystal : and it be not to be doubt but that this land may be find very rich and beneficial if it be thorough discover , although we see no creature there but little bird . it be a marvellous thing to behold of what great bigness and depth some hand of ice be here , some seventie , some eighty fathom under water , beside that which be above , seem hand more than half a mile in circuit . all these ice be in taste fresh , and seem to be breed in the sound thereabouts , or in some land near the pole , and with the wind and tide be drive alongst the coast . we find none of these hand of ice salt in taste , whereby it appear that they be not congeal of the ocean sea water which be always salt , but of some stand or little move lake or great fresh water near the shore , cause either by melt snow from top of mountain , or by continual access of fresh river from the land , and intermingle with the sea water , bear yet the dominion ( by the force of extreme frost ) may cause some part of salt water to freeze so with it , and so seem a little brackish , but otherwise the main sea freeze not , and therefore there be no mare Glaciale or freeze sea , as the opinion hitherto have be . our general prove land here twice , but by the sudden fall of mist ( whereunto this coast be much subject ) he be like to loose sight of his ship , and be greedy endanger with the drive ice alongst the coast , be force aboard and fain to surcease his pretence till a better opportunity may serve : and have spend four day and night sail alongst this land , find the coast subject to such bitter cold and continual mist , he determine to spend no more time therein , but to bear out his course towards the straight call frobisher strait after the general name , who seven 289 t white coral get by sound . monstrous isle of ice , in taste fresh , tohere - hence they be suppose to come . the opinion of the freeze sea be destroy by experience . be the first that ever pass beyond 58 degree to the northward , for any thing that have be yet know of certainty of new find land , otherwise call the continent or firm land land of America , discover the say straight this last year 1576 . between Frisland and the straight we have one great storm , wherein the Michael be somewhat in danger , the stirrage have her stirrage break , and her top mast blow ° bnkenb ^ ae ^ over board , and be not pass 50 league short of the tempest ? straight by our account , we strike sail and lay a hull , fear the continuance of the storm , the wind be at the north - east , and have lose company of the bark the first en - in that flaw of wind , we happy meet again the seven - tranceofthe teenth day of July , have the evening before see * s ' diverse hand of fleet ice , which give a argument that we be not far from land . our general in the morning from the main top ( the weather be reasonfill . 63 . ] able clear ) descry land , but to be better assure he send the two bark two contrary course , whereby they may descry either the south or north foreland , the aid lie off and on at sea , with a small sail by a hand of ice , which be the mark for we to meet together again . and about noon , the weather be more clear , we make the north foreland perfect , which hall Ilana otherwise be call Halles hand , and also the small hand bear the name of the say hall whence the ore be take up which be bring into England this last year 1576 then say hall be present at the find and take up thereof , who be then master in the gabrieli with captain Frobisher . at our arrival here all the sea about this coast be so cover over with huge quanti tie of great ice , that we think these place may only deserve the name of mare Glaciale , and be call the icy sea the descrip - this north foreland be think to be divide from the trafhb continent of the Northerland , by a little sound call ' hall sound , which make it a hand , and be think little less than then he of wight , and be the first entrance 290 of the straight upon the norther side , and stand in the latitude of sixty two degree and fifty minute , and be reckon from Frisland league . God have bless we with so happy a landfall , we bear into the straight which run in next hand , and somewhat further up to the northward , and come as near the shore as we may for the ice , and upon the eighteenth day of July our general take the goldfiner with he , attempt to go on shore with a small row pinnace , upon the small island where the ore be take up , to prove whether there be any store thereof to be find , but he can not get in all that hand a piece so big as a walnut , where the first be find . but our man which seek the other hand thereabouts find they all to have good store of the ore , whereupon our general with these good tiding return aboard about ten of the clock at night