the channel Anne Francis over and over again , the anne Francis come aground in danger . upon a sink rock within the harbour , and lie thereon more than half dry until the next flood , when by god almighty providence , contrary almost to all expectation , they come afloat again , be force all that time to underset their ship with their main yard , which otherwise be likely to overset and put thereby in danger the whole company . they have above two thousand stroke together at the pump , before they can make their ship free of the water again , so sore the moon in she be bruise by lie upon the rock . the moon harbour . come safe , and ride at anchor by the anne Francis , who help in their necessity they can not well have miss . now while the mariner be rummage their ship , and mend that which be amiss , the miner follow their labour for get together of sufficient quantity of ore , and the carpenter endeavour to do their best for the make up of the boat or pinnace : which to bring to pass , they want two speciali and most necessary thing , that be , certain principali timber that be call knee , which be the chief strength of any boat , and also nail , wherewithal ! to join the plank together . whereupon have by chance a smyth among they , ( and yet unfurnish of his necessary tool to work and make nail withal ) they be fain of a gun chamber to make a anvil to work upon , and to use a pickaxe 356 in stead of a sledge to beat withal , and also to occupy two small bellows in stead of one pair of great smith bellows . and for lack of small iron for the easy make of the nail , they be force to break their tong , grydiron , and fireshovell in piece . the eleven of August the captain of the anne Francis take the master of his ship with he , go up to the top of hatton Hedland , which be the high land of all the strait , to the end to descry the situation of the country underneath , and to take a true plot of the place , whereby also to see what store of ice be yet leave in the strait , as also to search what mineral matter or fruit that soil may yield : and the rather for the honour the say captain do owe to that honourable name which himself give thereunto the last year , in the high part of this Hedland he cause his company to make a column or cross of stone , in token of christian possession . in this place there be plenty of black ore , and diverse pretty stone . the seventeenth of August the captain with their company chase and kill a great white bear , which adventure and give a fierce assault upon twenty man be weapon . and he serve they for good meat many day . the eighteenth of August the pinnace with much ado be set together , the say captain best determine to depart up the strait , to prove and make trial , as before be pretend , some of his company great persuade he to the contrary , and special the carpenter that set the same together , who say that he will not adventure himself therein for five hundred hatton Hedland . pretty stone . a mighty white bear . a pinnace there build . pound , for that the boat hang together but only by the strength of the nail , and lack some of her principali knee and timber . these word somewhat discourage some of the company which shall have go therein . whereupon the captain , as one not altogether addict to his own selfwill , but somewhat foresee how it may be 357 they adventure by the strait in a weak pinnace . afterward speak , if contrary fortune shall happen he ( lo he have follow his own opinion and desperate resolution , and so thereafter it be befall he ) call the master and mariner of best judgement together , declare unto they how much the cause import he in his credit to seek out the general , as well to confer with he of some cause of weight , as otherwise to make due examination and trial of the goodness of the ore , whereof they have no assurance but by guess of the eye , and it be well like the other : which so to carry home , not know the goodness thereof , may be as much as if they shall bring so many stone . and therefore he desire they to deliver their plain and honest opinion , whether the pinnace be sufficient for he so to adventure in or no . it be answer , that by careful heed take thereunto among the ice , and the foul weather , the pinnace may suffice . and hereupon the master mate of the anne Francis call John grey , manful and honest offer himself unto his captain in this adventure and service , give cause to other of his mariner to follow the attempt . and upon the nineteenth of August the say captain be accompany with captain upcote of the moon , and eighteen person in the small pinnace , have convenient portion of victual and thing necessary , depart upon the say pretend voyage , leave their ship at anchor in a good readiness for the take in of their fraught . and have little wind to sail withal , they ply alongst the Souther shore , and pass above 30 . league , have the only help of man labour with oar , and so intend to keep that shore aboard until they be get up to the far and narrow of the strait , mind there to cross over , and to search likewise alongst the Northerland unto the countess sound , and from thence to pass all that coast along , whereby if any of the fleet have be distress by wreck of rock or ice , by that mean they may be perceive of they , and so they thereby to give they such 358 help and relief as they can . they do great fear , and ever suspect that some of the fleet be sure cast away , and drive to seek sour salad among the cold cliff . and be shoot up about forty league within the +° - league strait