awennye , yonder . Nugo , no tucktodo , a fog . Lechiksah , a skin . , Maccoah , a dart . ’ Sugnacoon , a coat . Gounah , come down . sasobneg , a bracelet . ugnake , a tongue . ataneg , a seal . Macuah , a beard . Pignagogah , a thread . Quoysah , give it to i . the 7 . of July be very desirous to search the habitation of this country , i go myself with our new pinnace into the body of the land , think it to be a firm continent , and pass up a very large river , a great flaw of wind take i , whereby we be constrain to seek succour for that night , which be have , i land with the most part of my company , and go to the top of a high mountain , hope from thence to see into the country : but the mountain be so many and so mighty as that my purpose prevail not : whereupon i again return to my pinnace , and will diverse of my company to gather muscle for my supper , whereof in this place there be great store , my self have espy a very strange sight , especial to i that never before see the like , which be a mighty whirlwind take up the water in very great quantity , furious mount it into the air , which whirlwind , be not for a puff or blast , but continual , for the space of three hour , with very little intermission , which sith it be in the course that i shall pass , we be constrain that night to take up our lodging under the rock . the next morning the storm be break up , we A . D . 1586 . muscle . a strange whirlwind . 399 go forward in our attempt , and sail into a mighty great river direct into the body of the land , and in brief , find it to be no firm land , but huge , waste , and desert isle with mighty sound , and inlet pass between sea and sea whereupon we return towards our ship , and land to stop a flood , we find the burial of these miscreant ; we find of their fish in bag , plaice , and caplin dry , of which we take only one bag and depart . the nine of this month we come to our ship , where we find the people desirous in their fashion , of friendship and barter : our mariner complain heavy against the people , and say that my lenity and friendly use of they give they stomach to mischief : for they have steal a anchor from we , they have cut our cable very dangerous , they have cut our boat from our stern , and now since your departure , with sling they spare we not with stone of half a pound weight : and will you still endure these injury ? it be a shame to bear they . i desire they to be content , and say , i doubt not but all shall be well . the 10 . of this month i go to the shore , the people follow i in their canoas : i toll they on shore , and use they with much courtesy , and then depart aboard , they follow i , and my company . i give some of they bracelet , and cause seven or eight of they to come aboard , which they do willing , and some of they go into the top of the ship : and thus courteous use they , i let they depart : the sun be no soon down , but they begin to practise their devilish nature , and with sling throw stone very fierce into the moonlight , and strike one of her man then boatswain , that he overthrow withal : whereat be move , i change my courtesy , and grow to hatred , my self in my own boat well man with shot , and the bark boat likewise pursue they , and give they diverse shot , but to small purpose , by reason of their swift row : so small content we return . 400 the 11 . of this month there come five of they to make a new truce : the master of the admiral come to i to show i of their come , and desire to have they take and keep as prisoner until we have his anchor again : but when he see that the chief ringleader and master of mischief be one of the five , he then be vehement to execute his purpose , so it be determine to take he : he come cry iliaout , and strike his breast offer a pair of glove to sell , the master offer he a knife for they : so two of they come to we , the one be not touch , but the other be soon captive among we : than we point to he and his fellow for our anchor , which be have , we make sign that he shall be set at liberty : within one hour after he come aboard the wind come fair , whereupon we weigh and set sail , and so bring the oneofthepeo - fellow with we : one of his fellow still follow our ship close aboard , talk with he and make a kind a ™ r you ' of lamentation , we still use he well with yliaout , which be the common course of courtesy . at length this fellow aboard we speak four or five word unto the other and clap his two hand upon his face , whereupon the other do the like , depart as we suppose with heavy cheer . we judge the cover of his face with his hand and bow of his body down , signify his death . at length he become a pleasant companion among we . i give he a new suit of freeze after the english fashion , because i see he can not endure the cold , of which he be very joyful , he trim up his dart , and all his fish tool , and will make okam , and set his hand to a rope end upon occasion . he live with the dry caplin that i take when i be search in the pinnis , and do eat dry Newland fish . all this while , God be thank , our people be in very good health , only one young man except , who die at sea the fourteenth of this month , and the fifteen , accord to the order of the sea , with praise give to God by service , be cast overboard . un 401 2 c a huge quantity