ofyce in 63 . degree of latitude . the nature of fog . the 17 of this month be in the latitude of 63 . degree 8 . minute , we fall upon a most mighty and strange quantity of ice in one entire mass , so big as that we know not the limit thereof , and be withal so very high in form of a land , with bay and cape and like high cliff land , as that we suppose it to be land , and therefore send our pinnace off to discover it : but at her return we be certain inform that it be only ice , which breed great admiration to we all consider the huge quantity thereof , incredible to be report in truth as it be , and therefore i omit to speak any further thereof . This only i think , that the like before be never see : and in this place we have very stickle and strong current . we coast this mighty mass of ice until the 30 of July , find it a mighty bar to our purpose : the air in this time be so contagious and the sea so pester with ice , as that all hope be banish of proceed : for the 24 of July all our shrowd , rope and sail be so freeze , and compass with ice , only by a gross fog , as seem to i more than strange , sith the last year i find this sea free and navigable , without impediment . our man through this extremity begin to grow sick and feeble , and withal hopeless of good success : whereupon very orderly , with good discretion they entreat i to regard the state of this business , and withal advise i , that in conscience i ought to regard the safety of my own life with the preservation of they , and that i shall not through my overboldness leave their widow and fatherless child to give i bitter curse . this matter in conscience do great move i to regard their estate : yet consider the excellency of the business if it may be attain , the great hope of certainty by the last year discovery , and that there be yet a three way not put in practice , i think it will grow to my great 402 disgrace , if this action by my negligence shall grow into discredit : whereupon seek help from God , the fountain of all mercy , it please his divine majesty to move my heart to prosecute that which i hope shall be to his glory , and to the contentation of every christian mind . whereupon fall into consideration that the mermaid , albeit a very strong and sufficient ship , yet by reason of her burden be not so convenient and nimble as a small bark , especial in such desperate hazard : further have in account her great charge to the adventurer be at xoo . li . the month , and that in doubtful service : all the premise consider with diverse other thing , i determine to furnish the moonlight with revictual and sufficient man , and to proceed in this action as God shall direct i . whereupon i alter our course from the ice , and bare eastsoutheast to recover the next shore where this thing may be perform : so with favourable wind it please God that the first of August we discover the land in latitude 66 . degree , 33 . min . and in longitude from the meridian of London 70 . degree void of trouble without snow or ice . the second of August we harbour our self in a very excellent good road , where with all speed we grave the moonlight , and revictual she : we search this country with our pinnace while the bark be trim , which William Eston do : he find all this land to be only hand , with a sea on the east , a sea on the west , and a sea on the north . in this place we find it very hot , and we be very much trouble great heat . with a fly which be call muskyto , for they do sting grievous . the people of this place at our first coming in catch a seal , and with bladder fast tie to he send he unto we with the flood , so as he come . right with our ship , which we take as a friendly present from they . the five of August i go with the two master and other to the top of a hill , and by the way William 403 Eston espy three canoas lie under a rock , and go unto they : there be in they skin , dart , with diverse superstitious toy , whereof we diminish nothing , but leave upon every boat a silk point , a bullet of lead , and a pin . the next day be the sixth of August , the people come unto we without fear , and do barter with we for skin , as the other people do : they differ not from the other , neither in their canoas nor apparel , yet be their pronunciation more plain than the other , and nothing hollow in the throat . Oure Savage aboard we keep himself close , and make show that he will fain have another companion . thus be provide , i depart from this land the twelve of August at six of the clock in the morning , where i leave the mermaid at a anchor : the fourteen sail west about fifty league , we discover land , be in latitude 66 . degree 66 . degree igminut : this land be 70 . league from the 19 minute . other from whence we come . this fourteenth day from nine a clock at night till three a clock in the morning , we anchor by a hand of ice , twelve league off the shore , be more to the ice . the fifteen day at three a clock in the morning we depart from this land to the south , and the eighteenth of August we discover land northwest from we in the morning , be a very fair promontory , in latitude 65 . degree , have no land on the south . great hope of here we have great hope of a through passage . a passage . this day at three a clock in the afternoon we again discover land Southwest and by south from we , where at night we be becalm . the nineteenth of this month at noon , by observation , we be in 64 . . degr . 20 . 64 . degree 20 . minute . from the eighteenth day at mn ' noon unto the nineteenth at noon , by precise ordinary