abundance of bird egg , that our man that be half famish , be fill therewithal ! . while we be ride here , begin the month of June , at which time the air in the island be so temperate and pleasant as be impossible to express : but when we can see no people at all , we suspect great that this pleasant place loo soui be desolate and dishabit . we give name to the diers retw ^ eii heaven call it trin , and the point that stretch out which have into the sea , we call Capo de Trin . the 100 soldier be through that be send forth , 8 day after return , and bring the lsland , word that they have be through the island and at they and mountain , and that the smoke be a natural thing pro - find . 461 m . Antonio ' leno , make chief captain of those ship which go back to Frisland . cede from a great fire that be in the bottom of the hill , and that there be a spring from which issue a certain water like pitch which run into the sea , and that thereabouts dwell great multitude of people half wild , hide themselves in cave of the ground , of small stature , and very fearful ; for as soon as they see they they flee into their hole , and that there be a great river and a very good and safe harbour . Zichmni be thus inform , and see that it have a wholesome and pure air , and a very fruitful soil and fair river , with sundry commodity , fall into such like of the place , that he determine to inhabit it , and build there a city . but his people be weary and faint with long and tedious travel begin to murmur , say that they will return into their country , for that the winter be at hand , and if they enter into the harbour , they shall not be able to come out again before the next summer . wherefore he retain only the bark with oar and such as be willing to stay with he , send all the rest with the ship back again , and will that i , ( though unwilling ) shall be their captain . i therefore depart , because i can not otherwise choose , sail for the space of twenty day to the eastwards without sight of any land ; then turn my course towards the southeast , in 5 . day i discover land , and find my self upon the isle of Neome , and know the country , i perceive i be past island : wherefore take in some fresh victual of the inhabitant be subject to Zichmni , i sail with a fair wind in three day to Frisland , where the people , who think they have lose their prince , because of his long absence , in this our voyage receive we very joyful . what follow after this letter i know not but by conjecture , which i gather out of a piece of another letter , which i will set down here underneath : that Zichmni build a town in the port of the island that he discover , and that he search the country very diligent and discover it all , and also the river on 462 c . 1380 - 90 . both side of Engroneland , for that i see it particular describe in the sea card , but the discourse or narration be lose . the beginning of the letter be thus . concern those thing that you desire to know of the 5 letter . i , as of the man and their manner and custom , of the beast , and of the country adjoin , i have make thereof a particular book , which by God help i will bring with i : wherein i have describe the country , the monstrous fish , the custom and law of Frisland , island , Estland , the kingdom of Norway , Estotiland , Drogio , and in the end the life of m . Nicolo , the knight our brother , with the discovery which he make , and the state of Groneland . i have also write the life and act of Zichmni , a prince as worthy of immortali memory , as any that ever live , for his great valiancy and singular humanity , wherein i have describe the discovery of Engroneland on both side , and the city that he build . therefore i will speak no further hereof in this letter , hope to be with you very short , and to satisfy you in sundry other thing by word of mouth . all these letter be write by m . Antonio to Messer Carlo his brother : and it grieve i , that the book and diverse other write concern these purpose , be miserable lose : for be but a child when they come to my hand , and not know what they be , ( as the manner of child be ) i tear they , and rend they in piece , which now i can call to remembrance but to my exceed great grief . notwithstanding , that the memory of so many good thing shall not be lose : whatsoever i can get of this matter , i have dispose and put in order in the former discourse , to the end that this age may be partly satisfy , to the which we be more behold for the great discovery make in those part , then to any other of the time past , be most studious of the new relation and discovery of strange country , make by the great mind , and industry of our ancestor . for the more credit and confirmation of the former 463 the second discovery thereof . Historic of Messer Nicolas and Messer Antonio Zeni ( which for some few respect may perhaps be call in question ) i have here annex the judgement of that famous cosmographer Abraham Ortelius , or rather the yield and submit of his judgement thereunto : who in his theatrum orbis , folio 6 . next before the map of Mar deal Zur , borrow proof and authority out of this relation , to show that the north - east part of America call Estotiland , and in the original always affirm to be a island , be about the year 1390 discover by the aforesaid venetian gendeman Messer Antonio Zeno , above 100 year before ever Christopher Columbus set sail for those western region ; and that the northern sea be even then sail by our european pilot through the help of the loadstone : with diverse other particular concern the custom , religion and wealth of the southern Americans , which be most evidendy confirm by all the late and modern spanish history of Nueva Espanna and Peru .