the discovery of the isle of Frisland , Iseland , Engroneland , Estotiland , Drogeo and Icaria : make by two brethren , namely m . Nicholas Zeno , and m . Antonio his brother : gather out of their letter by m . Francisco Marcolino . n the year of our lord 1200 there be in the city of Venice a famous gentleman , name Messer Marino Zeno , who for his great virtue and singular wisdom , be call and elect governor in certain common wealth of Italy : in the administration whereof he bear he - self so discreet , that he be belove of all man , and his name great reverence of those that never know or see his person . and among sundry his worthy work , this be record of he , that he pacify certain grievous civil dissension that arise among the citizen of Verona : whereas otherwise , if by his grave advise and great diligence they have not be prevent , the matter be likely to break out into hot broil of 445 war . he be the first Podesta , or ruler , that the common wealth of Venice appoint in Constantinople in the year 1205 when our state have rule thereof with the french baron . this gentleman have a son name Messer Pietro , who be the father of the duke Rinieri , which duke die without issue , make his heir m . Andrea , the son of m . Marco his brother . this m . Andrea be captain general and procurator , a man of great reputation for many rare part , that be in he . he have a son m . Rinieri , a worthy senator and prudent counsellor : of who descend m . Pietro captain general of the league of the christian against the Turk , who be call dragon , for that in his shield , in stead of a manfrone which be his arm at the first , he bear a dragon . he be father to m . Carlo two grande the famous procurator and captain generail against the genoese in those cruel war , when as almost all the chief prince of Europe do oppugn and seek to overthrow our empire and liberty , wherein by his great valiancy and prowess , as Furius Camillus deliver Rome , so he deliver his country from the present peril it be in , be ready to become a prey and spoil unto the enemy : wherefore he be afterward surname the lion , and for a eternal remembrance of his fortitude and valiant exploit he give the lion in his arm . m . Carlo have two brethren . m . Nicolo , the knight and m . Antonio , the father of m . dragon , of who issue m . Caterino , the father m . Pietro da i Grocecchieri . this m . Pietro have son m . Caterino , that die the last year , be brother unto m . Francisco , m . Carlo , m . Battista , and m . Vincenzo : which m . Caterino be father to m . Nicolo , that be yet live . now m . Nicolo , the knight , be a man of great courage , after this aforesaid Genouan war of Chioggia that trouble so our predecessor , enter into a great desire and fancy to see the fashion of the world and to travel and acquaint himself with the manner of 446 sundry nation and learn their language , whereby afterward upon occasion he may be the better able to do service to his country , and purchase to himself credit and honour . wherefore he cause a ship to be make , and have furnish she at his proper charge ( as he be very wealthy ) he depart out of our sea , and pass the strait of Gibraltar , he sail for certain day upon the ocean , keep his course still to the northward , with intent to see England and Flanders . where be assault in those sea by a terrible tempest , he be so toss for the space of many day with the sea and wind , that he know not where he be , till at length he discover land , and not be able any long to sustain the violence of the tempest the ship be cast away upon the isle of the ship of Friseland . the man be save , and most part of the good that be in the ship . and this be in the year pa ^^ island 1380 . the inhabitant of the island come run in jn anno great multitude with weapon to set upon m . Nicolo 1380 . and his man , who be sore weather - beaten and overlabour at sea , and not know in what part of the world they be , be not able to make any resistance at all , much less to defend themselves courageous , as it behoove they in such a dangerous case . and they shall have be doubtless very discourteous entreat and cruel handle , if by good hap there have not be foreign hard by the place a prince with arm people . who understand that there be even at that present a iandwith great ship cast away upon the island , come rune at arm man , the noise and outcry that they make against our when m . Zeno poor mariner , and drive away the inhabitant , sufferetl s , fp - spake in latin and ask they what they be and come unt0 im from whence they come , and perceive that they come and speak from Italy and that they be man of the say country , latin . he be surprise with marvelous great joy . wherefore promise they all , that they shall receive no discourtesy , and that they be come into a place where they shall be well use and very welcome , he take 447 Ziehmm prince of Porland or duke of Zorani . Frisland the king ofnor - waye . they into his protection upon his faith . this be a great lord , and possess certain island call Porland , lie on the south side of Frisland , be the rich and most populous of all those part , his name be Zichmni : and beside the say little island , he be duke of Sorani , lie over against Scotland . of these north part i think good to draw the copy of a sea card , which among other antiquity i have in my house , which although it be rot through many year , yet it fall out indifferent well : and to those that be delight in these thing , it may serve for some light to the understanding of that , which without it can so easy be conceive . Zichmni be lord of those sygnory ( as be say ) be a very warlike and valiant man and