dambere , and bre : and have spoil they all , he build a fort in bre , where he leave m . Nicolo , with certain small bark and man and munition . and now think he have do well for this voyage , with those few ship which be leave he return safe into Frisland . m . Nicolo remain now in Bres , determine in the spring to go forth and discover land : wherefore arm out three small bark in the month of July , he sail to the northward , and arrive in Engroneland . where he find a monastery of Engnneland . friar , of the order of the predicator , and a church . dedicate to saint Thomas , hard by a hill that cast a ™ forth fire , like Vesuvius and Aetna . there be a fountain of hot burn water with the which they heat the church of the monastery and the friar chamber , it come also into the kitchen so boil hot , that they use no other fire to dress their meat : and put their bread into brass pot without any water , it do bake as it be in a hot oven . they have also small garden cover over in the winter time , which be water with this water , be defend from the force of the snow and cold , which in those part be situate far under the pole , be very extreme , and by this mean they produce flower and fruit and herb of sundry sort , even as in other temperate country in their season , in such sort that the rude and savage people of those part see these supernatural ! effect , do take those friar for god , and bring they many present , as chicken , flesh , and diverse other thing , and have they all in great reverence as lord . when the frost and snow be great , they heat their house in manner beforesaid , and will by let in the water or open the window , at a instant temper the heat and cold at their pleasure . in the building of the monastery they use no other matter but that which be minister unto they by the fire : for they take the burn - 45 * ing stone that be cast out as it be sparkle or cinder at the fiery mouth of the hill , and when they be most inflame , cast water upon they , whereby they be dissolve and become excellent white lime and so tough that be contrive in build it last for ever . and the very sparkle after the fire be out of they do serve in stead of stone to make wall and vault : for be once cold they will never dissolve or break , except they be cut with some iron tool , and the vault that be make of they be so light that they need no sustentaccle or prop to hold they up , and they will endure continual very fair and whole . by reason of these great commodity , the friar have make there so many building and wall that it be a wonder to see . the covert or roof of their house for the most part be make in manner follow : first they raise up the wall up to his full height , than they make it incline or bow in by little and little in form of a vault . but they be not great trouble with rain in those part , because the climate ( as i have say ) be extreme cold : for the first snow be fall , it thaw no more for the space of nine month , for so long dure their winter . they feed of the flesh of wild foul and of fish : for whereas the warm water fall into the sea , there be a large and wide haven , which by reason of the heat of the water , do never freeze all the winter , by mean whereof there be such concourse and flock of sea foul and such abundance of fish , that they take thereof infinite multitude , whereby they maintain a great number of people round about , which they keep in continual work , both in building and take of fowl and fish , and in a thousand other necessary affair and business about the monastery . their house be build about the hill on every side , in form round , and 25 foot broad , and in mount upward they go narrow and narrow , leave at the top a little hole , whereat the air come in to give light to the house , and the floor of the house be so hot , 45 2 that be within they feel no cold at all . hither in the summer time come many bark from the island their about , and from the cape above Norway , and from Trondon , and bring to the friar all manner of thing that may be desire , take in change thereof fish , which they dry in the sun or in the cold , and skin of diverse kind of beast . for the which they have wood to burr ne and timber very artificial carve , and corn , and cloth to make they apparel . for in change of the two aforesaid commodity all the nation border round about they covet to traffic with they , and so they without any travel or expense have that which they desire . to this monastery resort friar of Norway , of Suetia and of other country , but the most part be of island . there be continual in that part many bark , which be keep in there by reason of the sea be freeze , wait for the spring of the year to dissolve the ice . the fisher boat be make like unto a weaver shuttle : take the skin of fish , they fashion they with the bone of the same fish , and sow they together in many double they make they so sure and substantial , that it be miraculous to see , how in tempest they will shut themselves close within and let the sea and wind carry trade in summertime from Trondon to saint Thomas friar in Groneland . resort of friar from Norway and Sueden , to the monastery in Engroneland , call S . Tho . m . frobishet bring these kind of boat from these part into England , they they care not whither , without any fear either of break or drown . and if they chance to be drive upon any rock , they remain sound without the least bruise in the world : and they have as it be a sleeve in the bottom , which be tie fast in the middle , and when there come any water into the boat , they put it into the one half of