fair , we gather up the break piece of the bark that be lose , and sail with a prosperous wind we discover land at west . wherefore keep our course direct upon it , we arrive in a good and safe harbour , where we see a infinite company of people ready in arm , come run very furious to the water side , as it be for defence of the island . wherefore Zichmni cause his man to make sign of peace unto they , they send io man unto we that can speak ten language , but we can understand none of they , except one that be of island . he be bring before our prince and ask , what be the name of the island , and what people inhabit it , and who govern it , answer , that the island be call Icaria , and that all the king that reign there , be call Icari , after the name of the first king of that place , which as they say be the son of Dedalus king of Scotland , who conquer that island , leave his son there for king , and leave they those law that they retain to this present , and after this , he desire to sail further , in a great tempest that arise , be drown , wherefore for a memoriali of his c . 1380 - 90 . tdchrnni his discovery of the island Icaria . a island man in Icari . the king of Icaria call Icari after the name of the first king of that place , who as they report , be son to Deda - death , they call those sea yet , the icarian sea , and the lus king of king of the island Icari , and for that they be content with that state , which God have give they , neither Icartan Sea ‘ will they alter one jote of their law and custom , they will not receive any stranger : wherefore they request our prince , that he will not seek to violate their law , which they have receive from that king of worthy memory and observe very due to that present : which if he do attempt , it will redound to his manifest destruction , they be all resolute bend rather to leave their life , than to loose in any respect the use of their law . notwithstanding , that we shall not think they do altogether refuse conversation and traffic with other 459 the people of i carta desirous of the italian tongue . ten man of ten sundry nation . infinite multitude of arm man in Icaria . zichmni depart from Icaria westwards . man , they tell we for conclusion that they will willing receive one of our man , and prefer he to be one of the chief among they , only to learn my language the italian tongue , and to be inform of our manner and custom , as they have already receive those other ten of ten sundry nation , that come into their island . to these thing our prince answer nothing at all , but cause his man to seek some good harbour , he make sign as though he will depart , and sail round about the island , he espy at length a harbour on the east side of the island , where he put in with all his fleet : the mariner go on land to take in wood and water , which they do with as great speed as they can , doubt lest they shall be assault by the inhabitant , as it fall out in deed , for those that dwell thereabouts , make sign unto the other with fire and smoke , put themselves present in arm and the other come to they , they come all run down to the sea side upon our man , with bow and arrow , and other weapon , so that many be slay and diverse sore wound . and we make sign of peace unto they , but it be to no purpose , for their rage increase more and more , as though they have fight for land and live . wherefore we be force to depart , and to sail along in a great circuit about the island , be always accompany upon the hill top and the sea coast with a infinite number of arm man : and so double the cape of the island towards the north , we find many great sholde , among the which for the space of ten day we be in continual danger of loose our whole fleet , but that it please God all that while to send we fair weather . wherefore proceed on till we come to the east cape , we see the inhabitant still on the hill top and by the sea coast keep with we , and in make great outcry and shoot at we a far off , they utter their old spiteful affection towards we . wherefore we determine to stay in some safe harbour , and see if we may speak once again with the islander , but our 460 Nicholas and Antonio Zeno a . d . c . 1380 - 90 . determination be frustrate : for the people more like unto beast than man , stand continual in arm with intent to beat we back , if we shall come on land . wherefore Zichmni see he can not prevail , and think if he shall have persevere and follow obstinate his purpose , their victual will have fail they , he depart with a fair wind and sail six day to the westwards , but the wind change to the southwest , and the sea wax rough , we sail 4 day with the wind the powp , and at length discover land , be afraid to approach near unto it , the sea be grow , and we not know what land it be : but God so provide for we , that the wind cease there come a great calm . wherefore some of our company row to land with oar , return 8c bring we news to our great comfort , that they have find a very good country and a better harbour : upon which news we tow our ship and small bark to land , and be enter into the harbour , we see a far off a great mountain , that cast forth smoke , which give we good hope that we shall find some inhabitant in the island , neither will Zichmni rest , although it be a great way off , but send 100 soldier to search the country and bring report 100 man send what people they be that inhabit it , 8c in the mean t0 discontent ™ time they take in wood and water for the provision of countrey - the fleet , and catch great store of fish and sea foul and find such