the sleeve , then fasten the end thereof with two piece of wood and loose the band beneath , they convey the water forth of the boat : and this they do as often as they have occasion , without any peril or impediment at all . moreover , the water of the monastery , be of sulphurous or brimstony nature , be convey into the lodging of the principali friar by certain vessel of brass , tin , or stone , so hot that it heat the place 453 in the monastery of saint Thomas most of they speak the latin tongue . the end of the 2 . letter . N . Zeno die in Frisland . as it be a stove , not carry with it any stink or other noisome smell . beside this they have another conveyance to bring hot water with a wall under the ground , to the end it shall not freeze , unto the middle of the court , where it fall into a great vessel of brass that stand in the middle of a boil fountain , and this be to heat their water to drink and to water their garden , and thus they have from the hill the great commodity that may be wish : and so these friar employ all their travail and study for the most part in trim their garden and in make fair and beautiful building , but especial handsome and commodious : neither be they destitute of ingenious and painful artificer for the purpose ; for they give very large payment , and to they that bring they fruit and seed they be very bountiful , and give they care not what . so that there be great resort of workman and master in diverse faculty , by reason of the good gain and large allowance that be there . the most of they speak the latin tongue , and special the superior and principal of the monastery . and this be as much as be know of Engroneland , which be all by the relation of m . Nicolo , who make also particular description of a river that he discover , as be to be see in the card that i draw . and in the end m . Nicolo , not be use and acquaint with these cruel cold , fall sick , and a little while after return into Frisland , where he die . he leave behind he in Venice , two son , m . Giovanni and m . Toma , who have two son , m . Nicolo the father of the famous cardinal Zeno , and m . Pietro of who descend the other Zenos , that be live at this day . now m . Nicolo be dead , m . Antonio succeed he both in his good , and in his dignity and honour : and albeit he attempt diverse way , and make great supplication , he can never obtain licence to return into his country . for Zichmni , be a man of great 454 c . 1380 - 90 . courage and valour , have determine to make himself lord of the sea . wherefore use always the counsel and service of m . Antonio , he determine to send he with certain bark to the westwards , for that towards those part , some of his fisherman have discover certain island very rich and populous : which discovery m . Antonio , in a letter to his brother m . Carlo , recounteth from point to point in this manner , save that we have change some old word , leave the matter entire as it be . six and twenty year ago there depart four fisher boat , the which , a mighty tempest arise , be toss for the space of many day very desperate upon the sea , when at length , the tempest cease , and the wether wax fair , they discover a island call Estotiland , the discovery lie to the westwards above 1000 mile from Frisland , ° f Estotiland upon the which one of the boat be cast away , and six man that be in it be take of the inhabitant and man take . bring into a fair and populous city , where the king of the place send for many interpreter , but there be none can be find that understand the language of the fisherman , except one that speak latin , who be also cast by fisherman of chance upon the same island , who in the behalf of the Ensland king ask they what countryman they be : and so s ? ea e Ratine . understand their case , rehearse it unto the king , who will that they shall tarry in the country : wherefore they obey his commandment , for that they can not otherwise do , dwell five year in the island , and learn six be five the language , and one of they be in diverse part of the island , and reporteth that it be a very rich country , qne abound with all the commodity of the world , and fisher of fris - that it be little less than island , but far more fruitful , land , report have in the middle thereof a very high mountain , from the which there spring four river that pass through rich the whole country . ing with all the inhabitant be very witty people , and have all the commodi - arte and faculty , as we have : and it be credible that in time past they have have traffic with our man , for Kor ’ 455 abundance of glide . trade from Estotiland , to Engoneland : skin , brimstone , and fitch : glde , corn , and beer , or ale . many city and castle . a country call Drogo . the 6 fisherman of Frisland only save , by show the manner to take fish . the chief of the 6fisher , specifiedbefore and his companion . he say , that he see latin book in the king library , which they at this present do not understand : they have a peculiar language , and letter or character to themselves . they have mine of all manner of metal , but especial they abound with gold . they have their trade in Engroneland , from whence they bring fur , brimstone and pitch : and he say , that to the southward , there be a great populous country very rich of gold . they sow corn , and make beer and ale , which be a kind of drink that north people do use as we do wine . they have mighty great wood , they make their building with wall , and there be many city and castle . they build small bark and have sail , but they have not the load stone , nor know not the use of the compass . wherefore these fisher be have in