a letter write to m . Richard Hakluyt of the middle temple , contain a report of the true state and commodity of Newfoundland , by m . Anthony Parkhurst gentleman , 1578 . after Hakluyt , after most hearty commendation , with like thanks for your manifold kindness to i show , not for any merit that hitherto have be i , but whole proceed , i must needs confess , of your own good nature , which be so ready press to benefit your country and all such poor man as have any spark in they of good desire , that you do not only become their friend , but also - humble your self as servant in their affair : for which i will to God i be once in place where i may cause your burn zeal to be know to those that have authority , power , and ability to recompense your travel mind and pen , wherewith you cease not day nor night to labour and travel to bring your good and godly desire to some pass , though not possible to that happy end that you most thirst for : for such be the malice of wicked man the devil instrument in this our age , that they can suffer any thing ( or at least few ) to proceed and prosper that tend to the set forth of God glory , and the amplify of the christian faith , wherein hitherto prince have not be so diligent as their call require . Alas , the labourer as yet be few , the harvest great , i trust God have make you a instrument to increase the number , and to move man of power , to redeem the people of Newfoundland and those part from out of the captivity of that spirituali Pharaoh , the devil . now to answer some part of your letter touch the sundry navy that come to Newfoundland , or terra nova , for fish : you shall understand that some fish not near the other by 200 . league , and therefore the certainty be not know ; and some year come many more english , then other some , as i see the like among we : who since my first travel be but 4 . year , be increase from 30 . sail to 50 . which come to pass chief by the imagination of the western man , who think their neighbour have have great gain than in very deed they have , for that they see i to take such pain yearly to go in proper person : they also suppose that i find some secret commodity by reason that i do search the harbour , creek and haven , and also the land much more than ever any Englishman have do . Surely i be glad that it so increase , whereof soever it spring . but to let this pass , you shall understand that i be inform that there be above 100 sail of Spaniards . Spaniards that come to take cod ( who make all wet , and do dry it when they come home ) beside 20 . or 30 . more that come from biskaie to kill whale for train . Theise be better appoint for ship and furniture of munition , than any nation save the Englishman , who common be lord of the harbour where they fish , and do use all stranger help in fish if need require , accord to a old custom of the country , which thing they do willing , so that you take nothing from they more than a boat or twain of salt , in respect of your protection of they against rover or other violent intruder , who do often put they from good harbour , etc as touch their tunnage , i think it may be a report of Newfoundland a . d . . 1578 . near five or six thousand ton . but of Portugal Portugal ! . there be not light above 50 . sail , and they make all wet in like sort , who tunnage may amount to three thousand tun , and not upward . of the french nation french . and Briton , be about one hundred and fifty sail , Briton . the most of their ship be very small , not past forty ton , among which some be great and reasonable well appoint , better than the Portugal , and not so well as the Spaniard , and the burden of they may be some 7000 ton . their ship be from all part of France and Britain , and the Spaniard from most part of Spain , the Portugal from Aviero and Viana , and from 2 . or 3 . port more . the trade that our nation have to island make , that the english be not there in such number as other nation . now to certify you of the fertility and goodness of the fertility the country , you shall understand that i have in sundry place sow wheat , barley , rye , oat , bean , Pease ’ and seed of herb , kernel , plumstone , nut , all which have prosper as in England . the country yield many good tree of fruit , as filbert in some place , but in all place cherry tree , and a kind of pearetree meet to graft on . as for rose , they be as common as bramble here : strawberry , dewbery , and rasp , as common as grass . the timber be most fir , yet plenty of pineapple tree : few of these two kind meet to mast a ship of threescore and ten : but near cape Briton , and to the southward , big and sufficient for any ship . there be also oak and thorn , there be in all the country [ three . 133 . i plenty of birch and alder , which be the meet wood for coal , and also willow , which will serve for many other purpose . as touch the kind of fish beside cod , several sort there be herring , salmon , thornebacke , plase , or ° ffish - rather we shall call they flounder , dog fish , and another most excellent of taste call of we a cat , oyster , and muscle , in which i have find pearl above 40 . in one muscle , and general all have some , great or small . i hear of a Portugal that find one worth 300 . ducat : there be also other kind of shellfish , as limpet , cockle , wilke , lobster , and crab : also a fish call by the like a * smell which come on shore , and another that nchwa have the like property , call a squid : these be the and by the fish , which ( when i please to be merry with my old Portugal : companion ) i say , do come on shore when i command capernas . they in the name of the 5 . port , and conjure they by such like word : these also be the fish which i may sweep with broom on a heap , and never wet my foot , only pronounce two or three word whatsoever they be appoint by any man , so they hear my voice : the virtue of the word be small , but the nature of the fish great and strange . for the squid , who nature be to come by night as well as by day , i tell they , i set he a candle to see his way , with which he be much delight , or else come to wonder at it as doe our fresh water fish , the other come also in the night , but chief in the day , be force by the cod that will devour he , and therefore for fear come so near the shore , be drive dry by the surge of the sea on the pibble and sand . of these be as good as a smell you may take up with a shove - net as plentiful as you do wheat in a shovel , sufficient in three or four hour for a whole city . there be also other fish which i tell those that be desirous of strange news , that i take as fast as one will gather up stone , and they i take with a long pole and hook . yea marry say they , we believe so , and that you catch all the rest you bring home in that sort , from Portugal and Frenchman . no sure , but thus i do : with three hook stretch forth in the end of a pole , i make as it be a eel spear , with which i prick those flounder as fast as you will take up fritter with a sharp point stick , and with that tool i may take up in less than half a day lobster sufficient to find three hundred man for a day meat . this pastime end , i show they that for my pleasure i take a great mastive i have , and