, which n ? m can fly , their wing not able to carry their body , be en ^ tn - very large ( not much less than a goose ) and exceed fat : which the french man use to take without difficulty upon that hand , and to barrel they up with salt . but for linger of time we have make we there the like provision . viii 49 d trending this coast , we come to the hand call baccalaos , be not pass two league from the main : to fafish th6 south thereof lie cape S . Francis , 5 . league distant take there , from baccalaos , between which go in a great bay , by the vulgar sort call the bay of conception . here we meet with the swallow again , who we have lose in the fog , and all her man alter into other apparel : whereof it seem their store be so amend , that for joy and congratulation of our meeting , they spare not to cast up into the air and overboard , their cap and hat in good plenty . the captain albeit himself be very honest and religious , yet be he not appoint of man to his humour and desert : who for the most part be such as have be by we surprise upon the narrow sea of England , be pirate and have take at that instant certain Frenchman lade , one bark with wine , and another with salt . both which we rescue , and take the man of war with all her man , which be the same ship now call the swallow , follow still their kind so oft , as ( be separate from the general ) they find opportunity to rob and spoil . and because God justice do follow the same company , even to destruction , and to the overthrow also of the captain ( though not consent to their misdemeanour ) i will not conceal any thing that make to the manifestation and approbation of his judgement , for example of other , persuade that god more sharp take revenge upon they , and have tolerate long as great outrage in other : by how much these go under protection of his cause and religion , which be then pretend . misdemeanour therefore upon further enquiry it be know , how of they in the this company meet with a bark return home after fallow . the Ashing with his fraught : and because the man in the swallow be very near scant of victuali , and chief of apparel , doubtful withal where or when to find and meet with their admiral , they beseech the captain they may go aboard this newlander , only to borrow what may be spare , the rather because the same 1583 - was bind homeward . leave give , not without charge to deal favorable , they come aboard the fisherman , who they rifle of tackle , sail , cable , victual , and the man of their apparel : not spare by torture ( wind cord about their head ) to draw out else what they think good . this do with expedition ( like man skilful in such mischief ) as they take their cock boat to go aboard their own ship , it be overwhelm in the sea , and certain of these man there drown : the rest be preserve even by those silly soul who they have before spoil , who save and deliver they aboard the swallow . what become afterward of the poor newlander , perhaps destitute of sail and furniture sufficient to carry they home ( whither they have not less to run then 700 league ) god alone know , who take vengeance not long after of the rest that escape at this instant : to reveal the fact , and justify to the world God judgement inflict upon they , as shall declare in place convenient . thus after we have meet with the swallow , we hold on our course southward , until we come against the harbour call S . John , about 5 league from the former cape of S . Francis : where before the entrance into the harbour , english ship we find also the frigate or squirrel lie at anchor , who the english merchant ( that be and always be mirais admiral by turn interchangeable over the fleet of fieete , fish fisherman within the same harbour ) will not permit to upon the south enter into the harbour . glad of so happy meeting both purtsofuew - of the swallow and frigate in one day ( be Saturday ° un a ' the 3 . of August ) we make ready our fight , and prepare to enter the harbour , any resistance to the contrary notwithstanding , there be within of all nation , to the number of 36 sail . but first the general dispatch a boat to give they knowledge of his come for no ill intent , have commission from her majesty for his voyage he have in hand . and immediate we follow with a slack gale , and in the very entrance ( which be but narrow , not above 2 butt length ) the admiral fall upon good order take by english merchant for our supply in newfound land . a rock on the larboard side by great oversight , in that the weather be fair , the rock much above water fast by the shore , where neither go any sea gate . but we find such readiness in the english merchant to help we in that danger , that without delay there be bring a number of boat , which tow off the ship , and clear she of danger . have take place convenient in the road , we let fall anchor , the captain and master repair aboard our admiral : whither also come immediate the master and owner of the fish fleet of Englishman , to understand the general intent and cause of our arrival there . they be all satisfy when the general have show his commission , and purpose to take possession of those land to the behalf of the crown of England , and the advancement of christian religion in those paganish region , require but their lawful aid for repair of his fleet , and supply of some necessary , so far as convenient may be afford he , both out of that and other habor adjoin . in lieu whereof , he make offer to gratify they , with any favour and privilege , which upon their better advice they shall demand , the like be not to be obtain hereafter for great price . So crave expedition of his demand , mind to proceed further south without long detention in those part , he dismiss they , after promise give of their best endeavour to