the golden hind , of burden 40 ton , be then rear - admiral : in which go Edward Hayes captain and owner , and William Cox of Limehouse master . 4 the swallow , of burden 40 ton : in she be captain Maurice Browne . 5 the squirrel , of burden 10 ton : in which go captain William Andrew , and one cade master . we be in number in all about 260 man : among our fleet con - whom we have of every faculty good choice , as ship - tiste ^ offive wright , mason , carpenter , smith , and such like , " wonderful / Mlibout requisite to such a action : also Minerali man and 260 man . refiner . beside , for solace of our people , and allure - prevision fit mean of the savage , we be provide of music in fir su ^ good variety : not omit the least toy , as morris covenes ' dancer , hobby horse , and maylike conceit to delight the savage people , who we intend to win by all fair mean possible . and to that end we be indifferent furnish of all petty haberdasherie ware to barter with those simple people . in this manner we set forward , depart ( as have be June 11 . say ) out of Causon bay the eleven day of June be Tuesday , the weather and wind fair and good all day , but a great storm of thunder and wind fall the same night . Thursday follow , when we hail one another in June 13 . the evening ( accord to the order before specify ) they signify unto we out of the vice - admiral , that both observe . the captain , and very many of the man be fall sick . and about midnight the viceadmiral forsake we , notwithstanding we have the wind east , fair and good . but it be after credible report , that they be infect with a contagious sickness , and arrive great distress at Plimmoth : the reason i can never understand . sure i be , no cost be spare by their owner master Raleigh in set they forth : therefore i leave it unto God . by this time we be in 48 degree of latitude , not a little grieve with the loss of the most puissant ship in July 20 . Greatfogges upon the ocean sea northward . July 27 . the bank in length unknown , stretchethfrom north into south , in breadth 10 . league , in depth of water upon it 30 . fathom . our fleet : after who departure , the golden hind succeed in the place of vice - admiral , and remove her flag from the mizon unto the foretop . from Saturday the 15 of June until the 28 , which be upon a Friday , we never have fair day without fog or rain , and wind bad , much to the west northwest , whereby we be drive southward unto 41 degree scarce . about this time of the year the wind be common west towards the newfound land , keep ordinary within two point of west to the south or to the north , whereby the course thither fall out to be long and tedious after June , which in march , Apriell and may , have be perform out of England in 22 day and less . we have wind always so scant from west northwest , and from west southwest again , that our traverse be great , run south unto 41 degree almost , and afterward north into 51 degree . also we be encumber with much fog and mist in manner palpable , in which we can not keep so well together , but be dissever , lose the company of the swallow and the squirrel upon the 20 . day of July , who we meet again at several place upon the newfound land coast the three of August , as shall declare in place convenient . Saturday the 27 of July , we may descry not far from we , as it be mountain of ice drive upon the sea , be then in 50 degree , which be carry southward to the weather of we : whereby may be conjecture that some current do set that way from the north . before we come to newfound land about 50 league on this side , we pass the bank , which be high ground rise within the sea and under water , yet deep enough and without danger , be common not less than 25 and 30 fathom water upon they : the same ( as it be some vain of mountain within the sea ) do run along , and from the newfound land , begin northward about 52 or 53 degree of latitude , and do extend 48 into the south infinite . the breadth of this bank be somewhere more , and somewhere less : but we find the same about io league over , have sound both on this side thereof , and the other towards newfound land , but find no ground with almost 200 fathom of line , both before and after we have pass the bank . the Portugal , and French chief , have a notable trade of great fishfish upon this bank , where be sometime a hundred or more sail of ship : who common begin the ' fish in Apriell , and have end by July . that fish be large , always wet , have no land near to dry , and be call Corre fish . during the time of fish , a man shall know without sound when he be upon the bank , by the incredible multitude of sea foul hover over the same , to pray abundance of upon the offalle and garbage of fish throw out by fisherman , and float upon the sea . upon Tuesday the 11 of June , we forsake the coast of England . so again Tuesday the 30 of July ( seven i ay 30 . week after ) we get sight of land , be immediate d ^^ embay in the grand bay , or some other great bay : the ’ certainty whereof we can not judge , so great hase and fog do hang upon the coast , as neither we may discern the land well , nor take the sun height . but by our best computation we be then in the 51 degree of latitude . forsake this bay and uncomfortable coast ( nothing appear unto we but hideous rock and mountain , bare of tree , and void of any green herb ) we follow the coast to the south , with weather fair and clear . we have sight of a hand name Penguin , of a foul hand and a there breed in abundance , almost incredible