, namely the Bonito , lobster , Turbut , with other infinite not seek after : oyster have pearl but not orient in colour : i take it by reason they be not gather in season . concern the inland commodity , aswell to be draw from this land , as from the exceed large country adjoin : there be nothing which our east and northerly country of Europe do yield , but the like also may be make in they as plentiful by time and industry : namely , rosin , pitch , tar , sopeash , deal - boord , mast for ship , hide , fur , flax , hemp , corn , cable , cordage , linen - cloth , metal and many more . all which the country will afford , and the soil be apt to yield . the tree for the most in those south part , be firtree , pine and cypress , all yield gum and turpentine . cherry tree bear fruit no big than a small pease . also pear tree , but fruitless . other tree of some sort to we unknown . the soil along the coast be not deep of earth , bring forth abundant peason small , yet good feed for cattle . Roses pass sweet , like unto our musk rose in form , raspase , a berry which we call hurt , good and wholesome to eat . the grass and herb do fat sheep in very short space , prove by english merchant which have carry sheep thither for fresh victuali and have they raise exceed fat in less than three week . peason which our countryman have sow in the time of May , have come up fair , and be gather in the begin of August , of which our general have a present acceptable for the rareness , be the first fruit come up by art and industry in that desolate and dishabit land . lake or pool of fresh water , both on the top of mountain and in the valley . in which be say to be muscle not unlike to have pearl , which i have put in trial , if by mischance fall unto i , i have not be let from that and other good experiment i be mind to make . foul both of water and land in great plenty and diversity . all kind of green foul : other as big as bustard , yet not the same . a great white foul call of some a gaunt . upon the land diverse sort of hawk , as falcon , and other by report : partridge most plentiful large than we , grey and white of colour , and rough footed like dove , which our man after one flight do kill with cudgel , they be so fat and able to fly . bird some like blackbird , linnet , canary bird , and other very small . beast of sundry kind , red dear , buffle or a beast , as it seem by the tract and foot very large in manner of a ox . bear , ounce or leopard , some great and some lesser , wolf , fox , which to the northward a little further be black , who fur be esteem in some country of Europe very rich . otter , beaver , martern : newfound land do minister commodity abundant for art y industry . silver over bring unto the general . and in the opinion of most man that see it , the general have bring unto he a sable alive , which he send unto his brother sir John Gilbert knight of Devonshire : but it be never deliver , as after i understand . we can not observe the hundred part of creature in those unhabit land : but these mention may induce we to glorify the magnificent God , who have superabundant replenish the earth with creature serve for the use of man , though man have not use a five part of the same , which the more do aggravate the fault and foolish sloth in many of our nation , choose rather to live indirect , and very miserable to live and die within this realm pester with inhabitant , than to adventure as become man , to obtain a habitation in those remote land , in which nature very prodigal do minister unto man endeavour , and for art to work upon . for beside these already recount and infinite more , the mountain general make show of minerail substance : iron very common , lead , and somewhere copper . i will not aver of rich metal : albeit by the circumstance follow , more than hope may be conceive thereof . for among other charge give to inquire out the singularity of this country , the general be most curious in the search of metal , command the minerali man and refiner , especial to be diligent . the same be a saxon bear , honest and religious , name Daniel . who after search bring at first some sort of ore , seem rather to be iron then other mettle . the next time he find over , which with no small show of contentment he deliver unto the general , use protestation , that if silver be the thing which may satisfy the general and his follower , there it be , advise he to seek no further : the peril whereof he undertake upon his life ( as dear unto he as the crown of England unto her majesty , that i may use his own word ) if it fall not out accord . my self at this instant like to die then to live , by a mischance , can not follow this confident opinion of our refiner to my own satisfaction : but afterward demand our general opinion therein , and to have some part of the ore , he reply : content your self , i have see enough , and be it but to satisfy my private humour , i will proceed no further . the promise unto my friend , and necessity to bring also the south country within compass of my patent near expire , as we have already do these north part , do only persuade i reason why further . And touch the ore , i have send it aboard , whereof i will have no speech to be make so long as ma ^ efor we remain within harbour : here be both Portugal , silver my . Biscains and Frenchmen not far off " , from who must be keep any bruit or mutter of such matter . when we be at sea proof shall | be make : if it be to our desire , we may return the soon hither again . who answer i