a brief relation of the new find land , and the commodity thereof . menappoint to make search . hat which we do call the newfound land , and the Frenchman bacalaos , be a hand , or rather ( after the opinion of some ) it consist of sundry hand and break land , situate in the north region of America , upon the gulf and entrance of the great river call S . Laurence in new find land be all island or break land Canada . into the which , navigation may be make both on the south and north side of this hand . the land lie south and north , contain in length between three and 400 mile , account from cape race ( which be in 46 degree 25 minute ) unto the grand bay in 52 degree of septentrionali latitude . the hand round goodly road about have very many goodly bay and harbour , safe and harbour . roajs for ship , the like not to be find in any part of the know world . the common opinion that be have of intemperature and extreme cold that shall be in this country , as of some part it may be verify , namely the north , where i grant newfound ft be more cold than in country of Europe , which be land be habit - unjer g same elevation : even so it can stand with ’ reason and nature of the clime , that the south part shall be so intemperate as the brute have go . for as the same do lie under the climate of Briton , Anjou , Poictou in France , between 46 and 49 degree , so can they not so much differ from the temperature of those country : unless upon the outcoast lie open unto the ocean and sharp wind , it must in deed be subject to more cold , then further within the land , where the mountain be interpose , as walk and bulwark , to defend and to resist the asperity and rigor of the sea and weather . some hold opinion , that the newfound land may be the more subject to cold , by how much it lie high and near unto the middle region . i grant that not in newfound land alone , but in Germany , Italy and Africa , even under the equinoctial line , the mountain be extreme cold , and seldom uncover of snow , in their culme and high top , which come to pass by the same reason that they be extend towards the middle region : yet in the country lie beneath they , it be find quite contrary . Even so all hill have their descent , the valley also and low ground must be likewise hot or temperate , as the clime do cold by aai - give in newfound land : though i be of opinion that the dental mean . gun reflection be much cool , and can be so forcible in the newfound land , nor general throughout America , as in Europe or Africa : by how much the sun in his diurnal course from east to west , pass over ( for the most part ) dry land and sandy country , before he arrive at the west of Europe or Africa , whereby his motion increase heat , with little or no qualification by moist vapour . where , on the contrary fie pass from Europe and Africa unto America over the ocean , from whence it draw and carry with he abundance of moist vapour , which do qualify and enfeeble great the sun reverberation upon this country chief of newfound land , be so much to the northward . nevertheless ( as i say before ) the cold can be so intolerable under the latitude of 46 47 and 48 ( especial within land ) that it shall be unhabitable , as some do suppose , see also there be very many people more to the north by a great deal . and in these south part there be certain beast , ounce or leopard , and bird in like manner which in the summer we have see , not hear of in country of extreme and vehement coldness . beside , as in the month of June , July , August and September , the heat be somewhat more than in England at those season : so man remain upon the south part near unto cape receive , until after Hollandtide , have not find the cold so extreme , nor much differ from the temperature of England . those which have arrive there after November and December , have find the snow exceed deep , whereat no marvel , consider the ground upon the coast , be rough and uneven , and the snow be drive into the place most decline as the like be to be see with we . the like depth of snow happy shall not be find within land upon the plain country , which also be defend by tfie mountain , break off the violence of wind and weather . but admit extraordinary cold in those south part , above that with we here : it can not be so great as in Swedland , much less in Moscovia or Russia : yet • be the same country very populous , and the rigor of cold be dispense with by the commodity of stove , warm clothing , meat and drink : commodity . all which need not to be want in the newfound land , if we have intent there to inhabit . in the south part we find no inhabitant , which by all likelihood have abandon those coast , the same be so much frequent by Christians : but in the north be savage altogether harmless . touch the commodity of this country , serve either for sustenta - tion of inhabitant , or for maintenance of traffic , there be and may be make diverse : so ill it seem nature have recompense that only defect and incommodity of some sharp cold , by many benefit : viz . with incredible fish of sea quantity , and no less variety of kind of fish in the sea and fresh anj fresh water , as trout , salmon and other fish to ’ we unknown : also cod , which alone draw many nation thither , and be become the most famous fish of the world . abundance of whale , for which also be a very great trade in the bay of Placentia and the grand bay , where be make train oil of the whale : herring the large that have be hear of , and exceed the malstrond herring of Norway : but hitherto be never benefit take of the herring fish . there be sundry other fish very delicate