judge reasonable , and content i well : wherewith i will conclude this narration and description of the newfound land , and proceed to the rest of our voyage , which end tragical . while the better sort of we be serious occupy in repair our want , and contrive of matter for the commodity of our voyage : other of another sort misdemeanour 8c disposition be plot of mischief . some cast ** ° ur come to steal away our ship by night , watch opor - ? aunt ' tunitie by the general and captain lie on the shore : who conspiracy discover , they be prevent . other draw together in company , and carry away out of the harbour adjoin , a ship lade with fish , set the poor man on shore . a great many more of our people steal into the wood to hide themselves , attend time and mean to return home by such ship as daily depart from the coast . some be sick of flux , and many dead : and in brief , by one mean or other our company be diminish , and many by the general license to return home . insomuch as after god bring together these man into the ship ordain to perish , who before have commit such outrage . why sir Humf . Gilbert go in the frigate . liberalise of the Portugal . August 20 s . John in 47 deg . 40 min . cape race in 46 degree z 5 minute . we have review our people , resolve to see a end of our voyage , we grow scant of man to furnish all our ship : it seem good therefore unto the general to leave the swallow with such provision as may be spare for transport home the sick people . the captain of the delight or admiral return into England , in who stead be appoint captain Maurice brown , before captain of the swallow : who also bring with he into the delight all his man of the swallow , which before have be note of outrage perpetrate and commit upon fisherman there meet at sea . the general make choice to go in his frigate the squirrel ( whereof the captain also be among they that return into England ) the same frigate be most convenient to discover upon the coast , and to search into every harbour or creek , which a great ship can not do . therefore the frigate be prepare with her netting and fight , and overcharge with base and such small ordinance , more to give a show , then with judgement to foresee unto the safety of she and the man , which afterward be a occasion also of their overthrow . now have make ready our ship , that be to say , the delight , the golden hind , and the squirrel , and put aboard our provision , which be wine , bread or rusk , fish wet and dry , sweet oil : beside many other , as marmalade , fig , lymmon barrel , and such like : also we have other necessary provision for trim our ship , net and line to fish withal , boat or pinnaces fit for discovery . in brief , we be supply of our want commodious , as if we have be in a country or some city populous and plentiful ! of all thing . we depart from this harbour of saint Johns upon Tuesday the twenty of August , which we find by exact observation to be in 47 degree 40 minute . and the next day by night we be at cape race , 25 league from the same harbour . this cape lie south Southwest from S . Johns : it be a low land , be off from the cape about half a league : 62 within the sea rise up a rock against the point of the cape , which thereby be easy know : it be in latitude 46 degree 25 minute . under this cape we be becalm a small time , during which we lay out hook and line to take Codde , and draw in less than two hour , fish so large fish large and and in such abundance , that many day after we feed entiful1 - upon not other provision . from hence we shape our course unto the island of Sablon , if convenient it will so fall out , also direct to cape Briton . Sablon lie to the seaward of Cape briton about Mattel in the 25 league , whither we be determine to go upon intelligence we have of a Portugal , ( during our abode in saint Johns ) who be himself present , when the Portugal ( above thirty year pass ) do put into the same island both neat and swine to breed , which be since exceed multiply . This seem unto we very happy tiding , to have in a island lie so near unto the main , which we intend to plant upon , such store of cattle , whereby we may at all time convenient be relieve of victuali , and serve of store for breed . in this course we trend along the coast , which from cape race stretch into the northwest , make a bay which some call Trepassa . than it go out again towards the west , and make a point , which with cape race lie in manner east and west . but this point incline to the north : to the west of which go in the bay of Placentia . we send man on land to take view of the soil along this coast , whereof they make good good soil . report , and some of they have will to be plant there . they see Pease grow in great abundance every where . the distance between cape race and Cape briton be 87 league . in which navigation we spend 8 day , have many time the wind indifferent good : yet can we never attain sight of any land all that time , see we be hinder by the current . at last we fall into such flat and danger , that hardly any of we escape : where nevertheless we lose our admiral with all the man and provision , not know certain the place . yet for induce man of skill to make conjecture , by our course and way we hold from cape race thither ( that thereby the flat and danger may be insert in sea card , for warn to other that may follow the same course hereafter ) i have set down the best reckon that be keep by expert man , William Cox master of the hind , and John Paul his mate , both of Limehouse .