silly soul ? who country do ( as it be with arm advance ) above the climate both of Spain and France , stretch out it self towards England only : in manner pray our aid and help , as it be not only set forth in mercator general map , but it be also find to be true by the discovery of our nation , and other stranger , who have oftentimes travail upon the same coast . Christopher Columbus of famous memory , the first instrument to manifest the great glory and mercy of almighty God in plant the christian faith , in those so long unknown region , have in purpose to acquaint ( as he do ) that renown prince , the queen majesty grandfather king Henry the seven , with his intend voyage for the western discovery , be not only deride and mock general , even here in England , but afterward become a laugh stock to the Spaniard themselves , who at this day ( of all other people ) be most bind to laud and praise God , who first stir up the man to that enterprise . and while he be attend there to acquaint the king of Castille ( that then be ) with his intend purpose , by how many way and mean be he deride ? some scorn the pildnesse of his garment , some take occasion to jest at his simple and silly look , other ask if this be he that lowt so low , which do take upon he to bring man into a country that abound with gold , pearl , and precious stone ? if he be any such man ( say they ) he will carry another manner of countenance with he , and look somewhat lofty . thus some judge he by his garment , and other by his look and countenance , but none enter into the consideration of the inward man . A . D . 1583 . god do not always begin hit great work by the great person . he custom be to bow himself very low in make of courtesy . in the end , what success his voyage have , who listen to read the decade , the history of the west Indies , the conquest of Hernando Cortes about Mexico , and those Hernando of Francisco Pizarro in Peru about Casamalcha and Cusco , may know more particular . all which their p ^^ discovery , travail and conquest be extant to be have in the english tongue . this devise be then account a fantastical imagination , and a drowsy dream . but the sequel thereof have since awake out of dream thousand of soul to know their creator , be thereof before that time altogether ignorant : and have since make sufficient proof , neither to be fantastic nor vain imagine . withal , how mighty it have enlarge the dominion of the crown of Spain , and great enrich the subject of the same , let all man consider . beside , it be well know , that sithence the time of Columbus his first discovery , through the plant , possess , and inhabit those part , there have be transport and bring home into Europe great store of gold , silver , pearl , and precious stone , then heretofore have be in all age since the creation of the world . i do therefore hearty wish , that see it have please almighty god of his infinite mercy , at the length to awake some of our worthy country man out of that drowsy dream , wherein we have so long slumber : that we may now not suffer that to quail for want of maintenance , which by these valiant gentleman our countryman be so noble begin and enterprise . for which purpose , i have take upon i to write this simple short treatise , hope that it shall be able to persuade such as have be , and yet do continue detractor and hinderer of this journey , ( by reason perhaps that they have not deliberate and advise enter into the judgement of the matter ) that yet now upon better consideration they will become favourable furtherer of the same . and that such as be already well affect there - a reasonable unto , will continue their good disposition : and withal , i request . most humble pray all such as be no niggard of their purse in buy of costly and rich apparel , and liberali contributor in set forth of game , pastime , feast and banquet , ( whereof the charge be pass , there be no hope of public profit or commodity ) that henceforth they will bestow and employ their liberality ( heretofore that way expend ) to the furtherance of these so commendable purpose proceed . and to this end have i take pen in hand , as in conscience thereunto move , desire much rather , that of the great multitude which this realm do nourish , far better able to handle this matter than i my self be , it will have please some one of they to have undertake the same . but see they be silent , and that it fall to my lot to put pen to the paper , i will endeavour my self , and do stand in good hope ( though my skill and knowledge be simple , yet through the the argument assistance of almighty God ) to prove that the voyage of the book . jate | y enterprise for trade , traffic , and plant in America , be a action tend to the lawful enlargement 96 of her majesty dominion , commodious to the whole realm in generail , profitable to the adventurer in particular , beneficial to the savage , and a matter to be attain without any great danger or difficulty . and last , ( which be most of all ) a thing likewise tend to the honour and glory of almighty God . and for that the lawfulness to plant in those country in some man judgement seem very doubtful , i will begin the proof of the lawfulness of trade , traffic , and plant . the second chapter show , that it be lawful and necessary to trade and traffic with the savage : and to plant in their country : and divide plant into two sort . a nd first for traffic , i say that the Christians may lawful travel into those country and abide there : who the savage may not just impugn and forbid in respect of the mutual society