and crystal , and great store of beast , bird , and fowl both for pleasure and necessary use of man be to be find . and for such as take delight in hunt , there be stag , wild bore , fox , hare , cony , badger , otter , and diverse other such like for pleasure . also for such as have delight in hawk , there be hawk of sundry kind , and great store of game , both for land and river , as fezant , partridge , crane , heronshawe , duck , mallards , and such like . there be also a kind of beast much big than a ox , who hide be more than eighteen foot long , of which sort a countryman of we , one Walker a sea man , who be upon that coast , do for a truth report in the presence of diverse honourable and worshipful person , that he and his company do find in one cottage above two hundred and forty hide , which they bring away and sell in France for forty shilling a hide ; and with this agree David Ingram , and describe that beast at large , suppose it to be a certain kind of buff ; there be likewise beast and fowl of diverse kind , which i omit for brevity sake , great store of fish both in the salt water and in the fresh , plenty of grape as big as a man thumb , and the most delicate wine of the palm tree , of which wine there be diverse of good credit in this realm that have taste : and there be also a kind of grain call Maiz , potato root , and sundry other fruit natural grow there : so that after such time as they be once settle , they shall need to take no great care for victuali . and now for the better contentation and satisfaction 114 of such worshipful , honest mind , and well dispose merchant , as have a desire to the furtherance of every good and commendable action , i will first say unto they , as i have do before to the nobleman and gentleman , that within the degree abovesaid , be doubtless to be find the most wholesome and best temperature of air , fertility of soil , and every other commodity or merchandise , for the which , with no small peril we do travel into Barbary , Spain , Portugal , France , Italy , Moscovie and Eastland . all which may be either present have , or at the least wise in very short time procure from thence with less danger than now we have they . and yet to the end my argument shall not altogether stand upon likelihood and presumption , i say that such person as have discover and travel those part , do testify that they have find in those country all these thing follow , namely : ' of beast for fur . martern . beaver . fox , black and white . leopard . of worm . silk worm great and large . < of bird . hawk . Bitters . curlewe . herons . partridge . crane . mallards . wild goose . stock dove . and sundry other strange margaus . black bird . parrot . pengwin . of fish . Codde . salmon . seal . herring . of tree . palm tree yield sweet wine . cedar . firre . sassafras . oak . Eime . popler . tree to we unknown . TI5 of fruit . grape very large . muskemellon . lemon . date great . orange . fig . prune . raisin great and small . pepper . almond . citron . of metal . ' gold . silver . copper . lead . tin . of stone . turkeis . ruby . pearl great and fair . marble , of diverse kind . jasper . crystal . sundry other commodity of all sort . ' Rosen . pitch . tar . turpentine . frankincense . honey . wax . rhubarb . oil olive . train oil . musk codde . x . salt . ' tallow . hide . hemp . flax . Cochenello and die of diverse sort . feather of sundry sort , as for pleasure and fill of featherbed . and see that for small cost , the truth of these thing may be understand ( whereof this intend supply will give we more certain assurance ) i do find no cause to the contrary , but that all well mind person shall be willing to adventure some competent portion for the furtherance of so good a enterprise . now for the trial hereof , consider that in the article of the society of the adventurer in this voyage , there be provision make , that no adventurer shall be bind to any further charge than his first adventure : and yet notwithstanding keep still to himself his child , his 116 apprentice and servant , his and their freedom for trade and traffic , which be a privilege that adventurer in other voyage have not : and in the say article it be likewise provide , that none other than such as have adventure in the first voyage , or shall become adventurer in this supply , at any time hereafter be to be admit in the say society , but as redemptionary , which will be very chargeable : therefore general i say unto all such accord to the old proverb , nothing venture , nothing have . for if it do so fall out , accord to the great hope and expectation have , ( as by god grace it will ) the gain which now they reap by traffic into other far country , shall by this trade return with less charge , great gain , and more safety : less charge , i say , by reason of the ample and large deep river at the very bank , whereof there be many , whereby both easy and quiet they may transport from the innermost part of the main land , all kind of merchandise , yea in vessel of great burden , and that three time , or twice in the year at the least . but let we omit all presumption how vehement soever , and dwell upon the certainty of such commodity as be discover by saint Humphrey Gilbert , and his assistant in newfound land in August last . for . there may be very easy make pitch , tar , Rosen , soap 4 *^ 1 last ash in