to the worshipful , master Richard hakluit at Oxford in Christchurch master of art , and philosophic , his friend and brother . i have not purpose to write unto you , when the promise of your letter come to my mind : you think in June last to have follow we your self , and therefore i have leave order that you shall be advertise of my state , by master doctor Humphrey : but so you will not be satisfy : i will write therefore to you almost in the same word , because i have no leisure at this time , to meditate new matter , and to vary or multiply word . the two . of June we set sail at length from England in good earnest , and depart , leave the haven and land behind we at Plymouth : our fleet consist of five ship : the great , which the admiral brother have lend we , withdraw her self from we the three day , we know not upon what occasion : with the rest we sail still together till the 23 . of July : at which time our view of one another be intercept by the great mist , some of we sail one way , and some another : to we alone the first land appear , the first of August , about the latitude of 50 . degree , when as before we have descend beyond 41 . degree in hope of some southerly wind , which notwithstanding never blue to we at any fit time . five it be a island which your man call Penguin , because of the multitude of bird of the same name . yet we neither see any bird , nor draw near to the land , the wind serve for our course direct to another place , but we meet altogether at that place a little before the haven , whereunto by common council we have determine to come , and that within the space of two hour by the great goodness of God , and to our great joy . the place be situate in newfound land , between 47 . and vni 81 f A . D . . 1583 . 48 . degree , call by the name of saint Johns : the admiral himself by reason of the multitude of the man , and the smallness of his ship , have his company somewhat sickly , and have already lose two of the same company , which die of the flix : of the rest we conceive good hope . of our company ( for i join my self with Maurice brown , a very proper gentleman ) two person by a mischance be drown , the rest be in safety , and strong , and for my own part i be never more healthy . we arrive at this place the three of August : and the five the admiral take possession of the country , for himself and the kingdom of England : have make and publish certain law , concern religion , and obedience to the queen of England : at this time our fare be somewhat better , and dainty , than it be before : for in good sooth , the experience of so long time have teach we what contrary wind we have find , and what great travel we may endure hereafter : and therefore we will take such order , that we will want nothing : for we find in this place about twenty Portugal and spanish ship , beside the ship of the english : which be not able to match we , suffer we not to be hunger starve : the English although they be off themselves strong enough , and safe from our force , yet see our authority , by the queen letter patent , they show we all manner of duty and humanity . the manner of this country and people remain now to be speak of . but what shall i say , my good Hakluyt , when i see nothing but a very wilderness ? of fish here be incredible abundance , whereby great gain grow to they , that travel to these part : the hook be no soon throw out , but it be eftsoon draw up with some goodly fish : the whole land be full of hill and wood . the tree for the most part be pine and of they some be very old , and some young : a great part of they be fall by reason of their age , do so hinder the sight of the land , and stop the way of those that seek to travel , that they can go no whither : all the 82 grass here be long , and tall , and little differ from we . it seem also that the nature of this soil be fit for corn : for i find certain blade and ear in a manner beard , so that it appear that by manure and sow , they may easy be frame for the use of man : here be in the wood bush berry , or rather straw berry grow up like tree , of great sweetness . bear also appear about the fisher stage of the country , and be sometime kill , but they seem to be white , as i conjecture by their skin , and somewhat less than we . whether there be any people in the country i know not , neither have i see any to witness it . and to say truth , who can , when as it be not possible to pass any whither ? in like sort it be unknown , whither any metal lie under the hill : the cause be all one , although the very colour and hue of the hill seem to have some mine in they : we move the admiral to set the wood a fire , that so we may have space , and entrance to take view of the country , which motion do nothing displease he , be it not for fear of great inconvenience that may thereof ensue : for it be report and confirm by very credible person , that when the like happen by chance in another port , the fish never come to the place about it , for the space of 7 . whole year after , by reason of the water make bitter by the turpentine , and rosin of the tree , which run into the river upon the fire of they . the weather be so hot this time of the year , that except the very fish , which be lay out to be dry by the sun , be every day turn , it can possible be preserve from burn : but how cold it be in the winter , the great heap , and mountain of ice , in the midst of the sea have teach we : some of our company report , that in may , they be sometime keep in , with such huge ice , for 16 . whole day together , as that the island thereof be threescore fathom thick , the side whereof which be towards the sun , when they be melt , the whole mass or heap be so invert and turn in manner of balance , that that part which be before downward rise upward , to the great peril of those that be near they , as by reason we may gather . the air upon land be indifferent clear , but at sea towards the east there be nothing else but perpetuali mist , and in the sea it self , about the bank ( for so they call the place where they find ground forty league distant from the shore , and where they begin to fish ) there be no day without rain . when we have serve , and supply our necessity in this place , we purpose by the help of God to pass towards the south , with so much the more hope every day , by how much the great the thing be , that be report of those country , which we go to discover . thus much touch our estate . now i desire to know somewhat concern you , but i fear in vain , but special i desire out of measure to know how my patron master Henry Umpton do take my absence : my obedience , and duty shall always be ready towards he as long as i live : but in deed i hope , that this journey of we shall | be profitable to his intention . it remain that you think i to be still you , and so you as no man moor . the son of God bless all our labor , so far , as that you your self may be partaker of our blessing . adieu , my most friendly , most sweet , most virtuous Hakluyt : in newfound land , at saint Johns port , the 6 . of August . 1583 . Steven Parmenius of Buda , you .