and first grow into familiarity with the inland people . 140 what Minerali matter may fall out to be find , be a thing leave in suspense , until some better knowledge , because there be many man , who have long since expect some profit herein , upon the great promise that have be make they , and be as yet in no point satisfy , do thereupon conceive that they be but word purposely cast out for the induce of man to be the more ready and willing to furnish their money towards the charge of the first discovery . but now to answer some other who begin with a other objection , say : that it be not for the merchant purse to continue the charge of transport and plant : and that since these hundred man which be now to be plant , will cost four thousand pound : it be then to be think , that the charge of a far great number , will be also a far great sum of money . whereunto i answer , that in all attempt unknown , especial such a one as this be , wherewith we be present in hand , the first charge be common adventure in more desperate kind , than those that follow upon some better knowledge : and therewith it fall out , that whereas one adventure in the first enterprise , a hundred for that one will of themselves be willing and desirous to adventure in the next , if there be never so little more appearance , that the intend matter be by some knowledge of our own , find true in some point of our first presumption . the example be many , and may easy be remember by those who be merchant , even in their ordinary and daily trade , as well as in extraordinary attempt , which of late year have fall into those term of some likelihood , as be aforesaid . so then no doubt , but when certain report shall be bring by they who direct come from thence , that such a country and people they have themselves see , as be by we speak off , but that then there will come forward a great number of those , who now neither have hear any thing of the matter , as also of other , who present make such 141 A . D . objection . answer . the ewer of metal bring by m . Frobisher , cause two several supply , the two year nextfollow ; whereof the latter be of thirteen tall ship . frivolous scruple , and will not otherwise be satisfy , then by the report of saint Thomas . i speak not this by the merchant who for their freedom of trade 1 will not have press to any further charge than this first preparation , but rather by such as have great affection to hazard the change of their estate , and will be well content to go in the voyage if they may only be assure that there be such a country , and that their money shall not be waste to nothing in the preparation . the right examination of this point must be the contrary sequel of the common proverb that be use , nothing venture , nothing have : so on the other side by venture , many great good profit be find out , to the wonderful benefit of the common weal , and to those especial in private , who take on they the hazard of their life and travel , or substance in the first attempt : and therefore i will wish that they , who ( God be thank ) be well able to spare that which be require of each one towards the undertake of this adventure , be well content and willing to employ the same , since the sequel in good and substantiali reason do promise , not only a great commodity in particular to the merchant , who shall here at home exercise the trade of merchandise : but also to a infinite number of other , who present live in poor estate , and may by take the opportunity of this discovery , alter the same to a far better degree . wherefore to make some conclusion upon this point of the merchant misdoubt , who suspect lest this first disbursement without return of present gain , shall not be all his charge , but that afterward he may yet further be urge to continue the like again , as have happen in the discovery of the moscovian trade : it may suffice to consider , that this be not a action which concern only the merchant particular , but a great deal more the general sort of people throughout all England : and that when such relation shall be return , as that it may be find a matter worthy the follow , the whole generality will not refuse to contribute towards the furtherance 142 Christopher CARLILE ’ S discourse a . d . .. 1583 * thereof , rather than it shall sink for want of any reasonable supply . but as it be a very little time , since i have be thorough resolve to try my fortune in the matter , so it be more than time the preparation be in hand already , and therefore no fit time now to make any number of ignorant man to understand with reason the circumstance that belong to a matter of so great consideration and importance . to those who have any forward mind in well do to the generality of mankind , i say thus much more , that christian charity do as great persuade the furtherance of this action , as any other that may be lay before we , in as much as thereby we shall not only do a most excellent work , in respect of reduce the savage people to Christianity and civility , but also in respect of our poor sort of people , which be very many among we , live altogether unprofitable , and often time to the great disquiet of the better sort . for who know not , how by the long peace , happy health , and bless plentifulness , wherewith God have endue this realm , that the people be so mighty increase , as a great number be bring up , during their youth in their parent house , without any instruction how to get their live after their parent decease , be drive to some necessity , whereby very often for want of better education they fall into sundry disorder , and so the good sort of people , as i say before , be by they ordinary trouble , and themselves lead on to one shameful end or other , whereas if there may be find some such kind of employment as this will be , no doubt but a great part of they will be withhold from fall into such vile ' deed : and in stead thereof , prove great serviceable in those affair , where they may be so employ . this i speak of my own experience , have see master cardiver come over to the war of the low country ^ es ™ ne during my residence in the same , who here have be very expenence - evill and idle liver , and by some little continuance with 143 we , have grow to be very industrious in their faculty , which i can assure you , be a more painful manner of live then in this action be like to fall out , and withaU to a purpose of far less value , in respect of their particular recompense , then with a assure