strong argue , the say prince with his people to have inhabit there . and the same in effect be confirm by Mutezuma that mighty emperor of Mexico , who in a oration unto his subject for the better pacify of they , make in the presence of Hernando Cortes use these speech follow . my kinsman , friend , and servant , you do well know that eighteen year i have be your king , as my father and grandfather be , and always i have - bene unto you a love prince , and you unto i good 108 and obedient subject , and so i hope you will remain unto i all the day of my life . you ought to have in remembrance , that either you have hear of your father , or else our divine have instruct you , that we be not natural of this country , nor yet our kingdom be durable , because our forefather come from a far country , and their king and captain , who bring they hither , return again to his natural country , say that he will send such as shall rule and govern we , if by chance he himself return not , etc these be the very word of Mutezuma set down in the spanish chronicle , the which be thorough consider , because they have relation to some strange noble person , who long before have possess those country , do all sufficient argue the undoubted title of her majesty : forasmuch as no other nation can true by any chronicle they can find , make prescription of time for themselves , before the time of this prince Madoc . beside all this , for further proof of her highness title sithence the arrival of this noble briton into those part ( that be to say ) in the time of the queen grandfather of worthy memory , king Henry the seven , letter patent be by his majesty grant to John Cabota a italian , to Lewis , Sebastian and Sancius , his three son , to discover remote , barbarous and heathen country , which discovery be afterwards execute to the use of the crown of England , in the say king time , by Sebastian and Sancius his son , who be bear here in England : in true testimony whereof there be a fair haven in Newfoundland , know , and call until this day by the name of Sancius haven , which prove that they first discover upon that coast from the height of 63 unto the cape of Florida , as appear in the decade . and this may stand for another title to her majesty : but any of the foresay title be as much or more than any other christian prince can pretend to the Indies , before such time as they have actuali possession thereof , 109 m . Oliver Dalbony . m . Edward reow . m . R . H . m . i A . obtain by the discovery of Christopher Columbus , and the conquest of Vasques nun de Balboa , Hernando Cortes , Francisco Pizarro , and other . and therefore i think it needless to write any more touch the lawfulness of her majesty title . the four chapter show how that the trade , traffic , and plant in those country , be likely to prove very profitable to the whole realm in general . now to show how the same be likely to prove very profitable and beneficial general to the whole realm : it be very certain , that the great jewel of this realm , and the chief strength and force of the same , for defence or offence in martial matter and manner , be the multitude of ship , master and mariner , ready to assist the most stately and royal navy of her majesty , which by reason of this voyage shall have both increase and maintenance . and it be well know that in sundry Cox the place of this realm ship have be build and set forth master . of jate jaye } for the trade of fish only : yet notwithstanding the fish which be take and bring into England by the english navy of fisherman , will not suffice for the expense of this realm four month , if there be none else bring of stranger . and the chief cause why our english man do not go so far westerly as the especial fish place do lie , both for plenty and greatness of fish , be for that they have no succour and know safe harbour in those part . but if our nation be once plant there , or near thereabouts ; whereas they now fish but for two month in the year , they may then fish so long as please themselves , or rather at their come find such plenty of fish ready take , salt , and dry , as may be sufficient to fraught they home without long delay ( God grant that salt may be find there ) whereof David Ingram ( who travel in those country as aforesaid ) say that there be great plenty : and withal the climate do give great hope , that though there be none no natural grow , yet it may as well be make there by art , as it be both at rochel and Bayon , or elsewhere . which be bring to pass , shall increase the number of our ship and mariner , be it but in respect of fish only : but much more in regard of the sundry merchandize and commodity which be there find , and have in great abundance . moreover , it be well know that all savage , aswell those that dwell in the south , as those that dwell in the north , so soon as they shall begin but a little to taste of civility , will take marvelous delight in any garment , be it never so simple ; as a shirt , a blue , yellow , red , or green cotton cassock , a cap , or such like , and will take incredible pain for such a trifle . for i my self have hear this report make sundry clothier , time by diverse of our countryman , who have dwell wwlman . in the southerly part of the west Indies , some twelve year together , and some of less time ; that the people weaver . in those part be easy reduce to civility both in manner fuller . and garment . which be so , what vent for