three , namely , 91 the delight , wherein be appoint captain in m . William winter place , ( that thence return immediate for England ) m . Maurice Browne : the golden hind , in which be captain and owner , m . Edward Hays : and the little frigate where the general himself do go , seem to he most fit to discover and approach the shore . the 21 . day they come to cape race , towards the south part whereof , lie a while becalm , they take cod in largeness and quantity , exceed the other part of newfound land , where any of they have be . and from thence , trending the coast west , towards the bay of Placentia , the general send certain man a shore , to view the country , which to they as they sail along , seem pleasant . whereof his man at their return give great commendation , like so well of the place , as they will willing have stay and winter there . but have the wind fair and good , they proceed on their course towards the firm of America , which by reason of continual fog , at that time of the year especial , they can never see , till Cox master of the golden hind do discern land , and present lose sight thereof again , at what time they be all upon a breach in a great and outrageous storm , have under 3 . fathom water . but God deliver the frigate and the golden hind , from this great danger . and the delight in the presence of they all be lose , to their unspeakable grief , with all their chief victuali , munition , and other necessary provision , and other thing of value not fit here to be name . whereupon , by reason also that winter be come upon they , and foul weather increase with fog and mist that so cover the land , as without danger of perish they can not approach it : sir Humphrey Gilbert and m . Hays be compel much against their will to retire homeward : and be 300 . league on their way , be after by tempestuous weather separate the one from the other , the nine of September last , since which time m . Hays with his bark be safe arrive , but of sir Humphrey as yet they hear no certain news . upon this report ( together with my former intent , to write some brief discourse in the commendation of this so noble and worthy a enterprise ) i do call to my remembrance , the history of Themystocles the grecian , who ( be a right noble and valiant captain ) signify unto his countryman the citizen of Athens , that he have invent a devise for their common wealth very profitable : but it be of such importance and secrecy , that it ought not to be reveal , before private conference have with some particular prudent person of their choice . the athenian know Aristides the philosopher , to be a man endue with singular wisdom and virtue , make choice of he to have conference with Themystcles , and thereupon to yield his opinion to the citizen concern the say devise : which be , that they may set on fire the navy of their enemy , with great facility , as he have lay the plot : Aristides make relation to the citizen , that the stratagem devise by Themystocles be a profitable practice for the common wealth but it be dishonest . the athenian ( without further demand what the same be ) do by common consent reject and condemn it , prefer honesty and upright deal before profit . by occasion of this history , i draw my self into a more deep consideration of this late undertake voyage , whether it be as well please to almighty God , as profitable to man : as lawful , as it seem honourable : as well grateful to the savage , as gainful to the Christians . and upon mature deliberation i find the action to be honest and profitable , and therefore allowable by the opinion of Aristides if he be now alive : which be by i herein sufficient prove , ( as by god grace i purpose to do ) i doubt not but that all good mind will endeavour themselves to be assistant to this so commendable a enterprise , by the valiant and worthy gentleman our country man already attempt and undertake . now whereas i do understand that sir Humphrey Gilbert his adherent , associate and friend do mean 93 A . D . I583 - plutarch . | | Englishman . master John Hawkins . sir Francis drake . m . William winter . m . John Chester . m . Martin Frobisher . Anthony Parkhurst . William Bat . John Lovel . David Ingram . stranger . French . John Ribault . Jaques Cartier . Andrew Thevet . monsieur Gourgues . Monsieur Laudonniere . Italians . Christopher Columbus . John VeraiMnus . with a convenient supply ( with as much speed as may be ) to maintain , pursue and follow this intend voyage already in part perform , and ( by the assistance of almighty God ) to plant themselves and their people in the continent of the hither part of America , between the degree of 30 . and 60 . of septentrionali latitude : within which degree by computation astronomical and cosmographical be doubtless to be find all thing that be necessary , profitable , or delectable for man life : the climate mild and temperate , neither too hot nor too cold , so that under the cope of heaven there be not any where to be find a more convenient place to plant and inhabit in : which many notable gentleman , both | | of our own nation and stranger , ( who have be traveller ) can testify : and that those country be at this day inhabit with savage ( who have no knowledge of God : ) be it not therefore ( i say ) to be lament , that these poor pagan , so long live in ignorance and idolatry , and in sort thirst after Christianity , ( as may appear by the relation of such as have travail in those part ) that our heart be so harden , that few or none can be find which will put to their help hand , and apply themselves to the relieve of the miserable and wretched estate of these