our steerman . English clothes will thereby ensue , and how great benefit to all such person and artificer , who name be quote capper . in the margin , i do leave to the judgement of such as hatter , be discreet . an man3 te - and questionless , hereby it will also come to pass , cayedt ™ nes that all such town and village as both have be , ’ and now be utter decay and ruinate ( the poor people thereof be not set on work , by reason of the transportation of raw wool of late day more excessive then in time past ) shall by this mean be restore to their pristinate wealth and estate : all which do likewise tend to the enlargement of our navy , and maintenance of our navigation . to what end need i endeavour my self by argument to prove that by this voyage our navy and navigation shall | be enlarge , when as there need none other reason then the manifest and late example of the near neighbour to this realm , the king of Spain and Portugal , who m the idle person of this realm shall by occasion of thisjourneybee well employ y set on work . hemp do grow near saint Laurence river natural . read the begin of the bookeintitule , diverse voyage touch the discovery of America . since the first discovery of the Indies , have not only mighty enlarge their dominion , great enrich themselves and their subject : but have also by just account treble the number of their ship , master and mariner , a matter of no small moment and importance ? beside this , it will prove a general ! benefit unto our country , that through this occasion , not only a great number of man which do now live idle at home , and be burdenous , chargeable , and unprofitable to this realm , shall hereby be set on work , but also child of twelve or fourteen year of age , or under , may be keep from idleness , in make of a thousand kind of trifle thing , which will be good merchandise for that country . and moreover , our idle woman ( which the realm may well spare ) shall also be employ on pluck , dry , and sort of feather , in pull , beat , and work of hemp , and in gather of cotton , and diverse thing right necessary for die . all which thing be to be find in those country most plentiful . and the man may employ themselves in drag for pearl , work for mine , and in matter of husbandry , and likewise in hunt the whale for Trane , and make cask to put the same in : beside in fish for cod , salmon , and herring , dry salt and barrel the same , and fell of tree , hew and saw of they , and such like work , meet for those person that be no man of art or science . many other thing may be find to the great relief and good employment of no small number of the natural subject of this realm , which do now live here idle to the common annoy of the whole state . neither may i here omit the great hope and likelihood of a passage beyond the grand bay into the south sea , confirm by sundry author to be find lead to Cataia , the Moluccas and spicery , whereby may ensue as general a benefit to the realm , or great than yet have be speak of , without either such charge , or other inconvenience , as by the tedious tract of time and 112 peril , which the ordinary passage to those part at this day do minister . and to conclude this argument withal , it be well know to all man of sound judgement , that this voyage be of great importance , and will be find more beneficial to our country , than all other voyage at this day in use and trade among we . the five chapter show , that the trade and plant in those country be likely to prove to the particular profit of all adventurer . must now accord to my promise show forth some probable reason that the adventurer in this journey be to take particular profit by the same . it be therefore convenient that i do divide the adventurer into two sort : the nobleman and gentleman by themselves , and the merchant by themselves . for , as i do hear , it be mean that there shall be one society of the nobleman and gentleman , and another society of the merchant . and yet not so divide , but that each society may free and frank trade and traffic one with the other . and first to bend my speech to the nobleman and gentleman , who do chief seek a temperate climate , wholesome air , fertile soil , and a strong place by nature whereupon they may fortify , and there either plant themselves , or such other person as they shall think good to send to be lord of that place and country : to they i say , that all these thing be very easy to be find within the degree of 30 and 60 aforesaid , either by south or ■ North , both in the continent , and in island thereunto adjoin at their choice : but the degree certain of the elevation of the pole , and the very climate where these place of force and fertility be to be find , i omit to make public , for such regard as the wise sort can easy conjecture : the rather because i do certain understand , that some of those which have the manage of this vni i13 h hide sell for forty shilling a piece . great grape . wine of the palm tree . matter , know it as well or better than i my self , and do mean to reveal the same , when cause shall require , to such person who it shall concern , and to no other : so that they may seat and settle themselves in such climate as shall best agree with their own nature , disposition , and good like : and in the whole tract of that land , by the description of as many as have be there , great plenty of minerail matter of all sort , and in very many place , both stone of price , pearl