and fellowship between man and man prescribe by the law of nation . for from the first beginning of the creation of the world , and from the renew of the same after Noes flood , all man have agree , that no violence shall be offer to ambassador : that the sea with his haven shall be common : that such as shall fortune to be take in war , shall be servant or slave : and that stranger shall not be drive away from the place or country whereunto they do come . if it be so then , i demand in what age , and by what law be the same forbid or deny since ? for who doubt but that it be lawful for christian to use trade and traffic with infidel or savage , carry thither such commodity as they want , and bring from thence some part of their plenty ? a thing so common and general practise , both in these our day , and in time past , beyond the memory of man , both by Christians and infidel , that it need no further proof . vni 97 g the principali cause why this voyage be undertake . and forasmuch as the use of trade and traffic ( be it never so profitable ) ought not to be prefer before the plant of Christian faith : i will therefore somewhat entreat of plant , ( without which , Christian religion can take no root , be the preacher never so careful and diligent ) which i mean to divide into two sort . the first , when Christians by the good like and will assent of the savage , be admit by they to quiet possession . the second , when Christians be unjust repulse , do seek to attain and maintain the right for which they do come . and though in regard of the establishment of christian religion , either of both may be lawful and just exercise : ( whereof many example may be find , as well in the time of Moses and Josua , and other ruler before the birth of Christ , as of many virtuous emperor and king sithence his incarnation : ) yet do i wish , that before the second be put in practice , a proof may be make of the first , save that for their safety as well against the savage , as all other foreign enemy , they shall first well and strong fortify themselves : which be do , then by all fair speech , and every other good mean of persuasion to seek to take away all occasion of offence . as let they to understand , how they come not to their hurt , but for their good , and to no other end , but to dwell peaceable among they , and to trade and traffic with they for their own commodity , without molest or grieve they any way : which must not be do by word only but also by deed . for albeit , to maintain right and repel injury , be a just cause of war : yet must there hereof be heedful care have , that whereas the savage be fearful by nature , and fond otherwise , the Christians shall do their best endeavour to take away such fear as may grow unto they by reason of their strange apparel , armour , and weapon , or such like , by quiet and peaceable conversation , 98 and let they live in security , and keep a measure of blameless defence , with as little discommodity to the savage as may be : for this kind of war will be only defensive and not offensive . and questionless there be great hope and likelihood , that by this kind of mean we shall bring to pass all effect to our desire purpose : consider that all creature , by constitution of nature , be render more tractable and easy win for all assay , by courtesy and mildness , then by cruelty or roughness : and therefore be a principle teach we by natural reason , it be first to be put in ure . for albeit as yet the Christians be not so thorough furnish with the perfectness of their language , either to express their mind to they , or again to conceive the savage intent : yet for the present opportunity , such policy may be use by friendly sign , and courteous token towards they , as the savage may easy perceive ( be their sense never so gross ) a assure friendship to be offer they , and that they be encounter with such a nation , as bring they benefit , commodity , peace , tranquillity and safety . to further this , and to accomplish it in deed , there must be present unto they gratis , some kind of our petty merchandize and trifle : as look glass , bell , bead , bracelet , chain , or collar of bugle , crystal , amber , jet , or glass etc for such be the thing , though to we of small value , yet account by they of high price and estimation : and soon will induce their barbarous nature to a like and a mutual society with we . moreover , it shall be requisite either by speech , if it be possible , either by some other certain mean , to signify unto they , that once league of friendship with all love conversation be admit between the Christians and they : that than the christian from thenceforth will always be ready with force of arm to assist and defend they in their just quarrel , from all invasion , spoil and oppression offer they by any tyrant , the second kind of plant mg . adversary , or their next borderer : and a benefit be so much the more to be esteem , by how much the person upon who it be bestow stand in need thereof . for it appear by the relation of a countryman of we , namely David Ingram , ( who travel in those country xi . month and more ) that the savage general for the most part , be at continual war with their next adjoin neighbour , and especial the cannibal , be a cruel kind of people , who food be man flesh , and have tooth like dog , and do pursue they with ravenous mind to eat their flesh , and devour they . and it be not to be doubt , but that the Christians may in this case