kind of good hope be look for in this . thus you see in every point that may be wish for in a good action and voyage , there be matter and reason enough to satisfy the well dispose . but now to grow somewhat near the quick , and to show you some great appearance , then have be yet speak of touch the trade which be the only subject wherewith i do mean to intermeddle at this time , because my address hereby , be chief to man of such like faculty : you may understand by that which follow , the circumstance of a little discourse , which do concern these matter very direct . in the year 1534 . James Carthier , of saint Malo make his first discovery of those part of America , which lie to the westwards , and as it be on the backside of Newfoundland . in which voyage his principali intention be to seek out the passage , which he presume may have be find out into the east indian sea , otherwise call the passage to Cathaya , but this year he go no high than the island of the assumption in the great bay of saint Laurence , and so return back into France . the next year follow he go with great provision into the grand bay again , where he keep the northerly shore , run up the great river that come down from Canada and other place , until at last with his small pinnace , ( have leave his great ship by the way ) he arrive at Hochelaga town , be three hundred league within the entrance of the grand bay . in which travail he have spend so much of the year , that it be now the month of October , and therefore think it convenient , for the better inform himself at large in this discovery , to winter it out in those part , which he do at a place call by himself holy cross . 144 Christopher CARLILE ’ S discourse a . d . .. I583 - this winter fall out to be a very long and hard winter , as many time the like happen with we in these part , and the savage people , who for the most part make but a slender kind of provision , even as it be from hand to mouth , fall into some scarcity of victual ; yet do they not refuse to serve the Frenchman , with any thing they have all the winter long , albeit at somewhat high price towards the end when the need be most , as with our self the like happen at such time . but when the french have their want serve all the year , and that as yet they see not any appearance of their intend matter , which be the discovery of the passage , and yet imagine by the sign wherewith the willing people endeavour to declare their knowledge in that point , that some good matter may be have from they , if they may have be well understand , they resoulve with themselves to take some of the sufficient man of that country home into France , and there to keep they so long , as that have once achieve the french tongue , they may declare more substantial their mind , and knowledge in the say passage , con - eluding this to be the mean of least charge , of least travail , and of least hazard . and when they come to bethink themselves , who may be meet for it , they determine to take the king , as the person who may be best inform of such part as be somewhat remote from his own country , as also that for the respect of he , the people will be always ready , and content to do they any further service , when it shall happen they to return thither again about the discovery . thus the poor king of the country , with two or three other of his chief companion come aboard the french ship , be require thither to a banquet , be traitorous carry away into France , where he live four year , and then die a christian there , as Thevet the french king cosmographer do make mention . this outrage and injurious deal do put the whole vni 145 king the trenchmens trade re * new in Canada , in the year 1581 . the south fart best fir inhabit and traffic . country people into such dislike with the french , as never since they will admit any conversation or familiarity with they , until of late year , the old matter begin to grow out of mind , and be the rather draw on by gift of many trifle thing , which be of great value with they , they be as ( i say ) within these two or three year content again to admit a traffic , which two year since be begin with a small bark of thirty ton , who return be find so profitable , as the next year follow , be the last year , by those merchant , who mean to have keep the trade secret unto themselves , from any other of their own country man , there be hire a ship of fourscore ton out of the isle of Jersey , but not any one mariner of that place , save a shipboy . this ship make her return in such sort , as that this year they have multiply three ship , to wit , one of nine score ton , another of a hundred ton , and a three of four score ton : which report be give by very substantiali and honest man of Plymouth , who see the say ship in readiness to depart on their voyage , and be aboard of some of they . here be at this instant in the town a man of Gernesey , Lewis de Vike , who report to have credible hear , that by this last year voyage the Frenchman get fourteen or fifteen hundred for every one hundred : but how soever it be , it carry good likelihood of some notable profit , in asmuch as they do so great , and thus sudden increase the burden and number of their ship this present year . now , if in so little as two year time this voyage of the northern part be grow to such good pass as have be declare unto you : it be worth the think on to consider what may be hope for from the southern part , which in all reason may promise a great deal more . and so , as one who be never touch with any indirect meaning , i presume to wish and persuade you to some better take of this matter to heart , as a thing which i 146 Christopher CARLILE ’ S discourse a . d . do very think will turn to your great and more assure commodity , than you receive by any other voyage , as yet frequent of so short and safe a course as this have : deal herein no otherwise with you for your several small sum , than i do with my self , both for moor of my own , then be require of any one of you : beside the hazard and travail of my person , and the total employment of my poor credit , which ( i thank God ) have hitherto pass clear and unspotted in matter of great importance and difficulty , then be like to fall out in this matter between you and i .