Jebusites , with all their prince and king , be thirty and one in number , and diverse other strange nation , beside who land and dominion he whole divide among God people . after that Josua be decease , Juda be constitute lord over the army , who receive like charge from God , pursue the proceed of the holy captain Josua , and utter vanquish many gentile , idolater , and adversary to the child of Israel , with all such ruler or king as withstand he , and namely Adonibezek the Judg . 1 . most cruel tyrant : who thumb and great toe he cause to be cut off , for so much as he have do the like before unto seventie king , who be his prisoner , he force to gather up their victual underneath his table . in this God show his justice to revenge tyrannic . we read likewise , that Gideon a most puissant and noble warrior so behave himself in follow the worthy act of Josua and Juda , that in short time he not only deliver the child of Israel from the hand of the multitude of the fierce madianite , but also subdue they and their tyrant , who land he cause God people to possess and inherit . i can recite diverse other place out of the scripture , which apt may be apply hereunto , be it not i do endeavour my self by all mean to be brief . now in like manner will i allege some few induction out of the authentical write of the ecclesiastical historiographer , all tend to the like argument . and first to begin withal , we do read : that after our saviour Jesus Christ have suffer his passion , the apostle be inspire with the holy ghost , and the knowledge of all strange language , do immediate disperse themselves to 103 a gpodnotefinal conqueror to be mercifiull . Judg . 6 . 7 . ad . 1583 - sundry part of the world , to the preach of the gospel . yet not in so general a manner , but that there remain some far remote country unvisited by they , among the which it be report that India the great , call the uttermost India , as yet have receive no light of the word . ruffinuslib . i . but it come to pass , that one Metrodorus a very learned ca ? ' 9 - and wise philosopher in that age , be desirous to search out unknown land , do first discover the same , find it wonderful populous and rich , which upon his return be publish , and for certain understand , there be another grave philosopher of Tyrus call Meropius , be a christian , who do resolve himself ( follow the example of Metrodorus ) to travail thither , and in a short time assist but with a few , in a small vessel arrive there , have in his company two young youth , Edesius and Frumentius , who ( be his scholar ) he have thorough instruct both in liberali science , and christian religion . now after that Meropius somewhile stay there , have ( as he think ) sufficient understanding of the Indians whole estate : he determine to depart , and to bring notice thereof unto the emperor , who he mean to exhort to the conquest of the same . but by misfortune he be prevent , for be in the midst of his course on the sea homeward , a sore tempest arise , and perforce drive he back again , to a unknown port of the say land : where he by the Meropius most cruel barbarous Indians on the sudden be slay slay . with all his company , except the two young scholar aforesaid , who the barbarous Indians , by reason they be of comely stature and beautiful personage , take , Edesius and and forthwith present they to their king and queen : frumentius which both be very well like of , the king courteous entreat , and ordain Edesius to be his butler , and the Indians . „ : , . „ ... r ’ - Frumentius his becretarie , and in rue year by reason or their learning and civil government , they be have in great favour , honour , and estimation with the prince . but the king depart this life , leave the queen his 104 wife with her young son to govern , and give free scope and liberty to the two Christians , at their best pleasure to pass to their native soil , allow they all necessary for the same . yet the queen who high favour they be very sorrowful they shall depart , and therefore most earnest entreat they to tarry and assist she in the government of her people , till such time as her young son grow to ripe year , which request they fulfil . and Frumentius excel Edesius far in all wisdom , rule both the queen and her subject at his discretion , whereby he take occasion to put in practise privy , that the foundation of christian religion may be plant in the heart of such as with who he think his persuasion may best prevail , and that soon will give ear unto he : which be bring to pass accord , he then with his fellow Edesius take leave of the queen to return to his native country . and so soon as he be arrive there , he reveal to the emperor Constantine , the effect of all those event : who both commend his deed and whole allow thereof , by the advice and good like of Athanasius then bishop of Alexandria , do arm and set forth a convenient power for the aid of Frumentius , in this his so godly a purpose . and by this mean come the emperor afterward by fair promise , and by force of histone , testi - arme together , unto the possession of all the Indians fi how that country . the author of this story Ruffinus receive c ° nstantl ™ the truth hereof from the very mouth of Edesius come - eniarge his panion to Frumentius . dominion by moreover Eusebius in his historic ecclesiastical ! in subdue of infidel and idolatrous nation . Eusebius deavour by all mean to subject all such remote hib . i . de vita barbarous and heathen nation , as then inhabit the C ^‘ four quarter of the world . for ( as it be write ) the eod . emperor thorough aid