just and lawful aid the savage against the cannibal . so that it be very likely , that by this mean we shall not only mighty stir and inflame their rude mind glad to embrace the love company of the christian , proffer unto they both commodity , succour , and kindness : but also by their frank consent shall easy enjoy such competent quantity of land , as every way shall be correspondent to the christian expectation and contentation , consider the great abundance that they have of land , and how small account they make thereof , take no other fruit thereby then such as the ground of it self do natural yield . and thus much concern the first sort of plant , which as i assure hope , so i most hearty pray may take effect and place . but if after these good and fair mean use , the savage nevertheless will not be herewithal satisfy , but barbarous will go about to practise violence either in repel the christian from their port and safelanding , or in withstand they afterward to enjoy the right for which both painful and lawful they have adventure themselves thither : then in such a case i hold it no breach of equity for the Christians to defend themselves , to pursue revenge with force , and to do whatsoever be necessary for the attain of their safety : for it be allowable by all law in such distress , to resist violence with violence : and 100 for their moor security to increase their strength by building of fort for avoid the extremity of injurious deal . wherein if also they shall not be suffer in reasonable quietness to continue , there be no bar ( as i judge ) but that in stout assembly the Christians may issue out , and by strong hand pursue their enemy , subdue they , take possession of their town , city , or village , and ( in avoid murderous tyrannic ) to use the law of arm , as in like case among all nation at this day be use : and most especial to the end they may with security hold their lawful possession , lest happy after the departure of the christian , such savage as have be convert , shall afterward through compulsion and enforcement of their wicked ruler , return to their horrible idolatry ( as do the child of Israel , after the decease of Joshua ) and continue their wicked custom of most unnatural sacrifice of humane creature . and in so do , doubtless the Christians shall no whit at all transgress the bond of equity or civility , forasmuch as in former age , ( yea , before the incarnation of Christ ) the like have be do by sundry king and prince , governor of the child of Israel : chief in respect to begin their plant , for the establishment of God word : as also since the nativity of Christ , mighty and puissant emperor and king have perform the like , i say to plant , possess , and subdue . for proof whereof , i will allege you example of both kind . we read in the old testament , how that after Noes flood be cease , restauration of mankind begin only of those few of Noes child and family as be by God preelect to be save in the ark with he , who seed in process of time , be multiply to infinite number of nation , which in diverse sort divide themselves to sundry quarter of the earth . and forasmuch as all their posterity be mighty increase , follow not the perfect life of Noe their predecessor , God choose out of the multitude a peculiar people to himself , to who after - ioi ward be under the government of Moses in mount Sinai , he make a grant to inherit the land of Canaan , call the land of promise , with all the other rich and fertile country next adjoin thereunto . nevertheless , before they come to possession thereof , have be afflict with many grievous punishment and plague for their sin , they fall in despair to enjoy the same . but be encourage and comfort by their ruler , ( man of God ) they proceed , arm themselves with all patience , to suffer whatsoever it shall please God to send : and at last attain to the land , they be encounter with great number of strong people , and mighty king . Josua 4 . notwithstanding , Josua their leader replenish with the spirit of God , be assure of the justness of his quarrel , gather the chief strength of the child of Israel together , to the number of 40000 . with who he safe pass the huge river Jordan , and have before Josua 6 . scent privy spy for the discovery of the famous city Jerico , to understand the certainty of the citizen estate , he forthwith come thither , and environ it round about with his whole power the space of seven day . in which respite , perceive none of the gentile dispose to yield or call for mercy , he then command ( as God before have appoint ) that both the city Jerico shall be burn , yea , and all the inhabitant , as well old as young , with all their cattle shall be destroy , only except Rahab , her kindred and family , because she before have hide secret the messenger of Josua , that be send thither as spy . as for all their gold , silver , precious stone , or vessel of brass , they be reserve and consecrate to the lord treasury . Josua 8 . in like manner he burn the city hay , slay the inhabitant thereof , and hang up their king . but for so much as the gebionite ( fear the like event ) send Josua 9 ambassador unto Josua to entreat for grace , favour , and peace : he command that all their life shall be save , and that they shall be admit to the come - 102 pany of the child of Israel . yet understand afterward they wrought this by a policy , he use they as drudge to hew wood and to carry water , and other necessary for his people . thus begin this valiant captain his conquest , which he pursue and never leave till he have subdue all the Hethites , Amorites , Cananite , Judg . 11 . 13 . Peresites , h evite , and