same , as well for the emperor than king of 125 Spain , his five part , as otherwise , there be find to be already bring in into the say hall , the number of 132425 . pound weight of silver , and in gold the number of 1828125 . pezo , which be a riches never before that nor since see of any man together , of which there do appertain to the emperor for his five part of gold 365625 . pezo , and for his five part of silver 26485 . pound weight , and to every horseman eight thousand pezo of gold , and 67 . pound weight of silver . Every soldier have 4550 . pezo of gold and 280 . pound weight of silver . Every captain have some 30000 . some 20000 pezo of gold and silver , proportional answerable to their degree and call , accord to the rate agree upon among they . Francis Pizarro as their general , accord to his decree and call proportional , have more than any of the rest , over and beside the massy table of gold which Atabalipa have in his litter , which weigh 25000 . pezo of gold : never be there before that day soldier so rich in so small a time , and with so little danger . and in this journey for want of iron , they do shoe their horse , some with gold , and some with silver . this be to be see in the general history of the west Indies , where as the do of Pizarro , and the conquest of Peru be more at large set forth . to this may i add the great discovery and conquest which the prince of Portugal have make round about the west , the south , and the east part of Africa , and also at calicut , and in the east Indies , and in America , at Brasile and elsewhere in sundry island , in fortify , people and plant all along the say coast and island , ever as they discover : which be right weigh and consider , do minister just cause of encouragement to our countryman , not to account it so hard and difficult a thing for the subject of this noble realm of England , to discover , people , plant and possess the like goodly land and rich country not far from we , but near adjoin 8c offer themselves unto we 126 ( as be aforesaid ) which have never yet heretofore be in the actuali possession of any other christian prince , than the prince of this realm . all which ( as i think ) shall not a little animate and encourage we to look out and adventure abroad , understand what large country and island the Portugal with their small number have within these few year discover , people and plant , some part whereof i have think it not amiss , brief in particular to name both the town , country and island , so near as i can upon the sudden call they to remembrance : for the rest i do refer the reader to the history , where more at large the same be to be see . first , they do win and conquer from the prince of Barbary the island of Geisera and town of Arzila , not past a 140 . mile distant from their metropolitan and chief city of Fesse : and after that they win also from the say prince the town of Tanger , Ceuta , Mazigam , Azamor , and azaffi , all alongst the sea coast . and in the year of our lord , 1455 . Alouis de Cadomosta a gentleman venetian , be he that first discover for their use cape Verd , with the island adjoin , of which he then people and plant those of Bonavista and Sant Iago discover also the river Senega , otherwise call Niger , and cape Roxo and Sierra Leone , and in a few year after they do discover the coast of Guinea , and there people and build the castle of Mina : then discover they further to the country of melegette , Benin , and Congo , with the hand of Principe , da Nobon , saint Matthew , and saint Thomas under the equinoctial line , which they people , and build in the say island of S . Thomas the haven town or port of Pavosan . after that , about the year of our lord , 1494 . one Bartholomew Dias be send forth , who be the first man that discover and double that great and large cape call de bon Esperanze , 8c pass the current that run upon the say coast , on the southeast part of Africa , between the say main land 8c the island of S . Laurence , otherwise call of the ancient , madam - 127 Ceffala accomt to be the place where the noble and wise king Salomon do fetch his gold . gascar , he discover to you harbour name the river of the infant . after that since the year of our lord God , 1497 . and before the full accomplishment of the year of Christ , 1510 . through the travail and discovery of Vasques de Gama , Peter Alvares , Thomas Lopes , Andrew Corsale , John de Empoli , Peter Sintra , Sancho de Toar , and that noble and worthy gentleman Alonzo de Albuquerque , they do discover , people , and plant at Ceffala , be upon the east side of Africa , in the twenty degree of latitude of the south pole , and direct west from the hand of S . Laurence ( at which port of Ceffala , diverse do affirm that king Salomon do fetch his gold ) as also upon the say east side of Africa , they do afterward discover , people , and plant at Mozambique , Quiola , Monbaza , and melinde , two degree of southerly latitude , and so up to the strait of Babel - Mandell at the enter of the red sea , all upon the east coast of Africa , from whence they put off - at the cape of guarda fu , and past the great gulf of Arabia , and the indian sea east to Sinus Persicus , and the island of ormus , and so pass the large and great river Indus , where he have his fall into the main ocean , in 23 . degree and a half , under the tropic of cancer , of septentrionali latitude