a brief and summary discourse upon the intend voyage to the hithermost part of America : write by captain Carlile in April , 1583 . for the better inducement to satisfy such merchant of the moscovian company and other , as in disburse their money towards the furniture of the present charge , do demand forthwith a present return of gain , albeit their say particular disbursement be require but in very slender sum , the high be 25 . livre . the second at 12 . livre . 10 . s . and the low at 6 . pound five shilling . hen the goldsmith desire to find the certain goodness of a piece of gold , which be new offer unto he , he present bring the same to the touchstone , where , by compare the show or touch of this new piece with the touch or show of that which he know of old , he forthwith be able to judge what the value be of that , which be new offer unto he . after the example whereof i have think it good to make some brief repetition of the particular estate of many other foreign voyage and trade already frequent and know unto we , whereby we may be the better 134 Christopher CARLILE ’ S discourse a . d . ... they - able to conceive and judge what certain likelihood of good there be to be expect in the voyage , which be present recommend unto your knowledge and resolution . and first to lay down that of Moscovia , who Moscovie . beginning be yet in the remembrance of many : it be well know , that what by the charge of the first discovery , and by the great gift bestow on the emperor and his nobili tie , together with the lewd deal of some of their servant , who thought themselves safe enough from orderly punishment , it cost the company above fourscore thousand pound , before it can be bring to any profitable reckon . and now that after so long a patience and so great a burden of expense , the same begin to frame to some good course and commodity : it rall to very ticklish term , and to as slender likelihood of any further goodness , as any other trade that may be name . for first the estate of those country and the emperor deal , be thing more fickle than be by every body understand . next , the Dutchman be there so creep in as they Dutchmen . daily augment their trade thither , which may well confirm that uncertainty of the emperor disposition to keep promise with our nation . third , the quality of the voyage , such as may not be perform but once the year . four , the charge of all ambassador between that prince and her majesty , be always bear by the merchant stock . and last , the danger of the king of Denmark , who Denmark . beside that present he be like to enforce a tribute on we , have likewise a advantage upon the ship in their voyage , either homeward or outward whensoever he list to take the opportunity . the bid ‘ deal of the Easterling be sufficient Easterling . know to be such towards our merchant of that trade , as they do not only offer they many injury i3 overlong to be write , but do seek all the mean they can , to deprive they whole of their occupy that way : and to the same purpose have of late clean debar they their accustom and ancient privilege in all their great town . Turkle . the traffic into turquoise , beside that by some it be think a hard point to have so much familiarity with the profess and obstinate enemy of Christ : it be likewise a voyage which can not be make but at the devotion , and as it be in the danger of many state , who for sundry respect be apt to quarrel with we upon sudden occasion , and the present to be give away in turquoise this year , cost little less than two thousand pound . Levant . as for the trade into all the part of Italy , it may easy be consider by every one of judgement , that the same stand in the like term touch the passage , as that of turquoise , and that many time our ship be take in the way by the galley of Alger , our poor mariner after the loss of their good and travel ! , be set at such excessive ransom before they can be free of their slavery , as for the most part they be no way able to discharge . as for example , at this instant there be some prisoner , poor ordinary mariner , for who release there must be pay two hundred ducat the man , for some three hundred , yea , four or five hundred ducat the man for some of they . and how envious the venetian do already oppose themselves against our frequent into their part , may appear by the late custom which they have impose as well upon our english merchandise which we bring they , as also upon such their merchandise which we fetch from they . Barbary . the trade into Barbary grow likewise to worse term than before time , and when it be at the best , our merchant have be in danger of all their good they have there , whensoever it happen the king to die . for until a new be choose , the liberty of all disorder person be such , as they spoil and wrong who they listen , without any redress at all . 136 Christopher CARLILE ’ S discourse a . d . 1583 - touch Spain and Portugal , with who we have Spain . very great trade , and much the great , by mean of their vent a good part of our ware in their Indies , as also of the provision they have from the same , wherewith be make many of our return from they again : it fall out that twice the year ordinary we send our fleet into those part : so that whensoever the king of remember the Spain list to take the opportunity , he may at these season deprive we not only of a great number of er . our very good ship , but also of our honest and 1598 . able sort of mariner that be to be find in our whole realm again , which be a matter of no small consequence : for it be to be note , that when he shall take a quarrel in hand , though it be but his own particular , yet have he the mean to put in hazard as well those our ship which be in his own country of Spain and Portugal , as also all other which shall be bind to any the part of all Italy or of turquoise either . and further whosoever he be that be but mean affect in religion , as of necessity become every ordinary man and good Christian to be , can but be aggrieve in his heart to consider , that his child and servant who he desire to have well bring up , be in these trade of Spain and Portugal , and all Italy , force to deny their own profession , and make to acquaint themselves with that which the parent and master do utter deny and refuse , yea which many of they do in their own heart abhor as a detestable and most wicked doctrine . but who shall