the manner how our admiral be lose . upon Tewsday the 27 of August , towards the evening , August 27 . our general cause they in his frigate to sound , who find white sand at 35 fathom , be then in latitude about 44 degree . Wednesday towards night the wind come south , and we bear with the land all that night , westnorthwest , contrary to the mind of master Cox : nevertheless we follow the admiral , deprive of power to prevent a mischief , which by no contradiction can be bring to hold other course , allege they can not make the ship to work better , nor to lie otherways . the evening be fair and pleasant , yet not without prediction token of storm to ensue , and most part of this t1 , e Wednesday night , like the swan that sing before ' her death , they in the admiral , or delight , continue in sound of trumpet , with drum , and fife : also wind the cornet , haughtboye : and in the end of their jollity , leave with the battle and ring of doleful kneel . towards the evening also we catch in the golden hind a very mighty porpose , with a harp iron , have first strike diverse of they , and bring away part of their flesh , stick upon the iron , but can recover only that one . Theise also pass through the ocean , in herd , do portend storm . i omit to recite frivolous report by they in the frigate , of strange voice , the same night , which scar some from the helm . Thursday the 29 of August , the wind rise , and blow vehement at south and by east , bring withal rain , and thick mist , so that we can not see a cable length before we . and betimes in the morning we be all - loss of our together run and fold in among flat and sand , admirdu . among which we find shoal and deep in every three vin 65 e or four ship length , after we begin to sound : but first we be upon they unaware , until master Cox look out , discern ( in his judgement ) white cliff , cry ( land ) withal , though we can not afterward descry any land , it be very likely the break of the sea white , which seem to be white cliff , through the haze and thick weather . immediate token be give unto the delight , to cast about to seaward , which , be the great ship , and of burden 120 ton , be yet foremost upon the breach , keep so ill watch , that they know not the danger , before they feel the same , too late to recover it : for present the admiral strike a ground , and have soon after her stern and hinder part beat in piece : whereupon the rest ( that be to say , the frigate in which be the general and the golden hind ) cast about eastsoutheast , bear to the south , even for our life into the wind eye , because that way carry we to the seaward . make out from this danger , we sound one while seven fathom , than five fathom , than four fathom and less , again deep , immediate four fathom , than but three fathom , the sea go mighty and high . at last we recover ( God be thank ) in some despair , to sea room enough . in this distress , we have vigilant eye unto the admiral , who we see cast away , without power to give the man succour , neither can we espy any of the man that leap overboard to save themselves , either in the same pinnace or cock , or upon rafter , and such like mean , present themselves to man in those extremity : for we desire to save the man by every possible mean . but all in vain , sith God have determine their ruin : yet all that day , and part of the next , we beat up and down as near unto the wrack as be possible for we , look out , if by good hap we may espy any of they . this be a heavy and grievous event , to lose at one blow our chief ship freight with great provision , 66 1583 gather together with much travel , care , long time , and difficulty . but moor be the loss of our man , which perish to the number almost of a hundred soul . among who be drown a learned man , a hun - Stephanus garian , bear in the city of Buda , call thereof Budaeus , Parmeni ™ a who of piety and zeal to good attempt , adventure in sar - tan . this action , mind to record in the latin tongue , the gest and thing worthy of remembrance , happen in this discovery , to the honour of our nation , the same be adorn with the eloquent stile of this orator , and rare poet of our time . here also perish our saxon refiner and discoverer Daniel a of inestimable riches , as it be leave among some of we nfiwof • j i j 1 ° metal . in undoubted hope . no less heavy be the loss of the captain Maurice brown , a virtuous , honest , and discreet gentleman , oversee only in liberty give late before to man , that aught to have be restrain , who show himself a man resolve , and never unprepared for death , as by his last act of this tragedy appear , by report of they that escape this wrack miraculous , as shall be hereafter declare . for when all hope be pass of recover the ship , and that man begin to give over , and to save themselves , the captain be advise before to shift also for his life , by the pinnace at the stern of the ship : but refuse that counsel , he will not give example with the first to leave the ship , but use all mean to exhort his people not to despair , nor so to leave off their labour , choose rather to die , than to incur infamy , by forsake his charge , which then may be think to have perish through his default , show a ill precedent unto his man , by leave the ship first himself . with this mind he mount upon the high deck , where he attend imminent death , and unavoidable : how long , i leave it to God , who withdraw not his comfort from his servant at such time . in the mean season , certain , to the number of fourteen person , leap into a small pinnace ( the a wmderfull escape and deliverance . a great distress . a desperate resolution . two man famish . bigness of a Thames barge , which be make in the new find land ) cut off the rope wherewith it be tow , and commit themselves to God mercy , amid the storm , and rage of sea and wind , destitute of food , not so much as a drop of fresh water . the boat seem overcharge in foul weather with company , Edward Headly a valiant soldier , and well repute of his company , prefer the great to the lesser , think better that some of they perish then all , make this motion to cast lot , and they to be throw overboard