great plenty , yea , as it be think , enough to serve the whole realm of every of these kind : and of train oil such quantity , as if i shall set down the value that they do esteem it at , which have be there , it will seem incredible . it be hereby intend , that these commodity in this abundant manner , be not to be gather from thence , without plant and settle there . and as for other thing of more value , and that of more sort and kind then one or two ( which be likewise discover there ) i do hold they for some respect , more meet for a time to be conceal then utter . of the fish i do speak nothing , because it be general know : and it be not to be forget , what trifle 117 they be that the savage do require in exchange of these commodity : yea , for pearl , gold , silver , and precious stone . all which be matter in trade and traffic of great moment . but admit that it shall so fall out , that the above specify commodity shall not happy be find out within this first year : yet it be very clear that such and so many may be find out as shall minister just occasion to think all cost and labour well bestow . for it be very certain , that there be one seat fit for fortification , of great safety , wherein these commodity follow , especial be to be have , that be to say , grape for wine , whale for oil , hemp for cordage , and other necessary thing , and fish of far great size and plenty , than that of newfound land , and of all these so great store , as may suffice to serve our whole realm . beside all this , if credit may be give to the inhabitant of the same soil , a certain river do thereunto adjoin , which lead to a place abound with rich substance : i do not hereby mean the passage to the molucca , whereof before i make mention . and it be not to be omit , how that about two year past , certain merchant of saint Malo in France , do hire a ship out of the island of Jersey , to the end that they will keep that trade secret from their countryman , and they will admit no mariner , other than the ship boy belong to the say ship , to go with they , which ship be about 70 . ton . i do know the ship and the boy very well , and be familiar acquaint with the owner , which voyage prove very beneficial . to conclude , this which be already say , may suffice any man of reasonable disposition to serve for a taste , until such time as it shall please almighty God through our own industry , to send we better tiding . in the mean season , if any man well affect to this journey , shall stand in doubt of any matter of importance touch the same , he may satisfy himself with the judgement and like of such of good call and credit , as be principali dealer herein . for it be not necessary in this 118 the western plant treatise , public to set forth the whole secret of the voyage . the sixth chapter show that the traffic and plant in those country , shall be unto the savage themselves very beneficial and gainful . now to the end it may appear that this voyage be not undertake altogether for the peculiar commodity of our self and our country ( as general other trade and journey be ) it shall fall out in proof , that the savage shall hereby have just cause to bless the hour when this enterprise be undertake . first and chief , in respect of the most happy and gladsome tiding of the most glorious gospel of our saviour Jesus Christ , whereby they may be bring from falsehood to truth , from darkness to light , from the high way of death to the path of life , from superstitious idolatry to sincere Christianity , from the devil to Christ , from hell to heaven . and if in respect of all the commodity they can yield we ( be they many more ) that they shall but receive this only benefit of Christianity , they be more than full recompense . but hereunto it may be object , that the gospel must be free preach , for such be the example of the apostle : unto who although the authority and example before allege of emperor , king and prince , aswell before Christ time as since , may sufficient satisfy : yet for further answer , we may say with saint Paul , if we have sow unto you heavenly thing , do you think it much that we shall reap your carnali thing ? and withal , the workman be worthy of his hire . Theise heavenly tiding which those labourer our countryman ( as messenger of god great goodness and mercy ) will voluntary present unto they , do far exceed their earthly riches . Moreover , if the other inferiout worldly and temporali thing which they shall receive from we , be weigh in equal balance , i assure my self , that by equal judgement of any indiff - ” 9 Corinth . 9 this barge can be unjust , where both party be gainer . ent person , the benefit which they then receive , shall tarre surmount those which they shall depart withal unto we . and admit that they have ( as they have not ) the knowledge to put their land to some use : yet be bring from brutish ignorance to civility and knowledge , and make then to understand how the ten part of their land may be so manure and employ , as it may yield more commodity to the necessary use of man life , than the whole now do : what just cause of complaint may they have ? and in my private opinion , i do very think that God do create land , to the end that it shall by culture and husbandry yield thing necessary for man life . but this be not all the benefit which they shall receive by the Christians : for , over and beside the knowledge how to till and dress their ground , they ' shall be reduce from