look into the quality of this voyage , be direct to the latitude of forty degree or thereabouts , of that hithermost part of America , shall find it have as many point of good moment belong unto it , as may almost be wish for . 1 as first it be to be understand , that it be not any long course , for it may be perform too and fro in four month after the first discovery thereof . 2 second , that one wind suffice to make the pas - 137 commodity of this voyage in shortness . commodity of the country more than those of moscovy . sage , whereas most of your other voyage of like length , be subject to 3 . or 4 . wind . 3 third , that it be to be perform at all time of the year . 4 four , that the passage be upon the high sea , whereby you be not bind to the knowledge of danger , on any other coast , more than of that country , and of we hear at home . 5 five , that those part of England and Ireland , which lie apt for the proceed outward or homeward upon this voyage , be very well store of goodly harbour . 6 six , that it be to be account of no danger at all as touch the power of any foreign prince or state , when it be compare with any the best of all other voyage before recite . 7 and to the godly mind , it have this comfortable commodity , that in this trade their factor , be they their servant or child , shall have no instruction or confession of idolatrous religion enforce upon they , but contrary shall be at their free liberty of conscience , and shall find the same religion exercise , which be most agreeable unto their parent and master . as for the merchandise , which be the matter especial look for , albeit that for the present we be not certain able to promise any such like quantity , as be now at the best time of the moscovian trade bring from thence : so likewise be there not demand any such proportion of daily expense , as be at the first , and as yet be consume in that of Moscovia and other . but when this of America shall have be haunt and practise thirty year to a end , as the other have be , i doubt not by God grace , that for the ten ship that be now common employ once the year into Moscovia , there shall in this voyage twice ten be employ well , twice the year at the least . and if for the present time there do fall out nothing else to be find then the bare fish , yet doubt i not after the first year plant , but by that matter only to serve 138 Christopher CARLILE ’ S discourse a . d . 1583 - halfe a dozen of your best sort of ship , although my supply of people do not follow i so substantial , as in all reason may be well look for . but when it be ask what may be hope from thence overall after some year , it be first to be consider , that this merchandtse - situation in fourty degree , shall be very apt to gather the commodity either of those part which stand to the southward of it , as also of those which be to the northward . in the northerly may be expect not only a especial good fish for salmon , Codde , and whale , but also any other such commodity , as the eastern country doe yield we now : as pitch , tar , hemp , and thereof cordage , mast , losshe hide , rich fur , and other such like without be in any sort behold to a king of Denmark , or other prince or state that shall be in such sort able to command our ship at their pleasure , as those do at this day , by mean of their strait passage and strong ship . as for those part which lie west and to the southward , it may well be hope they will yield wine with a small help , since the grape do grow there of themselves already very fair and in great abundance . olive be once plant , will yield the like oil as Spain , province and Italy . the country people be make to know , that for wax and honey , we will give they such trifle thing as they desire of we , and show they once the mean how to provide the same , the labour thereof be so light , no doubt but in short time they will earnest care to have the same in good quantity for we . beside , what great likelihood there be of good mean to make salt , which may serve for the fish of lake of salt those part , may well enough appear unto they , who ™ his can judge the quality of such place as be require to make the same in . thus much for the beginning , because they may be have with a easy kind of travel ! : but when it may have please God to establish our people there any such time 139 as they may have plant among they in sundry part of the country , and that by gentle and familiar entreat they , they be make to see what be better for they than they do as yet understand of , and that in so many sort of occasion as be infinite to be set down : it be to be assure hope , that they will daily by little and little forsake their barbarous and savage live , and grow to such order and civility with we , as there may be well expect from thence no less quantity and diversity of merchandise then be now have out of Dutchland , Italy , France or Spain . and as the border neighbour be common the apt to fall out with we , so these part be somewhat remote , be the like to take , or give less occasion of disquiet . but when it be consider that they be our own kindred , and esteem our own country nation which have the government , mean by those who shall be there plant , who can look for any other than the deal of most love and most assure friend ? there be far to be consider these two point of good importance , concern the matter of trade . the one be , that by the good prosper of this action , there must of necessity fall out a very liberali utterance of our english clothes into a main country , describe to be big than all Europe , the large part whereof bend to the northward , shall have wonderful great use of our say English clothes , after they shall come once to know the commodity thereof . the like will be also of many other thing , over many to be reckon , which be make here by our artificer and labour people , and of necessity must be provide from hence . the other be , if there be any possible mean to find a sea passage or other fresh water course , which may serve in some reasonable and convenient sort , to transport our merchandise into the east indian sea , through any of these northerly part of America , it shall be soon and most assure perform by these who shall inhabit