other : their boat be in a number about fourty or fifty . one part of the which come to the say point , and a great number of the man go on shore make a great noise , beckon unto we that we shall come on land , show we certain skin upon piece of wood , but because we 197 have but one only boat , we will not go to they , but go to the other side lie in the sea : they see we flee , prepare two of their boat to follow we , with which come also five more of they that be come from the sea side , all which approach near unto our boat , dance , and make many sign of joy and mirth , as it be desire our friendship , say in their tongue napeu tondamen assurtah , with many other word that we understand not . but because ( as we have say ) we have but one boat , we will not stand to their courtesy , but make sign unto they that they shall turn back , which they will not do , but with great fury come towards we : and sudden with their boat compass we about : and because they will not away from we by any sign that we can make , we shoot off two piece among they , which do so terrify they , that they put themselves to flight towards the say point , make a great noise : and have stay a while , they begin anew , even as at the first to come to we again , and be come near our boat we strike at they with two lance , which thing be so great a terror unto they , that with great haste they begin to flee , and will no more follow we . how the say wild man come to our ship , and our man go towards they , both party go on land , and how the say wild man with great joy begin to traffic with our man . the next day part of the say wild man with nine of their boat come to the point and entrance of the creek , where we with our ship be at road . we be advertise of their come , go to the point where they be with our boat : but so soon as they see we , they begin to flee , make sign that they come to traffic with we , show we , such skin as they cloth themselves withal , which be of small value . we likewise make sign unto they , that we wish they no evil : and in sign thereof two of our man 198 venture to go on land to they , and carry they knife with other iron ware , and a red hat to give unto their captain . which when they see , they also come on land , and bring some of their skin , and so begin to deal with we , seem to be very glad to have our iron ware and other thing , still dance with many other ceremony , as with their hand to cast sea water on their head . they give we whatsoever they have , not keep any thing , so that they be constrain to go back again naked , and make we sign that the next day they will come again , and bring more skin with they . how that we have send two of our man on land with ware , there come about 300 . wild man with great gladness . of the quality of the country , what it bring forth , and of the bay call bay du chaleur , or the bay of heat . upon Thursday be the eight of the month , because the wind be not good to go out with our ship , we set our boat in a readiness to go to discover the say bay , and that day we go 25 . league within it . the next day the wind and weather be fair , we sail until noon , in which time we have notice of a great part of the say bay , and how that over the low land , there be other land with high mountain : but see that there be no passage at all , we begin to turn back again , take our way along the coast : 8c sailing , we see certain wild man that stand upon the shore of a lake , that be among the low ground , who be make fire and smoke : we go thither , 8c find that there be a chanel of the sea that do enter into the lake , and set our boat at one of the bank of the channel , the wild man with one of their boat come unto we , and bring up piece of seal ready sodden , put they upon piece of wood : then retire themselves , they will make sign unto we , that they do give they we . we send two man unto they with 199 hatchet , knife , bead , and other such like ware , whereat they be very glad , and by and by in cluster they come to the shore where we be , with their boat , bring with they skin and other such thing as they have , to have of our ware . they be more than 300 . man , woman and child : some of the woman which come not over , we may see stand up to the knee in water , sing and dance : the other that have pass the river where we be , come very friendly to we , rub our arm with their own hand , then will they lift they up towards heaven , show many sign of gladness : and in such wise be we assure one of another , that we very familiar begin to traffic for whatsoever they have , till they have nothing but their naked body ; for they give we all whatsoever they have , and that be but of small value . we perceive that this people may very easy be convert to our religion . they go from place to place . they live only with fish . they have a ordinary time to fish for . their provision . the country be hot than the country of Spain , and the fair that can possible be find , altogether smooth , and level . there be no place be it never so little , but it have some tree ( yea albeit it be sandy ) or else be full of wild corn , that have a ear like unto rye : the corn be like oat , and small peason as thick as if they have be sow and plow , white and red gooseberry