the first relation of Jaques Carthier of S . Malo , of the new land call new France , new discover in the year of our lord 1534 . how m . Jaques carthy depart from the port of saint Malo , with two ship , and come to Newfoundland , and how he enter into the port of Buona vista . ft that sir Charles of Mouy knight lord of Meylleraye , and vice - admiral of France have cause the captain , master , and mariner of the ship to be swear to behave themselves true and faithful in the service of the most christian king of France , under the charge of the say carthy , upon the twenty day of April 1534 , we depart from the port of saint Malo with two ship of threescore tun apiece burden , and 61 well appoint man in each one : and with such prosperous weather we sail onward , that upon the ten day of may we come to Newfoundland , where we enter into the cape of Buona vista , which be in latitude 48 degree and a half , and in longitude * . but because of the great store of the ice that be alongst the say land , we be constrain to enter into a haven call S . katherins haven , distant from the other port about five league towards southsoutheast : there do we stay ten day look for fair weather ; and in the mean while we mend and dress our boat . 183 a great white bear . how we come to the island of bird , and of the great quantity of bird that there be . upon the 2i of may the wind be in the west , we hoist sail , and sail towards north and by east from the cape of Buona vista until we come to the island of bird , which be environ about with a bank of ice , but break and crack : notwithstanding the say bank , our two boat go thither to take in some bird , whereof there be such plenty , that unless a man do see they , he will think it a incredible thing : for albeit the island ( which contain about a league in circuit ) be so full of they , that they seem to have be bring thither , and sow for the nonce , yet be there a hundred fold as many hover about it as within ; some of the which be as big as jay , black and white , with beak like unto crow : they lie always upon the sea ; they can fly very high , because their wing be so little , and no big than half one hand , yet do they fly as swift as any bird of the air level to the water ; they be also exceed fat ; we name they Aporath . in less than half a hour we fill two boat full of they , as if they have be with stone : so that beside they which we do eat fresh , every ship do powder and salt five or six barrel full of they . of two sort of bird , the one call Godetz , the other Margaulx ; and how we come to Carpunt . beside these , there be another kind of bird which hover in the air , and over the sea , lesser than the other ; and these do all gather themselves together in the island , and put themselves under the wing of other bird that be great : these we name Godetz . there be also of another sort , but big , and white , which bite even as dog : those we name Margaulx . and albeit the say island be 14 league from the main land , notwithstanding bear come swim thither to eat of the say bird : and our man find one there as great 184 as any cow , and as white as any swan , who in their presence leap into the sea ; and upon Whitsunmunday ( follow our voyage towards the land ) we meet she by the way , swim towards land as swift as we can sail . so soon as we see she , we pursue she with our boat , and by main strength take she , who flesh be as good to be eat as the flesh of a calf of two year old . the le Chas - Wednesday follow , be the 27 of the month , we ieaux ' come to the entrance of the bay of the castle ; but because the weather be ill , and the great store of ice we find , we be constrain to enter into a harbour about the say entrance call Carpunt , where , because we can not come out of it , we stay till the nine of June , what time we depart , hope with the help of God to sail further than the say Carpunt , which be in Carpunt . latitude 51 degree . the description of Newfoundland , from cape Razo to cape degrade . the land from cape Razo to cape degrade , which be the point of the entrance of the bay that trend from head to head towards Northnortheast , and southsouthwest . all this part of land be part into island one so near the other , that there be but small river between they ; through the which you may pass with little boat , and therefore there be certain good har - borows , among which be those of Carpunt and degrade . in one of these island that be the high of they all , be the top of it you may plain see the two low island that be near to cape Razo , from whence to the port of Carpunt they count it five and twenty league ; and there be two entrance thereat , one on the east , the other on the south side of the island . but you must take heed of the side and point of the east , because that every where there be nothing else but shelf , and the water be very shallow : you must go about the island towards the west the length of half a cable or thereabouts , and then to go towards the south to the say Carpunt . 185 also you be to take heed of three shelf that be in the channel under the water : and towards the island on the east side in the channel , the water be of three or four fathom deep , and clear ground . the other trend towards Eastnortheast , and on the west you may go on shore . of the island which now be call S . katherins island . go from the point degrade , and enter into the say bay towards the west and by north : there be