other be about fifteen league . the middle between they both be 50 degree and a terce in latitude . we have much ado to go five mile far , the wind be so great , and the tide against we . and at five mile end , we may plain see and perceive land on both side , which there begin to spread it self , but because we rather fall , then get way against the wind , we go towards land , purpose to go to another cape of land , lie southward , which be the farthermost out into the sea that we can see , about five league from we , but so soon as we come thither , we find it to be nought else but rock , stone , 8c craggy cliff , such as we have not find any where since we have sail southward from s Johns cape : and then be the tide with we , which carry we against the wind westward , so that as we be sail along the say coast , one of our boat touch a rock , and sudden go over , but we be constrain to leap out for to direct it on accord to the tide . how after we have agree and consult what be best to be do , we purpose to return : and of saint Peter strait , and of cape tiennot . after we have sail along the say coast , for the space of two hour , behold , the tide begin to turn against we , with so swift and rage a course , that it be not possible for we with 13 oar to row 206 or get one stone cast far , so that we be constrain to leave our boat with some of our man to guard they , and io or 12 man go ashore to the say cape , where we find that the land begin to bend Southwest , which have see , we come to our boat again , and so to our ship , which be still ready under sail , hope to go forward : but for all that , they be fall more than four league to leeward from the place where we have leave they , where so soon as we come , we assemble together all our captain , master , and mariner , to have their advice and opinion what be best to be do : and after that every one have say , consider that the easterly wind begin to bear sway , and blow , and that the flood be so great , that we do but fall , and that there be nothing to be get , and that storm and tempest begin to reign in newfound land , and that we be so far from home , not know the peril and danger that be behind , for either we must agree to return home again , or else to stay there all the year . Moreover , we do consider , that if the northern wind do take we , it be not possible for we to depart thence . all which opinion be hear and consider , we altogether determine to address our self homeward . now because upon saint Peter day we enter into the say streite , we name it saint Peter streite . the strait of we sound it in many place , in some we find s - peter - 150 fathom water , in some 100 , and near the shore sixty , and clear ground . from that day till Wednesday follow , we have a good and prosperous gale of wind , so that we trended the say north shore east , southeast , west northwest : for such be the situation of it , except one cape of low land that bend more towards the southeast , about twenty five league from the strait . in this place we see certain smoke , that the people of the country make upon the say cape : but because the wind blow we towards the coast , we go not to they , which when they see , they come 207 with two boat and twelve man unto we , and as free come unto our ship , as if they have be French man , and give we to understand , that they come from the great gulf , and that Tiennot be their captain , who then be upon that cape , make sign unto we , that they be go home to their country whence we be come with our ship , and that they be lade with fish . we cape Tiennot . name the say cape , cape tiennot . from the say cape all the land trend eastsoutheast , and westnorthwest . all these land lie low , very pleasant , environ with sand , where the sea be intermingle with marsh and shallows , the space of twenty league : then do the land begin to trend from west to Eastnortheast altogether environ with island two or three league from land , in which as far as we can see , be many dangerous shelf more than four or five league from land . how that upon the nine of August we enter within white sand , and upon the five of September we come to the port of s . malo . from the say Wednesday until Saturday follow , we have a great wind from the southwest , which cause we to run Eastnortheast , on which day we come to the easterly part of Newfoundland , between the grange and the double cape . there begin great stormy wind come from the east with great rage : wherefore we coast the cape northnorthwest , to search the northern part , which be ( as we have say ) all environ with island , and be near the say island and land , the wind turn into the south , which bring we within the say gulf , so that the next day be the 9 of August , we by the grace of God enter within the white sand . and this be so much as we have discover . after that , upon the 15 of August , be the feast of the assumption of our lady , after that we have hear service , we altogether depart from the port of white sand , and with a happy and prosperous weather we come into 208 the middle of the sea , that be between Newfoundland and Britain , in which place we be toss and turmoil three day long with great storm and windy tempest come from the east , which with the aid and assistance of God we suffer : then have we fair weather , and upon the five of September , in the say year , we come to the port of saint Malo whence we depart . A . D . 1534 -