to grande Coste , because of the leeshore , and the wind . against we , and therefore ask what we shall do . i qa ? e Briton . ask then how far we have to the river of cape 171 briton : he say a little way . then say i , if it be not far , we be best to go thither to trade with the savage while the wind be contrary , and to take in water and balist , which we want . to which the master say , that if i will he will carry we thither . i think it to be the best course , say i be content , so far forth as that from thence we take the first fair wind for grande cost . hereupon the master will he at the helm to keep his course southeast and southeast and by south . present after i ask he how many league we have to the say river , and from the say river to grande cost . he then say that we have 40 league to the river , and from the river to Grande cost 120 league . hereupon i say i will not consent to go so far out of our way , but will he to keep his direct course for Grande cost ; which he do . within one half hour afterward the 23 day the gunner and company of the ship present i and the master with a request in write to return for England or to go for the island of azore for a man of war , for they will not proceed on their voyage to Grande cost ; and therefore do what i can they turn the helm homeward . the their arrival 14 of June we send our boat on shore in a great bay in the hie of upon the jsje of cape Briton for water . the 25 we ape nton . arrjvej on west side of the isle of Menego , where we leave some cask on shore in a sandy bay , but can not tarry for foul weather . the 26 we cast anchor in another bay upon the main of cape Briton . the 27 about ten of the clock in the morning we meet with the chance - eight man of the Chancewell our consort in a shallope ; who tell we that their ship be cast away upon the within cape main of cape Briton , within a great bay eighteen Briton . league within the cape , and upon a rock within a mile of the shore , upon the 23 of this month about one of the clock in the afternoon : and that they have clear their ship from the rock : but be bilge and full of water , they present do run she up into a 172 sandy bay , where she be no soon come on ground , but present after there come aboard many shallop with store of french man , who rob and spoil all they can lay hand on , pillage the poor man even to their very shirt , and use they in savage manner : whereas they shall rather as Christians have aid they in that distress . which news when we hear , we bless God , who by his divine providence and unspeakable mercy have not only preserve all the man , but bring we thither so miraculous to aid and comfort they . so present we put into the road where the Chancewell lie ; where be also one ship of Sibiburo , who man that help to pillage the Chancewell be run away into the wood . but the master thereof which on they have deal very honest with our man stay in his ship , and come aboard of we : who we use well , not take j any thing from he that be he , but only such thing l as we can find of our own . and when we have dispatch our business , we give he one good cable , one old cable and a anchor , one shallop with mast , sail , and other furniture , and other thing which belong to the ship . in recompense whereof he give we two hogshead of sider , one barrel of pease , and 25 score of fish . the 29 betimes in the morning we depart from that road towards a great biskaine some 7 league off of 300 tun , who man deal most dogged with the chancewels company . the same night we anchor at the mouth of the harbour , where the biskain be . the 30 betimes in the morning we put into the harbour ; and approach near their stage , we see it uncover , and so suspect the ship to be go : whereupon we send our pinnace on shore with a dozen man , who when they come , find great store of fish on shore , but all the man be flee : neither can they perceive whether the ship shall be go , but as they think to sea . this day about twelve of the clock we take a savage boat which our man pursue : but all the savage run away into the 173 the savage of Cape briton come aboard of our ship . cibo a harbour in the isle of Cape briton . new port . port ingle . wood , and our man bring their boat on board . the same day in the afternoon we bring our ship to a anchor in the harbour : and the same day we take three hogshead and a half of train , and some 300 of green fish . also in the evening three of the savage , who boat we have , come unto we for their boat ; to who we give coat and knife , and restore they their boat again . the next day be the first of July , the rest of the savage come unto we , among who be their king , who name be Itarey , and their queen , to who also we give coat and knife , and other trifle . Theise Savages call the harbour Cibo . in this place be the great multitude of lobster that ever we hear of : for we catch at one hawle with a little draw net above 140 . the four of July in the morning we depart from Cibo . and the five we cast anchor in a reasonable good harbour call new port under a island some eight league from Cibo , and within three league from the english port . at this place in pursue certain shallop of a ship of rochel , one of they come aboard , who tell we , that the biskainer who we seek , be in the english port with two biskainer more , and two ship of rochel . thereupon we send one of our man in the rocheller shallop to parley with the admiral and other our friend in the english port , request they aid for the recovery of our thing , which the other ship call the Santa maria of S . Vincent ( whereof be master Johannes de heart , and pilot Adam de lauandote ) have rob from the Chancewell . to which they answer , that if we will come in unto they in peace , they will assist we what