they shall not loose the value of one penny if they be the french king subject . than i carry away all our man , and also take with i two or three of the chief of they , and when i come aboard go to examine of they , and by circumstance find one of the ship to belong to France : whereupon i tell the master of the say ship , that i be thorough satisfy that he be of France and so dismiss he in peace . of the other ship we have great presumption that she be of Spain , but have no certain proof thereof , wherefore we dismiss they likewise in peace . after i have thus dismiss they , our ship company fall into a mutiny , and more than half of they resolve to carry one of those ship away . but they be prevent of their evil purpose by aid which the say ship receive from their countryman in the other another har - harborough : for the next morning , which be then in twenty of June , very early there be gather it together out of all the ship in both harborough , at the least 200 Frenchman and Briton , who have plant upon the shore three piece of ordinance against we , and have prepare they self in all readiness to fight with we , which so soon as we have descry they give the onset upon we with at least a hundred small shot out of the wood . there be also in a readiness to assault we about three hundred savage . but after we have skirmish a skirmish while with they , we procure a parley by one of the man between the of saint Malo , who ship row hard by we : in which andus . parley they require some of our man to come on shore unto they : whereupon we request m . Ralph hill and the boatswain mate to go on shore to they : who when they have they detain as prisoner ; and then require the powder and munition , which we have of the bask in possession ; which we surrender unto they in safety as our intent always be , which do , there a new treason come aboard unto we one captain Charles , who be of the briton . 169 captain of the great ship of saint Malo , which ride in the other harbour : who challenge our great boat which we have at Farrillon to be he . and while we be in talk with he about the two bask which at first we think to be Spaniards , we have almost be betray . for the say captain Charles with half a dozen more of his company keep themselves aboard of our ship and hold we in a talk , while thirty or forty other shall have enter our ship unaware from one of the ship of saint Malo , which profess to be our friend , and unto who we show all courtesy . but our perceive their treacherous intent , threaten to set fire on the say ship , which be then thwart our hawse , from which they will have enter . by which resolution of we god do discourage they from effect their mischievous purpose . now the say captain Charles when he see himself prevent of his wicked intent , take his boat present to go on shore , and promise that all thing shall be end in peace between we , and that he will send we our two man again . but when he be on shore he present send for our great boat which he claim to be he , and withal command we out of the harbour ; but he send not our man as he promise , we be now the weak side do not only deliver his boat but also deter - mine to be go and then request they to help we with our anchor which be on shore ; but they will not . than we desire they to cut the bent of the cable upon the anchor on shore ( for we dare not send our boat lest they shall have keep from we both our boat and man ) which they promise to do for we , as also to send our man ; but when they be on shore , they will do neither . we therefore see their falsehood in every thing , dare no long tarry for fear of far treachery ; wherefore we conclude to cut our cable in the hawse ; which we do , and so depart the harbour about 9 of the clock , leave two of our man with our cable and anchor , and 20 fathom of a new hawser behind we . and as we be go away , they make great show of friendship , 170 * 597 - and drink unto we from the shore ; but more for fear then love , and request we to come on shore for our man , who than they deliver . the same morning in pass over the bar before the harborowe mouth , and ar ° f by that time that we have all our man aboard , our ship come on ground upon the sand ; where we lay some 8 ' hour : during which time , at low water we trim our ship without board , and by the great providence of God find our leak which then we stop . about six of the clock at night we get our ship on float again , and that night anchor within part of the bar , which then because of the wind we can not pass . but it please God to send we fair weather all that night , and the next fnm day by noon we have get our ship clean over the bar . the 21 day after we get over the bar the wind arise at east and eastsoutheast , we blow right into the bay : which if it have come before we be clear of the bar , we have both ship and man perish in the sand . the same day , because the wind keep we within the bay , we go to the isle Blanch , where the ship of the other harbour isle Bland or have their stage : but it be at least two league from thewjllielse - their ship : where we hope by friendship to procure a shallope and assurance of our cable and anchor again . but when we have approach near the shore with our ship , and weave they with a white flag , they in stead of come unto we , send their message by a bullet out of a piece of great ordinance , which they have place on shore of purpose against we ; so that they will neither speak with we , nor permit we to come near they . thus we depart , and will have put to sea that night : but there be much wind at east , which keep we within the bay , and enforce we to come to a anchor under isle blanch . the next morning be the 22 , we put to sea , and about 12 of the clock the same day , the wind be at north - east and foul weather , the master say he can not ply up