a ship which we will leave , to have the old nail out of it , the three day follow they come from Stadacona , and most of they without difficulty do pass from one side of the river to the other with small skiff : but Donnacona will not come over : Taignoagny , and Domagaia stand talk together above a hour before they will come over , at last they come to speak with our captain . there Taignoagny pray he that he will cause the foresay man to be take and carry into France . our captain refuse to do it , say , that his king have forbid he to bring any man or woman into France , only that he may bring two or three young boy to learn the language , but that he will willing carry he to Newfoundland , and there leave he in a island . our captain speak this , only to assure they , that they shall bring Donnacona with they , who they have leave on the other side : which word , when Taignoagny hear , he be very glad , think he shall never return into France again , and therefore promise to come the next day , which be the day of the holy cross , and to bring Donnacona and all the people with he . how that upon Holy - rood day our captain cause a cross to be set up in our fort : and how the lord Donnacona , Taignoagny , Domagaia , and other of their company come : and of the take of the say lord . Chap . 18 . the three of May be Holyroode day , our captain for the solemn nitie of the day , cause a goodly fair cross of 35 foot in height to be set up , under the crosset of which he cause a shield to be hang , 254 wherein be the arm of France , and over they be write in antique letter , Franciscus primus dei gratia francorum rex regnat . and upon that day about noon , there come a great number of the people of Stadacona , man , woman , and child , who tell we that their lord Donnacona , Taignoagny , and Domagaia be come , whereof we be very glad , hope to retain they . about two of the clock in the afternoon they come , and be come near our ship , our captain go to salute Donnacona , who also show he a merry countenance , albeit very fearful his eye be still bend towards the wood . Shortly after come Taignoagny , who bid Donnacona that he shall not enter into our fort , and therefore fire be bring forth by one of our man , Sc kindle where their lord be . our captain pray he to come into our ship to eat and drink as he be wont to do , and also Taignoagny , who promise , that after a while he will come , and so they do , and enter into our ship : but first it be tell our captain by Domagaia that Taignoagny have speak ill of he , and that he have bid Donnacona he shall not come aboard our ship . our captain perceive that , come out of the fort , and see that only by Taignoagny his warning the woman run away , and none but man stay in great number , wherefore he straight command his man to lay hold on Donnacona , Taignoagny , and Domagaia , and Donnacona , two more of the chief who he point unto : then Taignoagny , he command they to make the other to retire . present after , the say lord enter into the fort with the captain , but by and by Taignoagny come to make he come out again . our captain see that there be no other remedy , begin to call unto they to take they , at who cry and voice all his man come forth , and take the say lord with the other , who they have appoint to take . the Canadians see their lord take , begin to run away , even as sheep before the wolf , some cross over the river , some through the wood , each one seek for his own advantage . that 255 four and twenty chain of Esurgny do , we retire our self , and lay up the prisoner under good guard and safety . how the say Canadians the night follow come before our ship to seek their man , cry and howl all night like wolves : of the talk and conclusion they agree upon the next day : and of the gift which they give our captain . Chap . 19 the night follow they come before our ship , ( the river be betwixt we ) strike their breast , and cry and howl like wolf , still call Agouhanna , think to speak with he , which our captain for that time will not permit , neither all the next day till noon , whereupon they make sign unto we , that we have hang or kill he . about noon , there come as great a number in a cluster , as ever we see , who go to hide themselves in the forest , except some , who with a loud voice will call and cry to Donnacona to speak unto they . our captain then command Donnacona to be bring up on high to speak unto they , and bid he be merry , for after he have speak , and show unto the king of France what he have see in Saguenay and other country , after ten or twelve month , he shall return again , and that the king of France will give he great reward , whereat Donnacona be very glad , and speak to the other , tell it they , who in token of joy , give out three great cry , and then Donnacona and his people have great talk together , which for want of interpreter , can be describe . our captain bid Donnacona that he shall cause they to come to the other side of the river , to the end they may better talk together without