and we pass up the river against the stream about ten league , coast the say hand , at the end whereof , we find a goodly and pleasant sound , where be a little river and haven , where by reason of the flood there be about three fathom water . this place seem to we very fit and commodious to harbour our ship therein , and so we do very safe , Santa Croix , we name it the holy cross , for on that day we come thither . near unto it , there be a village , whereof donna - cona be lord , and there he keep his abode : it be call Stadacona . Stadacona , as goodly a plot of ground as possible may be see , and therewithal ! very fruitful , full of goodly tree even as in France , as Okes , elm , ash , walnut tree , maple tres , cydron , vine , and white thorn , that bring forth fruit as big as any damson , and many other sort of tree , under which grow as fair tall goodly hemp , hemp , as any in France , without any seed or any man work or labour at all . have consider the place , and find it fit for our purpose , our captain withdraw himself on purpose to return to our ship : but behold , as we be come out of the river we meet come 220 against we one of the lord of the say village of stada - cona , accompany with many other , as man , woman , and child , who after the fashion of their country , in sign of mirth and joy , begin to make a long oration , the woman still sing and dance up to the knee in water . our captain know their good will and kindness towards we , cause the boat wherein they be , to come unto he , and give they certain trifle , as knife , and bead of glass , whereat they be marvellous glad , for be go about three league from they , for the pleasure they conceive of our come , we may hear they sing , and see they dance for all they be so far . how our captain go to see and note the bigness of the hand , and the nature of it , and then return to the ship , cause they to be bring to the river of the holy cross . Chap . 3 . after we be come with our boat unto our ship again , our captain cause our bark to be make ready to go on land in the say hand , to note the tree that in show seem so fair , and to consider the nature and quality of it : which thing we do , and find it full of goodly tree like to we . also we see many goodly vine , a thing not before of we see in those country , and therefore we name it Bacchus hand . it be in length about twelve league , in sight very pleasant , but full of wood , no part of it manure , unless it be in certain place , where a few cottage be for fisher dwelling as before we have say . the next day we depart with our ship to bring they to the place of the holy cross , and on the 14 of that month we come thither , and the lord Donnacona , Taignoagny , and Domagaia , with 25 boat full of those people , come to meet we , come from the place whence we be come , and go towards Stadacona , where their abide be , and all come to our ship , show sundry and diverse gesture of gladness 221 A . D . I535 - the lie of Bacchus , or the ik of Orleans . and mirth , except those two that we have bring , to wit , Taignoagny , and Domagaia , who seem to have alter and change their mind and purpose , for by no mean they will come unto our ship , albeit sundry time they be earnest desire to do it , whereupon we begin to mistrust somewhat . our captain ask they if according to promise they will go with he to Hochelaga ? they answer yea , for so they have purpose , and then each one withdraw himself . the next day be the fifteen of the month , our captain go on shore , to cause certain pole and pile to be drive into the water , and set up , that the better and safe we may harbour our ship there : and many of those country people come to meet we there , among who be Donnacona and our two man , with the rest of their company , who keep themselves aside under a point or nook of land that be upon the shore of a certain river , and no one of they come unto we as the other do that be not on their side . our captain understanding that they be there , command part of our man to follow he , and he go to the say point where he find the say Donnacona , Taignoagny , Domagaia , and diverse other : and after salutation give on each side , Taignoagny settle himself foremost to speak to our captain , say that the lord Donnacona do great grieve and sorrow that our captain and his man do wear warlike weapon , and they not . our captain answer , that albeit it do grieve they , yet will not he leave they off , and that ( as he know ) it be the manner of France . but for all these word our captain and Donnacona leave not off to speak one to another , and friendly to entertain one another . then do we perceive , that whatsoever Taignoagny speak , be only long of himself and of his fellow , for that before they depart thence our captain and Donnacona enter into a marvellous steadfast league of friendship , whereupon all his people at once with a loud voice , cast out three great cry , ( a