follow . they have certain piece of wood , make hollow like those whereon we beat our hemp , and with certain beetle of wood they beat their corn to powder : than they make paste of it , and of the paste , cake or wreathe , than they lie they on a broad and hot stone , and then cover it with hot stone , and so they bake their bread in stead of oven . they make also sundry sort of pottage with the say corn and also of pease and of bean , whereof they have great store , as ... - ... 0 - cumber , and also with other fruit , as musk - millions , and very great other fruit . cucumber . they have also in their house certain vessel as big as any but or tun , wherein they preserve and keep their fish , cause the same in summer to be dry in the sun , and live therewith in winter , whereof they make great provision , as we by experience have see . all their viand and meat be without any taste or savour of salt at all . they sleep upon bark of tree lay all along upon the ground be overspread with the skin of certain wild beast , wherewith they also cloth and cover themselves . the thing most precious that they have in all the world they call Asurgny : it be as white as any snow : they take it in the say river of Cornibotz , in the manner follow . when any one have deserve death , or that they take any of their enemy in war , first they kill he , then with certain knife they give great slash and stroke upon their buttock , flank , thigh , and shoulder : then they cast the same body so mangle down to the bottom of the river , in a place where the say Esurgny be , and there leave it ten dr 12 hour , than they take it up again , and in the cut find the say Esurgny or Cornibotz . of they they make bead , and wear they about their 233 Matz , pease , bean , muskmillton , cu - plenty offish and the preserve thereof . neck , even as we do chain of gold and silver , account it the precious thing in the world . they have this virtue and property in they , they will stop or staunch bleed at the nose , for we have prove it . Theise people be give to no other exercise , but only to husbandry and fish for their sustenance : they have no care of any other wealth or commodity in this world , for they have no knowledge of it , and that be , because they never travel and go out of their country , as those of Canada and Saguenay do , albeit the Canadians with eight or nine village more alongst that river be subject unto they . how we come to the town of Hochelaga , and the entertainment which there we have , and of certain gift which our captain give they , with diverse other thing . Chap . 8 . so soon as we be come near the town , a great number of the inhabitant thereof come to present themselves before we after their fashion , make very much of we : we be by our guide bring into the midst of the town . they have in the middlemost part of their house a large square place , be from side to side a good stone cast , whither we be bring , and there with sign be command to stay : then sudden all the woman and maiden of the town gather themselves together , part of which have their arm full of young child , and as many as can came to rub our race , our arm , and what part of the body soever they can touch , weep for very joy that they see we , show we the best countenance that possible they can , desire we with their sign , that it will please we to touch their child . that do , the man cause the woman to withdraw themselves back , than they every one sit down on the ground round about we , as if they will have show and rehearse some comedy or other show : then present come the woman again , 234 every one bring a four square mat in manner of carpet , and spread they abroad on the ground in that place , they cause we to sit upon they . that do , the lord and king of the country be bring upon 9 or 10 man shoulder , ( who in their tongue they call Agouhanna ) sit upon a great stag skin , and they lay he down upon the foresay mat near to the captain , every open beckon unto we that he be their lord and king . This Agouhanna be a man about fifty year old : he be no whit better apparel than any of the rest , only except , that he have a certain thing make of the skin of hedgehog like a red wreath , and that be in stead of his crown . he be full of the palsy , and his member shrink together . after he have with certain sign salute our captain and all his company , and by manifest token bid all welcome , he show his leg and arm to our captain , and with sign desire he to touch they , and so he do , rub they with his own hand : then do Agouhanna take the wreath or crown he have about his head , and give it unto our captain : that do they bring before he diverse disease man , some blind , some cripple , some lame and impotent , and some so old that the hair of their eyelid come down and cover their cheek , and lay they all along before our captain , to the end they may of he be touch : for it seem unto they that God be descend and come down from heaven to heal they . our captain see the misery