47 . deg . and f . the isle filbeard in of fuberd and the isle of Orleans lie north - east and ‘ and ‘ ^ quar - southwest , and they be distant 10 league , and thou must ters . pass by the high land on the northside about a quarter of a league , because that in the midst of the river there be nothing but shold and rock . and when thou shall be over against a round cape , thou must take over to the south shore southwest , and a quarter towards the south ; and thou shall sail in 5 . 6 and 7 fathom : and there then the beginning river of Canada begin to be fresh , and the salt water of the fresh end . and when thou shall be athwart the point of waUr ' the isle of Orleans , where the river begin to be fresh , thou shall sail in the midst of the river , and thou shall leave the isle on the starreboord , which be on the right the river but hand : and here the river be not past a quarter of a league a quarter of a broad , anj have 2o and 30 fathom water . and towards a ^ ie roa . gouth shore there be a ledge of isle all cover with 280 tree , and they end over against the point of the isle of Orleans . and the point of the isle of Orleans towards the north - east be in 47 degree and one terce of a degree . and the isle of Orleans be a fair isle , all cover with tree even unto the river side : and it be about 5 league long , and a league and a half broad . and on the north shore there be another river , which fall into the main river at the end of the island : and ship may very well pass there . from the midst of the isle unto Canada the river run west ; and from the place of Canada unto france - roy the river turn west Southwest : and from the west end of the isle to Canada be but one league ; and unto france - roy 4 league . and when thou be come to the end of the isle , thou shall see a great river which fall fifteen or twenty fathom down from a rock , and make a terrible noise . the fort of france - roy stand in 47 degree , and one sixth part of a degree . the extension of all these land , upon just occasion be call new France . for it be as good and as temperate as France , and in the same latitude . and the reason wherefore it be cold in the winter be , because the fresh river be natural more cold than the sea ; and it be also broad and deep : and in some place it be half a league and above in breadth . and also because the land be not till , nor full of people , and be all full of wood , which be the cause of cold , because there be not store of fire nor cattle . and the sun have his meridian as high as the meridian at rochel : and it be noon here when the sun be at south Southwest at rochel . and here the north star by the compass stand north north - east . and when at rochel it be noon , it be but half a hour past nine at france - roy . from the say place unto the ocean sea and the coast of new France , be not above 50 league distance . and from the entrance of Norumbega unto Florida be 300 league : and from this place of france - roy to Hochelaga , be about 80 league : and unto the isle of Rasus 30 381 1542 . the isle of Orleans in 47 degree and one three part . Canada 1 league to the west of the isle of Orleans . the fort of france - roy stand in 47 degree and one sixth part . why the country be cold in the winter then France . a second reason . the variation of the compass . from the fort of France Roy unto you mouth of the grand bay 230 leag . gold and silver like to be find in Canada . a bay in 42 . degree gyve some hope of a passage . tree . red plum . foul . corn . ivhe eat to be sow in march . league . and i doubt not but Norumbega enter into the river of Canada , and unto the sea of Saguenay . and from the fort of france - roy until a man come forth of the Grande bay be not above 230 league . and the course be Northeast and west Southwest not above 5 degree and £ difference : and reckon 16 league and ah half to a degree . by the nature of the climate the land towards Hochelaga be still better and better , and more fruitful . and this land be fit for fig and pear . and i think that gold and silver will be find here , accord as the people of the country say . Theise land lie over against Tartary , and i doubt not but that they stretch towards Asia , accord to the roundness of the world . and therefore it be good to have a small ship of 70 ton to discover the coast of new France on the back side of Florida : for i have be at a bay as far as 42 degree between Norumbega and Florida , and i have not search the end thereof , and i know not whether it pass through . and in all these country there be oak , and bortz , ash , elm , arable , tree of life , pine prussetree , ceder , great wall nut tree , and wild nut , hasel - tree , wild pear tree , wild grape , and there have be find red plum . and very fair corn grow there , and peason grow of their own accord , gooseberry and strawberry . and there be goodly forest , wherein man may hunt . and there be great store of stag , dear , porkepick , and the savage say there be unicorn . foul there be in abundance , as bustard , wild goose , crane , turtle dove , raven , crow , and many other bird . all thing which be sow there , be not pass 2 . or 3 . day in come up out of the ground . i have tell in one ear of corn a hundred and twenty grain , like the corn of France . and you need not to sow your wheat until march , and it will be ripe in the midst of August . the water be better and perfect than in France . and if the country be till and replenish with people , it will be as hot as rochel . and the reason why it 282 .. I54X snow there often then in France be , because it rain the cause of there but seidome : for the rain be convert into the often snow - tnetn Canada . snow . all thing above mention , be true . John Alphonse make this voyage with monsieur Roberval . there be a pardon to be see for the pardon of monsieur de saine terre , lieutenant of the say monsieur de Roberval , give in Canada in the presence of the say John Alphonse .