be in 48 . degree , and the coast lie north molve or and south , and take a quarter of the north - east and as ^ ' southwest unto the bay of heat : and there be 3 . Isles , one great one and two small : from the bay of heat the bay de until you pass the Monts nostre dame all the land be C ^^ roro ^ high and good ground all cover with tree . Ognedoc * 277 great store and better fish than in Newfoundland . bowl . tree . the mouth of the river of Canada twenty five lease broad . the 7 isle in 50 degree and a hafe . the nver be here but 1o league broad . the point of Ongear in 49 degree and a quarter . the isle of raquelle in 48 degree and two three part . be a good bay and lie northnorthwest and southsoutheast , and it be a good harbour : and you must sail along the shore on the northside by reason of the low point at the entrance thereof : and when you be pass the point bring your self to a anchor in 15 . or 20 . fathom of water towards the south shore , and here within this haven be two river , one which go towards the northwest , and the other to the southwest . and on this coast there be great fish for cod and other fish , where there be more store than be in Newfoundland , and better fish . and here be great store of river foul , as malards , wild goose , and other : and here be all sort of tree , rise tree , raspess , Filbird tree , apple tree , pear tree , and it be hot here in summer then in France . the isle of ascension and the 7 . Isles which lie on the north shore lie southeast and westnorthwest , and be distant 24 . league . the cape of Ognedoc and the 7 . isle be northnorthwest and southsoutheast , and be distant 35 . league . the cape of Monts nostre dame and the 7 . isle be north and south , and the cut over from the one to the other be 25 . league : and this be the breadth of this sea , and from thence upward it begin to wax narrow and narrow . the 7 . isle be in 50 . degree and the 7 . Isles and the point of Ongear lie Northeast and Southwest and the distance between they be 15 . league , and between they be certain small island : and the point of ongear and the mountain nostre Dame , which be on the south side of the entrance of the river , be north and south : and the cut over from the one to the other be ten league : and this be here the abredth of the sea the point of ongear and the river of Caen lie east and west , and they be distant 12 . league . and all the coast from the isle of ascension hither be very good ground , wherein grow all sort of tree that be in France and some fruit . the point of ongear be in 49 . degree and and the river of Caen and the isle of raquelle lie Northeast and Southwest , and they be distant 12 . league . the isle of raquelle be 278 in 48 . degree and in this river of Caen there be great store of fish . and here the sea be not past 8 . league the river % broad . the isle of raquelle be a very low isle , which be hoad . near unto the south shore , hard by a high cape which be call the cape of marble . there be no danger there at all . and between raquelle and the cape of marble ship may pass . and there be not from the isle to the south shore above one league , and from the isle unto the north shore about four league . the isle of raquelle and the entrance of Saguenay be Northeast Westsouthwest , and be distant 14 . league , and there be between they two small island near the north shore . the entrance the entrance of Saguenay be in 48 . degree and and the entrance have not pass a quarter of a league in breadth , and it be dangerous towards the southwest : and two or three league within the entrance it begin to wax wide and wide : and it seem to be as it be a arm of the sea : and i think that the same run into the sea of Cathay , for it send forth there a great the sea of current , and there do run in that place a terrible raze or tie . and here the river from the north shore to the river not the south shore be not past four league in breadth , and it be a dangerous passage between both the land , because ‘ there lie bank of rock in the river . the isle of raquelle and the isle of hare lie Northeast and Southwest , and take i of the east and the west , and they be distant 18 . league . the entrance of Saguenay and the isle of liepueres or hare lie Northnortheast and Southsouthwest , and be distant 5 . league . the entrance of Saguenay and the isle of raquelle be northnorthwest , and southsouthwest , and be distant three league . The the isle of isle of hare be in 48 and a of a degree . from the mountain of nostre dame unto Canada and unto fg ^ port 0 Hochelaga , all the land on the south coast be fair , a low land and goodly champagne , all cover with tree unto the brink of the river . and the land on the north side be high , and in some place there be high mountain . and from the isle of hare unto the isle of Orleans the 279 note . river be not past 4 or 5 league broad . between the isle of hare and the highland on the north side the sea be not past a league and a half broad , and it be very deep , for it be above 100 fathom deep in the midst . to the east of the isle of hare there be 2 or 3 small isle and rock . and from hence to the isle des coudre or of filbeard , all be nothing but isle and rock on the south shore : and towards the north the sea be fair and deep . the isle of hare and the isle of filbeard lie north - east , west and Southwest , and they be distant 12 league . and you must always run along the high land on the north shore ; for on the other shore there be nothing but rock . and you must pass by the side of the isle of filbeard , and the river there be not past a quarter of a league broad , and you must sail in the midst of the chanel : and in the midst run the best passage either at a hie or a low water , because the sea run there strong , and there be great danger of rock , and you have need of good anchor and cable . the isle of filbeard be a small isle , about one league long , and half a league broad , but they be all bank of sand . the isle of the isle of filbert stand in