the three voyage of discovery make by captain Jaques Cartier , 1540 unto the country of Canada , Hochelaga , and Saguenay . king Francis the first have hear the report of captain Cartier his pilot generail in his two former voyage of discovery , as well by write as by word of mouth , touch that which he have find and see in the Wester ne part discover by he in the part of Canada and Hochelaga , and have also see and talk with the people , which the say Cartier have bring out of those country , whereof one be king of Canada , who name be Donnacona , and other : which after that they have be a long time in France and Britain , be baptize at their own desire and request , and die in the say country of Britain . and albeit his majesty be advertise by the say Cartier of the death and decease of all the people which be bring over by he ( which be ten in number ) save one little girl about ten year old , yet he resolve to send the say Cartier his pilot thither again , with John Francis de la Roche , knight , lord of Roberval , who he appoint his lieutenant and governor in the country of Canada and Hochelaga , and the say Cartier captain generail and leader of the ship , that they may discover more than be do before in the former voyage , and attain ( if it be possible ) unto the knowledge of the country of Saguenay , whereof the people bring by Cartier , as be declare , make mention unto the king , that there be great riches , and very good country . and the king cause a certain sum of money to be deliver to furnish out the say voyage with five ship : which thing be perform by the say monsieur Roberval and Cartier . after that they have agree together to rig the say five ship at saint Malo in Britain , where the two 263 ten savage bring into France . John Francis de la Roche , lord of Roberval . great riches and very good soil in Saguenay , which be beyond you fault . 23 . of may , 1540 the great mischief of lose the season . former voyage have be prepare and set forth . and the say Monsieur Roberval send Cartier thither for the same purpose . and after that Cartier have cause the say five ship to be build and furnish and set in good order , monsieur Roberval come down to s . malo and find the ship fall down to the road , with their yard across full ready to depart and set sail , stay for nothing else but the come of the general , and the payment of the furniture . and because monsieur Roberval the king lieutenant have not as yet his artillery , powder and munition , and other thing necessary come down , which he have provide for the voyage , in the country of champagne and Normandy : and because the say thing be very necessary , and that he be loath to depart without they , he determine to depart from s . malo to Roan , and to prepare a ship or two at Honfleur , whither he think his thing be come : and that the say Cartier shall depart with the five ship which he have furnish , and shall go before . consider also that the say Cartier have receive letter from the king , whereby he do express charge he to depart and set sail immediate upon the sight and receit thereof , on pain of incur his displeasure , and to lay all the fault on he . and after the conclusion of these thing , and the say Monsieur Roberval have take muster and view of the gentleman , soldier , and mariner which be retain and choose for the performance of the say voyage , he give unto captain Cartier full authority to depart and go before , and to govern all thing as if he have be there in person : and himself depart to Honfleur to make his far preparation . after these thing thus dispatch , the wind come fair , the foresay five ship set sail together well furnish and victual for two year , the 23 . of may , 1540 and we sail so long with contrary wind and continual torment , which fall out by reason of our late departure , that we be on the sea with our say five ship full three month before we can arrive at the port and haven 264 of Canada , without ever have in all that time 30 hour of good wind to serve we to keep our right course : so that our five ship through those storm lose companyone of another , all save two that keep together , to wit that wherein the captain be , and the other wherein go the viscount of Beaupre , until at length at the end of one month we meet all together at the haven of Carpont in Newfoundland . but the length of time which we be in pass between Britain and Newfoundland be the cause that we stand in great need of water , because of the cattle , aswell goat , hog , as other beast which we carry for breed in the country , which we be constrain to water with cider and other drink . now therefore because we be the space of three month in sail on the sea , and stay in Newfoundland , wait for monsieur Roberval , and take in of fresh water and other thing necessary , we arrive not before the haven of saint Croix in Canada , ( where in the former voyage we have remain eight month ) until the 23 . day of August . in which place the people of the country come to our ship , make show of joy for our arrival , and namely he come thither which have the rule and government of the country of Canada , name Agona , which be appoint king there by donacona , when in the former voyage we carry he into France : and he come to the captain ship with 6 . or 7 . boat , and with many woman and child . and after the say Agona have inquire of the captain where donacona and the rest be , the captain answer he , that Donacona be dead in France , and that his body rest in the earth , and that the rest stay there as great lord , and be marry , and will not return back into their country : the say Agona make no show of anger at all these speech : and i think he take it so well because he remain lord and governor of the country by the death of the say Donacona . after which conference the A . D . 1540 Carpont haven . transport of diverse sort of cattellfir breed . the 23 . of August . the new king of Canada . say Agona take a piece of tan leather of a yellow skin edge about with esnoguy ( which be their riches and 265 the thing which they esteem most precious , as we esteem gold ) which be upon his head in stead of a crown , and he put the same on the head of our captain , and take from his wrist two bracelet of esnoguy , and put they upon the captain arm , coll he about the neck and show unto he great sign of joy : which be great this - all dissimulation , as afterward it well appear . the cap - simulatimt of tajne take his say crown of leather and put it again a upon his head , and give he and his wife certain small present , signify unto he , that he have bring certain new thing , which afterward he will bestow upon he : for which the say Agona thank the captain . and after that he have make he and his company eat and drink , they depart and return to the shore with their boat . after which thing the say captain go with two of his boat up the river , beyond Canada and the port of saint Croix , to view a haven and a small river , a good road which be about 4 . league high : which he find better +• f and more commodious to ride in and lay his ship , than “ croix . mnc 1 the former . and therefore he return and cause all his ship to be bring before the say river , and at a low water he cause his ordinance to be plant to place his ship in more safety , which he mean to keep and stay in the country , which be three : which he do the day follow , and the rest remain in the road in the midst of the river ( in which place the victual and other furniture be discharge , which they have bring ) from the 26 . of August until the second of September , what time they depart to return for s . malo , in which ship he send back mace jolloberte his brother in law , and Steven Noel his nephew , skilful and excellent pilot , with letter unto the king , and to advertise he what have be do and find : and how Monsieur de Roberval be not yet come , and that he fear that by occasion of contrary wind and tempest he be drive back again into France .