come from the north , and enter into that river , at the entrance whereof be four little hand full of fair and goodly tree : we name that river the river of Fovetz : but because one of those island stretch it self a great way into the river , our captain at the point of it cause a goodly great cross to be set up , and command the boat to be make ready , that with the next tide he may go up the say river , and consider the quality of it , which we do , and that day go up as far as we can : but because we find it to be of no importance , and very shallow , we return and sail down the river . how we come to the port of the holy cross , and in what state we find our ship : and how the lord of the country come to visit our captain , and our captain he : and of certain particular custom of the people . Chap . 9 upon Monday be the 11 of October we come to the port of the holy cross , where our ship be , and find that the master and mariner we have leave there , have make and rear a trench before the ship , altogether close with great piece of timber set upright [ three . 223 . i and very well fasten together : then have they beset the say trench about with piece of artillery and other necessary thing to shield and defend themselves from the power of all the country . so soon as the lord of the country hear of our come , the next day be the twelve of October , he come to visit we , accompany with Taignoagny , Domagaia and many other , feign to be very glad of our come , make 238 much of our captain , who as friendly as he can , entertain they , albeit they have not deserve it . Donnacona their lord desire our captain the next day to come and see Canada , which he promise to do : for the next day be the 13 of the month , he with all his gentleman and fifty mariner very well appoint , go to visit Donnacona and his people , about a league from our ship . the place where they make their abode be call Stadacona . when we be about a stone cast from their house , many of the inhabitant come to meet we , be all set in a rank , and ( as their custom be ) the man all on one side , and the woman on the other , still dance and sing without any cease : and after we have salute and receive one another , our captain give they knife and such other sleight thing : than he cause all the woman and child to pass along before he , give each one a ring of tin , for which they give he hearty thanks : that do , our captain be by Donnacona and Taignoagny , bring to see their house , which ( the quality consider ) be very well provide , and store with such victual as the country yield , to pass away the winter withal . than they show we the skin of five man head spread upon board as we do use parchment : Donnacona tell we that they be skin of Toudamani , a people dwell towards the south , who continual do war against they . Moreover they tell we , that it be two year past that those toudamans come to assault they , yea even into the say river , in a hand that lie over against Saguenay , where they have be the night before , as they be go a warfaring in Hognedo , with 200 person , man , woman , and child , who be all asleep in a fort that they have make , they be assault by the say Toudamans , who put fire round about the fort , and as they will have come out of it to save themselves , they be all slay , only five except , who escape . for which loss they yet sorrow , show Stadacona . Toudamani dwell southward of Canada . 239 with sign , that one day they will be revenge : that do , we come to our ship again . the manner how the people of that country live : and of certain condition : of their faith , manner , and custom . Chap . io . this people believe no whit in God , but in one who they call Cudruaigni : they say that often he speak with they and tell they what weather shall follow , whether good or bad . Moreover they say , that when he be angry with they he cast dust into their eye : they believe that when they die they go into the star , and thence by little and little descend down into the horizon , even as the star do , and that then they go into certain green field full of goodly fair and precious tree , flower , and fruit . after that they have give we these thing to understand , we show they their error , and tell that their Cudruaigni do but deceive they , for he be but a devil and a evil spirit : affirm unto they , that there be but one only God , who be in heaven , and who give we all necessary , be the creator of all himself , and that only we must believe in he : moreover , that it be necessary for we to be baptise , otherwise we be damn into hell . Theise and many other thing concern our faith and religion we show they , all which they do easy believe , call their Cudruaigni , Agouiada , that be to say , nought , so that very earnest they desire and pray our captain that he will cause they to be baptise , and their lord , and Taignoagny , doma - they desire io gaia , and all the people of the town come unto we , be baptize , hope to be baptise