so that if it have not be for our boat , we have be in great dailger to lose our pinnace : and coast along the say dry sand , there be more than 30 fathom water . 217 this be the river of Tadascu or of Saguenay . about five league beyond the river of Saguenay Southwest , there be another hand on the northside , aguenay . wherein be certain high land , and thereabouts we think to have cast anchor , on purpose to stay the next tide , but we can sound no ground in a 120 fathom , within a flight shoot from shore , so that we be constrain to wind back to the say hand , where we sound again and find 3 5 fathom . the next morning we hoist sail and go thence , sail further on , where we have notice of a certain kind of fish never before of any man see or know . they be about the bigness of a porpose , yet nothing like they , of body very well proportion , head like grayhound , altogeth as white as snow without any spot , within which river there be great quantity of they : they do live altogether between the sea and the fresh water . Theise people of the country call they Adhothuys , they tell we that they be very savoury and good to be eat . Moreover they affirm none to be find elsewhere but in the mouth of that river . the six of the month , the weather be calm and fair , we go about 15 league more upward into the river , and there light on a hand that look northward , and it make a little innumerable haven or creek wherein be many and innumerable great tortoise . tortoyze , continual lie about that hand . there be likewise great quantity of the say Adhothuys take by the inhabitor of the country , and there be as great a current in that place as be at Bourdeaux in France at every tide . this hand be in length about three league , and in breadth two , and be a goodly and fertile plot of ground , replenish with many goodly and great tree of many sort . among the rest there be many filbert - tree , which we find hang full of they , somewhat big and better in savour than we , but somewhat than we of hard , and therefore we call it the hand of filbert . iaerds ^ sevent ^ month be our lady even , after ‘ service we go from that hand to go up high into the river , and come to 14 hand seven or eight league 218 from the hand of filbert , where the country of Canada begin , one of which land be ten league in length , and five in breadth , great inhabit of such man as only live by fish of such sort of fish as the river afford , accord to the season of they . after we have cast anchor between the say great hand , and the this great northerly coast , we go on land and take our two wild man with we , meet with many or those country qriean 0 people , who will not at all approach unto we , but rather flee from we , until our two man begin to speak unto they , tell they that they be Taignoagny and Domagaia , who so soon as they have take acquaintance of they , begin great to rejoice , dance and show many sort of ceremony : and many of the chief of they come to our boat and bring many eel and other sort of fish , with two or three burden of great millet Matz . wherewith they make their bread , and many great musk million . the same day come also many other boat full of those countryman and woman , to see and take acquaintance of our two man , all which be as courteous receive and friendly entertain of our captain , as possible can be . and to have they the better acquaint with he , and make they his friend , he give they many small gift , but of small value : nevertheless they be great content with they . the next day follow , the lord of Canada ( who proper name be Donnacona , but by the name of lord they call he Agouhanna ) with twelve boat come to our ship , accompany with many people , who cause ten of his boat to go back with the other two , approach unto we with sixteen man . then begin the say Agouhanna over against the small of our ship , accord to their manner and fashion , to frame a long oration , move all his body and member after a strange fashion , which thing be a ceremony and sign of gladness and security among they , and then come to the general ship , where Taignoagny and Domagaia be , he speak with they and they with he , where they begin 219 to tell and show unto he what they have see in France , and what good entertainment they have have : hear which thing the say lord seem to be very glad thereof , and pray our captain to reach he his arm , that he may kiss it , which thing he do : their lord take it , lay it about his neck , for so they use to do when they will make much of one . than our captain enter into agouhannas boat , cause bread and wine to be bring to make the say lord and his company to eat and drink , which thing they do , and be great thereby content and satisfy . our captain for that time give they nothing , because he look for a fit opportunity . Theise thing be do , each one take leave of other , and the say lord go with his boat again to his place of abode . our captain then cause our boat to be set in order , that with the next tide he may go up high into the river , to find some safe harbour for our ship :