sail : it be tell we of Domagaia and other , that they will stay out but a fortnight , and we believe it , but they stay above two month , which make we mistrust that they have be go to raise the country to come against we , and do we some displeasure , we see our self so weak and faint . albeit we have use such diligence and policy in our fort , that if all the power of the country have be about it , they can have do nothing but look upon we : and while they be forth , many of the people come daily to our ship , and bring we fresh meat , as stag , deer , fish , with diverse other thing , but hold they at such a excessive price , that rather then they will sell they any thing cheap , many time they will carry they back again , because that year the winter be very long , and they Alongwmter . have some scarcity and need of they . [ how Donnacona 25x how Donnacona come to Stadacona again with a great number of people , and because he will not come to visit our captain , feign himself to be sore sick , which he do only to have the captain come see he . Chap . 17 . on the one and twenty day of April Domagaia come to the shore side , accompany with diverse lusty and strong man , such as we be not wont to see , and tell we that their lord Donnacona will the next day come and see we , and bring great store of dear flesh , and other thing with he . the next day he come and bring a great number of man to Stadacona , to what end , and for what cause we know not , but ( as the proverb say ) he that take heed and shield himself from all man , may hap to escape from some : for we have need to look about we , consider how in number we be diminish , and in strength great weaken , both by reason of our sickness and also of the number that be dead , so that we be constrain to leave one of our ship in the port of the holy cross . our captain be warn of their come , and how they have bring a great number of man with they , for Domagaia come to tell it we , and dare not pass the river that be betwixt Stadacona and we , as he be wont to do , whereupon we mistrust some treason . our captain see this , send one of his servant to they , accompany with John Poulet be best belove of those people , to see who be there , and what they do . the say Poulet and the other feign themselves only to be come to visit Donnacona , and bring he certain present , because they have be together a good while in the say donnaconas town . so soon as he hear of their come , he get himself to bed , feign to be very sick . that do , they go to Taignoagny his house to see he , and wheresoever they go , they see so many people , that in a manner one 252 can not stir for another , and such man as they be never wont to see . Taignoagny will not permit our man to enter into any other house , but still keep they company , and bring they half way to their ship , and tell they that if it will please our captain to show he so much favour as to take a lord of the country , who name be agonna , of who he have receive some displeasure , and carry he with he into France , he shall therefore for ever be bind unto he , and will do for he whatsoever he will command he , and bid the servant come again the next day , and bring a answer . our captain be advertise of so many people that be there , not know to what end , purpose to play a pretty prank , that be to say , to take their lord Donnacona , Taignoagny , Domagaia , and some more of the chief of they prisoner , in so much as before he have purpose , to bring they into France , to show unto our king what he have see in those western part , and marvel of the world , for that Donnacona have tell we , that he have be in the country of Saguenay , in which be infinite ruby , gold , and other riches , and Rubles , gold , that there be white man , who clothe themselves with woollen cloth even as we do in France . Moreover he riches in report , that he have be in another country of a Saguenay . people call picquemians , and other strange people . a people call the say lord be a old man , and even from his picquemians . childhood have never leave off nor cease from travail into strange country , as well by water and river , as by land . the say Poulet , and the other have tell our captain their embassage , and show he what Taignoagny his will be , the next day he send his servant again to bid Taignoagny come and see he , and show what he shall , for he shall be very well entertain , and also part of his will shall be accomplish . Taignoagny send he word , that the next day he will come and bring the lord Donnacona with he , and he that have so offend he , which he do not , but stay two day , in which time none come from Stadacona to 253 our ship , as they be wont to do , but rather flee from we , as if we will have slay they , so that than we plain perceive their knavery . the town of but because they understand , that those of Sidatin do tdatm . frequent our company , and that we have forsake the bottom of