any fear , and that he shall assure they : which Donnacona do , and there come a boat full of the chief of they to the ship , and there anew begin to talk together , give great praise to our captain , and give he a present of four and twenty chain of Esurgny , for that be the great 256 and precious riches they have in this world , for they esteem more of that , then of any gold or silver . after they have long talk together , and that their lord see that there be no remedy to avoid his go into France , he command his people the next day , to bring he some victual to serve he by the way . our captain give Donnacona , as a great present , two fry pan of copper , eight hatchet , and other small trifle , as knife , and bead , whereof he seem to be very glad , who send they to his wife and child . likewise , he give to they that come to speak with Donacona , they thank he great for they , and then go to their lodging . how the next day , be the five of May , the say people come again to speak unto their lord , and how four woman come to the shore to bring he victual . Chap . 20 . upon the five of May , very early in the morning , a great number of the say people come again to speak unto their lord , and send a boat , which in their tongue they call Casnoni , wherein be only four woman , without any man , for fear their man shall be retain . these woman bring great store of victual , as great millet , which be their corn that they live withal , flesh , fish , and other thing , after their fashion . these woman be come to our ship , our captain do very friendly entertain they . then Donnacona pray our captain to tell those woman that he shall come again after ten or twelve month , and bring Donnacona to Canada with he : this he say only to appease they , which our captain do : wherefore the woman , as well by word as sign , seem to be very glad , give our captain thank , and tell he , if he come again , and bring Donnacona with he , they will give he many thing : in sign whereof , each one give our captain a chain of Esurgny , and then pass vin 257 r coudre . a knife of red copper bring from Saguenay . the isle of hare . to the other side of the river again , where stand all the people of Stadacona , who take all leave of their lord , go home again . on Saturday follow , be the sixth of the month , we depart out of the say port of Santa Croix , and come to harbour a little beneath the island of Orleans , about twelve league from the port of the holy cross , and upon Sunday we come to the island of filbert , where we stay until the sixteenth of that month , till the fierceness of the water be pass , which at that time run too swift a course , and be too dangerous to come down along the river , and therefore we stay till fair weather come . in the mean while many of donnaconas subject come from the river of Saguenay to he , but be by Domagaia advertise , that their lord be take to be carry into France , they be all amaze : yet for all that they will not leave to come to our ship , to speak to Donnacona , who tell they that after twelve month he shall come again , and that he be very well use by the captain , gentleman , and mariner . which when they hear , they great thank our captain and give their lord three bundle of beaver , and sea wolves skin , with a great knife of red copper that come from Saguenay , and other thing . they give also to our captain a chain of Esurgny , for which our captain give they ten or twelve hatchet , and they give he hearty thanks , and be very well content . the next day , be the sixteenth of May , we hoist sail , and come from the say island of filbert , to another about fifteen league from it , which be about five league in length , and there , to the end we may take some rest the night follow , we stay that day , in hope the next day we may pass and avoid the danger of the river of Saguenay , which be great . that evening we go aland and find great store of hare , of which we take a great many , and therefore we call it the island of hare : in the night there arise a contrary wind , with such storm and tempest , that we be constrain to 258 return to the island of filbert again , from whence we be come , because there be none other passage among the say island , and there we stay till the one and twenty of that month , till fair weather and good wind come again : and then we sail again , and that so prosperous , that we pass to honguedo , which passage until that time have not be discover : we cause our ship to course athwart cape Prat which be the beginning of the port of Chaleur : and because the wind be good and convenient , we sail all day and all night without stay , and the next day we come to the middle of brion island , which we be not mind lsle ° f to do , to the end we may shorten our way . Theise brion - two land lie northwest , and southeast , and be about fifty league one from another . the say island be in latitude 47 degree and a half . upon Thursday be the twenty six of the month ,