meet with many of those countryman , who bring we fish and such other victual as they have , still dance and great rejoice at our come . our captain to lure they in , and to keep they our friend , to recompense they , give they knife , bead , and such small trifle , wherewith they be great satisfy . so soon as we be come near Hochelaga , there come to meet we above a thousand person , man , woman and child , who afterward do as friendly and merry entertain and receive we as any father will do his child , which he have not of long time see , the man dance on one side , the woman on another , and likewise the child on 230 * 535 - anoth : after that they bring we great store of fish , and of their bread make of Millet , cast they into our boat so thick , that you will have think it to fall from heaven . which when our captain see , he with many of his company go on shore : so soon as ever we be aland they come cluster about we , make very much of we , bring their young child in their arm , only to have our captain and his company to touch they , make sign and show of great mirth and gladness , that last more than half a hour . our captain see their love kindness and entertainment of we , cause all the woman orderly to be set in array , and give they bead make of tin , and other such small trifle , and to some of the man he give knife : than he return to the boat to supper , and so pass that night , all which while all those people stand on the shore as near our boat as they may , make great fire , and dance very merry , still cry aguiaze , which in their tongue signify mirth and safety . how our captain with five gentleman and twenty arm man all well in order , go to see the town of Hochelaga , and the situation of it . Chap . 7 . our captain the next day very early in the morning , the three of have very gorgeous attire himself , cause all qct0 ^ r . his company to be set in order to go to see the town and habitation of those people , and a certain mountain that be somewhat near the city : with who go also five gentleman and twenty mariner , leave the rest to keep and look to our boat : we take with we three man of Hochelaga to bring we to the place . all along as we go we find the way as well beat and frequent as can be , the fair and best country that possible can be see , full of as goodly great oak as be in any wood in France , under which the ground be all cover over . with fair acorn . after we have go about four or bernik from five mile , we meet by the way one of the chief lord of the rivet side . 231 the city , accompany with many more , who so soon as he see we beckon and make sign upon we , that we must rest we in that place where they have make a great fife and so we do . after that we have rest our self there a while , the say lord begin to make a long discourse , even as we have say above , they be accustom to do in sign of mirth and friendship , show our captain and all his company a joyful countenance , and good will , who give he two hatchet , a pair of knife and a cross which he make he to kiss , and then put it about his neck , for which he give our captain hearty thanks . this do , we go along , and about a mile and a half far , we begin to find goodly and large field , full of such corn as the country yield . it be even as the millet of Bresil , as great and somewhat big than small peason , wherewith they live even as we do with we . in the midst of those field be the city of Hochelaga , place near , and as it be join to a great mountain that be till round about , very fertili , on the top of which you may see very far , we name it mount royal . the city of Hochelaga be round , compass about with timber , with three course of rampire , one within another frame like a sharp spire , but lay across above . the middlemost of they be make and build , as a direct line , but perpendicular . the rampire be frame and fashion with piece of timber , lay along on the ground , very well and cunning join together after their fashion . this enclosure be in height about two rod . it have but one gate or entry thereat , which be shut with pile , stake , and bar . over it , and also in many place of the wall , there be place to run along , and ladder to get up , all full of stone , for the defence of it . there be in the town about fifty house , about fifty pace long , and twelve , or fifteen broad , build all of wood , cover over with the bark of the wood as broad as any board , very fine and cunning join together . within the say house , there be many room , lodging and chamber . in the midst of every one there be a great 232 court , in the middle whereof they make their fire . they live in common together : then do the husband , wife and child each one retire themselves to their chamber . they have also on the top of their house certain garret , wherein they keep their corn to make their bread withal : they call it carraconny , which they make as hereafter shall