a short and brief narration of the navigation make by the commandment of the king of France , to the island of Canada , Hochelaga , Saguenay , and diverse other which now be call new France , with the particular custom , and manner of the inhabitant therein . Chap . i . n the year of our lord 1535 , upon Whitsunday , be the 16 . of may , by the commandment of our captain James Cartier , and with a common accord , in the cathedral church of S . Malo we devout each one confess our self , and receive the sacrament : and all enter into the quire of the say church , we present our self before the reverend father in Christ , the lord bishop of S . Malo , who bless we all , be in his bishop robe . the Wednesday follow , be the 19 of may , there arise a good gale of wind , and therefore we hoist sail with three ship , that be to say , the great Hermina , be in burden about a hundredth , or a hundred and twenty ton , wherein the foresay captain James Cartier be general , and master Thomas Frosmont chief master , accompany with master Claudius de Pont Briand , son to the lord of Montcevell , and cupbearer to the dolphin of France , Charles of pomeray , John Powlet , and other gentleman . in the second ship call the little Hermina , be of 210 threescore ton burden , be captain under the say Cartier , mace Salobert , and master William marry . in the three ship call the Hermerillon , be of forty ton in burden , be captain m . William Britton , and m . James Maingare . so we sail with a good and prosperous wind , until the 20 of the say month , at which time the weather turn into storm and tempest , the which with contrary wind , and darkness , endure so long that our ship be without any rest , suffer as much as any ship that ever go on sea : so that the 25 of June , by reason of that foul and foggy weather , all our ship lose sight one of another again till we come to newfound land where we have appoint to meet . after we have lose one another , we in the general ship be with contrary wind toss to and fro on the sea , until the seven of July , upon which day we arrive in new find land , and come to the island call the island of bird , which lie from the main land 14 league . this island be so full of bird , that all our ship may easy have be freight with they , and yet for the great number that there be , it will not seem that any be take away . we to victuali our self fill two boat of they . this island have the pole elevate 49 degree , and 40 minute . upon the eight of the say month we sail further , and with a prosperous weather come to the port call the port of white sand , that be in the bay call the bay of castle , where we have purpose to meet and stay together the 15 of the say month . in this place therefore we look for our fellow , that be to say , the other two ship , till the 26 of the month , on which day both come together . so soon as our fellow be come , we set our ship in a readiness , take in both water , wood , and other necessary . and then on the 29 of the say month , early in the morning we hoist sail to pass on further , and sail along the northern coast that run north - east and Southwest , till two hour after sunset or thereabouts , than we cross along two island , which 211 the isle oj bird in 49 degree 40 minute . the bay des chaste aux ere the grand bay do stretch further forth than the other , which we call saint William island , be distant about 20 league or more from the port of breast . all the coast from the castle to that place lie east and west , Northeast and Southwest , have between it sundry little island , altogether barren and full of stone , without either earth or tree , except certain valley only . the next day be the 30 of July , we sail on westward to find out other island which as yet we have not find 12 league and a half , among which there be a great bay towards the north all full of island and great creek where many good harborough seem to be : they we name saint Martha island , from which about a league and a half further into the sea there be a dangerous shallow , wherein be five rock , which lie from saint Martha island about seven league as you pass into the say island , on the east and on the west side , to which we come the say day a hour after noon , and from that hour until midnight we sail about fifteen league athwart a cape of the low island , which we name saint germane island southeastward , from which place about three league , there be a very dangerous shallow . likewise between saint germane cape and saint Martha , about two league from the say island , there lie a bank of sand , upon which bank the water be but four fathom deep , and therefore see the danger of the coast , we strike sail and go no further that night : the next day be the last of July , we go all along the coast that run east and west , and somewhat southeasterly which be all environ about with island and dry sand , and in truth be very dangerous . the length from saint germane cape to the say island be about 17 league and a half , at the end of which there be a goodly plot of ground full of huge and high tree