from Canada , where the river waxes very narrow , and run very swift , wherefore it be very dangerous , not only for that , but also for certain great stone that be therein : many boat and bark come unto we , in one of which come one of the chief lord of the country , make a long discourse , who be come near we , do by evident sign and gesture show we , that the high the river go , the more dangerous it be , and bid we take heed of our self . the say lord present and give unto our captain two of his own child , of which our captain take one be a wench 7 or 8 year old , the man child he give he again , because it be too young , for it be but two or three year old . our captain as friendly and as courteous as he can do entertain and receive the say lord and his company , give they certain small trifle , and so they depart towards the shore again . afterwards the say lord and his wife come unto Canada to visit his daughter , bring unto our captain certain small present . from the nineteenth until the eight and twenty of September , we sail up along the say river , never lose one hour of time , all which time we see as goodly and pleasant a country as possible can be wish for , full ( as we have say before ) of all sort of goodly tree , that be to say , oak , elm , walnut - tree , cedar , firre , ash , box , willow , and great store of vine , all as full of grape as can be , so that if any of our fellow go on shore , they come home lade with they : there be likewise many crane , swan , goose , duck , feasant , partridge , thrush , blackbird , turtle , finche , redbreast , nightingale , 228 sparrow of diverse kind , with many other sort of bird , even as in France , and great plenty and store . upon the 28 of September , we come to a great wide lake in the middle of the river five or six league broad , the la ^ e of and twelve long , all that day we go against the tide , have but two fathom water , still keep the say scantling : be come to one of the head of the lake , we can espy no passage or go out , nay , rather it seem to have be close and shut up round about , and there be but a fathom and a half of water , little more or less . and therefore we be constrain to cast anchor , and to stay with our pinnace , and go with our two boat to seek some go out , and in one place we find four or five branch , which out of the river come into the lake , and they come from Hochelaga . but in the say branch , because of the great fierceness and swiftness wherewith they break out , and the course of the water , they make certain bar and should , and at that time there be but a fathom water . those shoulde be pass , we find four or five fathom , and as far as we can perceive by the flood , it be that time of the year that the water be low , for at other time they flow high by three fathom . all these four or five branch do compass about five or six hand very pleasant , which make the head of the lake : about fifteen league beyond , they do all come into one . that day we land in one of the say hand , and meet with five man that be hunt of wild beast , who as free and familiar come to our boat without any fear , as if we have ever be bring up together . our boat be somewhat near the shore , one of they take our captain in his arm , and carry he on shore , as light and as easy as if he have be a child of five year old : so strong and sturdy be this fellow . we find that they have a great heap of wild rat that live in the water , as big as a cony , rat as and very good to eat , which they give unto our cap - as taine , who for a recompense give they knife and 229 Hochelaga distant from the lake of angolesme 45 . league . glassen bead . we ask they with sign if that be the way to Hochelaga , they answer yea , and that we have yet three day sail thither . how our captain cause our boat to be mend and dress to go to Hochelaga : and because the way be somewhat difficult and hard , we leave our pinnace behind : and how we come thither , and what entertainment we have of the people . Chap . 6 . the next day our captain see that for that time it be not possible for our pinnace to go on any further , he cause our boat to be make ready , and as much munition and victual to be put in they , as they can well bear : he depart with they , accompany with many gentleman , that be to say , Claudius of Ponte Briand , cupbearer to the lord dolphin of France , Charles of Pommeraye , John gouion , John Powlet , with twenty 8c eight mariner : and mace Jallobert , and William briton , who have the charge under the captain of the other two ship , to go up as far as they can into that river : we sail with good and prosperous weather until the second of October , on which day we come to the town of Hochelaga , distant from the place where we have leave our pinnace five and forty league . in which place of Hochelaga , and all the way we go , we