the voyage of monsieur Roberval from his fort in Canada unto Saguenay , the five of June , I543 - the 5 . of June . the 6 . of June . monsieur de Royeze . the 14 of June . onsieur Roberval the king lieutenant general in the country of Canada , Saguenay , and Hochelaga , depart towards the say province of Saguenay on the Tuesday the 5 . day of June 1543 . after supper : and he with all his furniture be embark to make the say voyage . but upon a certain occasion they lie in the road over against the place before mention : but on the Wednesday about six of the clock in the morning they set sail , and sail against the stream : in which voyage their whole furniture be of eight bark , aswell great as small , and to the number of threescore and ten person , with the aforesaid general . the general leave behind he in the aforesaid place and fort thirty person to remain there until his return from Saguenay , which he appoint to be the first of July , or else they shall return into France . and he leave there behind he but two bark to carry the say thirty person , and the furniture which be there , while he stay still in the country . and for effectuate hereof , he leave as his lieutenant a gentleman name Monsieur de Royeze , to who he give commission , and charge all man to obey he , and to be at the commandment of the say lieutenant . the victual which be leave for their maintenance until the say first day of July , be receive by the say lieutenant Royeze . on Thursday the 14 . of June monsieur de 1 ’ Espiney , la Brosse , monsieur frete , monsieur longeval , and other , return from the general , from the voyage of Saguenay . and note that eight man and one bark be drown 288 sir Walter RALEGH ’ S patent and lose , among who be Monsieur de noire Fontaine , and one name la Vasseur of Constance . on Tuesday the 19 of June aforesaid , there come from the general , monsieur de Villeneufue , Talebot , and three other , which bring sixscore pound weight of their corn , and letter to stay yet until magdalen - tyde , which be the 22 . day of July . the rest of this voyage be want . A . D . 1584 . the 19 of June . Maiz . the 22 . of July 1543 . the voyage and navigation of the english t111 - 2 + 3 - l nation to Virginia , and the several discovery thereof chief at the charge of the honourable sir Walter Ralegh knight , from 33 to 40 degree of latitude : together with the success of the english colony there plant : as likewise a de - scription of the country , with the inhabitant , and the manifold commodity . whereunto be annex the patent , letter , discourse , etc to this part belong .