: but because we do not thorough know their mind , and that there be no body can teach they our belief and religion , we excuse our self , desire Taignoagny , and Domagaia , to tell the rest of their countryman , that he will come again another time , and bring priest and chrisome with we , for 240 without they they can not be baptise : which they do easy believe , for Domagaia and Taignoagny have see many child baptise in Britain while they be there . which promise when they hear they seem to be very glad . they live in common together : and of such commodity as their country yield they be indifferent well store , the inhabitant of the country cloth themselves with the skin of certain wild beast , but very miserable . in winter they be hose and shoe make of wild beast skin , and in summer they go barefooted . they keep and observe the rite of matrimony , save that every one wed 2 or 3 wife , which ( their husband be dead ) do never marry again , but for the death of their husband wear a certain black weed all the day of their life , besmear all their face with coaldust and grease mingle together as thick as the back of a knife , and by that they be know to be widow . they have a filthy and detestable use in marry of their maiden , and that be this , they put they all ( after they be of lawful age to marry ) in a common place , as harlot free for every man that will have to do with they , until such time as they find a match . this i say , because i have see by experience many house full of those damosel , even as our school be full of child in France to learn to read . Moreover , the misrule and riot that they keep in those house be very great , for very wanton they sport and dally together , show whatsoever God have send they . they be no man of great labour . they dig their ground with certain piece of wood , as big as half a sword , on which ground grow their corn , which they call Offici : it their Maiz . be as big as our small peason : there be great quantity of it grow in bresill . they have also great store of musk - millions , pompion , gourd , cucumber , peason and Beanes * of every colour , yet differ from we . there grow also a certain kind of herb , whereof in summer they make great provision for all the year , vin 241 q make great account of it , and only man use of it , and first they cause it to be dry in the sun , then wear it about their neck wrap in a little beast skin make like a little bag , with a hollow piece of stone or wood like a pipe : then when they please they make powder of it , and then put it in one of the end of the say cornet or pipe , and lay a coal of fire upon it , at the other end suck so long , that they fill their body full of smoke , till that it come out of their mouth and nostril , even as out of the tonnell of a chimney . they say that this do keep they warm and in health : they nev ^ r go without some of it about they . we our self have try the same smoke , and have put it in our mouth , it seem almost as hot as pepper . the woman of that country do labour much more than the man , as well in fish ( whereto they be great give ) as in till and husband their ground , and other thing : as well the man as woman and child , be very much more able to resist cold then savage beast , for we with our own eye have see some of they , when it be cold ( which cold be extreme raw and bitter ) come to our ship stark naked go upon snow and ice , which thing seem incredible to they that have not see it . when as the snow and ice lie on the ground , they take great store of wild beast , as faun , stag , bear , martern , hare and fox , with diverse other sort who flesh they eat raw , have first dry it in you sun or smoke , and so they do their fish . as far forth as we can perceive and understand by these people , it be a very easy thing to bring they to some familiarity and civility , and make they learn what one will . the lord God for his mercy sake set thereunto his help hand when he see cause . amen . 242 of the greatness and depth of the say river , and of the sort of beast , bird , fish , and other thing that we have see , with the situation of the place . Chap . 11 . the say river begin beyond the hand of the assumption , over against the high mountain of Hognedo , and of the seven hand . the distance over from one side to the other be about 35 or 40 league . in the midst it be above 200 fathom deep . the sure way to sail upon it be on the south side . and towards the north , that be to say , from the say 7 hand , from side to side , there be seven league distance , where be also two great river that come down from the hill of Saguenay , and make diverse very dangerous shelf in the sea . at the entrance of those two river we see many and great store of whale and sea horse . overthwart the say hand there be another little river that run along those marsh ground about 3 or 4 league , wherein there be great store of water fowl . from the entrance of