and devotion of this poor people , recite the gospel of saint John , that be to say , in the beginning be the word ; touch every one that be disease , pray to God that it will please he to open the heart of this poor people , and to make they know his holy word , and that they may receive baptism and Christendom : that do , he take a service - book in his hand , and with a loud voice read all the passion of Christ , word by word , that all the standard by may hear he : all which while this poor people keep silence , and be 235 marvellous attentive , look up to heaven , and imitate we in gesture . than he cause the man all orderly to be set on one side , the woman on another , and likewise the child on a other , and to the chief of they he give hatchet , to the other knife , and to the woman bead and such other small trifle . then where you child be , he cast ring , counter , and brooch make of tin , whereat they seem to be very glad . that do , our captain command trumpet and other musical instrument to be sound , which when they hear , they be very merry . than we take our leave and go to our boat : the woman see that , put themselves before to stay we , and bring we out of their meat that they have make ready for we , as fish , pottage , bean , and such other thing , think to make we eat , and dine in that place : but because the meat have no savour at all of salt , we like they not , but thank they , and with sign give they to understand that we have no need to eat . when we be out of the town , diverse of the man and woman follow we , and bring we to the top mount royal . of the foresay mountain , which we name mount royal , it be about a league from the town . when as we be on the top of it , we may discern and a ridge of plain see thirty league about . on the northside of mountain to ; it there be many hill to be see run west and Hochelaga h . ast , and as many more on the south , among and and another between the which the country be as fair and as to the south , pleasant as possible can be see , be level , smooth , and very plain , fit to be husband and till : and in the midst of those field we see the river further up a great way than where we have leave our boat , where be the great and the swift fall of water that any where have be see , and as great , wide and large as our sight may discern , go Southwest along three fair the 3 fault and round mountain that we see , as we judge about late in ? afteene league from we . those which bring we degree of ^ thither tell and show we , that in the say river there latitude . be three such fall of water more , as that be where we 236 1535 - had leave our boat : but because we can not understand their language , we can not know how far they be one from another . Moreover they show we with sign , that the say three false be pass , a man may sail the space of three month more alongst that river , and that along the hill that be on the north side there be a great river , which ( even as the other ) come from the west , we think it to be the river that run 2 % mor of through the country of Saguenay : and without any a & uenay sign or question move or ask of they , they take west the chain of our captain whistle , which be of silver , where there be and the dagger - haft of one of our fellow mariner , gold and hang on his side be of yellow copper guilt , and show we that such stuff come from the say river , and that there be Agouionda , that be as much to say , as evil people , who go all arm even to their finger end . also they show we the manner and make of their armour : they be make of cord and wood , fine and cunning wrought together . they give we also to understand that those Agouionda do continual war one against another , but because we do not understand they well , we can not perceive how far it be to that country . our captain show they red copper , which in their language they call caignetadze , and look toward that country , with sign ask they if any come from thence , they shake their head answer no : but they show we that it come from Saguenay , and that lie clean contrary to the other . Red copper in after we have hear and see these thing of they , we draw to our boat accompany with a great multitude of those people : some of they when as they see any of our fellow weary , will take they up on their shoulder , and carry they as on horseback . so soon as we come to our boat we hoist sail to go towards our pinnace , doubt of some mischance . our departure grieve and displease they very much , for they follow we along the river as far as they can : we go so fast that on Monday be the four of October 237 we come where our pinnace be . the Tuesday follow be the five of the month , we hoist sail , and with our pinnace and boat depart from thence towards the province of Canada , to the port of the holy cross , where we have leave our ship . the seven day we come against a river that