, albeit the rest of the coast be compass about with sand without any sign or show of harborough , till we come to cape thiennot , which trend northwest about seven league from the foresay island , which cape thiennot we note in 212 our former voyage , and therefore we sail on all that night west and westnorthwest , till it be day , and then the wind turn against we , wherefore we go to seek a haven wherein we may harbour our ship , and by good hap , find one fit for our purpose , about seven league and a half beyond cape thiennot , and that we name saint Nicholas haven , it lie amid 4 island that stretch into the sea : upon the near we for a token Nicholas . set up a wooden cross . but note by the way , that this cross must be bring Northeast , and then bend towards it , leave it on the left hand and you shall find six fathom water , and within the haven four . also you be to take heed of two shelf that lean outward half a league . all this coast be full of should and very dangerous , albeit in sight many good haven seem to be there , yet be there nought else but shelf and sand . we stale and rest our self in the say haven , until the seven of August be Sunday : on which day we hoist sail , and come towards land on the south side towards cape Rabast , distant from the cape Rabast . say haven about twenty league northnortheast , and southsouthwest : but the next day there rise a stormy and a contrary wind , and because we can find no haven there towards the south , thence we go coast along towards the north , beyond the abovesaid haven about ten league , where we find a goodly great gulf , full of island , passage , and entrance towards what wind soever you please to bend : for the knowledge of this gulf there be a great island that be like to a cape of land , stretch somewhat further forth than the other , and about two league within the land , there be a hill fashion as it be a heap of corn . we name the say gulf saint Laurence his bay . the twelve of they the gulf of say month we go from the say saint Laurence s - laurence - his bay , or gulf , sail westward , and discover a cape of land towards the south , that run west and cape of by south , distant from the say saint Laurence his we of bay , about five and twenty league . and of the two tm " 213 wild man which we take in our former voyage , it be tell we , that this be part of the southern coast , and that there be a island , on the southerly part of which be the way to go from honguedo ( where the year before we have take they ) to Canada , and that two day journey from the say cape , and island begin the kingdom of Saguenay , on the north shore extend towards Canada , and about three league athwart the say a mighty cape , there be above a hundred fathom water . Moreover shale i believe that there be never so many whale see ‘ as we see that day about the say cape . the next day after be our lady day of August the fifteen of the month , have pass the straight , we have notice of certain land that we leave towards the south , which land be full of very great and high hill , and this the isle of cape we name the island of the assumption , and Assumption . one qape of the sajj high country lie Eastnortheast , and westsouthwest , the distance between which be about five and twenty league . the country lie north may plain be perceive to be high than the southerly , more than thirty league in length . we trended the say land about towards the south : from the say day until Tewesday noon follow , the wind come west , and therefore we bend towards the north , purpose to go and see the land that we before have spy . be arrive there , we find the say land , as it be join together , and low towards the sea and the northerly mountain that be upon the say low land stretch east , and west , and a quarter of the south . our wild man tell we that there be the begin of Saguenay , and that it be land inhabit , and that thence come the red copper , of they name caignetdaze . there be between the southerly land , and the northerly about thirty league distance , the mouth of and more than two hundred fathom depth . the say ocheu f man moreover certify unto we , that there be then about thirty and begin of the great river of Hochelaga league broad , and ready way to Canada , which river the further it 214 go the narrow it come , even into Canada , and that then there be fresh water , which go so far upward , that they have never hear of any man who have go to the head of it , and that there be no other passage but with small boat . our captain hear their talk , and how they do affirm no other passage to be there , will not at that time proceed any further , till he have see and note the other land , and coast towards the north , which he have omit to see from saint Laurence his gulf , because he will know , if between the land towards the north any passage may be discover . how our captain cause the ship to return back again , only to know if in saint Laurence gulf there be any passage towards the north . Chap . 2 . upon the 18 of August be Wednesday , our captain cause his ship to wind back , and bend towards the other shore ,