great pit or hole , which they think to be in the further part of their part of the world towards the sun set , there to burn continual : the place they call Popogusso . for the confirmation of this opinion , they tell i two story of two man that have be late dead and revive again , the one happen but few year before our come into the country of a wicked man , which have be dead and bury , the next day the earth of the grave be see to move , be take up again , who make declaration where his soul have be , that be to say , very near enter into Popogusso , have not one of the god save he , and give he leave to return again , and teach his friend what they shall do to avoid that terrible place of torment . the other happen in the same year we be there , but in a town that be 60 . mile from we , and it be tell i for strange news , that one be dead , bury , and take up again as the first , show that although his body have lie dead in the grave , yet his soul be alive , and have travail far in a long broad way , on both side whereof grow most delicate and pleasant tree , bear more rare and excellent fruit , then ever he have see before , or be able to express , and at length come to most brave and fair house , near which he meet his father that have be dead before , who give he great charge to go back again , and show his friend what good they be to , do to enjoy the pleasure of that place , which when he have do he shall after come again . 377 what subtlety soever be in the wiroance and priest , this opinion work so much in many of the common and simple sort of people , that it make they have great respect to their governor , and also great care what they do , to avoid torment after death , and to enjoy bliss , although notwithstanding there be punishment ordain for malefactor , as stealer , whoremonger , and other sort of wicked doer , some punish with death , some with forfeiture , some with beat , accord to the greatness of the fact . and this be the sum of their religion , which i learn by have speciali familiarity with some of their priest . wherein they be not so sure ground , nor give such credit to their tradition and story , but through converse with we they be bring into great doubt of their own , and no small admiration of we , with earnest desire in many , to learn more than we have mean for want of perfect utterance in their language to express . most thing they see with we , as mathematical ! instrument , sea compass , the virtue of the loadstone in draw iron , a perspective glass whereby be show many strange sight , burn glass , wild firewoorke , gun , hook , write and read , spring - clock that seem to go of themselves and many other thing that we have be so strange unto they , and so far exceed their capacity to comprehend the reason and mean how they shall be make and do , that they think they be rather the work of god then of man , or at the leastwise they have be give and teach we of the god . which make many of they to have such opinion of we , as that if they know not the truth of God and religion already , it be rather to be have from we who God so special love , then from a people that be so simple , as they find themselves to be in comparison of we . whereupon great credit be give unto that we speak of , concern such matter . 378 many time and in every town where i come , accord as i be able , i make declaration of the content of the bible , that therein be set forth the true and only God , and his mighty work , that therein be contain the true doctrine of salvation through Christ , with many particularity of miracle and chief point of religion , as i be able then to utter , and think fit for the time . and although i tell they the book material and of it self be not of any such virtue , as i think they do conceive , but only the doctrine therein contain : yet will many be glad to touch it , to embrace it , to kiss it , to hold it to their breast and head , and strike over all their body with it , to show their hungry desire of that knowledge which be speak of . the wiroan with who we dwell call Wingina , and many of his people will be glad many time to be with we at our prayer , and many time call upon we both in his own town , as also in other whither he sometime accompany we , to pray and sing psalm , hope thereby to be partaker of the same effect which we by that mean also expect . twice this wiroan be so grievous sick that he be like to die , and as he lie languish , doubt of any help by his own priest , and think he be in such danger for offend we and thereby our God , send for some of we to pray and be a mean to our God that it will please he either that he may live , or after death dwell with he in bliss , so likewise be the request of many other in the like case . on a time also when their corn begin to wither by reason of a drought which happen extraordinary , fear that it have come to pass by reason that in some thing they have displease we , many will come to we and desire we to pray to our god of England , that he will preserve their corn , promise that when it be ripe we also shall be partaker of the fruit . 379 there can at no time happen any strange sickness , loss , hurt , or any other cross unto they , but that they will impute to we the cause or mean thereof , for offend or not please we . one other rare and strange accident , leave other , will i mention before i end , which move the whole country that either know or hear of we , to have we in wonderful admiration . there be no town where we have any subtle devise practise against we , we leave