by his mean . the next day sail along the west end of saint John , the governor determine to go aland in saint german “ bay , to gather young plant of orange , pine , Mameas , and Plantanos , to set at Virginia , which we know might easy be have , for that they grow near the shore , and the place where they grow , well know to the governor , and some of the planter : but our Simon deny it , say : he will come to a anchor at Hispaniola , and there land the governor , and some other of the assistant , with the pinnace , to see if he can speak with his friend Alanson , of who he hope to be furnish both “ a pleasant andfruitfull country , lie on the west end of 8 . Johns island , where grow plenty of orange , lemon , plantan , y Pines . of cattle , and all such thing as we will have take in at s . John : but he mean nothing less , as it plain do appear to we afterward . the next day after , be the three of July , we see Hispaniola , and bear with the coast all that day , look still when the pinnace shall be prepare to go for the place where Ferdinando his friend Alanson be : but that day pass , and we see no preparation for land in Hispaniola . the 4 of July , sail along the coast of Hispaniola , until the next day at noon , and no preparation yet see for the stay there , we have knowledge that we be past the place where Alanson dwell , and be come with Isabel : hereupon Ferdinando be ask by the governor , whether he mean to speak with Alanson , for the take in of cattle , and other thing , accord to his promise , or not : but he answer that he be now past the place , and that sir Walter Ralegh tell he , the french ambassador certify he , that the king of Spain have send for Alanson into Spain : wherefore he think he dead , and that it be to no purpose to touch there in any place , at this voyage . the next day we leave sight of Hispaniola , and hale oflf for Virginia , about four of the clock in the afternoon . the sixth of July we come to the island Caycos , wherein Ferdinando say be two salt pond , assure we if they be dry , we may find salt to shift with , until the next supply : but it prove as true as find of sheep at Baque . in this island , while Ferdinando solace himself ashore , with one of the company , in part of the island , other spend the latter part of that day in other part of the island , some to seek the salt pond , some fowl , some hunt swan , whereof we catch many . the next day early in the morning we weigh anchor , leave Caycos , with good hope , that the first land that we see next shall be Virginia . about the 16 of July we fall with the main of Virginia , which Simon Ferdinando take to be the island of 390 the four voyage to Virginia a . d . 1587 croatoan , where we come to anchor , and ride there two or three day : but find himself deceive , he weigh , and bear along the coast , where in the night , have not captain Stafford be more careful in look out , than our Simon Ferdinando , we have be all cast away upon the breach , call the cape of fear , for we be come within two cable length upon it : such be the carelessness , and ignorance of our master .. the two and twenty of July we arrive safe at Hatorask , where our ship and pinnace anchor : the governor go aboard the pinnace , accompany with forty of his best man , intend to pass up to Roanoak forthwith , hope there to find those fifteen Englishman , which sir Richard Grinvile have leave there the year before , with who he mean to have conference , concern the state of the country , and savage , mean after he have so do , to return again to the fleet , and pass along the coast , to the bay of chesepiok , where we a intent to intend to make our seat and fort , accord to the charge give we among other direction in writing , under sepi0 ^ the hand of sir Walter Ralegh : but assoon as we be put with our pinnace from the ship , a gentleman by the mean of Ferdinando , who be appoint to return for England , call to the sailor in the pinnace , charge they not to bring any of the planter back again , but to leave they in the island , except the governor , and two or three such as he approve , say that the summer be far spend , wherefore he will land all the planter in no other place . unto this be all the sailor , both in the pinnace , and ship , persuade by the master , wherefore it boot not the governor to contend with they , but pass to Roanoak , and the same night at sunset go aland on the island , in the place where our fifteen man be leave , but we find none of they , nor any sign that they have be there , save only we find the bone of one of those fifteen , which the savage have slay long before . the three and twenty of July the governor with 391 diverse of his company , walk to the north end of the island , where master Ralph lane have his fort , with sundry necessary and decent dwell house , make by his man about it the year before , where we hope to find some sign , or certain knowledge of our fifteen man . when we come thither , we find the fort raze down , but all the house stand unhurt , save that the nether room of they , and also of the fort , be overgrow with melon of diverse sort , and deer within they , feed on those melon : so we return to our company , without hope of ever see any of the fifteen man live . the same day order be give , that every man shall be employ for the repair of those house , which we find stand , and also to make other new cottage , for such as shall need . the 25 our flyboat and the rest of our planter arrive all safe at Hatoraske , to the great joy and comfort of the whole company : but the master of our admiral Ferdinando grieve great at their safe coming : for he purposely leave they in the bay of Portugal , and steal away from they in the night , hope that the master thereof , who name be Edward Spicer , for that he never have be in Virginia , will hardly find the place , or else