which some have speak of more than ever they see , or otherwise know to be there . other sum have not be ashamed to make absolute denial of that , which although not by they , yet by other be most certain and there plentiful know , and other some make difficulty of those thing they have no skill of . the cause of their ignorance be , in that they be of that many that be never out of the island where we be seat , or not far , or at the least wise in few place else , during the time of our abode in the country : or of that many , that after gold and silver be not so soon find , as it be by they look for , have little or no care of any other thing but to pamper their belly : or of that many which have little understanding , less discretion , and more tongue then be needful or requisite . some also be off a nice bring up , only in city or town , or such as never ( as i may say ) have see 351 A . D . I587 - the world before . because there be not to be find any english city , nor such fair house , nor at their own wish any of their old accustom dainty food , nor any soft bed of down or feather , the country be to they miserable , and their report thereof accord . because my purpose be but in brief to open the cause of the variety of such speech , the particularity of they , and of many envious , malicious , and slanderous report and device else , by our own countryman beside , as trifle that be not worthy of wise man to be think upon , i mean not to trouble you withal , but will pass to the commodity , the substance of that which i have to make relation of unto you . the treatise whereof , for your more ready view and easy understanding , i will divide into three speciali part . in the first i will make declaration of such commodity there already find or to be raise , which will not only serve the ordinary turn of you which be and shall be the planter and inhabitant , but such a overplus sufficient to be yield , or by man of skill to be provide , as by way of traffic and exchange with our own nation of England , will enrich your self the provider : those that shall deal with you , the enterpriser in general , and great profit our own countryman , to supply they with most thing which heretofore they have be fain to provide either of stranger or of our enemy , which commodity , for distinction sake , i call merchantable . in the second i will set down all the commodity which we know the country by our experience do yield of it self for victuali and sustenance of man life , such as be usual feed upon by the inhabitant of the country , as also by we during the time we be there . in the last part i will make mention general of such other commodity beside , as i be able to remember , and as i shall think behooveful for those that shall 352 1586 . inhabit , and plant there , to know of , which special concern building , as also some other necessary use : with a brief description of the nature and manner of the people of the country . the first part of merchantable commodity . like of grass , or grass silk . there be a kind of grass in the country , upon the blade whereof there grow very good silk in form of a thin glitter skin to be strip off . it grow two foot and a half high or better : the blade be about two foot in length , and half a inch broad . the like grow in Persia , which be in the self same climate as Virginia , of which very many of the silk work that come from thence into Europe be make . hereof if it be plant and order as in Persia , it can in reason be otherwise , but that there will rise in short time great profit to the dealer therein , see there be so great use and vent thereof aswell in our country as elsewhere . and by the mean of sow and plant it in good ground , it will be far great , better , and more plentiful than it be . although notwithstanding there be great store thereof in many place of the country grow natural and wild , which also by proof here in England , in make a piece of silk grogran , we find to be excellent good . worm silk . in many of our journey we find silkworm fair and great , as big as our ordinary walnut . although it have not be our hap to have find such plenty , as elsewhere to be in the country we have hear of , yet see that the country do natural breed and nourish they , there be no doubt but if art be add in plant of mulberry tree , and other , fit . for they in commodious place , for their feed and nourish , and some of they careful gather and husband in that sort , as by man of skill they 353 z be know to be necessary : there will rise as great profit in time to the Virginians , as thereof do now to the persian , Turks , Italians and Spaniard . flax and hemp . the truth be , that of hemp and flax there be no great store in any one place together , by reason it be not plant but as the soil do yield of it self : and howsoever the leaf and stem or stalk do differ from we , the stuff by judgement of man of skill be altogether as good as we : and if not , as further proof shall find otherwise , we have that experience of the soil , as that there can be show any reason to the contrary , but that it will grow there excellent well , and by plant will be yield plentiful , see there be so much ground whereof some may well be apply to