find by trial to hold silver . pearl . sometime in feed on muscle we find some pearl : but it be our hap to meet with rag , or of a pied colour : not have yet discover those place where we hear of better and more plenty . one of our company , a man of skill in such matter , have gather together from among the savage people about five thousand : of which number he choose so many as . thousand make a fair chain , which for their likeness and fea ^ s uniformity in roundness , orientness , and pidenesse of * ‘ many excellent colour , with equality in greatness , be very fair and rare : and have therefore be present to her majesty , have we not by casualty , and through extremity of a storm lose they , with many thing else in come away from the country . sweet gum of diverse kind , and many other apothecary drug , of which we will make speciali mention , when we shall receive it from such man of skill in that kind , that in take reasonable pain shall discover they more particular than we have do , and then now i can make relation of , for want of the example i have provide and gather , and be now lose , with other thing by casualty before mention . die of diverse kind : there be Shoemake well know , and use in England for black : the seed of a herb call Wasebur , little small root call chap - pacor , and the bark of the tree call by the inhabitant tangomockonomindge : which die be for diverse sort of red : their goodness for our english clothes remain yet to be prove . the inhabitant use they only for the die of hair , and colour of their face , and mantle make of dear skin : and also for the die 357 of rush to make artificiali work withal in their mat and basket : have no other thing beside that they account of , apt to use they for . if they will not prove merchantable , there be no doubt but the planter there shall find apt use for they , as also for other colour which we know to be there . woad : a thing of so great vent and use among English dyer , which can not be yield sufficient in our own country for spare of ground , may be plant in Virginia , there be grind enough . the growth thereof need not to be doubt , when as in the island of the azore it grow plentiful , which be in the same climate . so likewise of mad . we carry thither sugar - cane to plant , which be not so well preserve as be requisite , and beside the time of the year be pass for their set when we arrive , we can not make that proof of they as we desire . notwithstanding , see that they grow in the same climate , in the south part of Spain , and in Barbary , our hope in reason may yet continue . so likewise for orange and Limmons . there may be plant also Quinses . whereby may grow in reasonable time , if the action be diligent prosecute , no small commodity in sugar , sucket , and Marmelades . many other commodity by plant may there also be raise , which i leave to your discreet and gentle consideration : and many also may be there , which yet we have not discover . two more commodity of great value , one of certainty , and the other in hope , not to be plant , but there to be raise and in short time to be provide , and prepare , i may have specify . so likewise of those commodity already set down i may have say more : as of the particular place where they be find , and best to be plant and prepare : by what mean , and in what reasonable space of time they may be raise to profit , and in what proportion : but because other than well - willer may be there withal acquaint , not to the good of the action , i have witting omit 358 they : know that to those that be well dispose , i have utter , accord to my promise and purpose , for this part sufficient . the second part of such commodity as Virginia be know to yield for victuali and sustenance of man life , usual feed upon by the natural inhabitant ; as also by we , during the time of our abode : and first of such as be sow and husband . agatowr , a kind of grain so call by the inhabitant : the same in the west Indies be call Mayz : English man call it guiny - wheat or turkey - wheat , accord to the name of the country from whence the like have be bring . the grain be about the bigness of our ordinary english pease , and not much different in form and shape : but of diverse colour : some white , some red , some yellow , and some blue . all of they yield a very white and sweet flower : be use accord to his kind , it make a very good bread . we make of the same in the country some malt , whereof be brew as good ale as be to be desire . so likewise by the help of hop , thereof may be make as good beer . it be a grain of marvellous great increase : of a thousand , fifteen hundred , and some two thousand fold . there be three sort , of which two be ripe in eleven and twelve week at the most , sometime in ten , after the time they be set , and be then of height in stalk about six or seven foot . the other sort be ripe in fourteen , and be about ten foot high , of the stalk some bear four head , some three , some one , and some two : every head contain five , six , or seven hundred grain , within a few more or less . of these grain , beside bread , the inhabitant make victuali , either by parch they , or seethe they whole until they 359 be