a account of the particularity of the employments of the english man leave in Virginia by sir Richard greenevill under the charge of master Ralph lane general of the same , from the 17 . of August 1585 . until the 18 . of June 1586 . at which time they depart the country : send and direct to sir Walter Ralegh . hat i may proceed with order in this discourse , i think it requisite to divide it into two part . the first shall declare the particularity of such part of the country within the main , as our weak number , and supply of thing necessary do inable we to enter into the 2 . part of this discourse . discovery of . the second part shall set down the reason general move we to resolve on our departure at the instant with the general sir Francis Drake , and our common request for passage with he , when the bark , pinnace , and boat with the master and mariner mean by he to be leave in the country , for the supply of such , as for a further time mean to have stay there , be carry away with tempest and foul weather : in the beginning whereof shall be declare the conspiracy of Pemisapan , with the savage of the main to have cut we off , etc 320 the material original position here be too large for reproduction in this reissue . a pdf can be download from the web address give on page iv the Cambridge core . term oh ? usej - u - vaiabieathttpsv / www . cambridge . org / core / term . the first part declare the particularity of the country of Virginia . irst therefore touch the particularity of the country , you shall understand that our discovery of the same have be extend from the hand of Roanoak , ( the same have be the place of our settlement or inhabitation ) into the south , into the north , into the north - west , and into the west . the uttermost place to the southward of any discovery be Secotan , be by estimation fourscore mile distant from Roanoak . the passage from thence be through a broad sound within the main , the same be without ken of land , and yet full of flat and shoald : we have but one boat with four oar to pass through the same , which boat can not carry above fifteen man with their furniture , baggage , and victuali for seven day at the most : and as for our pinnace , beside that she draw too deep water for that shallow sound , she will not stir for a oar : for these and other reason ( winter also be at hand ) we think good whole to leave the discovery of those part until our strong supply . to the northward our further discovery be to the chesepians , distant from Roanoak about 130 . mile , the passage to it be very shallow and most dangerous , by reason of the breadth of the sound , and the little succour that upon any flaw be there to be have . but the territory and soil of the chesepians ( be distant fifteen mile from the shore ) be for pleasantness of seat , for temperature of climate , for fertility of soil , and for the commodity of the sea , beside multitude of bear ( be a excellent good victuali ) with great wood of sassafras , and walnut tree , be not to be excel by any other whatsoever . there be sundry king , who they call weroance , and country of great fertility adjoin to the same , as the excellende of the seat of cheseplook . Viii 321 the town of Chawanook able to make 700 . man of war . the mandoage , tripanick , and opossians , which all come to visit the colony of the english , which i have for a time appoint to be resident there . to the northwest the far place of our discovery be to Chawanook distant from Roanoak about 130 . mile . our passage thither lie through a broad sound , but all fresh water , and the channel of a great depth , navigable for good ship , but out of the channel full of shoald . the town about the water side situate by the way be these follow : Passaquenoke the woman town , Chepanoc , weapomeiok , muscamunge , and metackwem : all these be under the jurisdiction of the king of weapomeiok , call Okisco : from muscamunge we enter into the river , and jurisdiction of Chawanook : there the river begin to straighten until it come to Chawanook , and then grow to be as narrow as the Thames betewene Westminster , and Lambeth . between muscamunge and Chawanook upon the left hand as we pass thither , be a goodly high land , and there be a town which we call the blind town , but the savage call it Ohanoak , and have a very goodly corn field belong unto it : it be subject to Chawanook . Chawanook it self be the great province and signiory lie upon that river , and the very town it self be able to put 700 . fight man into the field , beside the force of the province it self . the king of the say province be call Menatonon , a man impotent in his limb , but otherwise for a savage , a very grave and wise man , and of a very singular good discourse in matter concern the state , not only of his own country , and the disposition of his own man , but also of his neighbour round about he as well far as near , and of the commodity that each country yield . when i have he prisoner with i , for two day that we be together , he give i more under - 322 1585 - 86 . stand and light of the country than i have receive by all the search and savage that before i or any of my company have have conference with : it be in march last past 1586 . among other thing he tell i , that go three day journey in a Canoa , up his river of Chawanook , and then descend to the land , you be within four day journey to pass over land Northeast to a certain king country , who province lie upon the sea , but his place of great strength be a island - a i ^ nd in situate , as he describe unto i , in a bay , the water a Ba9 ‘ round about the island very deep . out of this bay he signify unto i