the first voyage make to the coast of America , with two bark , where in be captain m . Philip Amadas , and m . Arthur Barlowe , who discover part of the country now call Virginia , anno 1584 . write by one of the say captain , and send to sir Walter Ralegh knight , at who charge and direction , the say voyage be set forth . he 27 day of April , in the year of our redemption , 1584 we depart the west of England , with two bark well furnish with man and victual , have receive our last and perfect direction by your letter , confirm the former instruction , and commandment de liver by your self at our leave the river of Thames . and i think it a matter both unnecessary , for the manifest discovery of the country , as also for tediousness sake , to remember unto you the diurnal of our course , sail thither and return : only i have presume to present unto you this brief discourse , by which you may judge how profitable this land be likely to succeed , as well to your self , ( by who direction and charge , and by , who servant this our discovery have be perform ) as also to her highness , and the common wealth , in which we hope your wisdom will | be satisfy , consider that as much by we have be bring to light , as by those small mean , and number of man we have , can any way have be expect , or hope for . the ten of May we arrive at the canary , and the ten of June in this present year , we be fall with the island of the west Indies , keep a more south - a southerly course not easterly course then be needful , because we doubt . .. that the current of the bay of Mexico , disbogging be - ^ Virginia . between the cape of Florida and Havana , have be of 297 great force than afterwards we find it to be . at which island , we find the air very unwholesome , and our man grow for the most part ill dispose : so that have refresh our self with sweet water , and fresh victuali , we depart the twelve day of our arrival there . Theise Islands , with the rest adjoin , be so well know to your self , and to many other , as i will not trouble you with the remembrance of they . a sweet smell the second of July , we find shoal water , where we from the land . smejt so sweet } anj so strong a smell , as if we have be in the midst of some delicate garden abound with all kind of odoriferous flower , by which we be assure , that the land can not be far distant : and keep good watch , and bear but slack sail , the four of the same month we arrive upon the coast , which we suppose to be a continent and firm land , and we sail along the same a hundred and twenty english mile before we can find any entrance , or river issue into the sea the first the first that appear unto we , we enter , though not n ^ r - without some difficulty , and cast anchor about - three harque - buz - shot within the haven mouth , on the left hand of the same : and after thanks give to God for our safe arrival thither , we man our boat , and go to view “ July x ^ pos - the land next adjoin , and “ to take possession of the session take . samej | n the right of the queen most excellent majesty , as rightful queen , and princess of the same , and after deliver the same over to your use , accord to her majesty grant , and letter patent , under her highness great seal . which be perform , accord to the ceremony use in such enterprise , we view the land about we , be , whereas we first land , very sandy and abundance of low towards the water side , but so full of grape , as the grape . very beat ancl surge of the sea overflow they , of which we find such plenty , as well there as in all place else , both on the sand and on the green soil on the hill , as in the plain , as well on every little shrub , as also climb towards the top of high cedar , that i think in all the world the like abundance be not to be find : and 298 my self have see those part of Europe that most abound , find such difference as be incredible to be write . we pass from the sea side towards the top of the isle of those hill next adjoin , be but of mean highth , and from thence we behold the sea on both side to the north , and to the south , find no end any of both way . this land lie stretch it self to the west , which after we find to be but a island of twenty mile long , and not above six mile broad . under the bank or hill whereon we stand , we behold the valley replenish with goodly cedar tree , and have discharge our harquebus - shot , such a flock of crane ( the most part white ) arise under we , with such a cry redouble by many echo , as if a army of man have shout all together . this island have many goodly wood full of deer , cony , hare , and foul , even in the midst of summer in incredible abundance . the wood be not such as you find in Bohemia , Moscovia , or Hercynia , barren and fruitless , but the high and red cedar of the world , goodly far better the ceder of the azore , of the Indies , or ^ ars ' 0 Lybanus , Pynes , cypress , sassafras , the lentisk , or the saphras ^ ' tree that bear the mastic , the tree that bear the rind of black cinnamon , of which master winter bring from the strait of Magellan , and many other of excellent smell and quali tie . we remain by the side of this