, and with great quantity of ° fpemisa ~ copper entertain to the number of 7 . or 8 . hundred p ' bow , to enterprise the matter thus to be order . they of weopomeiok shall be invite to a certain kind of month mind which they do use to solemnise in their savage manner for any great personage dead , and shall have be for Ensenore . at this instant also shall the mandoak , who be a great people , with the chesepians and their friend to the number of 700 . of they , be arm at a day appoint to the main of Dasamonquepeio , and there lie close at the sign of fierce , which shall interchangeable be make on both side , when Pemisapan with his troop above name shall have execute i , and some of our weroance ( as they call all our principali officer , ) the main force of the rest shall have come over into the hand , where they mean to have dispatch the rest of the company , who they do imagine to find both dismay and disperse abroad in the island , seek of crab and fish to live withal . the manner of their enterprise be this . vni 337 y the sufficiende of our man to deal against the savage . 10 . to a hundredth . the Savages Uve by fish , and hunt , till harvest . Tarraquine and Andacon two principali man about Pemisapan , and very lusty fellow , with twenty more appoint to they have the charge of my person to see a order take for the same , which they mean shall in this sort have be execute . in the dead time of the night they will have beset my house , and put fire in the reed that the same be cover with : mean ( as it be likely ) that my self will have come run out of a sudden amaze in my shirt without arm , upon the instant whereof they will have knock out my brain . the same order be give to certain of his fellow , for m . heriot : so for all the rest of our better sort , all our house at one instant be set on fire as afore be say , and that as well for they of the fort , as for we at the town . now to the end that we may be the few in number together , and so be the more easy deal withal ( for in deed ten of we with our arm prepare , be a terror to a hundred of the best sort of they , ) they agree and do immediate put it in practice , that they shall not for any copper sell we any victual whatsoever : beside that in the night they shall send to have our wear rob , and also to cause they to be break , and once be break never to be repair again by they . by this mean the king stand assure , that i must be enforce for lack of sustenance there , to disband my company into sundry place to live upon shell fish , for so the savage themselves do , go to Hatorask , croatoan , and other place , fish and hunt , while their ground be in sow , and their corn grow : which fail not his expectation . for the famine grow so extreme among we , or wear fail we of fish , that i be enforce to send captain Stafford with 20 . with he to croatoan my lord admiral hand to serve two turn in one , that be to say , to feed himself and his company , and also to keep watch if any ship come upon the coast to warn we of the same . i send m . pridiox with the pinnace to Hatorask , and ten with he , with the provost marshal to live there , and also to wait 338 for ship : also i send every week ten 6 . or 20 . of the rest of the company to the main over against we , to live of Casada and oyster . in the mean while Pemisapan go of purpose to Dasamonquepeio for three cause : the one to see his ground there break up , and sow for a second crop : the other to withdraw himself from my daily send to he for supply of victuali for my company , for he be afraid to deny i any thing , neither dare he in my presence but by colour and with excuse , which t be content to accept for the time , mean in the end as i have reason , to give he the jump once for all : but in the mean while , as i have ever do before , i and i bear all wrong , and accept of all excuse . my purpose be to have rely my self with menatonon , and the chaonist , who in truth as they be more valiant people and in great number than the rest , so be they more faithful in their promise , and since my late be there have give many token of earnest desire they have to join in perfect league with we , and therefore be great offend with Pemisapan and weopomeiok for make he believe such tale of we . the three cause of this go to Dasamonquepeio be to dispatch his messenger to weopomeiok , and to the mandoage as aforesaid : all which he do with great impress of copper in hand , make large promise to they of great spoil . the answer within few day after come from weopomeiok , which be divide into two part . first for the king Okisko , who deny to be of the party for himself , or any of his especial follower , and therefore do immediate retire himself with his force into the main : the other be concern the rest of the say province who accept of it : and in like sort the mandoag receive the impress . the day of their assembly aforesaid at Roanoak be appoint the 10 . of June : all which the premise be discover by Skyco , the king Menatonon his son my 339 prisoner , who have once attempt to run away , i lay he in the bylboe , threaten to cut off his head , who i remit at pemisapans request : whereupon he be persuade that he be our enemy to the death , he do not only feed he with himself , but also make he acquaint with all his practise . on the other side , the young man find himself as well use at my hand , as i have mean to show , and