among we , to have perfect this discovery of the mine : for that the discovery of a good i , by the goodness of God , or a passage to the Southsea , or some way to it , and nothing else can bring this country in request to be inhabit by our nation . 331 the great current of the river of Morattico . and with the discovery of either of the two above show , it will be the most sweet and healthfull climate , and therewithal ! the most fertile soil ( be manure ) in the world : and then will sassafras , and many other root and gum there find make good merchandise and lade for ship , which otherwise of themselves will not be worth the fetch . provide also , that there be find out a better harbour than yet there be , which must be to the northward , if any there be , which be my intention to have spend this summer in the search of , and of the mine of Chawnis Temoatan : the one i will have do , if the bark that i shall have have of sir Francis Drake , by his honourable courtesy , have not be drive away by storm : the other if your supply of more man , and some other necessary have come to we in any convenient sufficiency . for this river of Moratico promise great thing , and by the opinion of m . hariot the head of it by the description of the country , either rise from the bay of Mexico , or else from very near unto the same , that open out into the south sea . and touch the minerali , thus do m . Youghan affirm , that though it be but copper , see the savage be able to melt it , it be one of the rich mineral in the world . wherefore a good harbour find to the northward , as before be say , and from thence four day overland , to the river of Choanoak sconce be raise , from whence again overland through the province of Choanoak one day voyage to the first town of the mangoak up the river of Moratico by the way , as also upon the say river for the defence of our boat like sconce be set , in this course of proceed you shall clear your self from all those danger and broad shallow sound before mention , and gain within four day travel ! into the heart of the main 200 . mile at the least , and so pass your discovery into that most notable 332 1585 - 86 . country , and to the likely part of the main , with far great felicity than otherwise can be perform . thus sir , i have though simple , yet true set down unto you , what my labour with the rest of the gentleman , and poor man of our company ( not without both pain and peril , which the lord in his mercy many way deliver we from ) can yield unto you , which may have be perform in some more perfection , if the lord have be please that only that which you have provide for we have at the first be leave with we , or that he have not in his eternal providence now at the last set some other course in these thing , than the wisdom of man can look into , which true the carry away by a most strange and unlooked for storm of all our provision , with bark , master , mariner , and sundry also of my own company , all have be so courteous supply by the generail sir Francis Drake , the same have be most sufficient to have perform the great part of the premise , must ever make i to think the hand of God only ( for some his good purpose to my self yet unknown ) to have be in the matter . the second part touch the conspiracy of Pemisapan , the discovery of the same , and at the last , of our request to depart with sir Francis drake for England . Nsenore a savage father to Pemisapan be the only friend to our nation that we have among they , and about the king , die the 20 . of April 1586 . he alone have before oppose himself in their consultation against all matter propose against we , which both the king and all the rest of they after grangemoes death , be very willing to have prefer . and he be not only by the mere providence of God during his life , a mean to save we from hurt , as poison and such like , 333 this skill of make wear will he learn . but also to do we very great good , and singular in this . the king be advise and of himself dispose , as a ready mean to have assure bring we to ruin in the month of march 1586 . himself also with all his savage to have run away from we , and to have leave his ground in the hand unsowed : which if he have do , there have be no possibility in common reason , ( but by the immediate hand of God ) that we can have be preserve from starve out of hand . for at that time we have no wear for fish , neither can our man skill of the make of they , neither have we one grain of corn for seed to put into the ground . in my absence on my voyage that i have make against the chaonist , and mangoak , they have raise a brute among themselves , that i and my company be part slay , and part starve by the chaonist , and mangoak . one part of this tale be too true , that i and i be like to be starve , but the other false . nevertheless until my return it take such effect in pemisapans breast , and in those against we , that they grow not only into contempt of we , but also ( contrary to their former reverend opinion in show , of the almighty god of heaven , and Jesus Christ who we serve and worship , who before they will acknowledge and confess the only God ) now they begin to blaspheme , and flat to say , that our lord God be not God , since he suffer we to sustain much hunger , and also to be kill of the renapoak , for so they call by that generail name all the inhabitant of the whole main , of what province soever . insomuch as old Ensenore , neither any of his fellow , can for