to entreat both our captain and we . and after these gentle entertainment , we go our self into the wood , hope there to discover some singularity : where be great store of mulberry tree white and red , great store of on the top whereof there be a infinite number of silkworm . sjlkeworme . follow our way we discover a fair and great meadow , divide notwithstanding with diverse marsh , which constrain we by reason of the water , which environ it about , to return back again toward the river side . find not the king there , which by this time be go home to his house , we enter into our boat and sail toward our ship : the river of where after we arrive , we call this river the river of may , because we discover it the first day of the say month . soon after we return to our ship , we weigh our anchor and hoist our sail to discover the coast far forward , along the which we discover another fair river , which the captain himself be mind to search out , and have search it out with the king and the river of inhabitant thereof , he name it Seine , because it be very ke unto the river of Seine in France . from this river we retire towards our ship , where be arrive , we trim our sail to sail further towards the north , and to descry the singularity of the coast . but we have not sail any great way before we discover another very fair river , which cause we to cast anchor over against it , and to trim out two boat to go to search it out . we find there an he the river of anj a king no less affable than the rest , afterward we r name this river Somme . from thence we sail about six league , after we discover another river , the river of which after we have view be name by we by the cherente , name of Loire . and consequent we there discover Grande $ ve ot ^ ers : whereof the first be name Cherente , the belle ’ second Garonne , the three Gironde , the four Belle , the grande . five Grande : which be very well discover with such 460 thing as be in they , by this time in less than the space of threescore league we have find out many singularity along nine river . nevertheless not full satisfy we say lead yet further to ward the north , follow the course that may bring we to the river of Jordan one of the fair river of the north , and hold our wont course , great fog and tempest come upon we , which constrain we to leave the coast to bear towards the main sea , which be the cause that we lose the sight of our pinnace a whole day and a night until the next day in the morning , what time the weather wax fair and the sea calm , we discover a river which we call bellei a veoir . after we have . sail three or four league , we begin to espy our a veoir . pinnace which come straight towards we , and at their arrival they report to the captain , that while the foul weather and fog endure , they harbour themselves in a mighty river which in bigness and beauty exceed the former : wherewithal ! the captain be exceed joyful , for his chief desire be to find out a haven to harbour his ship , and there to refresh our self for a while . thus make thitherward we arrive athwart the say river , ( which because of the fairness and largeness thereof we name port royal ) river ° f we strike our sail and cast anchor at ten fathom of water : for the depth be such , namely when the sea ° begin to flow , that the great ship of France , yea , the arguze of Venice may enter in there . have cast anchor , the captain with his soldier go on shore , and he himself go first on land : where we find the place as pleasant as be possible , for it be all cover over with mighty high oak and infinite store of cedar , and with lentisk grow underneath they , smell so sweet , that the very fragrant odour only make the place to seem exceed pleasant . as we pass through these wood we see nothing but , , turkeycock fly in the forest , partridge grey and porridges * ' red , little different from we , but chief in bigness . grey and red . 461 we hear also within the wood the voice of stag , of bear , off luserne , of leopard , and diverse other sort of beast unknown unto we . be delight with this place , we set our self to fish with net , and fish in abun - we catch such a number of fish , that it be wonderful ! . dance . and among other we take a certain kind of fish which we call Sallicoques , which be no less than crevice , so that two draught of the net be sufficient to feed all the company of our two ship for a whole the river 3 . day . the river at the mouth thereof from cape to leaguesat cape be no less than 3 . French league broad ; it be m ° u ’ divide into two great arm , whereof the one run towards the west , the other towards the north : and i believe in my judgement that the arm which stretch . toward the north run up into the country as a passage by far as the river Jordan , the other arm run into a river into g as be know anj understand by those of our company , which be leave behind to dwell in this place . Theise two arm be two great league broad : and in the midst of they there be a he , which be point towards the open of the great river , in which hand there be infinite number of all sort of store of rare strange beast . there be simple grow there of so simples . rare property ) anj in so great quantity , that it be a excellent thing to behold they . on every side there be nothing to be see but palmetree , and other sort of tree bear blossom and fruit of very rare shape and very good smell . but see the evening approach , and that the captain determine to return unto the ship , we pray he to suffer we to pass the night in this place . in our absence the pilot and chief mariner advertise the captain that it be needful to bring the ship further up within the river , to avoid the danger of the wind which may annoy