of m . lane , captain of the pinnace ; how he be set William upon with one of the king galley belong to Santo lay ' Domingo , which be man with 400 man , who after he have fight with he 3 or 4 hour , give over the fight and forsake he , without any great hurt do on either part . the 26 the John our vice - admiral come to we to cape Tyburon , and the frigate which we leave with he at Saona . this be the appoint place where we shall attend for the meeting with the Santo Domingo fleet . on Whitsunday even at cape Tyburon one of our boy run away from we , and at ten day end return to our ship almost starve for want of food . in sundry place about this part of cape Tyburon we find the bone and carcase of diverse man , who have perish ( as we think ) by famine in those wood , be either straggle from their company , or land there by some man of war . 409 on the 14 of June we take a small spanish frigate which fall among we so sudden , as he double the point at the bay of cape Tyburon , where we ride , so that he can not escape we . this frigate come from Santo Domingo , and have but 3 man in she , the one be a expert pilot , the other a mountainer , and the three a vintner , who escape all out of prison at Santo Domingo , purpose to fly to Yaguana which be a town in the west part of his - spanishfap - paniola where many fugitive Spaniard be gather together . the 17 be Wednesday captain lane be send to Yaguana with his pinnace and a frigate to take a ship , which be there take in fraught , as we understand by the old pilot , who we have take three day before . the 24 the frigate return from captain lane at Yaguana , and bring we word to cape Tyburon , that captain lane have take the ship , with many passenger and negro in the same ; which prove not so rich a prize as we hope for , for that a Frenchman of war have take and spoil she before we come . nevertheless her load be think worth 1000 or 1300 pound , be hide , ginger , cannafistula , copper - pan , and Casavi . July - Edward t ^ he second of July Edward Spicer who we leave in Spicer . 1 England come to we at cape Tyburon , accompany with a small pinnace , whereof one m . harp be captain . and the same day we have sight of a fleet of 14 sail all of Santo Domingo , to who we present give chase , but they upon the first sight of we flee , and separate themselves scatter here and there : wherefore we be force to divide our self and so make after they until 12 of the clock at night . 410 but then by reason of the darkness we lose sight of each other , yet in the end the admiral and the moonlight happen to be together the same night at the fetch up of the vice - admiral of the spanish fleet , against who the next morning we fight and this fight take he , with loss of one of our man and two hurt , and of they 4 slay and 6 hurt . but what be become of our vice - admiral , our pinnace , and prize , and two frigate , in all this time , we be ignorant . the 3 of July we spend about rifle , rummage and fit the prize to be sail with we . the 6 of July we see Jamayca then which we leave on our larboard , keep Cuba in sight on our starboard . upon the 8 of July we see the hand of Pinos , which lie on the southside of Cuba nigh unto the west end or cape call cape S . Anthony . and the same day we give chase to a frigate , but at night we lose sight of she , partly by the slow sail of our admiral , and lack of the moonlight our pinnace , who captain Cooke have send to the cape the day before . on the both we come to cape S . Anthony , where we find our consort the moonlight and her pinnace abide for our come , of who we understand that the day before there pass by they 22 sail , some of they of the burden of 300 and some 400 ton load with the king treasure from the main , bind for Havana ; from this 11 of July until 22 we be much becalm : and the wind be very scarce , and the weather exceed hot , we be much pester with the Spaniard we have take : wherefore we be drive to land all the Spaniard save three , but the place where we land they be of their own choice on the southside of Cuba near unto the organ and Rio de puercos . the 23 we have sight of the cape of Florida , and the break hand thereof call the martyr . 411 the state of the current from the cape of Florida to Vir ^ nia . the 25 be s . James day in the morning , we fall with the matan ^ as , a headland 8 league towards the east of Havana , where we purpose to take fresh water in , and make our abode two or three day . on Sunday the 26 of July ply too and fro between the matan ^ as and Havana , we be espy of three small pinnace of saint John de ullua bind for Havana , which be exceed rich load . Theise 3 pinnace come very bold up unto we , and so continue until they come within musket shoot of we . and we suppose they to be captain harp pinnace , and two small frigate take by captain harp : wherefore we show our flag . but they present upon the sight of it turn about and make all