we , by reason of our be so near to the mouth of the river : and for this cause the captain send for we . be come to our ship , we sail three league further up within the river , and there we cast anchor . a little while 462 after , John Ribault accompany with a good number Gibault sall of soldier embark himself , desirous to sail further • * i th a RtVfgf up into the arm that run towards the west , and to ' search the commodity of the place . Having sail twelve league at the least , we perceive a troop of Indians , which assoon as ever they espy the pinnace , be so afraid that they flee into the wood leave behind they a young Lucerne which they be a turn upon a spit : for which cause the place be call cape cape Lucerne . Lucerne : proceed forth on our way , we find another arm of the river , which run towards the east , up which the captain determine to sail and to leave the great current . a little while after they begin to espy diverse other Indians both man and woman half hide within the wood : who know not that we be such as desire their friendship , be dismay at the first , but soon after be embolden , for the captain cause store of merchandise to be show they open whereby they know that we mean nothing but well unto they : and then they make a sign that we shall come on land , which we will not refuse . at our come on shore diverse of they come to salute our general accord to their barbarous fashion . some of they give he skin of chamois , other little basket make of chamois . palm leave , some present he with pearl , but no pearl . great number . afterwards they go about to make a arbour to defend we in that place from the parch heat of the sun . but we will not stay as then . wherefore the captain thank they much for their good will , and give present to each of they : wherewith he please they so well before he go thence , that his sudden departure be nothing pleasant unto they . for know he to be so liberali , they will have wish he to have stay a little long , seek by all mean to give he occasion to stay , show he by sign that he shall stay but that day only , and that they desire to advertise a great indian lord which have toreofpeary pearl in great abundance , and silver also , all which and silver . 463 thing shall be give unto he at the king arrival : say further that in the mean time while that this great lord come thither , they will lead he to their house , and show he there a thousand pleasure in shoot , and see the stag kill , therefore they pray he not to deny they their request . notwithstanding we return to our ship , where after we have be but one night , the captain in the morning command to put into the pinnace a pillar of hard stone fashion like a column , wherein the arm of the king of France be grave , to plant the same in the fair place that he can find . this do , we embark our self , and sail three league towards the west : where we discover a little river , up which we sail so long , that in the end we find it return into the great current , and in his return to make a little hand separate from the firm land , where we go on shore : and by commandment of the captain , because it be exceed fair and pleasant , there we plant they a pillar of pillar upon a hillock open round about to the view , and free stone environ with a lake half a fathom deep of very good arm of and sweet water . in which hand we see two stag France be of exceed bigness , in respect of those which we have grave , set up see before , which we may easy have kill with our he ^ lvertf11 harquebuss , if the captain have not forbid we , port Royal . move with the singular fairness and bigness of they . but before our departure we name the little river which the river of environ . this he , the river of Liborne . afterwards 1 orne - embark our self to search another he not far distant from the former : wherein after we have go a land , we find nothing but tall cedar , the fair that the lie of be see in this country . for this cause we call cedar . it jie of ceciar : so we return into our pinnace to go towards our ship . a few day afterward John Ribault determine to return once again towards the Indians which inhabit that arm of the river which run towards the west , and to carry with he good store of soldier . for 464 his meaning be to take two Indians of this place to bring they into France , as the queen have command he . with this deliberation again we take our former course so far forth , that at the last we come to the self same place where at the first we find the indian , from thence we take two Indians by the permission of the king , which think that they be more favour than the rest , think themselves very happy to stay with we . but these two Indians see we make no two Indians show at all that we will go on land , but rather that take awa ^ we follow the midst of the current , begin to be somewhat offend , and will by force have leap into the water , for they be so good swimmer that immediate they will have get into the forest . nevertheless be acquaint with their humour , we watch they narrow and seek by all mean to appease they : which we can not by any mean do for that time , though we offer they thing which they much esteem , which thing they disdain to take , and give back again whatsoever be give they , think that such gift shall have altogether bind they , and that in restore they they shall be restore unto their liberty . in fine , perceive that all that they do avail they nothing , they pray we to give they those thing which they have restore , which we do incontinent : than they approach one towards the other and begin to sing , the doleful agree so sweet together , that in hear their song it seem that they lament the absence of their friend . it they continue their song all night without cease : all which time