a shore for fresh water , so we defer our 414 i59 °- going to Roanoak until the next morning , and cause some of those sailor to dig in those sandy hill for fresh water whereof we find very sufficient . that water night we return aboard with our boat and our tn san whole company in safety . the next morning be the 17 of August , our boat and company be prepare again to go up to Roanoak , but captain Spicer have then send his boat ashore for fresh water , by mean whereof it be ten of the clock aforenoon before we put from our ship which be then come to a anchor within two mile of the shore . the admiral boat be half way towards the shore , when captain Spicer put off from his ship . the admiral boat first pass the breach , but not without some danger of sink , for we have a sea break into our boat which fill we half full of water , but by the will of God and careful styrage of captain cook we come safe ashore , save only that our furniture , victual , match and powder be much wet and spoil . for at this time the wind blue at Northeast and direct into the harbour so great a gale , that the sea break extreme on the bar , and the tide go very forcible at the entrance . by that time our admiral boat be hail ashore , and most of our thing take out to dry , captain Spicer come to the entrance of the breach with his mast stand up , and be half pass over , but by the rash and undiscreet styrage of Ralph Skinner his master mate , a very dangerous sea break into their boat and overset they quite , the man keep the boat some in it , and some hang on it , but the next sea set the boat on ground , where it beat so , that some of they be force to let go their hold , hope to wade ashore ; but the sea still beat they down , so that they can neither stand nor swim , and the boat twice or thrice be turn the keel upward , whereon captain Spicer and captain Skinner hang until they sink , and be see no more . but four that can swim a little keep themselves in ' deep water and be save by captain cook mean , 415 who so soon as he see their oversetting , strip himself , and four other that can swim very well , and with all haste possible row unto they , and save four . they be a 11 in all , and 7 of the chief be drown , who name be Edward Spicer , Ralph Skinner , Edward Kelley , Thomas Bevis , Hance the surgeon , Edward Kelborne , Robert Coleman . this mischance do so much discomfort the sailor , that they be all of one mind not to go any further to seek the planter . but in the end by the commandment and persuasion of i and captain cook , they prepare the boat : and see the captain and i so resolute , they seem much more willing . our boat and all thing fit again , we put off from Hatorask , be the number of 19 person in both boat : but before we can get to the place , where our planter be leave , it be so exceed dark , that we overshoot the place a quarter of a mile : there we espy towards the north end of the hand you light of a great fire through the wood , to the which we present row : when we come right over against it , we let fall our Grapnel near the shore , and sound with a trumpet a call , and afterwards many familiar english tune of song , and call to they friendly ; but we have no answer , we therefore land at daybreak , and coming to the fire , we find the grass and sundry rot tree burn about the place . from hence we go through the wood to that part of the hand direct over against Dasamongwepeuk , and from thence we return by the water side , round about the north point of the hand , until we come to the place where i leave our colony in the year 1586 . in all this way we see in the sand the print of the savage foot of 2 or 3 sort tread you night , and as we enter up the sandy bank upon a tree , in the very brow thereof be curious carve these fair roman letter c r o : which letter present we know to signify the place , where i shall find the planter seat , accord to a secret token agree upon between they and i at my last departure 416 from they , which be , that in any way they shall not fail to write or carve on the tree or post of the door the name of the place where they shall be seat ; for at my come away they be prepare to remove from Roanoak 50 mile into the main . therefore at my departure from they in An . 1587 i will they , that if they shall happen to be distress in any of those place , that than they shall carve over the letter or name , a cross and in this form , but we find no such sign of distress . and have well consider of this , we pass towards the place where they be leave in sundry house , but we find the house take down , and the place very strong enclose with a high palisado of great tree , with cortynes and flanker very fort - like , and one of the chief tree or post at the right side of the entrance have the bark take off , and 5 foot from the ground in fair capitali letter be grave croatoan without any cross or sign of distress ; this do , we enter into the palisado , where we find many bar of iron , two pig of lead , four iron fowler , iron sacker