certain voyage to Florida , and the late and more perfect discovery thereof , to wit , of all the seacoast , river , bay , haven , isle , and main land far up into the country , and a report of some colony and fort there plant and displant , with a description of the government , disposition and quality of the natural inhabitant , and a declaration of the temperature of the climate , and of the manifold good commodity find in those region . to the most christian king of France , Francis the first . the relation of John de Verrazzano a florentine , of the land by he discover in the name of his majesty . write in diepe the eight of July , 1524 . write not to your majesty , most christian king , since the time we suffer the tempest in the north part , of the success of the four ship , which your majesty send forth to discover new land by the ocean , think your majesty have be already due inform thereof . now by these present i will give your majesty to understand , how by the violence of the wind we be force with the two ship , the norman and the dolphin ( in such evil case as they be ) to land in Britain . where after we have repaired they in all point as be needful , and arm they very well , we take our course along by the coast of Spain , which your majesty shall understand by the profit that we receive thereby . afterwards with the dolphin alone we determine to make dis - 423 coverie of new country , to prosecute the navigation we have already begin , which i purpose at this present to recount unto your majesty to make manifest the whole proceed of the matter . the 17 . of January the year 1524 . by the grace of God we depart from the dishabit rock by the isle of Madera , appertain to the king of Portugal , with 50 . man , with victual , weapon , and other shipmunition very well provide and furnish for 8 . month : and sail westwards with a fair easterly wind , in 25 . day we run 500 league , and the 20 . of February we be overtake with as sharp and terrible a tempest as ever any sailor suffer : whereof with the divine help and merciful assistance of almighty God , and the goodness of our ship , accompany with the good hap of her fortunate name , we be deliver , and with a prosperous wind follow our course west and by north . and in other 25 . day we make above 400 . league more , where we discover a new land , never before see of any man either ancient or modern , and at the first sight it seem somewhat low , but be within a quarter of a league of it , we perceive by the great fire that we see by the sea coast , that it be inhabit : and see that the land stretch to the southward . in seek some convenient Harboro ugh wherein to anchor and to have knowledge of the place , we sail fifty league in vain , and see the land to run ne still to the southward , we resolve to return back again towards the north , where we find our self trouble with the like difficulty . at length be in despair to find any port , we cast anchor upon the coast , and send our boat to shore , where we see great store of people which come to the sea side ; and see we approach , they flee away , and sometime will stand still and look back , behold we with great admiration : but afterward be animate and assure with sign that we make they , some of they come hard to the sea 424 side , seem to rejoice very much at the sight of we , and marvel great at our apparel , shape and whiteness , show we by sundry sign where we may most command odious come aland with our boat , offer we also of their victual to eat . now i will brief declare to your majesty their life and manner , as far as we can have notice thereof : these people go altogether naked , except only that they cover their privy part with certain skin of beast like unto martern , which they fasten unto a narrow girdle make of grass very artificial wrought , hang about with tail of diverse other beast , which round about their body hang dangle down to their knee . some of they wear garland of bird feather . the people be of colour russet , and not much unlike the Saracen : their hair black , thick and not very long , which they tie together in a knot behind and wear it like a little tail . they be well feature in their limb , of mean stature , and common somewhat big than we : broad breast , strong arm , their leg and other part of their body well fashion , and they be disfigure in nothing , save that they have somewhat broad visage , and yet not all of they : for we see many of they well favour , have black and great eye , with a cheerful and steady look , not strong of body , yet sharp witted , nimble and exceed great runner , as far as we can learn by experience , and in those two last quality they be like to the people of the east part of the world , and especial to they of the uttermost part of China . we can not learn of this people their manner of live , nor their particular custom , by reason of the short abode we make on the shore , our company be but small , and our ship ride far off in the sea and not far from these we find another people , who live we think to be like unto they ; ( as hereafter i will declare unto your majesty ) show at this present the situation and nature of the foresay land . the shore 425 A . D . i524 - be all cover with small sand , and so ascend upward for the space of 15 . foot , rise in form of little hill about 50 . pace broad . And sail forward , we find certain small river and arm of the sea , that fall down by certain creek , wash the shore on both side as the coast lie . and beyond this we see the open country rise in height above the sandy shore with many fair field and plain , full of mighty great wood , some very thick , and some thin , replenish with diverse sort of tree , as pleasant and delectable to behold , as be possible to imagine . and your majesty may not think that these be like the wood of Hercynia or the wild desert of Tartary , and the northern coast full of ffuitlesse tree : but they be full of palm tree , bay tree , and high cypress tree , and many other sort of tree unknown in Europe , which yield most sweet savour far from the shore , the property whereof we can not learn for the cause