my lord admiral of Chastillon , a noble man more desirous of the public then of his private benefit , understand the pleasure of the king his prince , which be to discover new and strange country , cause vessel fit for this purpose to be make ready with all diligence , and man to be levy meet for such a enterprise : among who he choose captain John Ribault , a man in truth expert in sea cause : which have receive his charge , set himself to sea the year 1562 . the eighteenth of February , accompany only with two of the king ship , but so well furnish with gentleman , ( of who number i my self be one ) and with old soldier , that he have mean to achieve some notable thing and worthy of eternal memory . have therefore sail two month , never hold the usual course of the Spaniard , he arrive in Florida , land near a cape or promontory , which be no high land , because the coast be all flat , but only rise by reason of the high wood , which at his arrival he call cape Francois in honour of our France . this cape be distant from the equator about thirty degree . coast from this place towards the north , he discover a very fair and great river , which give he occasion to cast anchor that he may search the same the next day very early in the morning : which be do by the break of day , accompany with captain Fiquinville and diverse other soldier of his ship , he be no soon arrive on the brink of the shore , but straight he perceive many indian man and woman , which come of purpose to that place to receive the Frenchman with all gentleness and amity , as they well declare by the oration which their king make , and the present of chamois skin wherewith he honour our captain , which the day follow cause a pillar of hard stone to be plant within the say river , and not far from the mouth of the same upon a little sandy knap , in which pillar the 457 A . D . 1587 . the first voyage of John ri - baulttoflorida 1562 . the course of the Spaniard not altogether necessary . cape Francois in 30 . degree . apillar setup . arm of France be carve and engrave . This be do he embark himself again , to the end always to discover the coast towards the north which be his chief desire . after he have sail a certain time he cross over to the other side of the river , and then in the presence of certain Indians , which of purpose do attend he , he command his man prayer and to make their prayer , to give thanks to God , for thankestogod . tjjat of grace he have conduct the french nation unto these strange place without any danger at all . the prayer be end , the Indians which be very attentive to hearken unto they , think in my judgement , that we worship tbe sun , because we always have our eye lift up towards heaven , rise all up and come to salute the captain John Ribault , promise to show he their king , which rise not up as they do , but remain still sit upon green leaf of bay and palmetree : towards who the captain go and sit down by he , and hear he make a long discourse , but with no great pleasure , because he can not understand his language , and present give much less his meaning . the king give our captain to Ribault . at h - s departure a plume or fan of hernshawes feather die in red , and a basket make of pa { me - boughe after the indian fashion , and wrought very artificial , and a great skin paint and draw throughout with the picture of diverse wild beast so lively draw and portray , that nothing lack but life . the captain to show himself not unthankful , give he pretty tin bracelet , a cut hook , a look glass , and certain knife : whereupon the king show himself to be very glad and full content . have spend the most part of the day with these Indians , the captain embark himself to pass over to the north side of the river , whereat the king seem to be very sorry . nevertheless be not able to stay we , he command that with all diligence they shall take fish for we : which they do 458 with all speed . for be enter into their wear their fish - or enclosure make of reed and frame in the fashion of a labirynth or maze , they load we with trout , great mullet , Plaise , turbut , and marvelous store of other sort of fish altogether different from we . this do , we enter into our boat and go they pass towards the other shore . but before we come to the shore , we be salute with a number of other Indians , which enter into the water to their armpit , bring we many little basket full of Maiz , and goodly mui - goodly mulberry both red and white : other offer themselves to bear we on shore , where be land our per - ’ ceive their king sit upon a place dress with bough , and under a little arbour of cedar and bay tree somewhat distant from the water side . he be accompany with two of his son which be exceed fair and strong , and with a troop of Indians who have all their bow and arrow in marvelous good order . his two son receive our captain very gracious : but the king their father , represent i wot not what kind of gravity , do nothing but shake his head a little : then the captain go forward to salute he , and without any other move of himself he retain so constant a kind of gravity , that he make it seem unto we that by good and lawful right he bear the title of a king . our captain know not what to judge of this man behaviour , though he be jealous because we go first unto the other king , or else that he be not well please with the pillar or column which he have plant . while thus he know not what hereof to think , our captain show he by sign , that he be come from a far country to seek he , to let he understand the amity which he be desirous to have with he : for the better confirmation whereof , he draw out of a budget certain trifle , as certain bracelet cover as it be with silver and guilt , which he present he withal , and give his son certain 459 other trifle . whereupon the king begin very love