also there the tree call Esquine , which be very good against the pock and other contagious disease . the beast best know in this the beast of country be stag , hind , goat , deer , leopard , Tlonda . ounce , lusern , diverse sort of wolf , wild dog , hare , cony , and a certain kind of beast that diflrer - eth little from the lion of Africa . the fowl be Thefouk oj turkeycock , partridge , parrot , pigeon , ringdove , Florida . turtle , blackbirde , crow , tarcel , falcon , lay nerd , herons , crane , stork , wild goose , malards , cormorant , hernshawe , white , red , black and grey , and a infinite sort of all wild foul . there be such abundance of crocodile , that oftentimes in swim man crocodile . be assail by they ; of serpent there be many sort . 451 the mountains of appalatcy . store of die and colour . the disposition and manor of the floridians . the wear of their hair . their exercise and pastime . run for game . shoot . play at the ball . there be find among the savage good quantity of gold and silver , which be get out of the ship that be lose upon the coast , as i have understand by the savage themselves . they use traffic thereof one with another . and that which make i the rather believe it , be , that on the coast toward the cape , where common the ship be cast away , there be more store of silver then towards the north . nevertheless they say , that in the mountain of appalatcy there be mine of copper , which i think to be gold . there be also in this country great store of grain and herb , whereof may be make excellent good die and painting of all kind of colour . and in truth the Indians which take pleasure in paint of their skin , know very well how to use the same . the man be of a olive colour , of great stature , fair , without any deformity , and well proportion . they cover their privity with the skin of a stag well dress . the most part of they have their body , arm , and thigh paint with very fair devise : the paint whereof can never be take away , because the same be prick into their flesh . their hair be very black and reach even down to their hip , howbeit they truss it up after a fashion that become they very well . they be great dissembler and traitors , valiant of their person and fight very well . they have none other weapon but their bow and arrow . they make the string of their bow of a gut of a stag , or of a stag skin , which they know how to dress as well as any man in France , and with as different sort of colour . they head their arrow with the tooth of fish and stone , which they work very fine and handsome . they exercise their young man to run well , and they make a game among themselves , which he win that have the long breath . they also exercise themselves much in shoot . they play at the ball in this manner : they set up a tree in the midst of a place which be eight or nine fathom high , in the top whereof there be set a square mat make of reed or bulrush , which whoso - 45 2 hunt . fish . their form of war . their triumph after the victory . they worship Rene Laudonniere ever hit in play thereat , win the game . they take great pleasure in hunt and fish . the king of the country make great war one against the other , which be not execute but by surprise , and they kill all the man they can take : afterward they cut of their head to have their hair , which return home they carry away , to make thereof their triumph when they come to their house . they save the woman and child and nourish they and keep they always with they . be return home from the war , they assemble all their subject , and for joy three day and three night they make good cheer , they dance and sing , likewise they make the most ancient woman of the country to dance , hold the hair of their enemy in their hand : and in dance they sing praise to the sun , ascribe unto he the honour of the victory . they have no m knowledge of God , nor of any religion , save of that ’ which they see , as the sun and the moon . they have their priest to who they give great credit , their priest because they be great magician , great soothsayer , and be . e . caller upon devil . Theise priest serve they in stead physician . of physician and chirurgeon . they carry always about they a bag full of herb and drug to cure the sick disease which for the most part be sick of the pock , for they love woman and maiden exceed , which they call the daughter of the sun : and some of they be sodomite . they marry , and every one their marri - hath his wife , and it be lawful for the king to have two ase ' or three : yet none but the first be honour and acknowledge for queen : and none but the child of the first wife inherit the good and authority of the father . the woman do all the business at home . they keep the painefal - not house with they after they know they be with child . ness the and they eat not of that which they touch as long as ’ they have their flower . there be in all this country manyherma - many hermaphrodite , which take all the great pain , and bear the victual when they go to war . they the naije paint their face much , and stick their hair full of both sex . 453 their food and provision for war . their dress their flesh and fish over the smoke . their order in march to the war . their consultation . feather or down , that they may seem more terrible . the victual which they carry with they , be of bread , of honey , and of meal make of Maiz parch in the fire , which they keep without be mar a long while . they carry also sometime fish , which they cause to be dress in the smoke . in necessity they eat a thousand rifraffe , even to the swallow down of coal , and put sand into the pottage that they make with this meal . when they go to war , their king march first , with a club in the one hand , and his bow in the other , with his