nothing else but that they shall return if they want victual , and that they may assure themselves of he , that they shall qvade coun - neve want any thing that be in his power . wherefore trey twenty - they embark themselves , and sail towards charles - fort , which from this place may be some five and f ^ m ^ charles tcn & alCf league distant . but as soon as our man first . 479 the fort set on fire by casualty . the fort reedify by the savage in the space of sz hour . think themselves at their ease , and free from the danger whereunto they have expose themselves night and day in gather together of victual here and there : lo , even as they be asleep , the fire catch in their lodging with such fury , be increase by the wind , that the room that be build for they before our man departure , be consume in a instant , without be able to save any thing , save a little of their victual . whereupon our man be far from all succour , find themselves in such extremity , that without the aid of almighty God , the only searcher of the heart and thought of man , which never forsake those that seek he in their affliction , they have be quite and clean out of all hope . for the next day betimes in the morning the king Audusta and king Maccou come thither , accompany with a very good company of Indians , which know the misfortune , be very sorry for it . and then they utter unto their subject the speedy diligence which they be to use in build another house , show unto they that the Frenchman be their love friend , and that they have make it evident unto they by the gift and present which they have receive : protest that whosoever put not his help hand unto the work with all his might , shall be esteem as unprofitable , and as one that have no good part in he , which the savage fear above all thing . this be the occasion that every man begin to endeavour himself in such sort , that in less than 12 hour , they have begin and finish a house which be very near as great as the former . which be end , they return home full content with a few cut hook , and hatchet , which they receive of our man . within a small while after this mischance , their victual begin to wax short : and after our man have take good deliberation , think and bethink themselves again , they find that there be no better way for they then to return again to the king ovade and Covexis his brother . wherefore they resolve to send thither some of their company the 480 next day follow : which with a indian Canoa sail up into the country about io league : afterward they find a very fair and great river of fresh water , which they fail not to search out : they find therein a great number of crocodile , which in greatness pass those of crocodile . the river Nilus : moreover , all along the bank thereof , there grow mighty high cypress . after they have cypress . stay a small while in this place , they purpose to follow sec ^ he their journey , help themselves so well with the tide , countrey0of ‘ that without put themselves in danger of the continual ! ovade . peril of the sea , they come into the country of ovade : of who they be most courteous receive . they advertise he of the occasion wherefore they come again to visit he , and tell he of the mischance , which happen unto they since their last voyage : how they have not only lose their household stuff by casualty of fire , but also their victual which he have give they so bountiful : that for this cause they be so bold as to come once again unto he , to beseech he to vouchsafe to succour they in such need and necessity . after that the king have understand their case , he send messenger unto his brother Covexis , to request he upon his behalf to send he some of his mill and bean , which thing he do : and the next morning , they be come again with victual , which the king cause to be bear into their Canoa . our man will have take their leave of he , find themselves more then satisfy with this liberality . but for that day he will not suffer they , but retain they , and seek to make they the best cheer he can devise . the next day very early in the morning , he take they with he to show they the place where his corn grow , and say unto they that they shall not want as long as all that will do last . afterwards he give . they a certain number of exceed fair pearl , and two stone of fine crystal , and certain silver oar . our yne man forget not to give he certain trifle in recom - silver ore , vin 481 2 h the flace where crystal gp - oweth in very good quantity ten day journey from the river Belle . note . mutiny against the captain , and the cause thereof . penny of these present , and require of he the place whence the silver oar and the crystal come . he make they answer , that it come ten day journey from his habitation up within the country : and that the inhabitant of the country do dig the same at the foot of certain high mountain , where they find of it in very good quantity . be joyful to understand so good news , and to have come to the knowledge of that which they most desire , they take their leave of the king , and return by the same see , by which they come . behold therefore how our man behave themselves very well hitherto , although they have endure many great mishap . but misfortune or rather the just judgement of God will have it , that those which can not be overcome by fire nor water , shall be undo by their own self . this be the common fashion of man , which can continue in one state , and have rather to overthrow themselves , than not to attempt some new thing daily . we have infinite example in the ancient history , especial of the roman , unto which number this little handful of man , be far from their country and absent from their countryman , have also add this present example . they enter therefore into partiality