of good and pleasant taste . Moreover they live by fish and fowl , which they take with begin , and bow make of hard wood , the arrow of cane , be head with the bone of fish , and other beast . the beast in these part be much wild than in our Europe , by reason they be continual chase and hunt . we see many of their boat make of one tree 20 . foot long , and 4 . foot broad , which be not make with iron or stone , or any other kind of metal ( because that in all this country for the space of 200 . league which we run , tty run we never see one stone of any sort : ) they help alon & coast themselves with fire , burn so much of the tree as be make sufficient for the hollowness of the boat , ; then like hollow their they do in make the stern and the forepart , until it canoas with be fit to sail upon the sea . the land be in situation re ‘ goodness and fairness like the other : it have wood 429 100 league sayrng . a mighty river . like the other , thin and full of diverse sort of tree : but not so sweet , because the country be more northerly and cold . we see in this country many vine grow natural , which grow up , take hold of the tree as they do in Lombardie , which if by husbandman they be dress in good order , without all doubt they will yield excellent wine : for have oftentimes see the fruit thereof dry , which be sweet and pleasant , and not differ from we , we think that they do esteem the same , because that in every place where they grow , they take away the under branch grow round about , that the fruit thereof may ripen the better . we find also rose , violet , lily , and many sort of herb , and sweet and odoriferous flower different from we . we know not their dwelling , because they be far up in the land , and we judge by many sign that we see , that they be of wood and of tree frame together . we do believe also by many conjecture and sign , that many of they sleep in the field , have no other covert than the open sky . further knowledge have we not of they : we think that all the rest who country we pass , live all after one manner . have make our abode three day in this country , and riding on the coast for want of harborough , we conclude to depart from thence , trending along the shore between the north and the east , sail dne in the daytime , and ride at anchor by night . in the space of 100 league sail we find a very pleasant place situate among certain little steep hill : from amid the which hill there run down into the sea a exceed great stream of water , which wlin the mouth be very deep , and from the sea to the mouth of the same with you tide which we find to rise 8 . foot , any great ship lade may pass up . but because we ride at anchor in a place well fence 43 ° from the wind , we will not venture our self without knowledge of the place : and we pass up with our boat only into the say river , and see the country very well people . the people be almost like unto the other , and be clad with the feather of fowl of diverse colour : they come towards we very cheerful , make great shout of admiration ; show we where we may come to land most safe with our boat . we enter up the say river into the land about half a league , where it make a most pleasant lake about 3 . league in compass : on the which they row from the one side to the other to the number of 30 . of their small boat , wherein be many people which pass from one shore to the other to come and see we . and behold upon the sudden ( as it be wont to fall out in sail ) a contrary flaw of wind come from the sea , we be enforce to return to our ship , leave this land to our great discontentment , for the great commodity and pleasantness thereof , which we suppose be not without some riches , all the hill show minerali matter in they . we weigh anchor , and sail towards the east , for so the coast trend , and so always for 50 . league be in the sight thereof , we discover a hand in form of a triangle , distant from the main land 10 . league , about the bigness of the hand of the Rhodes : it be full of hill cover with tree , well people , for we see fire all along the coast : we give it the name of your majesty mother , not stay there by reason of the weather be contrary . and we come to another land be 15 . league distant from the hand , where we find a pass good haven , wherein be enter , we find about 20 . small boat of the people , which with diverse cry and wondering come about our ship , come no near than 50 . pace towards we : they stay and behold the artificialness of our ship , our shape and apparel : than they all make a loud shout together , 431 people clad with feather of diverse colour . the pleasantness and riches of the land . the coast trend to the east . the descrip - tionofclaudia hand , ten league from the may ne . Claudia be mother of king Francis . a pass good haven . declare that they rejoice . when we have something animate they , use their gesture , they come so near we , that we cast they certain bell and glass , and many toy , which when they have receive , they look on they with laugh , and come without fear aboard our ship . there be among these people 2 . king of so goodly stature and shape as be possible to declare : the elder be about 40 . year of age , the second be a young man of 20 . year old . their apparel be on this manner : the elder have upon his naked body a heart skin wrought artificial with diverse branch like damask : his head be bare with the hair tie up behind with diverse knot : about his neck he have a large chain , garnish with diverse stone of sundry colour : the young man be almost apparel after you same manner . this be the goodly people , and of the fair condition that we have find in this our voyage . they exceed we in bigness : they be of the colour of brass , some of they incline more to whiteness : other be of yellow colour , of comely visage , with long and black hair , which they be very careful to trim and deck up : they be black and quick eye , and