the sail they can from we towards the shore , and keep themselves in so shallow water , that we be not able to follow they , and therefore give they over with expense of shot and powder to no purpose . but if we have not so rash set out our flag , we may have take they all three , for they will not have know we before they have be in our hand . this chase bring we so far to leeward as Havana : wherefore not find any of our consort at you Matan ^ as , we put over again to the cape of Florida , and from thence through the chanel of Bahama . on the 28 the cape of Florida bear west of we . the 30 we lose sight of the coast of Florida , and stand to sea for to gain the help of the current which run much swift a far off then in sight of the coast . for from the cape to Virginia all along the shore be none but eddy current , set to the south and Southwest . the 31 our three ship be clear disbock , the great prize , the admiral , and the moonshine , but our prize be thus disbock depart from we without take leave of our admiral or consort , and sail direcdy for England . 412 on the first of August the wind scant , and from thence forward we have very foul weather with much rain , thunder , and great spout , which fall round about we nigh unto our ship . the 3 we stand again in for the shore , and at midday we take the height of the same . the height of that place we find to be 34 degree of latitude . towards night we be within three league of the low sandy hand west of Wokokon . but the weather sandy hand continue so exceed foul , that we can not come to a anchor nigh the coast : wherefore we stand off it again to sea until Monday the 9 of August . on Monday the storm cease , and we have very great likelihood of fair weather : therefore we stand in again for the shore : and come to a anchor at 11 fathom in 3 5 tty in degree of latitude , within a mile of the shore , where degree , we go on land on the narrow sandy hand , be one of the island west of Wokokon : in this hand we take in some fresh water and catch great store of fish in the shallow water . between the main ( as we suppose ) and that hand it be but a mile over and three or four foot deep in most place . on the 12 in the morning we depart from thence and towards night we come to a anchor at the north - east end of the island of croatoan , by reason of a breach 2 which we perceive to lie out two or three league into ° . rSagues the sea : here we ride all that night . tn ° ea ' the 13 in the morning before we weigh our anchor , our boat be send to sound over this breach : our ship ride on the side thereof at 5 fathom ; and a ship length from we we find but 4 and a quarter , and then deep and shallow for the space of two mile , so that sometime we find 5 fathom , and by great diverge by 7 , and within two cast with the lead 9 , and then ! Ounci ' 8 , next cast 5 , and then 6 , and then 4 , and then 9 again , and deep ; but 3 fathom be the last , 2 league off 413 from the shore . this breach be in 35 degr . and a half , and lie at the very north - east point of croatoan , whereas go a fret out of the main sea into the inner water , which part the island and the main land . the 15 of August towards evening we come to a Hatorask in anchor at Hatorask , in 36 degr . and one three , in five 36 degr . in a fajom water , three league from the shore . at our ierce ’ first come to anchor on this shore we see a great smoke rise in the he Raonoak near the place where i leave our colony in the year 1587 , which smoke put we in good hope that some of the colony be there expect my return out of England . the 16 and next morning our 2 boat go a shore , and captain cook , and Cap . Spicer , and their company with i , with intent to pass to the place at Raonoak where our countryman be leave . at our put from the ship we command our master gunner to make ready 2 minion and a falkon well load , and to shoot they off with reasonable space between every shot , to the end that their report may be hear to the place where we hope to find some of our people . this be accord perform , and our twoe boat put off unto the shore , in the admiral boat we sound all the way and find from our ship until we come within a mile of the shore nine , eight , and seven fathom : but before we be half way between our ship and the shore we see another great smoke to the southwest of kindriker mount : we therefore think good to go to that second smoke first : but it be much further they land . from the harbour where we land , than we suppose it to be , so that we be very sore tire before we come to the smoke . but that which grieve we more be that when we come to the smoke , we find no man nor sign that any have be there late , nor yet any fresh water in all this way to drink . be thus weary with this journey we return to the harbour where we leave our boat , who in our absence have bring their cask