i think there be none of you that be ignorant of how his compete ° great consequence this our enterprise be , and also how acceptable it be unto our young king . therefore my friend ( as one desire your honour and benefit ) i will not fail to advertise you all of the exceed good hap which shall fall to they , which , as man of valour and worthy courage , will make trial in this our first discovery of the benefit and commodity of this new land : which shall be , as i assure my self , the great occasion that ever can happen unto they , to arise unto the title and degree of honour . and for this cause i be desirous to propose unto you and set down before your eye the eternal memory which of right they deserve , which forget both their parent and their country have have the courage to enterprise a thing of such importance , which even king themselves understand to be man aspire to so high degree of 468 magnanimity and increase of their majesty , do not disdain so well to regard , that afterward employ they in matter of weight and of high enterprise , they make their name immortali for ever . howbeit , i will not have you persuade your self , as many do , that you shall never have such good fortune , as not be know neither to the king nor the prince of the realm , and beside descend of so poor a stock , that few or none of your parent , have ever make profession of arm , have be know unto the great estate . for albeit that from my tender year i my self have apply all my industry to follow they , and have hazard my life in so many danger for the service of my prince , yet can i never attain thereunto ( not that i do not deserve this title and degree of government ) as i have see it happen to many other , only because they descend of a noble race , since more regard be have of their birth then of their virtue . for well i know that if virtue be regard , there will moor be find worthy to deserve the title , and by good right to be name noble and valiant . i will therefore make sufficient answer to such proposition and such thing as you may object against i , lay before you the infinite example which we have of the roman ; which concern the point of honour be the first that triumph over the world . for how many find we among they , which for their so valiant enterprize , not for the greatness of their parentage , have obtain the honour to triumph ? if we have recourse unto their ancestor , we shall find that their parent be of so mean condition , that by labour with their hand they live very base . as the father of / Elius - ^ Rus Perti - Pertinax , which be a poor artisan , his grandfather nfx ^ scend - likewise be a bond man , as the historiographer do parentage witness : and nevertheless , be move with a valiant become em - courage , • he be nothing dismay for all this , but perour of rather desirous to aspire unto high thing , he begin rome - with a brave stomach to learn feat of arm , and 469 Rusten Bassha of a herdsmans son through his valour become the great Turk son in law . Agathocles a potters son become king of sicibe . profit so well therein , that from step to step he become at length to be emperor of the roman . for all this dignity he despise not his parent : but contrariwise , and in remembrance of they , he cause his father shop to be cover with a fine wrought marble , to serve for a example to man descend of base and poor lineage , to give they occasion to aspire unto high thing notwithstanding the meanness of their ancestor . i will not pass over in silence the excellency and prowess of the valiant and renown Agathocles the son of a simple potter , and yet forget the contemptible estate of his father , he so apply himself to virtue in his tender year , that by the favour of arm he come to be king of Sicily : and for all this title he refuse not to be count the son of a potter . but the more to eternize the memory of his parent and to make his name renown , he command that he shall be serve at the table in vessel of gold and silver and other of earth : declare thereby that the dignity wherein he be place come not unto he by his parent , but by his own virtue only . if i shall speak of our time , i will lay before you only Rusten Bassha , which may be a sufficient example to all man : which though he be the son of a poor herdsman , do so apply his youth in all virtue , that be bring up in the service of the great Turk , he seem to aspire to great and high matter , in such sort that grow in year he increase also in courage , so far forth , that in fine for his excellent virtue he marry the daughter of the great Turk his prince . Howe much then ought so many worthy example to move you to plant here ? consider also that hereby you shall | be registered for ever as the first that inhabit this strange country . i pray you therefore all to advise your self thereof , and to declare your mind free unto i , protest that i will so well imprint your name in the king ear , and the other prince , that your re - 470 1587 - nowme shall hereafter shine unquenchable through our realm of France . he have scarce end his oration , but the great part of our soldier reply : that a soldier great pleasure can never betide they , perceive ^ eretori - well the acceptable service which by this mean they shall do unto their prince : beside that this thing shall be for the increase of their honour : therefore they beseech the captain , before he depart out of the place , to begin to build they a fort , which they hope afterward to finish , and to leave they munition necessary for their defence , show as it seem that they be displease , that it be so long in do . whereupon John Ribault be as glad as may be to see his man so well willing , determine the next day to search the most fit and convenient