they with red . than my lieutenant Vasseur , and my sergeant promise he , that one day i shall march with my force into those country , and that join my self with his lord Olata , i will subdue the inhabitant of the high of those mountain . he be very glad of this speech , and answer that the least of these king which he have name , shall present unto the general of these succour the height of two foot of gold and silver , which by force of arm they have already get of those two king , Onatheaqua , and Houstaqua . the good cheer be do , and the discourse end , my man embark themselves again , with intention to bring i those good news unto the fort Caroline . but after they have sail a very long while down the river , and be come within three league of we , the tide be so strong against they , that they be constrain to go on land , and to retire themselves because of the night , unto the dwell of a certain Paracoussy name Molona , which show himself very glad of their arrival : for he desire to know some news of Thimogoa , and think that the french man go thither for none other occasion but for to invade ... i564 ' they . which captain Vasseur perceive , dissemble so well , that he make he believe that he go to Thimogoa with none other intention , but to subdue they , and to destroy they with the edge of the sword without mercy , but that their purpose have not such success as they desire , because that the people of Thimogoa be advertise of this enterprise , retire into the wood , and save themselves by flight : that nevertheless they have take some as they be flee away , which carry no news thereof unto their fellow . the Paracoussy be so glad of this relation , that he interrupt he , and ask Vasseur of the beginning and manner of his execution , and pray he that he will show he by sign how all thing pass . immediate Francis la caille the sergeant of my band take his sword in his hand , say , that with the point thereof he have thrust through two Indians which run into the wood , and that his companion have do no less for their part . and that if fortune have so favour they , that they have not be discover by the man of Thimogoa , they have have a victory most glorious and worthy of eternal memory . hereupon the Paracoussy show himself so well satisfy , that he can not devise how to gratify our man , which he cause to come into his house to feast they more honourable : and have make captain Vasseur to sit next he , and in his own chair ( which the Indians esteem for the chief honour ) and then underneath he two of his son , goodly and mighty fellow , he command all the rest to place themselves as they think good . this do , the Indians come accord to their good custom , to present their drink Cassine to the Paracoussy , and then to certain of his chief friend , and the Frenchman . than he which bring it set the cup aside , and draw out a little dagger stick up in the roof of the house , and like a mad man he lift his head aloft , and run apace , and go and smite a indian which sit alone in one of the corner of the hall , cry with a loud voice , hyou , the poor indian stir not at all for the blow , which he seem to endure patient . he which hold the dagger go quick to put the same in his former place , and begin again to give we drink as he do before : but he have not long continue , and have scarce give three or four thereof , but he leave his bowl again , take the dagger in his hand , and quick return unto he which he have strocken before , to who he give a very sore blow on the side , cry Hyou , as he have do before : and then he go to put the dagger in his place , and set himself down among the rest . a little while after he that have be strike fall down backward , stretch out his arm and leg , as if he have be ready to yield up the latter gasp . and then the young son of the Paracoussy apparel in a long white skin , fall down at the foot of he that be fall backward , weep bitter half a quarter of a hour : after , two other of his brethren clad in like apparel , come about he that be so strike , and begin to sigh pitiful . their mother bear a little infant in her arm come from another part , and go to the place where her son be , at the first she use infinite number of outcry , than one while lift up her eye to heaven , another while fall down unto the ground , she cry so doleful , that her lamentable mourning will have move the most hard and stony heart in the world with pity . yet this suffice not , for there come in a company of young girl , which do never leave weep for a long while in the place where the indian be fall down , who afterward they take , and with the sad gesture they can devise , carry he away into another house a little way off from the great hall of the Paracoussy , and continue their weep and mourn by the space of two long hour : in which mean while the indian cease not to drink Cassine , but with such silence that one word be not hear in the parlour . Vasseur be grieve that he understand not these ceremony , demand of the Paracoussy what these thing mean : which answer he slow , Thimogoa , Thimogoa , without say any more . be more displease than he be before with so slight a answer , he turn unto another Indian the paracoussyes brother , who