doubt he shall have have very much to do : for by this mean they lack arrow , and so be constrain to retire themselves . during the time of the conflict they cry and make sign that they be the captain and lieutenant friend : and that they fight for none other cause but to be revenge on the soldier , which be their mortali enemy . my lieutenant be come unto his boat take a re - two slalne . view of his company , and find two man want which be kill , of who the one be call James sale , and the other name be Mesureur . he find two and twen - moreover 22 of they wound , which with much ado ty wound . causecj to be bring unto the boat . all the mill that he find among his company come but to two man burden , which he divide equal among they . for [ three . 34 - 7 - ] assoon as the conflict begin , every man be constrain to leave his sack to put his hand to his weapon . in this mean while i remain at the fort , and cause every man diligent to travel , hope that my lieutenant will bring we victual . but see the time consume away , i begin to suspect the truth of that which fall out , whereof i be assure immediate after at their return . see therefore my hope frustrate of | it on at side , i make my prayer unto God , and thank God for their he of his grace which he have show unto my poor deliverance , soldier which be escape : afterwards i think upon new mean to obtain victual , aswell for our return into France , as to drive out the time until our embark . i be advertise by certain of our company , which usual go on hunt into the wood and through the village , that in the village Sarauahi situate on the other side of the river , and two league distant from the fort , and in the village emoloa there be field wherein the mill be very forward , and that there be thereof in those part in great abundance . wherefore i cause my boat to be make ready , and send my sergeant thither with certain soldier , which use such diligence , that we have good store of mill . i send also to the river which the savage call Iracana , name by captain Ribault the river of Somme , where captain Vasseur and my sergeant arrive with two boat and their ordinary furniture , and find there a great assembly of the lord of the country , among who be athore the son of Satourioua , Apalou , and Tacadocorou , which be there assemble to make merry : because that in this place be the fair maid and woman of all the country . captain Vasseur in my name give certain small trifle to all the lord , to the queen , to the maid and woman of the village . whereupon the boat be forthwith lade with mill , after they have make our man as good cheer as they can devise . the queen send i two small mat so artificial wrought as it be unpossible to make better . now find our self by this mean sufficient furnish with victual , we begin each of we in his place , to travail and use such diligence , as the desire to see our native country may move we . but because two of our carpenter be slay by the Indians ( as heretofore i mention ) John de Hais , master Carpenter , a man very worthy of his vocation , repair unto i , and tell i that by reason of want of man he be not able to make i up the ship against the time that he have promise i : which speech cause such a mutiny among the soldier that very hardly he escape kill : howbeit i appease they aswell as i 75 the village Sarauahi . the village Emoloa . the river of Iracana call by Ribault the river of Somme . courtesy and liberality the best mean to deal with the savage . most artificiali mat . the beat down of the house without the fort , y the palisade . the cause why the french lose Florida . eight king laudonnier friend and ally . the principali scope of planter in strange country . Florida a rich country . can , and determine to work no more from thenceforth upon the ship , but to content our self to repair the brigandine which i have . so we begin to beat down all the house that be without the fort , and cause coal to be make of the timber thereof : likewise the soldier beat down the palisade which be towards the water side , neither be i ever able to keep they from do it . i have also determine to beat down the fort before my departure and to set it on fire , for fear lest some newcome guest shall have enjoy and possess it . in the mean while there be none of we to who it be not a extreme grief to leave a country , wherein we have endure so great travail and necessity , to discover that which we must forsake through our own countrymen default . for if we have be succour in time and place , and accord to the promise that be make unto we , the war which be between we and utina , have not fall out , neither shall we have have occasion to offend the Indians , which with all pain in the world i entertain in good amity , aswell with merchandise and apparel , as with promise of great matter , and with who i so behave myself , that although sometime i be constrain to take victual in some few village , yet i lose not the alliance of eight king and lord my neighbour , which continual succour and aid i with whatsoever they be able to afford . yea this be the principali scope of all my purpose , to win and entertain they , know how great their amity may advance our enterprise , and principal while i discover the commodity of the country , and seek to strengthen my self therein . i leave it