be a Paracoussy as well as his brother , call Malica , which make he a like answer as he do at the KlngMalica . first , pray he to ask no more of these matter , and to have patience for that time . the subtle old Paracoussy pray he within a while after , to show he his sword , which he will not deny he , think that he will have behold the fashion of his weapon : but he soon perceive that it be to another end : for the old man hold it in his hand , behold it a long while on every place , to see if he can find any blood upon it , which may show that any of their enemy have be kill : for the Indians be wont to bring their weapon wherewith their enemy have be defeat , with some blood upon they , for a token of their victory . but see no sign thereof upon it , he be upon the point to say unto he , that he have kill none of the man of Thimogoa : when as Vasseur prevent that which he may object , declare and show unto he by sign , the manner of his enterprise , add , that by reason of the two indian which he have slay , his sword be so bloody , that he be enforce to wash and make it clean a long while in the river : which the old man believe to be like to be true , and make no manner of reply thereunto . Vasseur , la caille , and their other companion go out of the hall to go into the room whither they have carry the indian : there they find the Paracoussy sit upon tapestry make of small reed , which be tapistrymade at meat after the indian fashion , and the indian that qfsmailreeds - was smite hard by he , lie upon the self same tapestry , about who stand the wife of the Paracoussy , with all the young damsel which before bewail he in they lap the hall ; which do nothing else but warm a great deal moss about of moss instead of napkin to rub the indian side . their wound tt i j t * • r and use it in hereupon our man ask the Paracoussy again for stead of nap - what occasion the indian be so persecute in his kin . presence : he answer , that this be nothing else but a ceremony a kind of ceremony , whereby they will call to mind death ' of death and persecution of the paracoussy their their ancestor ancestor execute by their enemy Thimogoa : allege slalne by their moreover , that as often as he himself , or any of his enemy . friend and ally return from the country , without they bring the head of their enemy , or without bring home some prisoner , he use for a perpetuali memory of all his predecessor , to beat the best belove of all his child with the self same weapon wherewith they have be kill in time past : to the end that by renew of the wound their death shall be lament afresh . now when they be thus inform of those ceremony , they thank the Paracoussy for their good intertai nement which they have receive , and so set sail come to i unto the fort : where they declare all unto i as i have recite it the return of heretofore . the eight and twenty of July our ^ ardfrance s ^ tpes depart to return into France . and within a the 28 . of while , about two month after our arrival in Florida , July . the Paracoussy Satourioua send certain Indians unto i to know whether i will stand to my promise which i have make he at my first arrival in that country , which be that i will show my self friend to his friend , and enemy unto his - enemy , and also to accompany he with a good number of harquebuss , when he shall see it expedient , and shall find a fit occasion to go to war . now see he rest upon this promise , he pray i not to defer the same : see also that make account thereof , he have take such good order for the execution of his enterprise , that he be ready , and be furnish with all thing that be necessary for the voyage : i make he answer , that for his amity i will not purchase the enmity of the other , and that albeit i will , yet notwithstanding i want mean to do it . for it behoove i at that present to make provision of victual and munition for the defence of my fort on the other side , that my bark be nothing ready , and that this enterprise will require time : moreover , that the Paracoussy Satourioua may hold himself ready to depart within two month , and that then i will think of fulfil my promise to he . the indian carry this answer to their Paracoussy , which be little please with it , because he can not defer his execution or expedition , aswell because all his victual be ready , as also because ten other paracoussy be assemble with he for the performance of this enterprise . the ceremony which this savage use before he embark his army deserve not to be forget . for when he be set down by the river side , be compass about with ten other paracoussy , he command water to be bring he speedy . this do , look up into heaven , he fall to discourse of diverse thing with gesture that show he to be in exceed great choler , which make he one while shake his head hither and thither , and by and by with i wot not what fury to turn his face towards the country of his enemy , and to threaten to kill they . he oftentimes look upon the sun , pray he to grant he a glorious victory of his enemy . which when he have do by the space of half a hour , he sprinkle with his hand a little of the water which he hold in a vessel A . D . i564 .