they embark themselves in it , leave their second ship : than they return to the cape of Tiburon , the cape of where they meet with a patach , which they take by Tiburon . force after a long conflict . in this patach the governor the governor of Jamaica be take , with great store of riches , aswell of of Jamaica gold and silver as of merchandise and wine , and many taken - oth thing ; wherewith our seditious companion not content , determine to seek more in their caravel , and their governor of Jamaica also . after they be come to Jamaica , they miss of another caravel which do save it self in the haven . the governor be fine and subtle , see himself bring unto the place which he desire and where he command , obtain so much by his fair word , that they which have take he let he put two little boy which be take with he into a little cock boat , and send they to his wife into the village , to advertise she that she shall make provision of victual to send unto he . but in stead of write unto his wife , he speak unto the boy secret that with all diligence she shall send the vessel that be in the haven near that place to succour and rescue he . which she do so cunning , that on a morning about the break of the day , as our seditious companion be at the haven mouth ( which reach above two league up malguallre a within the land ) there come out of the haven a malgualire kind of vessel which make sail both forward and backward , and then two great ship , which may be each of they off fourscore or a hundred ton a piece , with good store of ordinance , and well furnish with man : at who come our mutinous fellow be surprise , be not able to see they when they come , aswell because of the darkness of the weather , as also by reason of the length of the haven , consider also they mistrust nothing . true it be that five or six and twenty that be in the brigantine discover these ship when they be near they , which see themselves press for want of leisure to weigh their anchor , cut their cable , and the trumpeter which be in it advertise the rest : whereupon the Spaniard see themselves descry , discharge a volley of canon shoot against the french man , which they follow by the space of three league , and recover their own ship : the brigantine which escape away , pass in the sight of the cape des Aigrettes , and the cape of S . Anthony situate in the isle of Cuba , and from thence pass within the sight of Havana ; but trenchant their pilot , and the trumpeter , and certain other mariner of this brigantine , which be lead away by force in this voyage ( as elsewhere we have declare ) desire nothing 44 the cape of S . Antony in Cuba . Havana . more than to return to i : wherefore these man agree together ( if peradventure the wind serve they well ) to pass the channel of Bahama , while their seditious come - the channel of panion be asleep : which they do accomplish with Bahama . such good success , that in the morning towards the break £ 111 . 336 . ] of the day about the five and twenty of march they arrive upon the coast of Florida : where know the fault which they have commit , in a kind of mockery they counterfeit the judge : but they play not this prank until they have tipple well of the wine which remain yet in their prize . one counterfeit the judge , another present my person : one other after he have hear the matter plead , conclude thus : make you your cause as good as it please you , but if when you come to the fort Caroline the captain cause you not to be hang , i will never take he for a honest man : other think that my choler be pass , i will easy forget this matter . their sail be no soon descry upon our coast , but the king of the place name patica , dwell eight league distant from our fort , and king patica . be one of our good friend , send a indian to advertise i that he have descry a ship upon the coast , and that he think it be one of our nation . hereupon the the return of brigantine oppress with famine , come to a anchor at the fart oflau - mouth of the river of May , when at the first blush we donnleressedi - thought they have be ship come from France ; which Aous sou iers ' give we occasion of great joy : but after i have cause she to be better view , i be advertise that they be our seditious companion that be return . therefore i send they word by captain Vasseur and my sergeant , that they shall bring up their brigantine before the fortress : which they promise to do . now there be not above two league distance from the mouth of the river where they cast anchor unto the fortress . the next day i send the same captain and sergeant with thirty soldier , because i see they much delay their come . than they bring they : and because certain of they have swear at their departure , that they will never come again within the fort , i be well please they shall keep their oath . for this purpose i wait for they at the river mouth , where i make my bark to be build , and command my sergeant to bring the four chief author of the mutiny on shore ; who i cause immediately to be put in fetter : for my meaning be not to punish the rest , consider that they be suborn , and because my council express assemble for this purpose have conclude that these four only shall die , to serve for a example to the rest . in the same place i make a oration unto they in this manner .