, nor any contentment or pleasure to we , if peradventure we will inhabit there . on the other side if we pass further towards the north to seek out port royal , it will be neither very profitable nor convenient : at the least if we shall give credit to the report of they which remain there a long time , although the haven be one of the fair of the west Indies : but that in this case the question be not so much of the beauty of the place , as of thing necessary to sustain life . and that for our inhabit it be much more needful for we to plant in place plentiful of victuali , then in goodly haven , fair , deep and pleasant to the view . in consideration whereof that i be of opinion , if it seem good unto they , to gold and sil - seat our self about the river of May : see also that in our first v ° yase we f ° und the same only among rtver of ajj the rest tQ abqun ( je jn mafz anj cornc ) besije the ' gold and silver that be find there : a thing that 14 put i in hope of some happy discovery in time to come . after i have propose these thing , every one give his opinion thereof : and in fine all resolve , namely those which have be with i in the first voyage , that it be expedient to seat themselves rather on the river of may then on any other , until they may hear news out of France . this point be thus agree upon , we sail towards the river , and use such diligence , that with the favour of the wind we arrive there the morrow after about the break of day , which be on Thursday the 29 . of the month of June . have - June the 29 . king cast anchor , i embark all my stuff and the soldier of my company , to sail right towards the open of the river : wherein we enter a good way up , and find a creek of a reasonable bigness , which invite we to refresh our self a little , while we repose our self there . afterwards we go on shore to seek out a place plain without tree , which we perceive from the creek . but because we find it not very commodious for we to inhabit there : we determine to return unto the place which we have discover before , when we have ace be join to a be more fit and come - modious to build a fortress , then that where we be last . therefore we take our way towards the forest be guide therein by the young Paracoussy which have lead we before to his father lodging . afterwards we find a large plain cover with high pinetree distant a little from the other : under which we perceive a infinite number of stag which bray amid the plain , athwart the which we pass : than we discover a little hill adjoin unto a great vale very green and in form flat : wherein be the fair meadow of the world , and grass to feed cattle . Moreover it be environ with a great number of brook of fresh water , and high wood , which make the vale J5 sail up the river . This pl mountain , and it seem unto 1 more delectable to the eye . after i have take the view thereof at my ease , i name it at the request of our then vale of soldier , the vale of Laudonniere . thus we go Laudonniere . forwar ( £ anon have go a little forward , we meet a indian woman of tall stature , which also be a an Herma - hermaphrodite , who come before we with a great ves - phrodite . sep of c | ere fountain water , wherewith she great refresh we . for we be exceed faint by reason of the ardent heat which molest we as we pass through those high wood . and i believe that without the succour of that indian hermaphrodite , or rather , if it have not be for the great desire which we have to make we resolute of our self , we have take up our lodging all night in the wood . be therefore refresh by this mean , we gather our spirit together , and march with a cheerful courage , we come to the place which we have choose to make our habitation in : whereupon at that instant near the river brink we strew a number of bough and leaf , to take our rest on they the night follow , which we find exceed sweet , because of the pain which before we have take in our travel . on the morrow about the break of day , i commanded a trumpet to be sound , that be assemble they begin we may give God thanks for our favourable and their plant happy arrival . there we sing a psalm of thankes - mth ^ prayer to givjng unto God , beseech he that it will please ' he of his grace to continue his accustom goodness towards we his poor servant , and aid we in all our enterprise , that all may turn to his glory and the advancement of our king . the prayer end , every man begin to take courage . afterwards have measure out a piece of ground in form of a triangle , we endeavour our self of all side , some to bring earth , some to cut faggot , and other to raise and make the rampire , for there be not a man that have not either a shovel , or cut hook , or hatchet , as well to make the ground plain by cut down the 16 1564 - tree , as for the build of the fort , which we do hasten w ‘ such cheerfulness , that within few day the effect of our diligence be apparent : in which mean space the Paracoussy Satourioua our near neighbour , and on who ground we build our fort , come usual accompanied with his two son and a great number of Indians to offer to do we all courtesy .