the second voyage unto Florida , make and write by captain Laudonniere , which fortify and inhabit there two summer and one whole winter . ft our arrival at diepe , at our come home , from our first voyage ( which be the twenty of July 1562 ) we find the civil war begin , which be in part the cause why our man be not succour , as captain John Ribault have promise they : whereof it follow that the civil war the cause why the Frenchman be not sup - captain Albert be kill by his soldier , and the phed , which country abandon , as heretofore we have sufficient ^ re , ty * discourse , and as it may more at large be understand j ^ rst voyase by those man which be there in person . after the peace be make in France , my lord admiral de chastillon show unto the king , that he hear no news at all of the man which captain John Ribault have leave in Florida , and that it be pity to suffer they to perish . in which respect , the king be content he shall cause 3 ship to be furnish , the one of six score ton , the other of 100 , and the three of 60 , to seek they out , and to succour they . my lord admiral therefore be well inform of the faithful service which i have do , aswell unto his majesty as to his predecessor king of France , advertise the king how able i be to do he service in this voyage , which be the cause that he make i chief captain over these 3 ship , and charge i to ix laudonniers second voyage to Florida , with three ship the 22 of April 1564 . the isle of Teneriffa , or the pike . depart with diligence to perform his commandment , which for my own part i will not gainsay , but rather think my self happy to have be choose out among such a infinite number of other , which in my judgement be very well able to have quit themselves in this charge , i embark my self at new haven the 22 of April 1564 , and sail so , that we fall near unto the coast of England : and then i turn towards the south , to sail direct to the fortunate island , at this present call the canary , one of which call the isle savage ( because as i think it be altogether without inhabitant ) be the first that our ship pass . sail therefore on forward , we land the next day in the isle of Teneriffa , otherwise call the pike , because that in the midst thereof there be a exceed high mountain , near as high as that of Aetna , which rise up like a pike , into the top whereof no man can go up but from the midst of may until the midst of August , by reason of the over great cold which be there all the year : which be a wonderful strange thing , consider that it be not past 27 degree and a half distant from the equator . we see it all cover over with snow , although it be then but the five of May . the inhabitant in this isle be heretofore pursue by the Spaniard , retire themselves into this mountain , where for a space they make war with they , and will not submit themselves to their obedience , neither by foul nor fair mean , they disdain so much the loss of their island . for those which go thither on the Spaniard behalf , leave their carcase there , so that not so much as one of they return home to bring news . notwithstanding in the end , the inhabitant not able to live in that place accord to their nature , or for want of such thing as be necessary for the commodity of their livelihood , do all die there . after i have furnish my self with some fresh water , very good and excellent , which .. 15640 spring out of a rock at the foot of this mountain , i continue my course towards the west , wherein the wind favour i so well , that 15 day after our ship arrive safe and sound at the Antilles : and go on land at the isle of Martinino , one of they the e 0 ° f first of they , the next day we arrive at Dominica , mat - ttnino . twelve league distant from the former . island . Dominica be one of the fair island of the west , full of hill , and of very good smell . who singularity desire to know as we pass , and seek also to refresh our self with fresh water , i make the mariner cast anchor , after we have sail about half along the coast thereof . as soon as we have cast anchor , two Indians ( inhabitant of that place ) sail towards we in two canoas full of a fruit of great excellency which they call Ananas . as they Ananas a approach unto our bark , there be one of they fruit of great which be in some misdoubt of we , go back eme enae ' again on land , and flee his way with as much speed as he can possible . which our man perceive and enter with diligence into the other Canoa , wherein they catch the poor indian , and bring he unto i . but the poor fellow become so astonish in behold we , that he know not which way to behave himself , because that ( as afterward i understand ) he fear that he be fall into the Spaniard hand , of who he have be take once before , and which , as he show we , have cut of his stone . at length this poor Indian be secure of we , and discourse unto we of many thing , whereof we receive very small pleasure , because we understand not his mind but by his sign . than he desire i to give he leave to depart , and promise i that he will bring i a thousand present , whereunto i agree on condition that he will have patience