. after he or 20 ktngt to be come home to his house he send messenger to his vassal . eighteen or twenty village of other king his vassal , and summon they to be present at the feast and dance which he purpose to celebrate because of his victory . in the mean while monsieur de Ottigny refresh himself for two day : and then take his leave of the Paracoussi , and leave he twelve of his man to see that Potanou , bethink himself of his late loss 58 shall not come to burn the house of utina , he set forward on his way to come unto i unto our fort , where he up and tell i how every thing have pass : and withal that he have promise the twelve soldier , that he will come back again to fetch they . then the king my neighbour all enemy to utina , be advertise of the return of my lieutenant , come to visit i with present and to inquire how thing have pass , pray i all to receive they into my favour , and to become enemy to utina , which notwithstanding i will not grant they for many reason that move i . the indian be wont to leave their house and to retire themselves into the wood the space of three month , to wit January , February , and march : during which time by no mean a man can see one Indian . for when they go on hunt , they make little cottage in the wood , whereunto they retire themselves , live upon that which they take in hunt . this be the cause that during this time , we can get no victual by their mean : and have it not be that i have make good provision thereof , while my man have store , until the end of April ( which be the time when at the uttermost , we hope to have have succour out of France ) i shall have be great amaze . this hope be the cause that the soldier take no great care to look well unto their victual , although i divide equal among they that which i can get abroad in the country , without reserve unto my self any more than the least soldier of all the company . the month of May approach and no manner of succour come out of France , we fall into extreme want of victual , constrain to eat the root of the earth and certain sorrel which we find in the field . for although the savage be return by this time unto their village , yet they succour we with nothing but certain fish , without which assure we have perish with famine . beside they have give we before the great part of their maiz and of their bean for our merchandise . this famine hold we from the beginning 59 a custom of the Indians to leave their house for 3 or 4 month and to live in the wood . they look for succour out of France by the end of April at the uttermost . extreme famine for six week space . promise break . of may until the midst of June . during which time the poor soldier and handicrafts - man become as feeble as may be , and be not able to work do nothing but go one after another in centinel unto the clift of a hill , situate very near unto the fort , to see if they may discover any french ship . in fine be frustrate of their hope , they assemble altogether , and come to beseech i to take some order that they may return into France , consider that if we let pass the season to embark our self , we be never like to see our country , where it can not be choose but that some trouble be fall out , see they have break their promise make unto we , and that no succour be come from thence . thereupon it be consult and resolve by all the company , that the bark Breton shall be trim up , whereof captain Vasseur have charge . but because the ship be not big enough to receive we all , some think good to build the brigandine two deck high , which our mutinous soldier have bring back , and that 25 man shall hazard themselves to pass therein into France . the rest be better advise say that it shall be far better to build a fair ship upon the keel of the galiote which i have cause to be make , promise to labour courageous thereupon . than i inquire of my shipwright to know in what space they can make this ship ready . they assure the whole company that be furnish with all thing necessary , they will make it ready by the 8 . of August . immediate i dispose of the time to work upon it , i give charge to monsieur de Ottigny my lieutenant to cause timber necessary for the finish of both the vessel to be bring , and to monsieur de Arlac my standart - bearer to go with a bark a league ofif from the fort to cut down tree fit to make plank , and to cause the sawier which he carry with he to saw they : and to my sergeant of the company to cause fifteen or sixteen man to labour in make coal : and to master hance keeper of the artillery , and to the gunner to gather 1565 . store of rosin to bray the vessel : wherein he use such diligence , that in less than 3 week he gather 2 hog - two hogshead head of the same together . there remain now but ° frosen - the principal , which be to recover victual to sustain we while our work endure : which i undertake to do with you rest of my company and the mariner of the ship . to this end i embark my self make up the thirty in my great bark , to make a voyage of forty or fifty league , have with we no provision at all of victual : whereby it may easy be gather how simple those of our fort be provide . true it be that certain soldier be better husband than the rest , and have make some provision of mast , sell a little