in the most part whereof they have place their negro , which they have bring to labour , and also lodge themselves and have cast diverse trench about they . thus for the consideration which he have , and doubt ( as he may well do ) that the Spaniard will encamp themselves there to molest we , and in the end to chase we out of the country , he resolve and continue in his embarkment , cause a proclamation to be make , that all soldier that be under his charge shall present with their weapon embark they , and that his two ensign shall march : which be put in execution . he come into my chamber , and pray i to lend he my lieutenant , my ensign , and my sergeant , and to let all my good soldier , which i have , go with he , which i deny he , because my self be sick , there be no man to stay in the fort . thereupon he answer i that i need not to doubt at all , and that he will return the morrow after , that in the mean space monsieur de Lys shall stay behind to look to all thing . than i show unto he that he be chief in this country , and that i for my part have no further authority : that therefore he will take good advisement what he do , for fear lest some inconvenience may ensue . than he tell i that he can do no less , than to continue this enterprise , and that in the letter which he have receive from my lord admiral , there be a postscript , which he show i write in these word : captain John Ribault , as i be enclose up this letter , i receive a certain advice , that don Pedro Melendes depart from Spain to go to the coast of new France : see you that you suffer he not to encroach upon you , no more than he will that you shall encroach upon he . you see ( quoth he ) the charge that i have , and i leave it unto your self to judge , if you can do any less in this case , consider the certain advertisement that we have , that they be already on land , and will invade we . This stop my mouth . thus therefore confirm or rather obstinate in this enterprise , and have regard rather unto his particular opinion then unto the advertisement which i have give he , and the inconvenience of the time whereof i have forewarn he , he embark himself the eight of September , and take my ensign and eight and thirty of my man away with he . i report i to those that know what war mean , if when a ensign march , any soldier that have any courage in he will stay behind , to forsake his ensign : thus no man 9i A . D . 1565 . a advertisement of my lord admiral to captain Ribault . captain ri - baidts em - barkment Sept . 8 . of commandement stay behind with i , for each one follow he as chief , in who name straight after his arrival , all cry and proclamation be make . captain Grange , which like not very well of this enterprise , the ten of be unto the ten of the month with i , and will September . not have go aboard , if it have not be for the instant request that captain Ribault make unto he , which stay two day in the road attend until la Grange be come unto he : who be come aboard , they set sail altogether , and from that time forward i never see a mighty they moor . the very day that he depart , which be l ^ uhof ^ eit th ® ten September , there rise so great a tempest ’ accompany with such storm , that the indian themselves assure i that it be the worst weather that ever be see on the coast : whereupon two or three day after , fear lest our ship may be in some distress , i send for monsieur du Lewis unto i , to take order to assemble the rest of our people to declare unto they what need we have to fortify our self : which be do accord : and then i give they to understand the necessity and inconvenience whereinto we be like to fall , aswell by the absence of our ship , as by the nearness of the Spaniard , at who hand we can look for no less than a open and sufficient proclaim war , see they have take land and fortify themselves so near unto we . and if any misfortune be fall unto our man which be at sea , we ought to make a full account with our self that we be to endure many great misery , be in so small number , and so many way afflict as we be . thus every one promise i to take pain : and therefore consider that their proportion of victual be small , and that so continue , they will not be able to do any Laudtmmere great work , i augment their allowance : although that after the arrival of captain Ribault my portion of victual be allot unto i as unto a common soldier , neither be i able to give so much as part of a bottle of wine to any man which deserve it : for i be so far from 92 a muster of the man leave in the fort by Ribault . Rene Laudonniere a . d . ... 15651 have mean to do so , that the captain himself take two of my boat , wherein the rest of the meal be , which be leave i of the biscuit which i cause to be make to return into France : so that if i shall say that i receive more favour at the hand of the Englishman be stranger unto i , i shall say but a truth . we begin therefore to fortify our Laudonniere self and to repair that which be break down , continue ™ 0 principal towards the water side , where