in the end Ottigni demand of they by sign if they have any gold or silver among they . but they tell he they have none as then : and that if he will send one of his man with they , they will bring he without danger into a place where they may have some . Ottigni see they so willing , deliver they one of his man which seem very resolute , to undertake this voyage : this fellow stay with they until ten of the clock the next morning , so that captain Ottigny somewhat ten ieague offend with his long stay , sail ten great league further . mayrraak rich in gold and silver . the second voyage . KingMolloua . Olata ouae utina a great king . further up the river : although he know not which way he shall go , yet he go so far up that he espy the boat wherein his soldier be : which report unto he , that the Indians will have carry he three great day journey further , and tell he that a king name Mayrra rich in gold and silver , dwell in those quarter , and that for small quantity of merchandise enough may be have of he : yet that he will not hazard himself without his leave , and that he bring but a very little gold . This be do , our man return towards our fort Caroline , after they have leave the soldier with the Indians to inform himself more and more of such thing as he may discover more at leisure . fifteen day after this voyage to Thimogoa , i dispatch captain Vasseur and my sergeant also to return again into this country , and to seek out the soldier which remain there in the former voyage . be therefore embark , they sail two whole day : and before they come to the dwell of the Indians , they find two of they on the river side , which be express send unto that place to descry whether any of their enemy be come to that part , with intention to surprise they , as they do usual . when they perceive captain Vasseur , they know incontinent that he be none of their enemy , and therefore make no difficulty to come near unto the bark , and show he by sign that the soldier which they seek be not in that place , but be at that present in the house of king Molloua which be vassal unto another great king name by they Olata ouae utina : and that if the captain will sail thitherward , he shall come thither very quick : wherewith he be content , and cause his man to row to that part which the Indians show he : whereat they be so glad , that they run quick before by land to declare his arrival , which be at the lodging of king Molloua , after he have row not past half a league . while king Molloua have end entertain captain Vasseur and his man , the soldier come in with five or six pound weight of silver which he have truck five or stxe and traffic with Indians . ofluver ^ this king cause bread to be make , and fish to be ’ dress after the indian fashion to feast our man : to who , while they be at meat , he make a discourse of diverse other king his friend and ally , reckon up to the number of nine of they by name , to wit , Cadecha , Chilili , Eclauou , Enacappe , Calany , Anacharaqua , omit - taqua , Aequara , moquoso : all which with he to the number of more than forty , he assure we to be the vassal of the most renown Olata ouae utina . ^ uthia t0 this do , he go about likewise to discover the enemy of ouae utina , in which number he place as the first the Paracoussy Satourioua monarch of the confine of the river of May , which have under his obeisance thirty other paracoussy , whereof there be ten which be all his brethren , and that therefore he be great esteem in those part : than he name three other not less puissant than Satourioua , whereof the first dwell two day journey from his lord Olata ouae utina , and ordinary make war upon he , who name be Potanou , a man cruel in war , but pitiful in the king Potanou . execution of his fury . for he take the prisoner to mercy , be content to mark they on the left arm with a great mark like unto a seal , and so imprint as if it have be touch with a hot iron , than he let they go without any more hurt . the two other be name Onatheaqua , and Houstaqua , be great lord , and abound in riches , and principal Onatheaqua , which dwell near unto the high mountains , wherein there be abundance of many rare thing , exceed and infinite quantity of a kind of slate stone , wherewith they make wedge to cleave their wood . the occasion which ( as he say ) move Potanou to wage war against Olata ouae utina , be the fear that he have , lest he and his companion shall get of that hard some paint their face with black , and some with red . stone in his country , wherewith they head their arrow , and can not get it in any near place . beside all this , Molloua recite to captain Vasseur , that the king ally the vassal of the great Olata , arm their breast , arm , thigh , leg and forehead with large plate of gold and silver : and that by this mean the arrow that be discharge upon they can do they no manner of hurt at all , but rather be break against they . hereupon captain Vasseur inquire whether the king Onetheaqua and Houstaqua be like unto we . for by the description that they make of they , he begin to doubt whether they be Spaniards or no : but Molloua tell he that they be not , but that they be Indians like the rest , save that they paint their face with black , and that the rest as Molloua , paint