1 cause three - fortify they . score foot of tree to be plant , to repair the palissado with the plank which i cause to be take of the ship which i have build . nevertheless notwithstanding all our diligence and travail , we be never able full to repair it by reason of the storm , which common do we so great annoy , that we can not finish our enclosure . perceive my self in such extremity i take a muster of the man , which captain Ribault have leave i , to see if there be any that want weapon : i find nine or ten of they whereof not past two or three have ever draw sword out of a scabbard , as i think . let they which have be bold to say , that i have man enough leave i , so that i have mean to defend my self , give ear a little now unto i , and if they have eye in their head , let they see what man i have . of the nine there be four but young stripling , which serve captain Ribault and keep his dog , the five be a cook : among those that be without the fort , and which be of the foresay company of captain Ribault , there be a carpenter of threescore year old , one a beer - brewer , one old crossbow maker , two shoemaker , and four or five man that have their wife , a player on the virginal , two servant of monsieur du Lewis , one of monsieur de Beauhaire , one of monsieur de la grange , and about fourscore and five or six in all , count aswell lackey as woman and child . behold the goodly troop so sufficient to defend themselves , and so courageous as they have esteem they to be : and for my part i leave it to 93 fourscore and five leave in the fort with Laudonniere . other consideration to imagine whether captain Ribault will have leave they with i to have borrow my man , if they have be such . those that be leave i of my own company be about sixteen or seventeen that can bear arm , and all of they poor and lean : the rest be sick and maim in the conflict which my lieutenant have against utina . this view be thus take , we set our watch , whereof we make two centinel , that the soldier may have one night free . than we bethink our self of those which may be most sufficient , among who we choose two , one of who be name Monsieur saint Cler , and the other monsieur de la Vigne , to who we deliver candle and lantern to go round about the fort to view the watch , because of the foul and foggy weather . i deliver they also a sandglasse or clock , that the centinel may not be trouble more one then another . in the mean while i cease not , for all the foul weather nor my sickness which i have , to oversee the corpse de garde . the night between the nineteenth and twenty of September la Vigne keep watch with his company , wherein he use all endeavour , although it rain without cease . when the day be therefore come , and that he see that it rain still worse than it do before , he pity the centinel so too moil and wet : and think the Spaniard will not have come in such a strange time , he let they depart , and to say the truth , he go himself unto his lodging . in the mean while one which have something to do without the fort , and my trumpet which go up unto the thespanyard rampart perceive a troop of Spaniard which come down from a little knap . where incontinent they i p ' begin to cry alarm , and the trumpeter also : which assoon as ever i understand , forthwith i issue out , with my target and sword in my hand , and get i into the midst of the court , where i begin to cry upon my soldier . some of they which be of the forward sort go towards the breach , which be on the Southside , and where the munition of the artillery lie , where they be repulse and slay . by the self same place two ensign enter , which immediate be the Spaniard plant on the wall . two other ensign also enter enter firton the other side towards the west , where there be another breach : and those which be lodge in this quarter , and which show themselves , be likewise defeat . as i go to succour they which be defend the breach on the southwest side , i encountered by chance a great company of Spaniards , which have already repulse our man and be now enter , which drive i back unto the court of the fort : be there i espy with they one call Francis Jean , which Francis Jean be one of the mariner which steal away my bark , atraitourto and have guide and conduct the Spaniard thither . t na tm ' assoon as he see i , he begin to say , this be the captain . this troop be lead by a captain who name , as i think , be don Pedro Melendes : these don Pedro make certain push at i with their pike which light on my tarket . but perceive that 1 be not able Spaniards . to withstand so great a company , and that the court be already win , and their ensign plant on the rampart , and that i have never a man about i , save one only who name be Bartholomew , i enter into the yard of my lodging , into which they follow i , and have it not be for a tent that be set up , i have be take : but the Spaniard which follow i be occupy in cut of the cord of the tent , and in the mean while i save my self by the breach which be on the west side near unto my lieutenant lodging , and gate