my bark in manner follow . Theise mariner of captain Bourdet put i in the head , that if they have such bark as i be , they may gain very much in the isle of the Antilles , and make a exceed profitable voyage . hereupon they begin to devise how they may steal away my bark , and consult that when i shall command they to go unto the the village of village of Sarauahi distant about a league and a half Sarauahi . from our fort , and situate upon a arm of the river , ( whither accord to my manner i send they daily to seek clay , to make brick and mortar for our house ) they will return no more , but will furnish themselves with victual as well as they may possible : and then will embark themselves all in one vessel , another of he and will go their way : as indeed they do . and bark steal jbat which be worse , two flemish carpenter , which “ carpenter ? sa ^ e B ° urdet have leave i , steal away the other ’ bark , and before their departure cut the cable of the bark , and of the shipboate , that it may go away with the tide , that i may not pursue they : so that i remain without either bark or boat , which fall out as unlucky for i as be possible . for 1 be ready to embark my self with all speed , to discover as far up our river , as i may by any mean . now my mariner , ( as i understand afterward ) take a bark that be a passenger of the Spaniard near the isle of Cuba , wherein they find a certain quantity of gold and silver , which they seize upon . and of these have this booty they lie a while at sea , until . their victual begin to fail they : which be the betray cause , that oppress with famine they come unto his own counHavana the principali town of the isle of Cuba : trey man to the whereupon proceed that mischief which hereafter i Spaniards , and will declare more at large . when i see my bark return not at their wont hour , and suspect that which fall out in deed , i command my carpenter with all diligence to make a little boat with a flat bottom , to search those river for some news of these mariner . the boat dispatch within a day and a night , by reason that my carpenter find plank and timber ready saw to their hand , as common i cause my Sawyers to provide it , i send man to seek some news of my thief : but all be in vain . therefore i determine to cause two great at Saw - mill bark to be build , each of which may be thirty five , necessary here . or thirty six foot long in the keel . and now the work be very well forward which i set my workman about , when ambition and avarice , the mother of all mischief , take root in the heart of four or five soldier which can not away with the work and pain take : and which from hence forward ( namely one Fourneaux , and one la Croix , and thethirde another call Steven le Geneuois , the three principali sedition . author of the sedition ) begin to practise with the best of my troop , show they that it be a vile thing for man of honest parentage , as they be , to moil themselves thus with abject and base work , see they have the best occasion of the world offer they to make themselves all rich : which be to arm the two bark which be in building , and by Peru the french mean the coast of Carthagena and number de Dios . the captain charge at his set forth . to furnish they with good man : and then to sail unto Peru , and the other isle of the Antilles , where every soldier may easy enrich himself with ten thousand crown . and if their enterprise shall be mislike withal in France , they shall be always able , by reason of the great wealth that they shall gain , to retire themselves into Italy , until the heat be overpass , and that in the mean season some war will fall out , which will cause all this to be quite forget . this word of riches sound so well in the ear of my soldier , that in fine , after they have oftentimes consult of their affair , they grow to the number of threescore and six : which to colour their great desire which they have to go on steal , they cause a request to be present unto i by Francis de la caille sergeant of my company , contain in sum a declaration of the small store of victual that be leave to maintain we , until the time that ship may return from France : for remedy whereof they think it necessary to send to new Spain , Peru , and all the isle adjoin , which they beseech i to be content to grant . but i make they answer , that when the bark be finish , i will take such good order in general , that by mean of the king merchandise , without spare my own apparel , we will get victual of the inhabitant of the country : see also that we have enough to serve we for four month to come . for i fear great , that under pretence of search victual , they will enterprise somewhat against the king of Spain subject , which in time to come may just be lay to my charge , consider that at our departure out of France , the queen have charge i very express , to do no kind of wrong to the king of Spain subject , nor any thing whereof he may conceive any jealousy . they make as though they be content with this 40 answer . but eight day after , as i continue in work upon our fort , and on my bark , i fall sick . than my seditious companion forget all honour and duty , suppose