, where find their way to be stop , they rest under the shadow of a mighty bay tree to refresh themselves a little and to resolve which way to take . than they discover , as it be on the sudden , five Indians half hide in the wood , which seem somewhat to distrust our man , until they say unto they in the indian language Antipola Bonassou , to the end that understand their speech they may come unto we more bold , which they do incontinent . but because they see , that the four that go last , bear up the train of the skin wherewith he that go foremost be apparel our man imagine that the foremost must needs be some man of great quality than the rest , see that withal they call he Paracoussy , Paracoussy , wherefore , some of our company go towards he , and use he courteous show he , monsieur de Ottigni , their lieutenant , for who they have make a harbour with bay and palm bough after the indian fashion , to the end that by such sign the savage may think the Frenchman have compain with such as they at other time . the indian Paracoussy draw near to the french , and courtesy begin to make he a long oration , which tend to no other end , but that he beseech the Frenchman very earnest to come and see his dwell and his parent , which they grant he , and straight for pledge of better amity , he give unto my lieutenant Ottigni , the very skin that he be clad with . then he take he by the hand , lead he right towards the marsh , over which the Paracoussy , monsieur Ottigni , and certain other of our man be bear upon the indian shoulder : and the rest which can not pass because of the mire and reed , go through the wood , and follow a narrow path which lead they forth until they come unto the paracoussyes dwelling ; out of which there come about fifty Indians to receive our man gallant , and to feast they after their manner . after which they bring at their entrance a great vessel of earth , make after a strange fashion full of fountain water clear and very excellent . this vessel be bear by a indian , and there be another young which bear of this water in another little vessel of wood , and present thereof to every one to drink , observe in do the same , a certain order and reverence , which he make to each of they , to who he give drink . our thirst well quench by this mean , and our man be sufficient refresh , the Paracoussy bring they to his father lodging , one of the old man that live upon the earth . our man regard his age , begin to make much of he , use this speech , Amy , Amy , that be to say , friend , friend , whereat the old sire show himself very glad . afterwards they question with he concern the course of his age : whereunto he make answer , show that he be the first living originali , from whence five generation be descend , as he show unto they by another old man that sit direct over against he , man of ex - which far exceed he in age . and this man be his ceedmg old father ? which seem to be rather a dead carkei than a live body : for his sinew , his vein , his artier , his bone , and other part , appear so clear through his skin , that a man may easy tell they , and discern they one from another . also his age be so great , that the good man have lose his sight , and can not speak one only word but with exceed great pain . monsieur de Ottigni have see so strange a thing , turn to the young of these two old man , pray he to vouchsafe to answer he to that which he demand touch - savage in Florida of 250 . year old . eagles in Florida . Rene Laudonniere a . d . 1564 . ing his age . then the old man call a company of Indians , and strike twice upon his thigh , and lay his hand upon two of they , he show he by sign , that these two be his son : again smite upon their thigh , he show he other not so old , which be the child of the two first , which he continue in the same manner until the five generation . but though this old man have his father alive more old than himself , and that both of they do wear their hair very long , and as white as be possible , yet it be tell they , that they may yet live thirty or forty year more by the course of nature : although the young of they both be not less than two hundred and fifty year old . after he have end his communication , he commanded two young eagles to be give to our man , which he have breed up for his pleasure in his house . he cause also little panier make of palm leave full of gourd red and blow to be deliver unto they . for recompense of which present he be satisfy with french toy . these two old man cause our man to be guide back again to the place from whence they come , by the young Paracoussy which have bring they thither . and have take leave of the Paracoussy , they come and seek i out in the place where i stay , and rehearse unto i all that they have see , pray i also that i will reward their guide , which so frank and hearty have receive they into his house , which i will not fail to do by any mean . now be i determine to search out the quality of the hill . therefore i go right to the top thereof , where we find nothing else but cedar , palm , and baytree of so sovereign odour , that balm smell nothing like in comparison . the tree be environ round about with