the content of those letter be these . captain Laudonniere , because some of they which letter of they be return from Florida speak indifferent of lordadmtrall the country , the king desire your presence , to the end , that accord to your trial , he may resolve to ’ bestow great cost thereon , or whole to leave it : and therefore i send captain John Ribault to be governor there , to who you shall deliver whatsoever you have 85 ' in charge , and inform he of all thing you have discover . and in a postscript of the letter be thus write . think not , that whereas i send for you , it be for any evil opinion or mistrust that i have of you , but that it be for your good and for your credit , and assure your self that during my life you shall find i your good master . Chastillon . now after i have long discourse with captain Ribault , captain la Grange accost i , and tell i of a accusation infinite number of false report which have be make of against he . i to my great hindrance : and among other thing ’ he inform i , that my lord admiral take it very 2 . evil that i have carry a woman with i : likewise that some body have tell he that i go about to counter ’ feit the king , and to play the tyrant : that i be too +• cruel unto the man that go with i : that i seek to be advance by other mean then by my lord 5 - admiral : and that i have write to many lord of they . i - court , which i ought not to have do . whereunto Laudonnieres j answerej that the woman be a poor chambermaid , answer there - .. , t , , , . t / . ' unto . which encage have take up in a inn , to oversee my household business , to look to a infinite sort of diverse beast , as sheep and poultry which i carry over with i to store the country withal : that it be not meet to put a man to attend this business : likewise , consider the length of the time that i be to abide there , i think it shall not offend any body to take a woman with i , aswell to help my soldier in their sickness , as in my own , whereinto i fall afterward . and how necessary her service be for we , each one at that time may easy perceive : that all my man think so well of she , that at one instant there be six or seven which do demand she of i in manage ; as in very 2 . deed one of they have she after our return . touch that which be say that i play the king , these report be make , because i will not bear with any thing which be against the duty of my charge , and the king service . Moreover , that in such enterprise it be necessary for a governor to make himself know and obey , for fear lest every body will become a master , perceive themselves far from great force . and that 3 . if the tale - teller call this rigour , it rather proceed of their disobedience , then of my nature less subject to cruelty than they be to rebellion . for the two 4 - last point , that i have not write to any of the lord of the court but by the advice and commandment of my lord admiral , which will i at my departure to send part of such thing as i shall find in the country unto the lord of the counsel : to the end that be move by this mean , they may deal with the queen mother for the continuance of this enterprise : that have be so small time in the country , continual hinder with building of fortress , and unlade of my ship , i be not able to come by any new or rare thing to send they , whereupon i think it best to content they in the mean while with letter , until such time as i may have long space to search out the country , and may recover something to send they : the distribution of which letter i mean not otherwise but to refer to my lord admiral good pleasure : that if the bearer have forget himself so far , as that he have break the cover of the letter , and present they himself for hope of gain , it be not my commandment . and 5 . that i never honour noble man so much , nor do to any man more willing and faithful service then to my lord admiral , nor ever seek advancement but by his mean . you see how thing pass for this day . the next day the Indians come in from all part , to know what people these be : to who i signify that this be he which in the year 1562 . arrive in this country , and erect the pillar which stand at the entry of the river . some of they know he : for in truth he be easy to be know by reason of the great beard which he wear . he receive many present of they which be of the village near adjoin , 87 the mountain of apalatcy wherein be mine of perfect gold . Sieroa Pira red mettle . perfect gold . good mean to avoid the danger of fire . September 4 . among who there be some that he have not yet forget . the king homoloa , Serauahi , Alimacani , Malica , and Casti come to visit he and welcome he with diverse gift accord to their manner . i advertise they that he be send thither by the king of France , to remain there in my room , and that i be send for . than they demand and pray he , if it may stand with his good pleasure , to cause the merchandise that he have bring with he to be deliver they , and that