be conclude , and the savage rendezvous be appoint they beyond the river Salinacani , of our man call Somme , they all drink the river of with great solemnity their drink call Cassine , make of the juice of certain herb ( as they be wont to do , fa French when they go to any place of danger , ) which have such force , that it take from they hunger and thirst for 24 hour , and Gourgues be fain to make as though he drink thereof for company . afterwards they lift up their hand and swear all that they will never forsake he . Olotocara follow he with pike in hand . be all meet at the river of Sarauahi , not without great the river of trouble , by reason of the rain and place full of water Sarauahi . which they must needs pass , which hinder their passage , they be distress with famine find nothing by the way to eat , their bark of provision be not arrive , 103 the estate of the Spaniard in Florida . the river of saracary , or Sarauahi . which be to come unto he from the ship , the oversight and charge whereof he have leave unto Burdelois with the rest of the mariner . now he have learn that the Spaniard be four hundred strong , divide into three fort build and flank , and well fortify upon the river of May , the great fort especial begin by the french , and afterward repair by they : upon the most dangerous and principali land place whereof , two league low and near toward the river mouth , they have make two small fort , which be defend , the river pass between they , with six score soldier , good store of artillery and other munition , which they have in the same . from saracary unto these small fort be two league space , which he find very painful , because of the bad way and continual rain . after - ward he depart from the river Catacouru with 10 , shot , to view the first fort , and to assault it the next day in the morning by the break of day , which he can not do , because of the foul weather , and darkness of the night . king helicopile see he out of quiet in that he have fail of his purpose there , assure he to guide he a more easy way , though it be far about . insomuch as lead he through the wood , he bring he within sight of the fort , where he discern one quarter which be but begin to be entrench . thus after he have sound the small river that fall down thereby , he stay until ten of the clock in the morning for a ebb water , that his man may pass over there , unto a place where he have see a little grove between the river and the fort ( that he may not be see to pass and set his soldier in array ) cause they to fasten their flask to their morion , and to hold up their sword and kaliver in their hand , for fear least the water , which reach up to their girdle , shall not wet they : where they find such abundance of great oyster , and shell which be so sharp , that many have their leg cut with they , and many other lose their shoe . notwithstanding assoon as 104 they be pass over , with a french courage they prepare themselves to the assault on the Sunday eve next after easter day , in April 1568 . insomuch that Gourgues to employ the ardent heat of this good affection , give twenty shot to his lieutenant Cazenove , and ten mariner lade with pot and ball of wild fire to burn the gate : and then he assault the fort assault on another side , after he have make a short speech unto ^ " f ^ his man of the strange treason which the Spaniard ' have play their companion . but be descry as they come hold down their head within two hundred pace from the fort , the gunner be upon the terrace of the fort , after he have cry , be i , arm , these be French man , discharge twice upon they a culverin , whereon the arm of France be grave , which have be take from Laudonniere . but as he go about to charge it the three time , Olotocara , which have not va ^ ure of learned to keep his rank , or rather move with rage , ot < , cara - lept on the platform , and thrust he through the body with his pike and slay he . whereupon Gourgues advance forward , and after he have hear Cazenove cry , that the Spaniard which issue out arm at the cry of the alarm , be flee , he draw to that part , and so hem they in between he and his lieutenant , that of threescore there escape not a man , save only fifteen reserve unto the same death which they have put the french unto . the Spaniard of the other fort in the meanwhile cease not to play with their ordinance , which much annoy the assailant : although to answer they they have by this place and oftentimes point the four piece find in the first fort where - the assault upon Gourgues be accompany with fourscore shot go aboard the bark which meet he there to good ' purpose to pass into the wood near unto the fort , out of which he suppose the Spaniard will issue to save themselves through the benefit of the wood in the great fort , which be not pass one league distant from you same . afterwards the Savages not stay for the return of Io5 the Spaniard of the second fort allslaine . note . a notable spanish subtlety . [ he . 359 - j the bark , leap all into the water hold up their bow and arrow in one hand , and swim with the other , so that the Spaniard sing both the shore cover with so great a number of man , think to flee towards the wood : but be charge by the french , and afterward repulse by the savage , towards who they will have retire , they be soon than they will bereave of their life . to conclude they all there end their day save 15 of those which be reserve to be execute for the example of other . whereupon captain Gourgues have cause all that he find in the second fort to be transport unto the first , where he mean to strengthen himself to take resolution against the great fort , the state whereof he do not understand : in fine a sergeant of a band one of