the four voyage of the Frenchman into Florida , under the conduct of captain Gourgues , in the year , 1567 . aptaine Gourgues a gentleman bear in the country near unto Bourdeaux incite with a desire of revenge , to repair the honour of his nation , borrowed of his friend and sell part of his own good to set forth and furnish three ship of indifferent burden with all thing necessary , have in they a hundred and fifty soldier , and fourscore choose mariner under captain Cazenove his lieutenant , and Francis Bourdelois master over the mariner . he set forth the 22 of August 1567 . and have endure contrary wind and storm for a season , at length he arrive and go 100 on shore in the isle of Cuba . from thence he pass to the cape of saint Antony at the end of they he of Cuba , about two hundred league distant from Florida , where the captain disclose unto they his intention which hitherto he have conceal from they , pray and exhort they not to leave he be so near the enemy , so well furnish , and in such a cause : which they all swear unto he , and that with such courage that they will not stay the full moon to pass the channel of Bahama , but speedy discover Florida , channel of where the Spaniard salute they with two canon Bahama be - shot from their fort , suppose that they have be of n ^ the hie * their nation , and Gourgues salute they again to enter - ofLucayos . take they in this error , that he may surprise they at more advantage , yet sail by they , and make as though he go to some other place until he have sail out of sight of the place , so that about evening , he land 15 league from the fort , at the mouth of the the TrenchRiver Tacatacouru , which the Frenchman call Seine , because they think it to be like Seine in France . afterwards perceive the shore to be cover with savage with their bow and arrow , ( beside the sign of peace and amity which he make they from his ship ) he send his trumpeter , to assure they , that they be come thither for none other end but to renew the amity and ancient league of the french with they . the trumpeter do his message so well ( by reason he have be there before under Laudonniere ) that he bring back from king Satourioua , the great of all the other king , a kid and other meat to refresh we , beside the offer of his friendship and amity . afterwards they retire dance in sign of joy , to advertise all the king satouriouaes kinsman to repair thither the next day to make a league of amity with the Frenchman . whereupon in the mean space our general go about to sound the chanel of the river to bring in his ship , and the better to traffic and deal with the savage , of who the chief the next day in the morning ioi complaint of the savage against the Spaniard . two chain of silver give to Gourgues . present themselves , namely the great king Satourioua , tacatacourou , halmacanir , athore , harpaha , Helmacape , Helicopil6 , Molloua , and other his kinsman and ally , with their accustom weapon . then send they to entreat the french general to come on shore , which he cause his man to do with their sword and harquebusy , which he make they leave behind they , in token of mutual assurance , leave his man but their sword only , after that the savage complain thereof have leave and likewise send away their weapon at the request of Gourgues . this do satourioua go to meet he , cause he to sit on his right hand in a seat of wood of lentisque cover with moss make of purpose like unto his own . than two of the elder of the company pull up the bramble and other weed which be before they , and after they have make the place very clean , they all sit round about they on the ground . afterwards Gourgues be about to speak , Satourioua prevent he , declare at large unto he the incredible wrong , and continual outrage that all the savage , their wife and child have receive of the Spaniard since their come into the country and massacre of the Frenchman , with their continual desire if we will assist they thorough to revenge so shameful a treason , aswell as their own particular grief , for the firm good will they always have bear unto the Frenchman . whereupon Gourgues give they his faith , and make a league between they and he with a oath give they certain present of dagger , knife , look glass , hatchet , ring , bell , and such other thing , trifle unto we , but precious unto these king : which moreover , see his great liberality , demand each one a shirt of he to wear only on their festival day , and to be bury in at their death . which thing after that they have receive , and Satourioua have give in recompense to captain Gourgues two chain of silver grain which hang about his neck , and each of the king certain dear skin dress after their manner , they retire 102 themselves dance and very jocund , with promise to keep all thing secret , and to bring unto the say place good company of their subject all well arm to be avenge thorough on the Spaniard . in the mean space Gourgues very narrow examine Peter de Br ^ Peter de Bri bear in Newhaven , which be but a young stripling escape out ot the tort into the wood while the span - yeera yard murder the rest of the french , and be afterward Satourioua . bring up with Satourioua , which at that time bestow he on our general , who advice stand he in great stead : whereupon he send to discover the fort and the estate of the enemy by certain of his man , be guide by Olotacara satouriouaes nephew which he have give he for this purpose and for assurance of estampe a gentleman of Cominges , and other which he send to descry the state of the enemy . Moreover he give he three fledge a son of his stark naked as all of they be , and his wife which he love best of all the rest , of eighteen satoi ^ ioua . year old , apparel with the moss of tree , which for 3 day space be in the ship , until our man return from descry the state of the enemy , and the king have furnish their preparation at their rendezvous . their march