: wherein have willing agree unto i , they raise 0 it all with turf from the gate unto the river which be the Westside on the west side - this do , i set my carpenter on of the fort . work to make another bark of the same bigness that Fcuiddus mtadcus num Laudzonerus aide s ' Florida , repnorunt conprendzc ^ dmerica quar nunc ( jduid minimum cvius Francis dirt eat ydbadtumy . ' ferfida quern si non sociorum turpiter ho ' s ' ti cedcdio prodp ^ ec ( cvius tamen , omnibus vltis , Flapsus maxibus ) quas , qualia . , quantapatraflem t Rene Laudonniere the other be of : i command the Sawyers that they shall prepare plank , the smith to prepare iron and nail , and certain other to make coal : so that the bark be finish in eighteen day . afterwards i make another lesser than the first , the better to discover up the river . in this mean space the indian visit i , and bring i daily certain present , as fish , deer , turki - cock , leopard , little bear , and other thing accord to the place of their habitation . i recompense they with certain hatchet , knife , bead of glass , comb , and looking - glass . two Indians come unto i one day to salute i on the behalf of their king , who name be Marracou , kingmarra - dwelling from the place of our fort some forty league cou . towards the south , and tell i that there be one in the house of king Onathaqua which be call Barbu king onatha - or the beard man , and in the house of king 9 ^ Mathiaca another man who name they know not , which be not of their nation : whereupon i conceive ' that these may be some Christians . wherefore i send to all the king my neighbour to pray they , that if there be any Christian dwell in their country , they will find mean that he may be bring unto i , and that i will make they double recompense . they which love reward , take so much pain , that twa span - the two man , whereof we have speak , be bring yard bring unto the fort unto i . they be naked , their hair long unto their ham as the use to do , and be Spaniard bear , yet accustom to the fashion of the country the first sight they find our manner of strange . after that i have question of matter with they , i cause they to be apparel , and to cut their hair ; which they will not loose , but lap it up in a linen cloth , say that they will carry it into their country to be a testimony of the misery that they have endure in the Indies . in the hair of one of they be find a little gold hide , to ix 49 d unto Laudonniere by the savage . wear savage so well that at apparel certain Calos a place upon you flat call the martyr near the cape of Florida . the king of Calos . great quantity ofgolde and silver . plate of g > ld as broad as a savicer . the value of five and twenty crown , which he give unto i . And examine they of the place where they have be , and how they come thither , they answer i that fifteen year past , three ship , in one of which they be , be cast away over against a place name Calos upon the flat which be call the martyr , and that the king of Calos recover the great part of the riches which be in the say ship , travel in such sort that the great part of the people be save , and many woman ; among which number there be three or four woman marry , remain there yet , and their child also , with this king of Calos . i desire to learn what this king be . they answer i , that he be the goodly and the tall indian of the country , a mighty man , a warrior , and have many subject under his obedience . they tell i moreover , that he have great store of gold and silver , so far forth that in a certain village he have a pit full thereof , which be at the least as high as a man , and as large as a ton : all which wealth the Spaniard full persuade themselves that they can cause i to recover , if i be able to march thither with a hundred shot , beside that which i may get of the common people of the country , which have also great store thereof . they further also advertise i , that the woman go to dance , do wear about their girdle plate of gold as broad as a saucer , and in such number ; that the weight do hinder they to dance at their ease ; and that the man wear the like also . the great part of these riches be have , as they say , out of the spanish ship , which common be cast away in this straight ; and the rest by the traffic which this king of Calos have with the other king of the country : final , that he be have in great reverence of his subject ; and that he make they believe that his sorcery and charm be the cause that make the earth bring forth her fruit : and that he may the easy persuade they that it be so , he retire himself once or twice a year to a certain house , accompany with two or three of his most familiar friend , where he use certain enchantment ; and if any man intrude himself to go to see what they do in this place , the king immediate cause he to be put to death . Moreover , they tell i , that one of these every year in the time of harvest ^ this savage king Spaniard sacrifice one man , which be keep express for this n ^^ at purpose , and take out of the number of the Spaniard qomes - which by tempest be cast away upon that coast . one