i be not able with you same store of victual which i have , so well to proportion out the travail upon the ship which we build to return into France , but that in the end we be constrain to endure extreme famine , which continue among we all the month of May : for in this latter season , neither Maiz nor bean , nor mast be to be find in the village , because they have employ all for to sow their field , insomuch that we be constrain to eat root , which the most part of our man pun in the mortar which i have bring with i to beat gunnepowder in , and the grain which come to we from other place : some take the wood of Esquine , beat it , and make meal thereof , which they boil with water , and eat it : other go with their harquebusy to seek to kill some foul . yea this misery be so great , that one be find that gather up among the filth of my house , all the fish bone that he can find , which he dry and beat into powder to make bread thereof . the effect of this hideous famine appear incontinent among we , for our bone eftsoon begin to cleave so near unto the skin , that the most part of the soldier have their skin peirce through with they in many part of their body : in such sort that my great fear be , lest the Indians will rise up against we , consider that it will have be very hard for we to have defend our self in such extreme decay of all our force , beside the scarcity of all victual , which fail we all at once . for the very river have not such plenty of fish as it be wont , and it seem that the land and water do fight against we . now as we be thus upon term of despair , about the end of the month of May , and the begin of June , i be new corn by advertise by certain Indians that be my neigh - en ^ ° f hour , that in the high country up above the river , there be new Maiz , and that that country be most ' forward of all . This cause i to take upon i to go thither with a certain number of my man , and i go up the river to a place call Enecaque : where i meet the village of the sister of utina in a village where she make we very Enecaque . good cheer and send we fish . we find that which be tell we to be true : for the maiz be now ripe : but by this good luck one shrewd turn happen unto i . for the most part of my soldier fall sick with eat moor of it then their weaken stomach can digest . we have also be the space of four day since we depart from our fort , without eat any thing , save little pinocke , and a little fish , which we a little green get of the fisher which we meet sometime along the fruit that river . and yet this be so little that certain soldier eat privy little whelp which be new whelp , cherry the next day i purpose to go into you lie of Edelano than he of to take the king which have cause one of my man to Edelano . be slay , as i have mention before : but be advertise of my depart out of my fort , and of the way which i take up the river , he fear that i go forth two carpen - ten killedfor gather the indian maiz . the village athore . Nia Cubacani a queen . with a purpose to be revenge of the evil turn which he play : so that when i come thither , i find the house empty , for he be retire a little before with all his people : and i can not by any mean keep my soldier , be angry because they have lose one of their companion , from set the village on fire . at my departure from thence i pass back again by Enecaque , where i gather as much maiz as i can possible : which with great diligence i convey to our fort to succour my poor man , which i have leave in great necessity . they therefore see i a far off come , run to that side of the river where they think i will come on land : for hunger so pinch they to the heart , that they can not stay until the victual be bring they to the fort and that they well show assoon as i be come , and that i have distribute that little maiz among they , which i have give to each man , before i come out of the bark : for they eat it before they have take it out of the husk . but see my self in this extreme need , i take pain day by day to seek some village where there be some food . and as i travail this way and that way , it happen that two of my carpenter be kill by the two son of king Emola , and by one who name be Casti , as they go on walk to the village call athore . the cause of this murder be , because they can not refrain themselves as they walk through the field from gather a little maiz , which as they be do , they be take in the manner : whereof i be present advertise by a indian which a little before have bring i a present from Nia Cubacani queen of a village , and neighbour to our fort upon receipt of this advertisement , i send my sergeant with a number of soldier which find nothing else but the 2 dead corpse , which they bury and return without do any other exploit , because the inhabitant be flee away , fear they shall be punish for such a foul fact . as these thing thus pass , and that by this time we have almost drive out the month of May , two subject of king utina come unto i with a hermaphrodite , which show i