in few day they will bring he to the mountain of apalatcy , whither they have promise to conduct i , and that in case they perform not their promise , that they be content to be cut in piece . in those mountain , as they say , be find red copper , which they call in their language Sieroa Pira , which be as much to say as red mettle , whereof i have a piece , which at the very instant i show to captain Ribault , which cause his gold - fine to make a assay thereof , which report unto he that it be perfect gold . about the time of these conference , come and go of the king of the country , be weaken with my former travail , and fall into a melancholy upon the false report that have be make of i , i fall into a great continual fever , which hold i eight or nine day : during which time captain Ribault cause his victual to be bring on shore , and bestow the most part thereof in the house which my lieutenant have build about two hundred pase without the fort : which he do to the end they may be the better defend from the weather , and likewise to the intent that the meal may be near to the bakehouse , which i have build of purpose in that place , the better to avoid the danger of the fire , as i say before . but lo how oftentimes misfortune do search and pursue we , even then when we think to be at rest baptize lo see what happen after that captain Ribault have bring up three of his small ship into the river , which be the four of September ! six great spanish ship arrive in the road , where four of our great ship remain , which cast anchor , assure our man of good amity . they ask how the chief T & Spaniards captain of the enterprise do , and call they all by their name and surname . i report i to you if it y prench . can be otherwise but these man before they go out of Spain must needs be inform of the enterprise and of those that be to execute the same . about the break of day they begin to make towards our man : but our man which trust they never a deal , have hoist their sail by night , be ready to cut the string that tie they . wherefore perceive that this make towards our man of the Spaniard be not to do they any pleasure , and know well that their furniture be too small to make head against they , because that the most part of their man be on shore , they cut their cable , leave their anchor , and set sail . the Spaniard see themselves discover , lend they certain vollei of their great ordinance , make sail after they , and chase they all day long : but our man get way of they still towards the sea . and the Spaniard see they can not reach they , by reason that the french ship be better of sail than they , and also because they will not leave the coast , turn back and go on shore in the river Seloy , which we call the the river river of dolphin 8 or 10 league distant from the orj ^ t place where we be . our man therefore find they - g ' or self better of sail than they , follow they to descry io league what they do , which after they have do , they return over land from unto the river of May , where captain Ribault have but descry they , embark himself in a great boat to know what news they have . be at the entry of the cape sea . river he meet with the boat of captain couset ship , wherein there be a good number of man which make relation unto he of all the Spaniard do : and how the great ship name the Trini tie have keep the sea , and that she be not return with they . they tell he moreover that they have see three spanish ship enter into the river of dolphin , and the other dangerous flaw of wind on the coast of Florida in September . king Emola . a village and river both of that name . three remain in the road ; far that they have put their soldier , their victual and munition on land . after he understand these news he return to the fortress , and come to my chamber where i be sick , and there in the presence of the captain , la grange , S . marie , Ottigny , visty , Yonville , and other gentleman , he propound , that it be necessary for the king service , to embark himself with all his force , and with the three ship that be in the road to seek the spanish fleet , whereupon he ask our advice . i first reply , and show unto he the consequence of such a enterprise , advertise he among other thing of the perilous flaw of wind that rise on this coast , and that if it chance that he be drive from the shore , it will be very hard for he to recover it again , that in the mean while they which shall stay in the fort shall be in fear and danger . the captain , saint marie , and la grange declare unto he far , that they think it not good to put any such enterprise in execution , that it be far better to keep the land , Sc do their best endeavour to fortify themselves : and that after that the Trinity ( which be the principali ship ) be return , there will be much more likelihood to enterprise this voyage . this notwithstanding he resolve to undertake it , and that which moor be , after he understand by king Emola , one of our neighbour which arrive upon the handle of these matter , that the Spaniard in great number be go on shore , which have take possession of the house of Seloy ,