, if i will not give they victual accord to their disordinate appetite . he also bring genre mes - mee word hereof himself , make a large discourse unto i of the good affection of the soldier , which all be - soldier seek i that i will conduct they to the country name . where the mine be : i make he answer that all can his answer . not go thither , and that it be necessary before their departure to settle our fortress in such estate , that those which be to stay at home behind shall remain in security against the Indians which may surprise they . Furthermore , that their manner of proceed seem strange unto i , for that they imagine , that the king majesty be at the charge of our voyage for none other end , but only to enrich they at their first arrival , in as much as they show themselves much more give unto covetousness , then unto the service of their prince : but see my answer tend unto none other end but to make our fortress strong and defensible , they determine to travail in the work , and make a ensign of old linen , which ordinary they bear upon the rampart when they go to work , always wear their weapon , which i think they have do to encourage themselves to work the better . but as i perceive afterward , and that by the confession of Genre send i in letter which he write to i of that matter , these gentle soldier do they same for hislieutenant . none other end , but to have kill i , and my lieutenant also , if by chance i have give they any hard speech . about the twenty of September , as i come home from the wood and coppicde to finish the build of my fort , ( and that accord to my usuali manner , i march first to give encouragement unto my soldier ) i chafe my self in such sort , that i fall into a sore and grievous sickness , whereof i think i shall have laudonnier die : during which sickness , i call le Genre often sickness . unto i , as one that i trust above all other , and of who conspiracy i doubt not any whit at all . in this mean while assemble his complice , sometime in his chamber and sometime in the wood to consult with they , he speak unto they to choose another captain beside i , to the intent to put i to death : but be not able by open force to execute his mis -^ “ ot ^ carie c ^^ eYous intention , he gate he unto my apothecary pray he instant to mingle in my medicine , which ‘ ’ i be to receive one or two day after , some drug that shall make i pitch over the perch , or at the least that he will give he a little Arsenike or quick silver , which he himself will put into my drink . but the apothecary deny he , as do in like manner master saint which be master of the firework . thus the master of whole disappoint of both his mean , he with certain the firework . other resolve to hide a little barrel of gunpowder underneath my bed , and by a train to set it on fire . upon these practise a gentleman which i have dispatch to return into France , be about to take his leave of i , advertise i , that Genre have give he a book full of all kind of lewd invective and slander against i , against monsieur de Ottigny , and against the principal of my company : upon which occasion i assemble all my soldier together , and captain captain Bourdet with all he , which on the four of September Bourdet ar - arrived in the road , and be come into our river . in their presence encage cause the content of the book to ofsepteml £ ' bee read aloud , that they may bear record of the untruth that be write against i . Genre , which have get he into the wood for fear of be take , ( where he live for a while after with the savage by my permission , ) write unto i often , and in many of his letter confess unto i , that he have deserve death , condemn himself so farrefoorth , that he refer all to my mercy and pity . the seven or eight day of November , after i have the 4 . voyage cause sufficient provision of such victual as be need - 7 - ofno - full to be make , i send two of my man , to wit , la vember - Roche Ferriere , and a other toward king utina , to discover every day more and more of the country : where he be the space of five or six month , during which he discover many small village , and among other one name Hostaqua , the king whereof be Hostaqua a desirous of my friendship , send unto i a quiver make village . of a lusern skin ne full of arrow , a couple of bow , four or five skin paint after their manner , and a chain of silver weigh about a pound weight . in recompense of which present i send he two whole suit of apparel , with certain cut hook or hatchet . after these thing therefore in this sort pass , about the ten of this month , captain Bourdet determine to leave i and to return into France . than i request he , yea rather be exceed importunate with he , to carry home with he some six or seven soldier , who i can not trust by any mean : which he do for my sake , and will not charge himself with Genre , which offer he a great sum of money , if it will please he to carry he into France : he transport he only to the other side of the river . one of his three day after his departure thirteen mariner which bark steal j bad bring out of France , suborn by certain other “ Mariners * mariner which captain Bourdet have leave i , steal away