vine bear grape in such quantity , that the number will suffice to make the place habitable . beside this fertility of the soil for vine , a man may see Esquine wreathe about the shrub in 11 cedar , palm , bay exceed sweet . abundance of grape . Esquine a drug excellent against the pocket . silver certain day journey up within the river of May . thimogoamor - tall enemy to Satourioua . great quantity . touch the pleasure of the place , the sea may be see plain and open from it , and more than six great league off , near the river Belle , a man may behold the meadow divide asunder into isle and islet interlace one another : brief the place be so pleasant , that those which be melancholic will be enforce to change their humour . after i have stay there a while , i embark again my people to sail towards the mouth of the river , where we find the Paracoussy , which accord to his promise wait for we . wherefore to content he , we go on shore , and do he that reverence that on our part be requisite . than he give i the skin so rich paint , and i recompense he with somewhat of our merchandise . i forget not to demand of he the place whence the wedge of silver come which he have give i before : whereunto he make i a very sudden answer , which notwithstanding i understand not , which he well perceive . and then he show i by evident sign that all of it come from a place more within the river by certain day journey from this place , and declare unto we that all that which they have thereof , they get it by force of arm of the inhabitant of this place , name by they Thimogoa , their most ancient and natural enemy , as he large declare . whereupon when i see with what affection he speak when he pronounce Thimogoa , i understand what he will say . and to bring my self more into his favour , i promise he to accompany he with all my force , if he will fight against they : which thing please he in such sort , that from thenceforth he promise himself the victory of they , and assure i that he will make a voyage thither within a short space , will cause store of mill to be prepare , and will command his man to make ready their bow , and furnish themselves with such store of arrow , that nothing shall be want to give battle to Thimogoa . in fine he pray i very earnest not to fail of my promise , and in so do , he hope to procure i gold and silver in such good quantity , that my affair shall take effect accord to my own and his desire . the matter thus full resolve upon , i take my leave of he to return unto my ship , where after we have rest our self all the night follow , we hoist sail the next day very early in the morning , and sail toward the river of Seine , distant from they the river of river of May about four league : and there continue - seine - ing our course toward the north , we arrive at the mouth of Somme , which be not past six league the river of distant from the river of Seine : where we cast anchor , somme - and go on shore to discover that place as we have do the rest . there we be gracious and cour - the courtesy teous receive of the Paracoussy of the country , °^ the which be one or the tall man and best proportion river of that may be find . his wife sit by he , which Somme . beside her indian beauty , wherewith she be great endue , have so virtuous a countenance and modest gravity , that there be not one among we but do great commend she ; she have in her train five of her daughter of so good grace and so well bring up , that i easy persuade my self that their mother be their mistress , and have teach they well and straight to preserve their honesty . after that the Paracoussy have receive we as i have say , he command his wife to present i with a certain number of bullet of silver , for his own part he present i with his bow and his arrow , as he have do unto captain John Ribault in our first voyage , which be a sign of a perpetuali amity and alliance with those which they honour with such a kind of present . in our discourse with one another , we enter into speech as touch the exercise of arm . then the Paracoussy cause a corselet to be set on end , and pray i to make a proof of our harquebuss and their bow : but this proof please he very little ; for assoon as he know that our harquebuss do easy 13 pierce that which all the force of their bow can not hurt , he seem to be sorry , muse with himself how this thing may be do . nevertheless go about to dissemble in his mind that which his countenance can not do by any mean , he begin to fall into another matter , and pray we very earnest to stay with he that night in his house or lodging , affirm that no great happiness can come unto he then our long abode , which he desire to recompense with a thousand present . nevertheless we can not grant he this point , but take our leave of he to return to our ship : laudonnleres where soon after i cause all my company to be consultation assemble , with the master and pilot of my ship , anywlureit to consult together of the place whereof we shall might be best make choice to plant our habitation . first i let they fir they to understand , how none of they be ignorant , that the part which be toward the cape of Florida , be altogether a marish country , and therefore unprofitable for our inhabitation : a thing which can yield neither profit to the king