) which this lord of Edelano grant he . 6ut be greedy of the riches which he have , he command two Indians , which he have charge to conduct he in the canoa , to murder he and bring he the merchandise and the gold which he have . which the two traitor villanous execute : for they knock he on the head with a hatchet , as he be blow of the fire in the canoa to seethe fish . utina send the Paracoussy utina send certain day afterward , to pray i to lend a dozen or fifteen of my shot , to jor be pe . jnvaje g enemy Potanou , and send i word , that this enemy once vanquish , he will make i passage , yea , and will conduct i unto the mountain in such sort , that no man shall be able to hinder i . than i assemble my man to demand their advice , as i be a good note , wont to do in all my enterprise . the great part be of opinion , that i shall do well to send succour unto this Paracoussy , because it will be hard for i to discover any further up into the country without his help : and that the Spaniard when they be employ in their conquest , do always enter into alliance with some one king to ruin another . notwithstanding , because i do always mistrust the Indians , and that the more after the last advertisement that the Spaniard have give i , i doubt lest the small number which utina demand may incur some danger ; wherefore i send he thirty shot under the charge of my lieutenant Ottigny , which stay not above two day with utina , while he prepare victual for his voyage , which ordinary and accord to the custom of the country be carry by woman and young boy , and by hermaphrodite . threehundr utina set forward with three hundred of his subject , Indians . have each of they their bow and quiver full of arrow , cause our thirty shot to be place in the foreward , and 56 1565 - made they march all the day , until that the night approach , and have not go past half the way , they be enforce to lie all night in the wood , near a great lake , and there to encamp themselves : they separate themselves by six and six , make each of they a fire about the place where their king lie , for who guard they ordain a certain number of those archer , in who he put most confidence . assoon as day be come , the camp of the indian march within three league of Potanou : there king utina request my lieutenant to grant he four or five of his man to go and discover the country ; which depart immediately , and have not go far , but they perceive upon a lake , distant about three league from the village of a lake three Potanou , three Indians which fish in a canoa . now league distant the custom be that when they fish in this lake , they / w ‘ have always a company of watchman , arm with bow potanou . and arrow to guard the fisher . our man be hereof advertise by those of the company , dare not pass any further , for fear of fall into some ambush : wherefore they return towards utina , which sudden send they back with a great company to surprise the fisher , before they may retire and advertise their king Potanou of the come of his enemy . which they can not execute so politic , but that two of they escape ; the three also do the best he can to save himself by swim , in which mean while he be stay with shot of arrow , and they draw he stark dead unto the bank side , where our Indians flay off the skin of his head , cut off both his arm in the high way , reserve his hair for the triumph , which their king hope to make for the defeat of his enemy . utina fear least Potanou advertise by the fisher which be escape , shall put himself in arm to withstand he valiant , ask counsel of his Jawa , which be as to say in their language as his magician , whether it be best to go any further . than his magician . magician make certain sign , hideous and fearful to behold , and use certain word ; which be end , he say unto his king , that it be not best to pass Potanou accom - any further , and that Potanou accompany with two pany with thousand Indians at the least stay in such and such Tndians ^ a p ^ ace or to bid he battle : and beside this , ' that all the say Indians be furnish with cord to bind the prisoner which they make full account to take . this relation cause utina to be unwilling to pass any further : whereupon my lieutenant be as angry as ever he may be , because he have take so great pain without do of any thing of account , say unto he , that he will never think well of he nor of his people , if he will not hazard himself : and that if he will not do it , at the least , that he will give he a guide to conduct he and his small company to the the prediction place where the enemy be encamp . hereupon of the ma - utina be ashamed , and see the good affection of monsieur de Ottigny determine to go forward : and ' he fail not to find his enemy in the very place which the magician have name : where the skirmish begin , which last three long hour : wherein without doubt utina have be defeat , unless our harquebusiers have not bear the burden and brunt of all the battle , and slay a great number of the soldier of Potanou , upon which occasion they be put to flight . wherewithal ! utina be content for the present , cause his people to retire and return homeward to the great discontentment of monsieur de Ottigny , which desire utina have 18 nothing more , than to pursue his victory