. king a adustas great humanity . pearl burn . Peter martyr write the cap . I . decade . 7 . that the like flock of pigeon be in the isle oj be return , i cause the two bark to be furnish ikeLucayos . again with soldier and mariner , and send they to carry a present from i unto the widow of king Hiocaia , who dwelling be distant from our fort about twelve league northward . she courteous receive our man , send i back my bark full of mill and acorn with 53 the widow of king hioa - caia , or hihou - hacara . certain basket full of the leaf of Cassine , wherewith they make their drink . and the place where this widow dwell be the most plentiful of mill that be in this queen all the coast , and the most pleasant . it be think that name be Nia the queen be the most beautiful of all the Indians , and Cubacam . off they make most account : yea , and her subject honour she so much , that almost continual they bear she on their shoulder , and will not suffer she to go on foot . within a few day after the return of my bark , she send to visit i by her hiatiqui , which be as much thefift voyage to say , as her interpreter . now while i think i be up the river furnish with victual until the time that our ship of may . may come out of France ( for fear of keep my people idle ) i send my two bark to discover along the river , and up towards the head thereof , which go so far up that they be thirty league good beyond a Mathiaqua . place name Mathiaqua , and there they discover they the discovery entrance of a lake , upon the one side whereof no land can be see , accord to the report of the Indians , ride ° whererf6 which have oftentimes climb on the high tree in no land can be the country to see land , and notwithstanding can not see . discern any : which be the cause that my man go no further , but return back ; and in come home the isle of go to see the island of Edelano situate in the midst Edelano . of the river , as fair a place as any that may be see through the world : for in the space of some three league , that it may contain in length and breadth , a man may see a exceed rich country , and marvellous people . at the come out of the village of Edelano to go unto the river side a man must pass through a alley about three hundred pace long and fifty pace broad : on both side whereof great tres be plant , the bough a excellent whereof be tie together like a arch , and meet together work of so artificial that a man will think it be a arbour nature . make of purpose , as fair i say , as any in all Christendom , although it be altogether natural . our man depart patica ' . from this p ^ ace row to eneguape , than to chily , from Coya . thence to patica , and last they come unto Coya : where leave their bark in a little creek of the river with man to guard they , they go to visit utina , which receive they very courteous : and when they depart from his house , he entreat they so earnest , that six of my man remain with he ; of which number there be one gentleman , name groutaid , which after he have abode there about two month , and take great pain to discover the country , with another which i have leave a great while there to that intent , come unto i to the fort , and tell i that he never see a fair country . among other thing , he report unto i that he have see a place name Hostaqua , and that the king thereof be so mighty , that he be able to bring three or four thousand savage to the field ; with who if i will join and enter into league , we may be able to reduce all the rest of the inhabitant unto our obedience : beside that this king know the passage unto the mountain of Apalatci , which the french man desire so great to attain unto , and where the enemy of Hostaqua make his abode ; which be easy to be subdue , if so be we will enter into league together . this king send i a plate of a minerail that come out of this mountain , out of the foot whereof there run a stream of gold or copper , as the savage think , out of which they dig up the sand with a hollow and dry cane of reed until the cane be full ; afterward they shake it , and find that there be many small grain of copper and silver among this sand : which give they to understand , that some rich i must needs be in the mountain . and because the king of Hostaqua or Oustaca able to bring three or four thousand savage to the field . the mountain of Apalatci . there be a mine of gold or rich cope in the mountain of Apalatci . the mountain be not pass five or six day journey from our fort , lie towards the northwest , i determine assoon as our supply shall come out of France , to remove our habitation unto some river more towards the north , that i may be near thereunto . one of my soldier who name be Peter Gamby , which have Peter Gamby remain a long space before in this country to learn the language and traffic with the Indians , at the last the mlage come to the village of Edelano , where have get Edelano . gold wonderful together a certain quantity of gold and silver , and silver . purpose to return unto i , he pray the king of the village to lend he a canoa ( which be a vessel ! make of one whole piece of wood , which the Indians use to fish withal , and to row upon the river