of these two declare unto i , that he have serve he a long time for a messenger ; and that often time by his commandment he have visit a king name Oathcaqua , distant from Calos four or king oath - five day journey , which always remain his faithful friend : but that in the midway there be a island houat ca - situate in a great lake of fresh water , name sarrope , sampe an about five league in bigness , abound with many island . sort of fruit , special in date , which grow on the abundance of palm tree , whereof they make a wonder traffic ; date . yet not so great as of a kind of root , whereof they a root of great make a kind of meal , so good to make bread of , t0 that it be unpossible to eat better , and that for fifteen brea league about , all the country be feed therewith : which be the cause that the inhabitant of the isle gain of their neighbour great wealth and profit : for they will not depart with this root without they be well pay for it . beside that , they be take for the most warlike man of all that country , as they make good proof when the king of Calos , have make alliance with Oathcaqua , be deprive of oathcaquaes daughter , which he have promise to he in manage . he tell i the whole matter in this sort : as Oathcaqua well accompany with his people carry one of his daughter , exceed beautiful , accord to the colour of the country , unto king Calos , to give she unto he for his wife , the inhabitant of this isle advertise of the matter , lay a ambush for he in a place where he shall pass , and so behave themselves , that Oathcaqua the g - eat victory among the floridians . the situation of Calos . cannaveral in 28 degree . the floridians great traitor and dissembler . be discomfit , the betroth young spouse take , and all the damosel that accompany she ; which they carry unto their isle ; which thing in all the indian country they esteem to be the great victory : for afterward they marry these virgin , and love they above all measure . the Spaniard that make this relation , tell i that after this defeat he go to dwell with oathcaqua , and have be with he full eight year , even until the time that he be send unto i . the place of Calos be situate upon a river which be beyond the cape of Florida , forty or fifty league towards the southwest : and the dwell of Oathcaqua be on this side the cape towards the north , in a place which we call in the chart cannaveral , which be in 28 degree . about the five and twenty of January Paracoussy Satourioua my neighbour send i certain present by two of his subject , to persuade i to join with he , and to make war upon ouae utina which be my friend : and further beseech i to retire certain of my man which be with utina ; for who if it have not be , he have often time set upon he , and defeat he . he beseech i herein by diverse other king his ally , which for three week or a month space send messenger unto i to this end and purpose : but i will not grant unto they that they shall make war upon he ; yea rather contrariwise i endeavour to make they friend ; wherein they condescend unto i , so far forth that they be content to allow of any thing that i will set down : whereupon the two Spaniard which of long time know well the nature of the Indians , warn i that in any case i shall not trust unto they , because that when they show good countenance and the best cheer unto man , then be the time that they will surprise and betray they ; and that of their nature they be the great traitor and most deep dissembler of the world . beside i never trust they but upon good ground , as one that have discover a thousand of their craft and subtlety , aswell by experience as by read of the history of late year . Oure two bark be not so soon finish , but i send captain Vasseur to discover along the coast lie towards the north , and command he to sail unto a river , the king whereof be call Audusta , which be lord of that place , where those of the year 1562 inhabit . i send he two suit of apparel , with certain hatchet , knife , and other small trifle , the better to insinuate my self into his friendship . and the better to win he , i send in the bark with captain Vasseur a soldier call Aimon , which be one of they which return home in the first voyage , hope that king Audusta may remember he . but before they be embark i command they to make inquiry what be become of another call Rouffi , which remain alone in those part when Nicolas Masson and those of the first voyage embark themselves to return into France . they understand at their arrival there , that a bark pass that way have carry away the same soldier : and afterward i know for a certainty that they be Spaniards which have carry he to Havana . the king Audusta send i back my bark full of mill , with a certain quantity of bean , two stag , some skin paint after their manner , and certain pearl of small value , because they be burn : and send i word that if i will dwell in his quarter , he will give i a great country : and that after he have gather his mill , he will spare i as much as i will have . in the mean while there come unto our fort a flock of stock - dove in so great number , and that for the space of seven week together , that every day we kill with harquebus shoot two hundred in the wood about our fort . after that captain Vasseur ' Nicolas Masson otherwise call Nicolas bar