dolphin , which be play in the mouth thereof . the next day the 23 of this month ( because that towards the south i have not find any commodious place for we to inhabit , and to build a fort ) i give commandment to weigh anchor , and to hoist our sail to sail towards the river of May , their arrival where we arrive two day after , and cast anchor . at the river of afterwards go on land , with some number of ay ' Gentlemen and soldier to know for a certainty the singularity of this place , we espy the Paracoussy of the country , which come towards we ( this be the very same that we see in the voyage of captain John Ribault ) which have espy we , cry very far off , Antipola , Antipola : and be so joyful that he can not contain himself , he come to meet we , accompany then .... i564 ' with two of his son , as fair and mighty person as may be find in all the world , which have nothing in their mouth but this word , Amy , Amy : that be to say , friend , friend : yea , and know those which be there in the first voyage , they go principal to they to use this speech unto they . there be in their train a great number of man and woman , which still make very much of we , and by evident sign make we understand how glad they be of our arrival . this good entertainment past , the Paracoussy pray i to go see the pillar which we have erect in the voyage of John Ribault ( as we have declare heretofore ) as a thing which they make great account of . have yield unto he and be come to the place the f ^ ar set where it be set up , we find the same crown with crown of bay , and at the foot thereof many little crownedwith basket full of mill which they call in their language garland of Tapaga Tapola . then when they come thither they Laurelland kiss the same with great reverence and beseech we ironedmth to do the like , which we will not deny they , to the f ^ rne end we may draw they to be more in friendship worshipped ' by with we . this do , the Paracoussy take i by the the savage . hand , as if he have desire to make i understand some great secret , and by sign show i very well up within the river the limit of his dominion , and say that he be call Paracoussy Satourioua , which be as much as king Paracoussy Satourioua . his child have the self same title of Satourioua . Paracoussy : the elder be name athore , a man , i dare say , perfect in beauty , wisdom , and honest sobriety , show by his modest gravity that he deserve the name which he bear , beside that he be gentle and tractable . after we have sojourn a certain space with they , the Paracoussy pray one of his son to present unto i a wedge of silver , which he do and that wedge oj with a good will : in recompense whereof i give he a silver - cutting hook and some other better present : wherewith he seem to be very well please . afterwards we take our leave of they , because the night approach , and then return to lodge in our ship . be allure with this good entertainment i fail not the next day to embark my self again with my lieutenant Ottigni and a number of soldier to return towards the Paracoussy of the river of May , which of purpose wait for we in the same place , where the day before we confer with he . we find he under the shadow of a arbour accompany with fourscore Indians at the least , and apparel at that time after the indian fashion , to wit , with a great heart skin dress like chamois , and paint with device of strange and diverse colour , but of so lively a portraiture , and represent antiquity , with rule so just compass , that there be no painter so exquisite that can find fault therewith : the natural disposition of this strange people be so perfect and well guide that without any aid and favour of art , they be able by the help of nature only to content the eye of artisan , yea even of those which by their industry be able to aspire unto thing most absolute . then i advertise Paracoussy Satourioua , that my desire be to discover far up into the river , but that this shall be with such diligence that i will come again unto he very speedy : wherewith he be content , promise to stay for i in the place where he be : and for a earnest of his promise , he offer i his goodly skin , which i refuse then , and promise to receive it of he at my return . for my part i give he certain small trifle , to the intent to retain he in our friendship . depart from thence , i have not sail three league up the river , still be follow by the Indians , which coast i a long the river , cry still , Amy , Amy , that be to say friend , friend : but i discover a hill of mean height , near which i go on land , hard by the field that be sow with will , at one corner whereof there be a house build for their lodging , which keep and guard the mill : for there be such number of cor - gnsses . nish chough in this country , which continual devour .. 15641 and spoil the mill , that the Indians be constrain to keep and watch it , otherwise they shall be deceive of their harvest . 1 rest my self in this place for certain hour , and command Monsieur de Ottigni , and monsieur de my sergeant to enter into the wood to search out the dwelling of the Indians : where after they have go awhile , they come unto a marish of reed