that they have find good occasion to execute their rebellious enterprise , begin to practise afresh their former design , handle their business so well , during my sickness , that they open vow that they will seize on the corpse de guard , and on the fort , yea , and force i also , if i will not consent unto their wicked desire . my lieutenant be hereof advertise , come and tell i that he suspect some evil practice : and the next day in the morning i be salute at my gate with man in complete harness , what time my soldier be about to play i a shrewd trick : then i send to seek a couple of gentleman who i most trust , which bring i word that the soldier be determine to come to i to make a request unto i : but i tell they that this be not the fashion to present a request unto a captain in this manner , and therefore they shall send some few unto i to signify unto i what they will have . hereupon the five chief author of the sedition arm with corslet , their pistol in their hand already bend , press into my chamber , say unto i , that they will go to new Spain to seek their adventure . than i warn they to be well advise what they mean to do : but they forthwith reply , that they be full advise already , and that i must grant they this request . see then ( quoth i ) that i be enforce to do it , i will send captain Vasseur and my sergeant , which will make answer and give i a account of every thing that shall be do in this voyage : and to content you , i think it good that you take one man out of every chamber , that they may accompany captain Vasseur and my sergeant . whereupon , blaspheme the name of God , they answer that they must go thither : and that there 41 A . D . [ 564 . lack nothing , but that i shall deliver they the armour which i have in my custody , for fear least i may use they to their disadvantage ( be so villan - ously abuse by they : ) wherein notwithstanding i will not yield unto they . but they take all by force , and carry it out of my house , yea and after they have hurt a gentleman in my chamber , which speak against their do , they lay hand on i , and carry i very sick , as i be , prisoner into a ship which ride at anchor in the midst of the Laudonniere river , wherein i be the space of fifteen day , ft " attend upon with one man only without permission owne ^ uldiers . f ° r any my servant to come to visit i : from every one of who , as also from the rest that take my part , they take away their armour . and they send i a passport to sign , tell i plain after i have deny they , that if i make any difficulty , they will all come and cut my throat in the ship . thus be i constrain to sign their passport , and Trenchanta forthwith to grant they certain mariner , with tren - skilfull pilot . c } ! of | it a honest and skilful pilot when the bark be finish , they arm they with the king munition , with powder , with bullet , and artillery , asmuch as they need , and choose one of my sergeant for their captain , name Bertrand conferrent , and for their ensign one name la Croix . they compel captain Vasseur to deliver they the flag of his ship . then have determine to sail unto a place of the Antilles call leauguave , belong unto the king of Spain , and there to go on land on Christmas night , with intention to enter into the church while the mass be say after midnight , and to murder all those that they find there , they set sail the eight of December . but because the great part of they by this time repent they of their enterprise , and that now they begin to fall into mutiny among themselves , when they come forth of the mouth of the river , the two bark divide themselves ; the one keep along the coast unto Cuba , to double the cape more easy , and the other go right forth to pass athwart the isle of Lucaya : by reason whereof they meet not until six week after their departure . during which time the bark that take her way along the coast , wherein one of the chief conspirator name de Orange be captain , and trenchant his pilot , near unto a place call Archaha , take a brigantine lade with a certain quantity of Cassavi , cassavi , bread which be a kind of bread make of root , and yet make of root . nevertheless be very white , and good to eat , and some little wine , which be not without some loss of their man : for in one assault that the inhabitant of Archaha make upon they , two of their man be take , to wit , Steven Gondeau , and one name grand Pr £ , beside two more that be slay in the place , namely Nicolas master and doublet : yet nevertheless they take the brigantine , wherein they put all their stuff that be in their own bark , because it be of great burden and better of sail then their own . afterwards they sail right unto the cape of Santa Maria near to leauguave , where they go on land to calk and bray their ship which have a great leak . in this mean baracouavil - while they resolve to sail to Baracou , which be a vil - luge in the isle lage of the isle of Jamaica : where at their arrival they ° f ^ amaica - found a caravel of fifty or threescore ton burden , which they take without any body in it : and after they have make good cheer in the village the space of five or six day ,