measure thereof for fifteen and twenty sou unto their companion . during our voyage we live of nothing else but raspice , of a certain round grain little and black , and of the root of palmito which we get by the river side : wherein after we have sail a long time in vain , i be constrain to return to the fort : where the soldier beginning to be weary of work , because of the extreme famine which do consume they , assemble themselves and declare unto i , that see we can get no victual of the Indians , it be expedient for the save of their life , to seize upon the person of one of the king of the country : assure themselves that one be take , the subject will not suffer our man to want victual . i make they answer that this enterprise be not rash to be attempt : but that we ought to have good regard unto the consequence that may ensue thereof . hereupon they reply unto i , that see the time be pass of our succour from France , and that we be resolve to abandon the country , that there be no danger to constrain the savage to furnish we with victual : which for the present t will not grant unto they , but promise they assure that i will send to advertise the Indians that they shall bring i victual for exchange of merchandise and apparel : which they also do for the space of certain day , during which pinocke a certain kind of fruit as big as cherry . they bring of their mast and of their fish : which these Indians be traitorous , and mischievous of nature , and know our exceed strange famine , sell we at so dear a price , that for less than nothing they have get from we all the rest of our merchandise which remain ; . and which be worse , fear to be force by we and see that they have get all from we , they come no near to our fort then the shot of a harquebus . thither they bring their fish in their little boat , to which our poor soldier be constrain to go , and oftentimes ( as i have see ) to give away the very shirt from their back to get one fish . if at any time they show unto the savage the excessive price which they take , these villain will answer they rough and churlish : if thou make so great account of thy merchandise , eat it , and we will eat our fish : then fall they out a laugh and mock they with open throat . whereupon our soldier utter impatient , be oftentimes ready to cut they in piece , and to make they pay the price of their foolish arrogancy . notwithstanding consider the importance hereof , i take pain to appease the impatient soldier : for i will not by any mean enter into question with the savage , and it suffice i to delay the time . wherefore i devise to send unto utina to pray he to deal so far forth with his subject , as to succour i with mast and maiz : which he do very spare , send i 12 or 15 basket of mast , and two of pinock , which be a kind of little green fruit which grow among the weed in the river , and be as big as cherry : yea , and this be not but by give of they in exchange twice as much merchandise and apparel as they be worth . for the subject of utina perceive evident the necessity wherein we be , and begin to use the like speech unto we , as the other do : as it be common see that need alter man affection . while these thing be in do , a certain breathe space present it self for utina give i to understand that there be a king his 1565 . subject who name be Astina , which he determine Astina a king . to take prisoner , and to chastise he for his disobedience : that for this cause , if i will give he aid with a certain number of my soldier , he will bring they to the village of Astina , where there be mean to recover mast and maiz . in the mean season he excuse himself unto i because he have send i no more maiz , and send i word that the little store that he have leave , be scarce sufficient for his seed - corn . now be somewhat relieve , as i think , by the hope which i have of this offer , i will not fade to send he the man which he desire of i , which nevertheless be very evil entreat : for he deceive they , and in stead of lead they against Astina , he cause they to march against his other enemy . my lieutenant which have the charge of this enterprise with captain Vasseur and my sergeant be determine to be revenge of utina and to cut he in piece 8c his people : and have it not be that they fear to do any thing against my will , without all doubt they will have put their enterprise in execution . therefore they will not pass any further without advertise i thereof . wherefore be come back again unto the fort , angry 8c prick deep to the quick for be so mock , they make their complaint unto i , declare unto i that they be almost dead for hunger . they tell the whole matter to the rest of the soldier , which be very glad that they have not enter into that action , 8c resolve , assemble themselves again together , to let i understand that they do persist in their first deliberation , which be , to punish the boldness and maliciousness of the savage , which they can no long endure , 8c be determine to take one of their king prisoner : which thing i be enforce to grant unto they , to you end to avoid a great mischief , and the sedition which i foresee will ensue , if i have make refusal thereof . for , say they , what occasion have you to deny we , consider the necessity wherein we be , and the small