to your cogitation to think how near it go to our heart , to leave a place abound in riches ( as we be thorough inform thereof ) in come whereunto , and do service unto our prince , we leave our own country , wife , child , parent , and friend , and pass the peril of the sea , and be therein arrive , as in a plentiful treasure of all our heart desire . as each of we be much torment in mind with these or such like cogitation , the three of August dig . 1565 . i descry four sail in the sea , as i walk upon a little hill , whereof i be exceed well pay : i send immediate one of they which be with i to advertise those of the fort thereof , which be so glad of those news , that one will have think they to be out of their wit to see they laugh and leap for joy . after these ship have cast anchor , we descry that they send one of their ship boat to land : whereupon i cause one of i to be arm with diligence to send to meet they , and to know who they be . in the mean while , fear lest they be Spaniards , i set my soldier in order and in readiness , attend the return of captain Vasseur and my lieutenant , which where go to meet they , which bring i word that they be Englishman : and in truth they have in their company one who name be Martine Atinas of diepe , which at that time be in their service , which on the behalf of master John Hawkins their general come to request i that i Hawkins you will suffer they to take fresh water , whereof they Qgnerau . stand in great need , signify unto i that they have be above fifteen day on the coast to get some . he bring unto i from the general two flagon of wine , and bread make of wheat : which great refresh i , forasmuch as for seven month space i never taste a drop of wine : nevertheless it be all divide among the great part of my soldier . this Martine Atinas have guide the Englishman unto our coast , wherewith he be acquaint : for in the year 1562 he come thither with i , and therefore the general send he to i . therefore after i have grant his request , he signify the same unto the general , which the next day follow cause one of his small ship to enter into the river , and come to see i in a great shipboate , accompany with gentle - man honourable apparel , yet unarm . he send for great store of bread and wine , to distribute thereof to every one : on my part i make he the best cheer sheep and i can possible , and cause certain sheep and poultry ^ int ^ flofida ^ to be kill , which until this present i have careful ' preserve hope to store the country withal . for notwithstanding all the necessity and sickness that happen unto i , i will not suffer so much as one chicken to be kill : by which mean in a short time i have gather together above a hundred pullet . now three day pass , while the english general remain with i , during which time the Indians come in from all part to see he , and ask i whether he a advantage be my brother : i tell they he be so , and signify wise take . unto that he be come to see i and aid i with so great store of victual , that from thence forward i shall have no need to take any thing of they . the bruit hereof incontinent be spread over all the country , in such sort as ambassador come unto i from all part , which on the behalf of the king their master desire to make alliance with i : and even they , which before seek to make war against i , come to offer their friendship and service unto i : whereupon i receive they and gratify they with certain present . the general immediate understand the desire and urgent occasion which i have to return into France : whereupon he offer to transport i and all my company home : whereunto notwithstanding i will not agree , be in doubt upon what occasion he make so large a offer . for i know not how the case stand between the french and the english : and although he promise i on his faith to put i on the trench land in France , before he will touch in England , yet mistrust that j stand jn doubt lest he will attempt somewhat in { man will ' Fkrida in the name of his mistress . wherefore i flat plant in refuse his offer : whereupon there arise a great mutiny Florida . among my soldier , which say that i seek to destroy they all , and that the brigandine , whereof i speak before , 78 be not sufficient to transport they , consider the season of the year wherein we be . the bruit and mutiny increase more and more : for after that the general be return to his ship , he tell certain gentleman and soldier which go to see he , partly to make good cheer with he , he declare , i say unto they , that he great doubt that hardly we shall be able to pass safe in those vessel which we have : and that in case we shall enterprise the same , we shall no doubt be in great jeopardy : notwithstanding , if i be so content , he will transport part of my man in his ship , and that he will leave i a small ship to transport the rest . the soldier be no soon come home , but they signify the offer unto their companion , which incontinent consent together that in case i will not accept the same , they will embark themselves with he and forsake i , so that he will receive they accord to his promise . they therefore assemble themselves all together and come to seek i in my chamber , and signify unto i their intention , whereunto i promise