to answer within one hour after . in which mean space i gather together the principali member of my company , which after i have break the matter with they , answer i all with one voice , that i ought not to refuse this offer , nor contemn the occasion which present it self , and that they can not think evil of it in France , if be forsake , as we be , we aid our self with such mean as God have send we . after sundry debating of this matter , in conclusion i give my advice , that we ought to deliver he the price of the ship which he be to leave we , and that for my part i be content to give he the best of my stuff , and the silver which i have gather silver find in the country . whereupon notwithstanding it be ™ determine that i shall keep the silver , for fear lest the queen of England see the same , shall the rather note . be encourage to set foot there , as before she have desire : that it be far better to carry it into France the great importance of this enterprise . the great humanity and bounty of master John Hawkins to the french . to give encouragement unto our prince not to leave off a enterprise of so great importance for our commonwealth , and that see we be resolve to depart , it be far better to give he our artillery , which otherwise we shall be constrain to leave behind we , or to hide it in the ground by reason of the weakness of our man , be not able to embark the same . this point be thus conclude and resolve on , i go my self unto the english general , accompany with my lieutenant , and captain Vasseur , captain Verdier , and trenchant the pilot , and my sergeant , all man of experience in such affair and know sufficient how to drive such a bargain . we therefore take a view of the ship which the general will sell , who we draw to such reason , that he be content to stand to my own man judgement , who esteem it to be worth seven hundred crown , whereof we agree very friendly . wherefore i deliver he in earnest of the sum , two bastard , two minion , one thousand of iron , and one thousand of powder . this bargain thus make , he consider the necessity wherein we be , have for all our sustenance but mill and water : whereupon be move with pity , he offer to relieve i with 20 barrel of meal , six pipe of bean , one hogshead of salt , and a hundred of wax to make candle . Moreover forasmuch as he see my soldier go barefoot , he offer i beside fifty pair of shoe , which i accept and agree of a price with he , and give he a bill of my hand for the same , for which until this present i be indebt to he . he do more than this : for particular he bestow upon my self a great jar of oil , a jar of vinegar , a barrel of olive , and a great quantity of rice , and a barrel of white biscuit . beside he give diverse present to the principali officer of my company accord to their quality : so that i may say that we receive as many courtesy of the general , as it be possible to receive of any man live . wherein doubtless he have win the reputation of a good and charitable man , deserve to be esteem asmuch of we all as if he have save all our life . incontinent after his departure i spare the departure no pain to hasten my man to make biscuit of the meal which he have leave i , and to hoop my cask ‘ to take in water needful for the voyage . a man may well think what diligence we use , in respect of the great desire we have to depart , wherein we continue so well , that the fifteen day of August the biscuit , the August it , . great part of our water , and all the soldier stuff be bring aboard : so that from that day forward we do nothing but stay for good wind to drive we into France : which have free we from a infinite number of mischief which afterward we suffer , if they have come as we desire : but it be not God good pleasure , as shall appear hereafter . be thus in a readiness to set sail , we bethink our self that it will do well to bring certain man and woman of the country into France , to the end that if this voyage shall be take in hand again they may declare unto their king the greatness of our king , the excellency of our prince , the goodness of our country , and the manner of live of the Frenchman : and that they may also learn our language , to serve our turn thereby in time to come . wherein i take so good order , that i find mean to bring away with i the goodly person of all the country , if our intention have succeed as i hope they will have do . in the mean season the king my neighbour come often to see and visit i : which , after that they understand that i will return into France , demand of i whether i mean to return again or no , and whether it shall be in short time . i signify unto they that within ten moon ( so they thefloridians call their month ) i will visit they again with measure their such force , that i will be able to make they conquerors over all their enemy . they pray i that the moon . i will leave they my house , that i will forbid my soldier to beat down the fort and their lodge - ix 81 f ing , and that i will leave they a boat to aid they withal in their war against their enemy . which i make as though i will grant unto they , to the end i may always remain their friend until my last departure .