account that they make of we . shall it not be lawful for we to punish they for the wrong which they do unto we , beside that we know apparent how little they respect we ? be not this sufficient although there be no necessity at all , since they thus delude we , and have break promise with we ? after i have therefore resolve with they to seize on the person of utina , which beside that he have give we occasion hereof , be also most able to help we to recover victual , i depart with fifty of my best soldier all embark in two bark and we arrive in the dominion of utina , distant from our fort about 40 or 50 league : then go on shore we draw towards his village situate 6 great utina take league from the river , where we take he prisoner , prisoner in his howbeit not without great cry and alarm , and lead r ^ mniere away our bark , have first signify unto and 50 of he be father in law and his chief subject , that in that soldier . i have take he , it be not for any desire that i have to do he any harm , but only to relieve my necessity and want of victual which oppress i , and that in case they will help i to some , i will find mean to set he again at liberty : that in the mean space i will retire my self into my bark ( for i fear lest they will there assemble themselves together , and that some mischief may thereof ensue ) where i will stay for he two day to receive his answer : notwithstanding that my meaning be not to have any thing without exchange of merchandise . this they promise they will do . and in very deed the very same evening , his wife accompany with all the woman of the village come unto the river brink , and cry unto i to enter into the bark , to see her husband and her son , which i hold both prisoner . i discover the next five os - six day five or six hundred indian archer , which draw hundred in - near unto the river side , and come to i to dian - signify unto i how that during the absence of their king , their enemy Potanou , be thereof advertise , 64 1565 . be enter into their village , and have set all on fire . they pray i that i will succour they : never - the deep dis - thelesse in the mean while they have one part of their troop in ambush , with intent to set upon i if i ln , ans ‘ have come on land , which be easy for i to discern . for see that i refuse so to do , they great doubt that they be discover , and seek by all mean to remove out of my mind that evil opinion which i have conceive of they . they bring i therefore fish in their little boat and of their meal of mast , they make also of their drink which they call cassine , which they send to utina and i . now albeit i have get this point of they that i hold their king prisoner , yet nevertheless i can not get any great quantity of victual for the present : the reason be , because they think that after i have draw victual from they , i will put their king to death . for they measure my will accord to their custom , the Indians whereby they put to death all the man prisoner that hillalltheman they take in war . and thus be out of all hope of his liberty , they assemble themselves in the great house , war . and have call all the people together they propose the election of a new king , at which time the father the election in law of utina set one of the king young son ofa king . upon the royal throne : and take such pain that every man do he homage by the major part of the voice . this election have like to have be the cause of great trouble among they . for there be a kinsman of the king near adjoin , which pretend a title to the kingdom , and in deed he have get one part of the subject : notwithstanding this enterprise can not take effect , forasmuch as by a common consent of the chief , it be consult and conclude , that the son be more meet to succeed the father then any other . now all this while i keep utina with i , to who i have give some of my apparel to clothe he , as i have likewise do unto his son . but his subject which before have a opinion that i will have kill he , ix 65 e the hatred among the savage king of Florida . note . note . root . Esquine . be advertise of the good entertainment which i use towards he , send two man which walk along the river , and come to visit he , and bring we some victual . Theise two man at their come be receive by i with all courtesy , and entertain accord to the victual which i have . while these thing thus pass , there arrive from all quarter many savage of the country adjoin , which come to see utina , and seek by all mean to persuade i to put he to death , offer that if i will do so , they will take order that 1 shall want no victual . there be also a king my neighbour who name be Saturioua , a subtle and crafty man , and one that show by proof that he be great practise in affair . the king send ordinary messenger unto i , to pray i to deliver utina unto he : and to win i the more easy , he send twice seven or eight basket of Maiz or of mast , think by this way to allure i , and to make i come to composition with he : in the end notwithstanding when he see he lose his time , he cease to visit i with ambassage and victual : 8c in the mean while