, wherein we have marvelous flaw of wind . and about the October 28 . eight and twenty of October in the morning at the break of the day we descry the isle of Flores , one of the azore , where immediate upon our approach to the land we have a mighty gust of wind which come from the north - east , which cause we to bear against it four day : afterward the wind come south and southeast , and be always variable . in all the time of our passage we have none other food save November 10 . biscuit and water . about the ten or eleven of November , after we have sail a long time , and suppose we be not far from land , i cause my man to sound , where they find threescore and afteene fathom water , whereat we all rejoice , and praise God because we have sail so prosperous . immediate after i cause they to set sail again and so we continue our way : but forasmuch as we have bear the chanel of too much towards the north - east we enter into saint saint George . George channel , a place much fear of all sailor , and whereas many ship be cast away : but it be a fair gift of God that we enter in it when the weather be clear . we sail all the night , suppose we have be shoot into the narrow sea between England and France , and by the next day to reach diepe , but we be deceive of our longing : for about two or three of the clock after midnight as i walk upon the hatch , i descry land round about i , whereat we be astonish . immediate i cause they to strike sail and sound : we find we have not under we past 8 fathom of water , whereupon i command they to stay till break of day : which be come , and see my mariner tell i that they know not this land , i command they to approach unto it . be near thereunto i make they cast anchor , and send the boat on 1565 - shore to understand in what country we be . word be bring i that we be in wale a province of England . i go incontinent on land , where after i have take the air , a sickness take i whereof i think i shall have dye . in the mean while i cause the ship to be bring into the bay of a small town call Swansey , where i find merchant of saint Laudonnieres malo , which lend i money , wherewith i make certain apparel for my self and part of my company that be in Qiamorgan . with i : and because there be no victual in the ship , fare in south i buy two ox , and salt they , and a ton of wale . beer , which i deliver into his hand which have charge of the ship , pray he to carry it into France , which he promise i to do : for my own part i purpose with my man to pass by land , and after i have take leave of my mariner , i depart from Swansey , and come that night with my company to a place call Morgan , where the lord of the place , understand what i be , stay i with he for the space of 6 or 7 day , and at my departure move with pity to see i go on foot , especial be so weak as i be , give i a little hackney . thus i pass on my journey first to Bristol , and then to London , where i go to do my duty to monsieur de Foix , which for the present be the king ambassador , and help i with money in my necessity . from thence i pass to Caleis , afterward to Paris , where i be inform that the king be go to molin to sojourn there : incontinent , and with all the haste i can possible make , i gate i thither with part of my come pany . thus brief you see the discourse of all that the conclusion . happen in new France since the time it please the king majesty to send his subject thither to discover those part . the indifferent and unpassionate reader may easy weigh the truth of my do , and be upright judge of the endeavour which i there use . for my own part i will not accuse nor excuse any : it suffice i to have follow the truth of the history , whereof many be able to bear witness , which 99 the courtesy of one master Morgan . Bristol . London . monsieur de Foix ambassador for the french king in England . thecauseswhy the french lose Florida . the french fleet cast away on the coast of Florida . be there present . i will plain say one thing , that the long delay that captain John Ribault use in his embark , and the 15 . day that he spend in rove along the coast of Florida , before he come to our fort Caroline , be the cause of the loss that we sustain . for he discover the coast the 14 of August , and spend the time in go from river to river , which have be sufficient for he to have discharge his ship in , and for i to have embark my self to return into France . i wot well that all that he do be upon a good intent : yet in my opinion he shall have have more regard unto his charge , then to the devise of his own brain , which sometime he print in his head so deep , that it be very hard to put they out : which also turn to his utter undo : for he be no soon depart from we , but a tempest take he , which in fine wrack he upon the coast , where all his ship be cast away , and he with much ado escape drown , to fall into their hand which cruel massacre he and all his company .