- holiday , to set our self about the furnish up of the Trinity : and after the work be take in hand by the two master which be very sufficient calker ( one of which be Juan castiliano chief pilot , and the other Peruccio de Bermes ) they finish the same so well in five day , as it be wonderful ; for no man can perceive how any drop of water can enter into any of the seam . afterwards they mend the other ship from Saturday till Monday , during which time all those be shrive that have not confess , and receive the communion , and it be resolve by charge of the confessor , that all those seal - skin which they have take from the Indians shall be restore again ; and the general give charge to Francis Preciado to restore they all , charge he on his conscience so to do . thus they gather they together , and deliver they into the hand of the father , to be keep until they return to the place , the Santa where they be to restore they . after this manner on Monday before noon we take our leaf of the New - spaine general Francis Ulloa , and of the people that stay the 5 . of with he , who at our departure shed no small number April . of tear , and we choose for our captain in the santa Agueda master Juan castiliano the chief pilot , as well of the ship , as of we all , and set sail the same day 276 be the five of April , have our boat tie at our stern , till we come over against the cottage , whence we have take the seal - skin . from the country of the ° f the Christians and the port of Colima we be now distant some three hundred league , which be the first port where we determine to touch at . and have sail a league from the Trinity the captain Juan castiliano command we to salute they with three piece of great ordinance , and she answer we with other three , and afterward we answer one another with two shot apiece . we sail on Monday and * Tewsday till noon with ThesixtoJ contrary wind in sight of the island , and at noon we have a fresh gale in the poop , which bring we over against the cottage of the Indians where we take away those seal skin ; and there certain soldier and mariner with the father friar Antony de Melo leap on shore with the boat , carry the skin with they , and fling they into the say cottage out of which they be take , and so return to their ship . this day the then quoth of weather calm , whereupon we be drive to cast anchor , ^ P ^ fear that we shall forthwith be distress for want of victual , if we shall stay there any long time : but God which be the true helper provide better for we than we deserve or imagine ; for as we ride here , they sail after midnight the Wednesday follow before ten the clock we have a favourable gale of wind from they the point of southeast , which put we into the sea ; whither be santa Cruz drive , we have the wind at northwest so good and con - or California stant , that in six day it bring we to the cape of the tn stxe point of the port of Santa Cruz : for which so great blessing of God we give unto he infinite thanks . and here we begin to allow our self a great proportion of victual than we have do before , for we have eat very spare for fear lest our victual will fail we . before we come to this point of the haven of Santa Cruz by six or seven league we see on shore between certain valley diverse great smoke . and have pass 277 read more of these vieede cap . 13 . sant Iago de buena esfer - anza in 19 degree . Cabo deal en - gtinno in 30 degree in a half . the point of this port , our captain think it good to launch forth into the main ocean : yet although we run a swift course , above 500 whale come athwart of we in 2 or 3 skull within one hour space , which be so huge , as it be wonderful , and some of they come so near unto the ship , that they swim under the same from one side to another , whereupon we be in great fear , lest they shall do we some hurt , but they can not because the ship have a prosperous and good wind , and make much way , whereby it can receive no harm , although they touch and strike the same . among these island be such abundance of those weed , that if at any time we be enforce to sail over they they hinder the course of our ship . they grow fourteen or fifteen fathom deep under the water , their top reach four or five fathom above the water . they be of the colour of yellow wax , and their stalk grow great proportionable . this weed be much more beautiful than it be set forth , and no marvel , for the natural painter and creator thereof be most excellent . this relation be take out of that which Francis Preciado bring with he . after this ship the Santa Agueda depart from the general Ulloa , and return back the 5 of April , she arrive in the port of Sant Iago de bvena esperan ^ a the 18 of the say month , and after she have stay there four or five day , she depart for Acapulco : howbeit until this present seventeenth of May in the year 1540 , i have hear no tiding nor news of she . moreover after the departure of the Santa Agueda for Nueva Espanna , the general Francis Ulloa in the ship call the Trinity proceed on his discovery coast the land until he come to a point call Cabo deal Enganno stand in thirty degree and a half of northerly latitude , and then return back to Newspaine , because he find the wind very contrary , and his victual fail he .