chief of they . he say that towards the southeast there be a kingdom call Marata , and that there be wont to be many , and those great city , which be all build of house of stone , with diverse loft ; and that these have and do wage war with the lord of the seven city , through which war this kingdom of Marata be for the most part waste , although it yet continue and maintain war against the other . likewise he say , that the kingdom call Totanteac lie towards the west , which he say be a very mighty province , replenish with infinite store of people and riches : and that in the say kingdom they be woollen cloth like that which i wear , and other fine sort of woollen cloth make of the fleece of those beast which they describe before unto i : and that they be a very civil people . Moreover he tell i , that there be another great province and kingdom call Acus ; for there be Acus , and Ahacus with a aspiration , which be the principali of the seven city : and Acus without a aspiration be a kingdom and province of it self . he tell i 136 also , that the apparel which they wear in Cevola be after the same manner as they before have certify i , and that all the inhabitant of the city lie upon bed raise a good height from the ground , with quilt and canopy over they , which cover the say bed : and he tell i that he will go with i to Cevola and far also , if i will take he with i . the like relation be give unto i in this town by many other , but not so particular . i travel three day journey through this valley : the inhabitant whereof make i exceed great cheer and entertainment . in this valley i see above a thousand ox - hides most excellent trim and dress . and here also i see far great store of turquese and chain make thereof , then in all place which i have pass ; and they say , that all come from the city of Cevola , whereof they have great knowledge , as also of the kingdom of Marata , and of the kingdom of Acus and Totonteac . Chap . 4 . of a very great beast with one horn upon his forehead ; and of the courtesy which the Indians show Frier Marcus of Niga , in his voyage . also how cruel Stephan Dorantez and his companion be use upon their arrival at Cevola , by the lord thereof . here they show i a hide half as big again mlghtie as the hide of a great ox , and tell i that it be the skin of a beast which have but one horn upon ' he forehead , 8c that this horn bend towards his breast , and that out of the same go a point right forward , wherein he have so great strength , that it will break any thing how strong so ever it be , if he run against it , and that there be great store of these beast in that country . the colour of the hide be of the colour of a great goatskin , and the hair be a finger thick . here i have messenger from Stephan which bring i word , that by this time he be come to 137 the far part of the desert , and that he be very joyful , because the far he go , the more perfect knowledge he have of the greatness of the country , and send i word , that since his departure from i , he never have find the indian in any lie ; for even unto that very place he have find all in such manner as they have inform he , and hope that he shall find the like at his arrival in the valley which he be go unto , as he have find in the village before pass . i set up cross , and use those act and ceremony , which be to be do according to my instruction . the inhabitant request i to stay here three or four day , because that from this place there be four day journey unto the desert , and from the first entrance into the same desert unto the fifteen dale city of Cevola be 15 great day journey more ; also that they will provide victual for i and other the end of they . i r . r t .... , , desert to necessary for that voyage . likewise they tell i , Cevola or that with Stephan the negro be go above 300 Clvola . man to bear he company , and to carry victual after he , and that in like sort many of they will go with i to serve i , because they hope to return home rich . i thank they , and will they to set thing in order with speed , and so i rest there three day , wherein i always inform my self of Cevola , and of as many other thing as i can learn , and call many Indians unto i , and examine they several , and all of they agree in one tale , and tell i of the great multitude of people , and of the order of the street , of the greatness of the house , and of the strength of the gate , agree altogether with that which the rest before have tell i . after three day many assemble themselves to go with i , 30 of the principal of who i take , be very well apparel , and with chain of turquese , which some of they wear five or six time double , and other people to carry thing necessary for they and i , and so set forward on my voyage . 138 thus i enter into the second desert on the 9 of may , the second de - and travel the first day by a very broad and beat way , and we come to dinner unto a water , where the Indians have make provision for i : and at night we come to another water , where i find a house which they have full make up for i , and another house stand mad where Stephan lodge when he pass that way , and many old cottage and many sign of fire which the people have make that travel to Cevola by this way . in this sort i travel 12 day journey be always well provide of twelve day victual , of wild beast