a relation of the reverend father friar Marco de Nifa , touch his discovery of the kingdom of Cevola or Cibola , situate about 30 . degree of latitude , to the north of Nueva Espanna . Chap . 1 . Frier Marco de ni ? a depart from saint Michael in the province of culiacan , stand in 24 . degree of northerly latitude : and come to the town of Petatlan , receive many courtesy of the Indians there . depart from thence , he have information of many island , and of a great country inhabit with civil people ; he come to Vacupa : where during his abode , he hear news of Cevola , and of the state of the 7 . city , and of other province , and of the rich island of pearl , which extent northward upon the coast . Frier Marco de ni ? a of the order of saint Francis , for the execution of the instruction of the right honourable lord don Antonio de Mendosa , viceroy and captain general for the emperor majesty in new Spain , depart from the town of saint Michael in the province of culiacan on Friday the 7 . of march , in the year 1539 have for my companion Frier Honoratus , and carry with i Stephan a negro , belong to Andrew Dorantez , and certain of those Indians which the say lord viceroy have make free , and buy for this purpose : who Francis Vazquez de Coronado governor of Nueva Galicia deliver i , and with many other Indians of Petatlan , and of the town call Cuchillo , which be some 50 . league from Petatlan , who come to the valley of culiacan , show themselves to bee exceed glad , because they be certify by the i2 indian which have be set free , who the say governor have send before to advertise they of their liberty , that none of they from thenceforth shall be make slave , and that no man shall invade they , nor use they bad ; signify unto they , that the emperor majesty have will and command that it shall be so . with the foresay company i go on my voyage until i come to the town of Petatlan , find all the way great entertainment , and provision of victual , with rose , flower , and other such thing , and bower which they make for i of chalk and bough plait together in all place where there be no house . in this town of Petatlan i rest 3 . day , because my companion Honoratus fall so sick , that i be constrain to leave he there behind . then , accord to my say instruction , i follow my journey as the holy ghost do lead i , without any merit of i , have in my company the say Stephan the negro of Dorantez , and certain of the Indians which have be set at liberty , and many of the people of the country , which give i great entertainment and welcome in all place where i come , and make i bower of tree , give i such victual as they have , although they be but small : because ( as they say ) it have not rain there in 3 year , and because the Indians of this country seek mean rather to hide themselves , than to sow corn , for fear of the Christians of the town of S . Michael , which be wont to make inroad even to that place , and to war upon they , and to carry they away captive . in all this way , which may be about 25 . or 30 . league from that part of Petatlan , i see nothing worthy the note , save that there come to seek i certain Indians from the island , where Fernando Cortes the mark of the valley have be , of who i be inform , that it be a island , and not firm land , as some suppose it to be . they come to you firm land upon certain raft of wood : and from the main to the island be but half a league by sea , little more or less . likewise cer - 126 taine Indians of another island great than this come a greatisland , to visit i , which island be far off , of who i be inform that there be 30 . other small island , which be inhabit , but have small store of victual , save 2 . new island of which have Maiz or corn of the country . Theise in - California dian have about their neck many great shell which be rtchmpearle . mother of pearl . i show they pearl which i carry with i for a show , and they tell i that there be in the island great store of they , and those very great : howbeit i see none of they . i follow my voyage through a desert of 4 . day journey , have in my company both the Indians of the island , and those of the mountain which i have pass , and at the end of this desert i find other Indians which marvel to see i , because they have no knowledge of any Christians , have no traffic nor conversation with those Indians which i have pass , in regard of the great desert which be worse desert fiure between they . Theise Indians entertain i exceed daiesj ° urne ^- courteously , and give i great store of victual , and seek to touch my garment , and call i Hayota , which in their language signify a man come from heaven . these Indians i advertise by my interpreter , accord to my instruction , in the knowledge of our lord God in heaven , and of the emperor . in these country and in all place else by all way and mean possible , i seek in - formation where any country be of moor city and people of civility and understanding , than those which i have find : and i can hear no news of any such : howbeit they tell i , that four or five day journey within the country , at the foot of the mountain , there be a large and mighty plain , wherein they tell i , ™ s be the that there be many great town , and people clad in Cotton : and when i show they certain metal which i ' carry with i , to learn what rich metal be in the land , they take the minerali of gold and tell i , that thereof be vessel among the people of