for the next day we have good weather , and all the mariner say , that it be the light of saint Elmo which appear on the shrowd , and they salute it with their song and prayer . Theise storm take we between the isle of saint Iago and saint Philip , and the isle call Isla de perlas lie over against the point of California suppose to be firm land . Chap . 7 . sail on their way they discover a pleasant country , and in their judgement great inhabit , and find the sea - coast very deep . they go to discover or view the isle of pearl . and by a current one of their ship be separate from the other , and with great joy after three day they have sight again of she , and follow their voyage they discover certain great , green , and pleasant plain . we begin to sail along the coast the seven or eight of November , the land always show very green with grass pleasant to behold , and certain plain near the shore , and up within the country many pleasant hill replenish with wood , and certain valley , so that we be delight above measure , and wonder at the greatness and goodly view of the country : and every night we see fire , which show that the country be great inhabit . thus we proceed on our voyage until the ten of the say month of November , have 228 1539 - alwayes the coast of the main ocean on our right hand , from hence and the far we sail , we always find the country more delightsome and pleasant , as well in behold the green thereof , as also in that it show certain plain backside of and deep valley , through which river do fall down California . into the land , within certain mountain , and hill full of great wood which be not very high , and appear within the country . here we be 54 league distant from California little more or less , always towards the California . Southwest , see in the night three or four fire , whereby it appear that the country be inhabit , and full of people , for the greatness of the country argue no less : and we suppose that there must needs be great town inhabit within the land , although in this point we be of diverse opinion . the sea be so deep on all this coast that we can scarce find ground in 54 fathom . on the great part of the coast there be hill of very white sand , and it seem to be a dangerous coast , because of the great and swift tide which go there , for the sand show so much for the space of ten or twelve league , for so the pilot affirm . this day be Saturday the wind increase , and we have sight of the isle of Isla de perlas . pearl , which on this side of the gulf appear with a deep valley all cover over with tree , and show much fair than on the other side , and we enter into the porte of Santa Cruz . from the nine of November to the fifteen we sail not above ten league , because we have contrary wind , and great shower : and beside this we have another mischance which do not a little grieve we : for we lose company of the ship call the Trinity , and can never see she for the space of three day , whereupon we suspect that she be return home unto new Spain , or that she be sever from our company : wherefore we be grieve out of measure to see our self so leave alone , and the captain of all other be most sad , though he cease not to encourage we to proceed on our voyage , say that notwithstanding all this we ought 229 not to leave off this enterprise which we have begin , and that though we be leave alone we shall deserve the great commendation and credit : whereupon we all answer he , that we will not have he think that any of we will ever be discourage , but that we will follow he until he shall think it reasonable that we shall not proceed any further in the enterprise , and that we be in danger of perish , and that until then we will be at his commandment : but withal we persuade he that after he have see any great difficulty to proceed any further , he shall do well to return back to make relation of our success to the R . H . lord the mark de valle . hereupon he make a oration unto we wherein he tell we , that he can not believe , much less can imagine , wherefore the ship call the Trinity shall return into new Spain , nor why she shall willing depart from we , and go unto any other place , and that he think by all reason , that some current have carry she out of our sight , and that through contrary weather and tempest she can not fetch we up , and that notwithstanding all that which we have do in the voyage , he have a instruction , that if by chance we be separate one from the other , we be to take this course to meet again together , namely to return back eight or ten league to seek one another , beyond certain headland which lie out into the sea , and that therefore we shall do well to return to seek she up . this sentence please we all , and so return to seek she , we espy she two league distant from we , come towards we with a fresh gale of wind , whereat we great rejoice . thus be come together we anchor for that day , because the weather seem very contrary , and the captain chide they for their negligence in sail , because they have in such sort lose our company ; and they excuse themselves , that they can do no less , because a current have carry they away above three league , whereby they can never reach unto we . the next day 230 be the sixeteenth of November we set forward , but sail very little , for the north and northwest