the first and second discovery of the gulf of California , and of the sea - coast on the northwest or back side of America , lie to the west of new Mexico , Cibola and Quivira , together with sir Francis drake land and take possession upon Nova Albion in the behalf of the crown of England , and the notable voyage of Francis Gaul ; wherein among many other memorable matter be set down the huge breadth of the ocean sea from China and Japan to the northwest part of America , in the 38 . and 40 . degree . a relation of the discovery , which in the name of God the fleet of the right noble Fernando Cortes Marques of the valley , make with three ship ; the one call Santa Agueda of 120 . ton , the other the Trinity of 35 . ton , and the third saint Thomas of the burden of 20 . ton . of which fleet be captain the right worshipful knight Francis de Ulloa bear in the city of Merida . take out of the three volume of the voyage gather by m . John Baptista Ramusio . Chap . 1 . Francis Ulloa a captain of Cortes depart with a fleet from the port of Acapulco , and go to discover unknown land , he pass by the coast of Sacatula and Motin , and by tempest run to the river of Guajaval , from whence he cross over to the haven of Santa Cruz , along the coast whereof he discover 3 . small hand , and within two day and a half return to the main land he discover the river call Rio de san Pedro y san Pablo , and not far distant from thence two other river as big or great than that of Guadalquivir which run by Sivil , together with their head - spring . e embark our self in the haven of Acapulco in Acapulco on the 8 . of July in the year i 7 ; degree of of our lord 1539 , call upon almighty atitude - God to guide we with his holy hand unto such place where he may be serve , and his holy faith advance . and we sail from the say port by the coast of Sacatula and Motin , which be sweet and pleasant the coast of through the abundance of tree that grow thereon , and $ acatfla river which pass through those country , for the which motin - wee often thank God the creator of they . So sail along we come to the haven of saint Iago in the province s - Iago de of Colima : but before we arrive there , the main mast of our ship call Santa Agueda be break by a storm of wind that take we , so as the ship be force to sail without her mast until we arrive in the say haven . from the port of Acapulco to this haven of Colima we be sail the space of 20 . day . here we stay to mend our mast and to take in certain victual , water , and wood , the space of 27 . day . and we depart from the say haven the 23 . of August , and the isle of sail by the isle of Xalisco the 27 . or 28 . of the Xalisco . say month we be take with a extreme tempest wherein we think we shall have perish , and be toss and weather - beaten , we run as far as Guajaval . the river of Guajaval in the province of culiacan . in this storm we lose the pinnace call Sant Thomas , and because we have lose she we cross over to the Santa Cruz port of Santa Cruz in California : for while we be ' cedifornla so beat tbe f ° rmer tempest , the pilot of the bark signify unto we , that he perceive she begin to leak , and that already she have receive in much water , insomuch that she begin to founder : whereupon , to help her need , and that we may meet together in a know haven , if by chance the tempest shall separate we , as it do indeed , we will he to repair to the haven of Santa Cruz , where we mean to repair his harm and our own . wherefore be all arrive in this place of Santa Cruz , we stay there five day and take in water , wherein we hear no news of our bark which we have lose : whereupon the captain resolve to follow on our voyage ; wherefore we set sail the 12 . of September , and as we sail we three hand , see along the coast of the say haven 3 . Islands , whereof the captain make no great account , think there can be no great good find in any of they . Theise Islands seem not to be great ; wherefore he command the master and pilot to proceed on their voyage , and not to lose time without any profit . So sail over the gulf of California , in two day and a half Rio de san we come to the river of saint Peter and S . Paul , find Ppablo * ! an before we enter into the same a small island in the a ° ' mouth of the river , be 4 . or 5 . mile distant from the main . on both side of this river we behold goodly and pleasant great plain full of many green and beautiful tree , and far within the land we behold certain exceed high mountain full of wood very pleasant to behold . from this river we sail still along the coast the space of 15 . league , in which course we find two other river in our judgement two great as great or great than Guadalquivir the river of nvers - sivilia in Spain . all the coast by these river be plain as the other which we have pass , with many wood : likewise within the land appear great mountain cover with wood very beautiful to behold , and beneath in the plain appear certain lake of water . from these river we sail 18 . league , and find very pleasant plain , and certain great lake who certainegreat mouth open into the sea : here our captain thought la ^ es ' good