. the season which be in this country , and the temperature of the air be like that of Mexico : for sometime it be hot , and sometime it rain : but hitherto i never see it rain , but once there fall a little shower with wind , as they be wont to fall in Spain . the snow and cold be wont to be great , for so say the inhabitant of the country : and it be very likely so to be , both in respect to the manner of the country , and by the fashion of their house , and their fur and other thing which this people have to defend they from cold . there be no kind of fruit nor tree of fruit . the country be all plain , and be on no side mountainous : albeit there be some hilly and bad passage . there be small store of fowl : the cause whereof be the cold , and because the mountain be not near . here be no great store of wood , because they have wood for their fuel sufficient four leaugue off from a wood of small cedar . there be most excellent grass within a quarter of a league hence , for our horse as well to feed they in pasture , as to mow and make hay , whereof we stand in great need , because our horse come hither so weak and feeble . the victual which the people of this country have , be Maiz , whereof they have great store , and also small white pease : and venison , which by all likelihood they feed upon , ( though they say no ) for we find many skin of deer , of hare , and cony . they eat the best cake that ever i see , and every body general eat of they . they have the fine order and way to grind that we ever see in any place . and one indian woman of this country will grind as much as four woman of Mexico . they have most excellent salt in kernel , which they fetch ery good from a certain lake a day journey from hence . they s ^^ esterne have no knowledge among they of the north sea , nor sea within of the western sea , neither can i tell your lordship 150 . league to which we be near : but in reason they shall fnm seem to be near to the western sea : and at the lion lest i think i be a hundred and fifty league from porkesplck , ’ thence : and the northern sea shall be much further mlghtlesheep , off . your lordship may see how broad the land be wild gpate . here . here be many sort of beast , as bear , tiger , bose . Lions , porkespick , and certain sheep as big as a horse , with very great home and little tail , i have stag . see their home so big , that it be a wonder to be - tty travalle hold their greatness . here be also wild goat who rd ^ head likewise i have see , and the paw of bear , n ^ e sea . and the skin of wild boar . there be game of deer , qxe hide ounce , and very great stag : and all man be of dress and opinion that there be some big than that beast f ° ity ^ very which your lordship bestow upon i , which once belong to John Melaz . they travel eight day journey unto certain plain lie towards the north sea in this country there be certain skin well dress , and they dress they and paint they where they kill their ox , for so they say themselves . 157 [ Chap . 4 . Tadouac seems because it be a lake , and end in ac to have some affinity herewith . other town near a river . Chap . 4 . of the state and quality of the kingdom of Totonteac , Marata , and Acus , quite contrary to the relation of Frier Marcus . the conference which they have with the Indians of the city of Granada which they have take , which have fifty year past foresee the coming of the christian into their country . the relation which they have of other seven city , whereof Tucano be the principali , and how he send to discover they . a present of diverse thing have in these country scent unto the viceroy Mendosa by Vasques de Coronado . the kingdom of Totonteac so much extol by the father provinciali , which say that there be such wonderful thing there , and such great matter , and that they make cloth there , the Indians say be a hot lake , about which be five or six house ; and that there be certain other , but that they be ruinate by war . the kingdom of Marata be not to be find , neither have the Indians any knowledge thereof . the kingdom of Acus be one only small city , where they gather cotton which be call Acucu . and i say that this be a town . for Acus with a aspiration nor without , be no word of the country . and because i guess that they will derive acucu of Acus , i say that it be this town whereinto the kingdom of Acus be convert . beyond this town they say there be other small town which be near to a river which i have see and have have report of by the relation of the Indians . i will to God i have better news to write unto your lordship : nevertheless i must say the truth : and as i write to your lordship from culiacan , i be now to advertise your honour as well of the good as of the bad . yet this i will have you be assure , that if all the riches and the treasure of the world be here , i can have do no more in the service of his majesty and of your 158 1540 lordship , than i have do in come hither whither you have send i , my self and my companion carry our victual upon our shoulder and upon our horse three hundred league ; and many day go on foot travail over hill and rough mountain , with other trouble which i cease to mention , neither purpose i to depart unto the death , if it please his majesty and your lordship that it shall be so