, and in hail we off the sand , whereupon we often fall : for in many place we in find the river so shall , that we have no water for , . 1 ri fall ofshelfe . our boat . as we thus go on our way , some or the Indians which i have leave behind i , come after we to pray i that i will thorough instruct they , how they shall join their hand in the worship of the cross : other show i whither they be well set in such and such sort , so that they will not let i be quiet . near unto the other side of the river be great store of people , which call unto i very often , that i will receive the victual which they have bring i . and because i perceive that one envy the other , because i will not leave they discontent , i do so . and here come before i another old man like unto the former with the like ceremony and another old offering : and i seek to learn something of he as man ' i have do off the other . this man say likewise to the rest of the people , this be our lord . now you see how long ago our ancestor tell we , that there be beard and white people in the world , and we laugh they to scorn . i which a old and the rest which be here , have never see any such people as these . and if you will not believe i , behold these people which be in this river : let we give they therefore meat , see they give we of their victual : let we willing serve this lord , which wish we so well , and forbid we to make war , and embrace all of we : and they have mouth , hand and eye as we have , and speak as we do . 1 give these likewise another cross as i have do to the other beneath , and say unto they the self same word : which they listen unto with a better will , and use great diligence to learn that which i say . afterwards as i pass far up the river , i find another people , who my interpreter understand not a whit : wherefore i show they by sign the self - their ancestors tell they thattherewere beard and white man in the world . another nation . 295 same ceremony of worship the cross , which i have teach the rest . and that principal old man which i take with i , tell i that far up the river i shall find people which will understand my interpreter : and be now late , some of those man call i to give i victual , and do in all point as the other have do , dance and play to show i pleasure . i desire to know what people live on the bank of this people of 23 . river : and i understand by this man that it be inlanguage habit by 23 language , and these be border upon mrs . river the river > beside other not far off , and that there be beside these 23 . language , other people also which he know not , above the river . i ask he whether every people be live in one town together : and he answer i , no : but that they have many house stand scatter in the field , and that every people have their country several and distinguish , and that in every habitation there be great store of people . JcueoasGo - he show i a town which be in a mountain , mara write a ( j to | j i that fhere be there great store of people ouiuabse ^ ° f bad condition , which make continual war upon they : which be without a governor , and dwell in that desert place , where small store of Maiz grow , come down into the plain to buy it in truck of dear skin , wherewith they be apparel with long garment , which they do cut with razor , and sew with great house needle make of dear bone : and that they have great of stone . house of stone . i ask they whether there be any there of that country ; and i find one woman which wear a garment like a little mantle , which clad she from the waste down to the ground , of a dear skin well dress . than i ask he whether the people which dwell on the river side , dwell always there , or else sometime go to dwell in some other place : he answer i , that in the summer season they abide there , and sow there ; and after they have gather in their crop they go their way , and dwell in other house which they have at the foot of the mountain far from the 296 river . and he show i by sign that the house be of wood compass with earth without , and i understand that they make a round house wherein the man Roundhouses . and woman live all together . i ask he whither their woman be common or no : he tell i not , and that he which be marry , be to have but one wife only . i desire to know what order they keep in marry : and he tell i , that if any man have a daughter to marry , he go where the people keep , and say , i have a daughter to marry : be there any man here that will have she ? and if there be any that will have she , he answer that he will have she : and so the marriage be make . and that the father of he which will have she , bring some thing to give the young woman ; and from that hour forward the marriage be take to be finish , and that they sing and dance : and that when dance and night come , the parent take they , and leave they to - nn & ngatma - gether in a place where no body may see they . and 6 i learn that brethren , and sister , and kinsfolk marry not together : and that maid before they be marry converse not with man , nor talk