i will make a end of that war between they , and that then i may have their company to Cevola . and upon this point we grow to such variance , that we begin to grow into choler , and in a rage he will have go out of the boat , but i stay he , and with gentle speech begin to pacific he , see that it import i much to have he my friend : but for all my courtesy which i show he , i can not alter he from his mind , wherein he still remain obstinate . in this mean while i send a man away unto my ship to give they knowledge of the journey that i have determine to make . after this i pray the old man that he will fetch he back again , because i have determine , that see i see no mean to be able to go to Cevola , 8c because i will stay no long among those people , because they shall not discover i , and likewise because i mean in person to visit my ship , with determination to return again up the river , carry with i other companion , 8c leave there some which i have sick , and tell the old man and the rest that i will return , and leave they satisfy the best i 310 can ( although they always say that i go away for fear ) i return down the river : and that way which i have go against the stream up the river in 15 . day and a half , i make in my return in 2 . day and a half , because the stream be great and very swift . in this wise go down the river , much people come to the bank , say , sir , wherefore do you leave we ? what discourtesy have be do unto you ? do you he return in 2 . day and a half to his ship . not say that you will remain continual with we , and be our lord ? and turn back again ? if any man above the river have do you any wrong we will go with our weapon with you and kill he ; and such like word full of love and kindness . Chap . 8 . when they come to their ship the captain name that coast la Campanna de la Cruz , and build a chapel unto our lady , and call the river el Rio de buena guia , and return up the same again : when he come to Quicona and Coama the lord of those place use he very courteous . upon my arrival at my ship i find all my people in health , although very heavy for my long stay , and because the current have fret four of their cable , and that they have lose two anchor which be recover . after we have bring our ship together , i cause they to bring they into a good harbour , and to give the carena to the ship call sanct Peter , and to mend all thing that be needful . and here assemble all my company together , i open unto they what knowledge i have receive of Francis Vasquez ; and how it may be that in those sixteen day space which i be in sail up the river he may peradventure have some knowledge of i , and that i be mind to return up the river once again to try if i can find any mean to join my self with he : and although some speak against my determination , i cause all my boat to be make ready , because the ship have no need of 311 mark what the . i cause one of they to be fill with ware thing then of exchange , with corn and other seed , with hen spamardes and cock of Castille , and depart up the river , leave in new dis - order that in that province call Campanna de la Cruz emery . they shall build a oratory or chapel , and call it the chapel of our lady de la buena guia , and that Rio de bvena they shall call this river Rio de buena guia because guia - that be your lordship devise : i carry with i Nicolas Zamorano pilot mayor , to take the height of the pole . and i depart on Tuesday the fourteenth of September , and on Wednesday i come unto the first dwelling of the first Indians , which come run to hinder my passage , suppose that we have be other people , for we carry with we a fifer , and a drummer , and i be clad in other apparel than i go in before , when they see i first of all : and when they know i they stay , though i can not grow unto perfect friendship with they , whereupon i give they some of those seed which i bring with i ; teach they how they shall sow they : and after i have sail 3 league , my first interpretor come even to my boat to seek i with great joy , of who i demand wherefore he have leave i , he tell i that certain companion of his have lead he away . i make he good countenance and better entertainment , because he shall bear i company again , consider how much it do import i to have he with i . he excuse himself because he parrot in stay there to bring i certain feather of parrot , these part . which he give i . i ask he what people these be , and whether they have any lord : he answer i , yea ; and name three or four unto i , of four or 25 name of people which he know and that they have house paint within , and that they have traffic with two moon those of Cevola , and that in two moon he come into to Cevola . the country . he tell i moreover many other name lord , and other people , which i have write down particular of in a b ° oke ot i , which 1 will bring my self unto that country . your lordship . but i think good to deliver this 312 ...... I54 °‘ brief relation to Augustine Guerriero in this haven of Colima , that he may send it overland to your lordship , to