; all Pamphilo de which escape of the company which Pamphilo the Narvaex Narvaez land in Florida ; who after they have be Florida 1527 . many day captive and slave , escape and come to these town , by who God show many miracle , and heal only by the touch of their hand many sick person , by reason whereof they become very famous in all that country . all this province remain in great peace and security ; in token whereof , they accompany and serve our man certain day , travel along by Rio deal norte , the great river aforesaid . another within few day after they come unto another great province . province of Indians , from whence they come forth to receive they , upon the news which they have hear of their neighbour , and bring they many very curious thing make of feather of diverse colour , and many mantle of cotton strake with blue and white , like those that be bring from China , to barter and truck they for other thing . all of they both man , woman and child be clad in chamois skin very good and well dress . our people can never understand what nation they be for lack of a interpreter : howbeit they deal with they by sign ; and have show very great unto they certain stone of rich metal , and inquire quantity of whither there be any such in their country : they stver ' answer by the same sign , that five day journey westward from thence there be great quantity thereof , and that they will conduct they thither , and show it unto they ; as afterward they perform their 192 1581 - 83 . promise , and bear they company 22 league , which be all inhabit by people of the same nation . next unto the foresay province they come unto another pro - another further up the great river aforesaid , be mnce ' much more populous than the former , of who they be well receive , and welcome with many present , especial of fish , whereof they have exceed great store , by reason of certain great lake not far from great lake . thence , wherein they be breed in the foresay plenty . they stay among these people three day ; all which time both day and night they make before they many dance , accord to their fashion , with signification of speciali joy . they can not learn the name of this nation for want of a interpreter , yet they understand that it extend very far , and be very great . among these people they find a indian of the foresay nation of the Conchos , who tell they , and show they by sign , that fifteen day journey from thence towards the west there be a very broad lake , and near unto a mighty lake . it very great town , and in they house of three or four story high , and that the people be well apparel , and the country full of victual and provision . This Concho offer himself to conduct our man thither , whereat our company rejoice , but leave off the enterprise , only to accomplish their intent for which they undertake the voyage , which be to go northward to give aid unto the two friar aforesaid . the chief and principali thing that they note in this province be , that it be of very good temperature , and a very rich soil , and have great store of wild beast , and wildfowl , and abundance of rich metal , and other excellent thing , and very pro - rich metal . fitable . from this province they follow their journey for the space of fifteen day without meet any people all that while , pass through great wood and grove of pine toe of pine tree bear such fruit as those of Castille : at the end tree ' whereof , have travel , to their judgement , fourscore league , they come unto a small hamlet or village of few ix 193 n people , in who poor cottage cover with straw they find many deeres - skinne as well dress as those of Flanders , with great store of excellent white salt . they give our man good entertainment for the space of two day while they remain there , after which they bear they company about twelve league , unto certain great town , always travel by the river call Rio deal norte abovesaid , till such time as they come unto the new Mexico , country call by they new Mexico . here all along o 째째 lar 째 and t ^ le sh 째 re say river grow mighty wood of poplar walnut tree be in some place four league broad , and great vine . store of walnut tree , and vine like those of Castillia . have travel two day through the say wood of poplar and Walnut tree , they come to ten town situate on both side of the say river , beside other which they may see further out of the way , wherein there seem to be great store of people , and those which they see be above ten thousand person . in this province they receive they very courteous , and bring they to their town , whereas they give they great plenty of victual and hen of the country , with many other thing , and that with great good will . house of 4 here they find house of four story high , very stone high . weq with gallant lodging , and in most of they be stoove for the winter season . their garment be of cotton and of dear - skin , and the attire both of the man and woman be after the manner of the Indians of the kingdom of Mexico . but the strange thing of all be to see both man and woman wear shoe and boot with good sole of neat leather , a thing which they never see in any other part of the Indies . the woman keep their hair well comb and dress , wear nothing else upon their head . in all these town they have cacique which govern their people like the cacique of Mexico , with sergeant to execute their commandment , who go through the town proclaim with a loud voice the pleasure of the caciques , command the same to be put in execution . in this 194 province our man find many idol which they worship , and particular they have in every house a oratory for the devil , whereinto they ordinary carry he meat : and another thing they find , that as it be a use among the Christians to erect cross upon the high way , so have this people certain high chapel , in which they say the devil use to take his ease , and to recreate himself as he travel from one town to another ; which chapel be marvellous well trim and paint . in all their arable ground , whereof they have great plenty , they erect on the one side a