and to shape our course towards the coast of the firm land , to view the situation thereof . and as we pass the island , and be betwixt it and the main , then northwest be a contrary wind begin to blow , which increase so by degree , that we be constrain to let fall the bonnet of our sail , to save they , strike they very low . and the Trinity see this bad weather return forthwith unto the place from whence we depart , and the admiral cast about all night in the sea , until the morning ; and the chief pilot consider that by no mean we can proceed far without danger , if we shall continue at sea any long , resolve that we shall retire our self again to that shelter , where we ride at ix 273 sister anchor until Thursday . and on Friday about noon we set sail again with a scarce wind , and in come forth unto the point of the island , we meet again with contrary wind at northwest : whereupon run all night with the firm land , on Saturday in the morning be saint Lazarus day and the 13 of march , we come in sight thereof , in view of the which we all rejoice , and we soldier will very willing have go on shore . this night fall great store of rain like the rain in Castilia , and we be all well wet in the morning , and we take great pleasure in behold the situation of Thefirmeland that firm land , because it be green , and because we very green and discover a pleasant valley and plain of good ^ gomy valley largenesj which seem to be environ with a garland and plain . of mountain . at length for fear of misfortune , see the sea so high , we dare not stay here or approach near the land , and because we have great want of cable and anchor , we be again constrain to put to sea ; and be in the same , and find the say contrary wind , the pilot judge that we have none other remedy , but again to retire our self to our wont shelter . and thus we return , but somewhat above the old place . on Sunday we ride here to the great grief of all the company , consider what trouble we endure , and can not get forward ; so that this be such a corrasive , as none can be more intolerable . this day be come to a anchor we have a mighty gale of wind at northwest , which be our adversary and capital enemy , and when day be shut in , it still grow great and great , so that the ship roll much . and after midnight , towards break of day , the Trinity break she two cable , which hold the two anchor which she have , and see her self thus forlese , she turn up and down in the sea until day , and come and ride near we , by one anchor which she have leave . this day all of we go to seek these lose anchor , and for all the diligence which we use , we can find but one of they . we ride at anchor all day until night , when 274 the Trinity again break a cable , which certain rock have cut asunder : whereupon the general command that she shall ride no long at anchor , but that she shall turn up and down , as she have do before in sight of we , which she do all day long , and at night she come to a anchor over against a fresh water somewhat low , and we go and ride hard by she . on Palme - sunday we go on shore with the father , which read the passion unto we and say mass , and we go in procession with branch in our hand . and so be comfort , because we have receive that holy sacrament , we return to our ship . Chap . 16 . return to the isle of cedar weather - beaten , and with their ship in evil case , they conclude , that the ship call Santa Agueda or Santa Agatha shall return unto Nueva Espanna . of the multitude of whale which they find about the point of California : with the description of a weed , which grow among the island of those sea . here we continue until the Wednesday before Easter be the four and twenty of march , on which day we consult together , that because the ship be ill condition , and want necessary furniture to proceed any further , it be best for we to return back to new Spain , as also because our clothes be consume : but the general seem not willing to return , but to proceed on his voyage : and in fine it be resolve , that see both the ship can not proceed forward , as well because they have lose their necessary furniture , as also that the Santa Agatha have need of calk , because she receive much water , and be the worst furnish of the twain , that she shall return back to advertise the mark of our success in this voyage , and what hinder our proceed , and in what case we stand , and how we be bereave of our necessary furniture . and because the Trinity be 275 A . D . j54o . the swift ship , and better appoint than the other , it be conclude , that it shall be provide in the best manner that may be , and that the general shall proceed on his journey in she with such company as he shall make choice of , and that the rest shall return at their good leisure . wherefore upon this determination we go under a point of this island , because it be a fit place to carene the ship : and in recover the same we spend Wednesday , Thursday , and Friday till noon , and yet for all that we can not well double it , until Easter day about noon . here we anchor very near the shore , and in a valley we find very excellent fresh water , whereof we make no small account , and here stay all the easter