many matter : i tell he that i will request he nothing else but that he will set i down in a chart as much as he know concern that river , and what manner of people those be which dwell upon the bank thereof on both side : which he do willing . and then he request i that i will describe my country unto he , as he have do his unto i . and for to 315 content he , i cause a draught of certain thing to be make for he . the next day i enter between certain very high mountain , through which this river pass with a strait chanel , and the boat go up against the stream very hardly for want of man to draw the same . here certain Indians come and tell i , that in the same place , there be certain people of Cumana , a enchanter , and among the rest a enchanter , who inquire which way we will pass ; and they tell he that we mean to pass by the river , he set certain cane on both side thereof , through which we pass , without receive any kind of damage which they intend against we . thus go forward i come unto the house of the old man which be in my company , and here i cause a very high cross to be set up , whereupon i engrave certain letter to signify that i be come thither : and this i do , that if by chance any of the people of the generail Vasquez de Coronado shall come thither , they may have knowledge of my be there . at length see i can not attain to the knowledge of that which i seek for , i determine to return back unto my ship . And be ready to depart there arrive two Indians , which by mean of the interpreter of the old man , tell i that they be send to i , and that they be of Cumana , and that their lord can not come himself , because he be far from that place , but desire i to signify unto he what my pleasure be . i tell they , that i wish that he will always embrace peace , and that i be come to see that country , but be enforce to return back down the river i can not now do it , but that hereafter i will return , and that in the mean season they shall give that cross unto their lord , which they promise i to do , and they go direct to carry he that cross with certain this river feather which be on the same . of these i seek to he ^ up ^ n ' understand what people dwell upward upon the bank he ^ tra ^ they and iverJ which give i knowledge of many people , veil . and tell i that the river go far moor up into the 316 land than i have yet see , but that they know not the head thereof , because it be very far into the country , and that many other river fall into the same . have learn thus much the next day morning i return down the river , and the day follow i come where i have leave my Spaniard , with who i speak , and tell he that all thing have go well with i , and that at this time and the former i have go above 30 league into the country . the Indians of that place inquire of i what the cause be of my departure , and when i will return ; to who i answer , that i will return short . thus sail down the stream , a woman leap into the water cry unto we to stay for she , and she come into our boat , and creep under a bench , from whence we can not make she to come out : i understand that she do this , because her husband have take unto he another wife , by who he have child , say that she mean not to dwell any long with he , see he have take another wife . thus she and another Indian come with i of their own accord , and so i come into my ship , and make they ready we proceed home on our voyage , coast and oftentimes go on land , and enter a great way into the country , to see if i can learn any news of captain Francis Vasquez and his company ; of who i can have no other knowledge , but such as i learn in the aforesaid river . i bring with i many act of take possession of all that coast . and by the situation of the river , and the height which i take , i find that that which the master and pilot of the marquess take be false , and that they be deceive by 2 degree , and i have sail beyond they above 4 degree . i sail up he sail it , the river 8 5 league , where i see and learn all the the particular before mention , and many other thing ; ' whereof when it shall please God to give i leave to kiss your lordship hand , i will deliver you the full and perfect relation . i think my self to have have 317 very good fortune , in that i find don Luis de Castilia , the port of and Augustine Ghenero in the port of Colima : for the Colima . Galiot of the adolantado come upon i , which be there with the rest of his fleet , and command i to strike sail , which seem a strange thing unto i , and not understand in what state thing be in Nueva Espanna , i go about to defend my self , and not to do it . in the mean while come don Luis de Castilia in a boat and confer with i , and i lay at anchor on the other side of the haven where the say fleet road , and i give unto he this relation ( and to avoid strife i determine to sail away by night ) which relation i carry about i brief write ; for i always have a purpose to send the same , as soon as i shall touch upon Nueva Espanna , to advertise your lordship of my proceed .