intent that they may learn some news of Stephan ; which i can not obtain at their hand . when i see this , i say unto they , that i purpose to see the city of Cevola , whatsoever come of it . they say that none of they will go with i . at the last when they see i resolute , two of the chief of they say they will go with i ; with who and with my Indians and interpreter i follow my way , till i come within sight of Cevola , which be situate on a plain at the foot of a round hill , and make show to be a fair city , and be better seat than any that i have see in these part . the house be build in order , accord as the indian tell i , all make of stone with diverse story , and flat roof , as far as i can discern from a mountain , whither i ascend to view the city . the people be somewhat white , they wear apparel , and lie in bed , their weapon be bow , they have emrald and other jewel , although they esteem none so much as turquese , wherewith they adorn the wall of the porch of their house , and their apparel and vessel , and they use they in stead of money through all the country . their apparel be of cotton and of ox hide , and this be their most commendable and honourable apparel . they use vessel of gold and silver , for they have no other mettle , whereof there be great use and more abundance than in Peru , and they buy the most rich same for turquese in the province of the pintado , where ” and der ^ n t ^ iere be say to mine ° f great abundance . of other the province of kingdom i can not obtain so particular instruction . the pintado . diverse time i be tempt to go thither , because i know i can but hazard my life , and that i have offer unto God the first day that i begin my journey : in the end i begin to be afraid , consider in what danger i 142 shall put my self , and that if i shall dye , the knowledge of this country shall be lose , which in my judgement be the great and the best that hitherto have be discover : and when i tell the chief man , what a goodly city Cevola seem unto i , they answer i that it be the least of the seven city , and that Toton - Totonteac the teac be the great and best of they all , because it have so many house and people , that there be no end of they . pnv - tnce . have see the disposition and situation of the place , i think good to name that country el Nuevo reyno de san Francisco : in which place i make a great heap of stone by the help of the Indians , and on the top thereof i set up a small slender cross because i want mean to make a great , and say that i set up that cross and heap in the name of the most honourable lord don Antonio de Mendosa viceroy and captain general of Nueva Espanna , for the emperor our lord , in token of possession , accord to my instruction . which possession i say that i take in that place of all the seven city , 8c of the kingdom of Totonteac , of Acus , and of Marata . thus i return with much more fear than victual , he retume . and go until i find the people which i have leave behind i , with all the speed that i can make , who i overtake in two day travel , and go in their company till i have pass the desert , where i be a desert . not make so much of as before : for both man and woman make great lamentation for the people which be slay at Cevola , and with fear i hasten from the people of this valley , and travel ten league a valley . the first day , and so i go daily eight or ten league , without stay until i have pass the second desert . a second and though i be in fear , yet i determine to go to desert . the great plain , whereof i say before , that i have information , be situate at the foot of the mountain , and in that place i understand , that this plain be inhabit for many day journey towards the east , but i dare not enter into it , consider , that if hereafter ! 43 we shall inhabit this other country of the seven city , and the kingdom before mention , that then i may better discover the same , without put my self in hazard , and leave it for this time , that i may give relation of the thing which i have now see . at the entrance of this plain 1 see but seven town only of a reasonable bigness , which be a far off in a low valley be very green and a most fruitful soil , out of which run many river . i be inform that there be much gold in this valley , and that the inhabitant work it into vessel and thin plate , wherewith they strike and take off their sweat , and that they be people that will not suffer those of the other side of the plain to traffic with they , and they can not tell i the cause thereof . here i set up two cross , and take possession of the plain and valley in like sort and order , as i do at other place before mention . and from thence i return on my voyage with as much haste as 1 can make , until i come to the city of saint Michael in the province of culiacan , think there to have find Francis Vazquez de Coronado governor of Nueva Galicia , and find he not there , i proceed on my journey Compostella in till i come to the city of Compostella , where i find 21 . degree of i wr | te not here many other particularity , because latitude . , .. , . r t i i they be impertinent to this matter : 1 only report that which i have see , and which be tell i concern the country through which i travel , and of those which i have information of .