they to come unto they , which they do , and Francis likewise go alone towards they , in which mean space the general command his people to get into the boat . Francis come unto the place begin to lay down his merchandise of traffic , and afterward make sign unto they to stay there , because he will go to the ship to bring they other thing , and so he return to the place where the captain be , and find they all get into the boat , save the general and three or four other , and the general make as though he have give other trifle to Preciado to carry unto the Indians , and when he be go a little from he , he call he back again , and all this while the 249 indian stand still , and be come unto he , we go fair and soft to our boat , and get into they at our ease , without any throng , and thence we come aboard our ship . the Indians see we thus go aboard come down to the strand where the brook of water be , and call unto we to come forth with our boat , and to come on shore , and to bring our bead , and that they will give we of their mother of pearl : but we be now set at [ three . 4 . 14 . ] dinner make no account of they : whereupon they begin to shoot arrow at the ship , and although they fall near we , yet they do not reach we . in the mean season certain mariner go out in the boat , to weigh the anchor , whereupon the Indians see they come towards they , 8c bring they nothing , they begin in scorn to show they their buttock , make sign that they shall kiss their bum : and these seem to be those that come last . the general see this , command a musket to be once or twice shoot off , and that they shall take their just aim . they see these shot to be make ready , some of they rise and go to shoot their arrow at our mariner , which be go to weigh the anchor , than the general command the great ordinance speedy to be shoot off , whereupon three or four bullet be discharge , and we perceive that we have slay one of they , for we assure see he lie dead upon the shore ; and i think some of the rest be wound . they hear this noise , and see he dead run away as fast as ever they can , some along the shore , and some through the valley , drag the dead indian with they , after which time none of they appear , save ten or twelve , which peep up with their head among those rock ; whereupon another piece of ordinance be discharge aloft against the place where they be , after which time we never see any more of they . 250 at the point of the Trinity they spend three day in fish , and in other pastime : after which set sail they discover pleasant country , and mountain void of grass , and a hand afterward call Isla de los cedros , or the he of cedar , near which they suffer sharp cold and rain , and to save themselves they return thither . immediate we set sail to join with the ship Santa Agueda , which be above half a league in the high sea from we , and this be on the Wednesday the seventeenth of December . be come together because the wind be contrary , we draw near to a headland , which we call Punta de la Trinidad , and here we stay fish , and solace our self two or three day , although we have always great store of rain . afterwards we begin to sail very slow , and at night we ride over against those mountain where we have leave our anchor , and upon knowledge of the place we receive great contentment see we have sail some five and thirty league from the place where we have take in water : neither be it any marvel that we so rejoice , because that the fear which we have of contrary wind cause we to be so well apay of the way which we have make . the day of the holy nativity of our lord , which be on the Thursday the five and twenty of the say month , God of his mercy begin to show we favour in give we a fresh wind almost in the poop , which carry we beyond those mountain , for the space of ten or twelve league , find the coast always plain : and two league within the land , which we coast along , and between these mountain , there be a great space of plain ground , which we may easy discern with our eye , although other be of another opinion . we begin from Christmas day to sail slow with certain small land - wind , and 251 great apparent of gold and silver . January 1540 forty league . sail from morning to night about seven or eight league , which we esteem no small matter , always pray to God to continue this his favour towards we , and thank he for his holy nativity , and all the day of this feast the friar say mass in the admiral , and the father Frier Raimund preach unto we , which give we not small comfort , by encourage we in the service of God . on Saturday at night be the 27 of the say month we ankor near unto a point which seem to be plain land all along the shore , and within the country be high mountain with certain wood , which wood and mountain run overthwart the country , and continue along with certain small hill sharp on the top , and certain little valley be between those mountain . and in truth to i which with diligent eye behold the same both in length and in the breadth thereof , it can not choose but be a good country , and to have great matter in it , as well touch the inhabit thereof by the Indians , as in gold and silver ; for there be great likelihood that