send back the people of the sea - coast : and two Indians of the island say they will go with i seven or eight day . so with these and with the three pintado above mention , i depart from Vacupa upon Easter Tuesday , the same way that Stephan go , from who i receive new messenger with a cross of the bigness of the first which he send i : which hasten i forward , 13 ° and assure i that the land which i seek for , be the great and best country in all those part . the say messenger tell i particular without fail in any one point , all that which the first messenger have tell i , and much more , and give i more plain information thereof . so i travel that day be easter Tuesday , and two day more , the very same way that Stephan have go : at the end of which 3 day they tell i , that from that place a man may travel in thirty day to the city of Cevola , which be the first of the seven . neither do one only tell i thus much , but very many ; who tell i very particular of the greatness of the house , and of the fashion of they , as the first messenger have inform i . also they tell i , that beside these seven city , there be 3 . other kingdom which be call Marata , Acus , and Totonteac . i inquire of they wherefore they travel so far from their house ? they say that they go for Turqueses , and hide of cow , and other thing ; and that of all these there be great abundance in this country . likewise i inquire how , and by what mean they obtain these thing ? they tell i , by their service , and by the sweat of their brow , and that they go unto the first city of the province which be call Cevola , and that they serve they in till their ground , and in other business , and that they give they hide of ox , which they have in those place , and turquese for their service , and that the people of this city wear very fine and excellent turquese hang at their ear and at their nostril . they say also , that of these turquese they make fine work upon the principali gate of the house of this city . they tell i , that the apparel which the inhabitant of Cevola wear , be a gown of cotton down to the foot , with a button at the neck , and a long string hang down at the same , and that the sleeve of these gown be as broad beneath as above . they say , they gird themselves with girdle of turquese , and that over these 131 coat some be good apparel , other hide of cow very well dress , which they take to be the best apparel of that country , whereof they have there great quantity . likewise the woman go apparel , and cover down to the foot . Theise Indians give i very good entertainment , and curious inquire the day of my departure from Vacupa , that at my return they may provide i of food and lodging . they bring certain sick folk before i , that i may heal they , and seek to touch my apparel , and give i certain cow - hydes so well trim and dress , that by they a man may conjecture that they be wrought by civil people , and all of they affirm , ithat they come from Cevola . the next day i follow my journey , and carry with i the pintado , i come to another village where i be well receive by the people of the same : who likewise seek to touch my garment , and give i as particular knowledge of the land aforesaid , as i have receive of those which meet i before : and also tell i , that from that place certain people be go with Stephan Dorantez four or five day journey . and here i find a great cross , which Stephan have leave i for a sign , that the news of the good country increase , and leave word , that with all haste they shall send i away , and that he will stay for i at the end of the first desert that he meet with . here i set up two cross , and take possession accord to my instruction , because that the country seem better unto i then that which i have pass , and that i think it meet to make a act of possession as far as that place . in this manner i travail five day , always find inhabit place with great hospitality and entertainment , and many turquese , and ox - hides , and the like report concern the country . here i understand , that after two day journey i shall find a desert where there be no food ; but that there be certain go before to 132 build i lodging , and to carry food for i : whereupon i hasten my way , hope to find Stephan at the end thereof , because in that place he have leave word that he will stay for i . before i come to the desert , i meet with a very pleasant town , by a pleasant reason of great store of water convey thither to water the same . here 1 meet with many people both man and woman clothe in cotton , and some cover with oxe - hydes , which general they take for better apparel than that of cotton . all the people of this village go in caconado , that be to say , with Turqueses hang at their nostril and ear : which turquese they call Cacona . among other , the lord of this village come unto i , and two of his brethren very well apparel in cotton , who also be in caconado , each of they have his collar of turquese about his neck : and they present unto i many wild beast , as cony , quail , Maiz , nut of pine tree , and all in great abundance , and ofier i many turquese , and dress oxe - hydes , and very fair vessel to drink in , and other thing : whereof i will receive no whit . and have my garment of grey cloth , which in Spain be call farago ^ a , the lord of this village , and the other Indians touch my gown with their