the relation of the navigation and discovery which captain Fernando Alarchon make by the order of the right honourable lord don Antonio de Mendosa viceroy of new Spain , date in Colima , a haven of new Spain . Chap . 1 . Fernando Alarchon after he have suffer a storm , arrive with his fleet at the haven of saint Iago , and from thence at the haven of Aguaiaval : he be in great peril in seek to discover a bay , and get out of the same he discover a river on the coast with a great current , enter into the same , and coast along he descry a great many of Indians with their weapon : with sign he have traffic with they , and fear some great danger return to his ship . n Sunday the nine of May in the year 1540 i set sail with two ship , the one call saint Peter be admiral , and the other saint Catherine , and we set forward mean to go to the haven of saint Iago of good hope : but before we arrive there we have a terrible storm , wherewith they which be in the ship call saint Catherine , be more afraid than be need , cast over board nine piece of ordinance , two anchor and one cable , and many other thing as needful for the enterprise wherein we go , as the ship it self . assoon as we be arrive at the haven of saint Iago i repair the haven of my loss which i have receive , provide my self of stint jag > . thing necessary , and take aboard my people which look for my come , and direct my course towards the haven of Aguaiavall . And be there arrive i the haven of understand that the general Francis Vazquez de Coronado be depart with all his people : whereupon take 279 the ship call saint Gabriel which carry victual for the army i lead she with i to put in execution your lordship order . afterwards i follow my course along the coast without depart from the same , to see if i can find any token or any indian which can give i knowledge of he : and in sail so near the shore i discover other very good haven , for the ship whereof captain Francis de ullua be general for the marquess de Valle neither see nor find they . and these shoald when we be come to the flat and shoald from whence “ ofmarbe ^ f ° resaid fleet return , it seem aswell to i as mrin nr th , to the rest , that we have the firm land before we , and bay of Cali - that those shoald be so perilous and fearful , that it fimia . be a thing to be consider whither with our skiff we can enter in among they : and the pilot and the rest of the company will have have we do as captain Ullua do , and have return back again . but because your lordship command i , that i shall bring you the secret of that gulf , i resolve , that although i have know i shall have lose the ship , i will not have cease for any thing to have see the head thereof : and therefore i command Nicolas Zamorano pilot major , and Dominico deal Castello that each of they shall take a boat , and their lead in their hand , and run in among those shoald , to see if they can find out the channel whereby the ship may enter in : to who it seem that the ship may sail up high ( although with great travel and danger ) and in this sort i and he begin to follow our way which they have take , and within a short while after we find our self fast on the sand with all our three ship , in such sort that one can not help another , neither can the boat succour we , because the current be so great that it be impossible for one of we to come unto another : whereupon we be in such great j eopardie that the deck of the admiral be oftentimes under water , and if a great surge of the sea have not come and drive our ship right up , and give her leave as it be to breathe a while , 280 1540 ’ we have there be drown : and likewise the other two ship find themselves in very great hazard , yet because they be lesser and draw less water , their danger be not so great as we . now it please God upon the return of the flood that the ship come on float , and so we go forward . and although the company will have return back , yet for all this i determine to go forward , and to pursue our attempt voyage : and we pass forward with much ado , turn our stem now this way , now that way , to seek to find the chanel . and it please God that after this sort we come to the very bottom of the bay ; where we find a very mighty river , which run with so great fury of a stream , that we can hardly sail against it . in this sort i determine as well as i can to go up this river , and with two boat , leave the three with the ship , and twenty man , my self be in one of they with Roderigo Maldonado treasurer of this fleet , and Gaspar de Castilleia comptroller , and with certain small piece of artillery i begin to sail up the river , and charge all my company , that none of they shall stir nor use any sign , but he who i appoint , although we find Indians . the same day , which be Thursday the six and twenty of August , follow our voyage with draw the boat with halser we go about some 6 league : and the next day which be Friday by the break of day thus follow our way upward , i see certain Indians which go towards cer the bottom of the bay of California . they go up the river of buena guia the 26 . of August . taine cottage near unto the water , who assoon as they see we , ten or twelve of they rise up furious , and cry with a