the foresay Francis Lopez de Gomara in his general history or the west Indies , Chap . 215 . write in manner follow of certain great and strange beast never see nor hear of in our know world of Asia , Europe , and Africa : which somewhat resemble our ox , have high bunch on their back like those on the back of camel , be therefore call by he Vacas corcobado , that be to say , crookbacked ox , be very deform and terrible in show , and fierce by nature : which notwithstanding for food , apparel , and other necessary use , be most serviceable and beneficial to the inhabitant of those country . he report also in the same chapter of certain strange sheep as big as horse , and of dog which use to carry burden of 50 . pound weight upon their back . a li the way between Cicuic and Quivira be a most plain soil , without tree and stone , and have but few and small town . the man clothe and shoe themselves with leather ; and the woman which be esteem captain fro - for their long lock , cover their head and secret with bisher bring the same . they have no bread of any kind of grain , int0 England as they say : which i account a very great matter . Mita their chief food be flesh , and that oftentimes they 5 ' eat raw , either of custom or for lack of wood . they eat the fat as they take it out of the ox , and drink the blood hot , and die not therewithal ! , though the ancient writer say that it kill , as Empedocles and other affirm , they drink it also cold dissolve in water . they see not the flesh for lack of pot , but roast it , or to say more proper , warm it at a fire of ox - dung : when they eat , they chew their meat but little , and raven up much , and hold the flesh with their tooth , they cut it with razor of stone , which seem to be great bestiality : but such be their manner of live and fashion . they go together in company , and move from one place to 167 the description of the ox ofQuivira . sheep as big as horse . mighty dog carry 50 . pound weight . another , as the wild moor of Barbary call alarbe do , follow the season and the pasture after their Oxen . these ox be of the bigness and colour of our bull , but their home be not so great . they have a great bunch upon their fore shoulder , and more hair on their fore part then on their hinder part : and it be like wool . they have as it be a horse - mane upon their back bone , and much hair and very long from the knee downward . they have great tuffe of hair hang down their forehead , and it seem that they have beard , because of the great store of hair hang down at their chin and throat . the male have very long tail , and a great knob or flock at the end : so that in some respect they resemble the lion , and in some other the Carnell . they push with their home , they run , they overtake and kill a horse when they be in their rage and anger . final , it be a foul and fierce beast of countenance and form of body . the horse flee from they , either because of their deform shape , or else because they have never see they . their master have no other riches nor substance : of they they eat , they drink , they apparel , they shoe themselves : and of their hide they make many thing , as house , shoe , apparel and rope : of their bone they make bodkin : of their sinew and hair , thread : off their home , maw , and bladder , vessel : of their dung , fire : and of their calves - skinne , budget , wherein they draw and keep water . to be short , they make so many thing of they as they have need of , or as many as suffice they in the use of this life . there be also in this country other beast as big as horse , which because they have home and fine wool , they call they sheep , and they say that every home of they weigh be fifty pound weight . there be also great dog which will fight with a bull , and will carry fifty pound weight in sack when they 168 go on hunt , or when they remove from place to place with their flock and herd .