we put out our boat and anchor , mark also how our bwoy float upon the water ; and when our boat return to the ship , two of they leap into the sea , and swim unto the bwoy , and behold it a great while ; then they take a cane of a arrow , and tie to the say bwoy a very fair and shine sea - oyster of pearl , and then return to the shore , near to the water place . Chap . 10 . they give unto the Indians many trifle which stand upon the shore to see they , and seek to parley with they by their interpreter , which be a chichimeco , who can not understand their language . they go to take fresh water . Francis Preciado spend the time with they with many sign , and truck and be afeard of their great multitude , retire himself wise with his companion , return with safety to the ship . when the captain and we behold this , we judge these Indians to be peaceable people ; whereupon the captain take the boat with 4 or 5 mariner carry with he certain bead to truck , and go to speak with they . in the mean while he command the indian interpreter our chichimeco , to be call out of 244 the admiral that he shall parley with they . and the captain come unto the boy , and lay certain thing upon it for exchange , and make sign unto the savage to come and take they ; and a indian make sign unto our man with his hand , his arm , and head , that they understand they not , but signify that they shall go aside . whereupon the captain depart a small distance from that place with his boat . and they make sign again that he shall get he further ; whereupon we depart a great way off , the say Indians leap into the water , come unto the boy , and take those bead , and return back again to land , and then come unto the other three , and all of they view our thing , they give a bow and certain arrow to a indian , and send he away , run with all haste on the shore , and make sign unto we that they have send word unto their lord what thing we have give they , and that he will come thither . within a while after the say Indian return , run as he do before , and begin to make sign unto we , that his lord be come . and while we stay here , we see on the shore ten or twelve Indians assemble themselves , which come unto the other Indians , apd by and by we see another company of 12 or 15 more appear , who assemble themselves all together . and again they begin to make sign unto we , to come forthwith to our boat , and show we many oyster of pearl on the top of certain cane , make sign that they will give they we . when we behold this , the captain command we to make ready our boat , and go aboard it with the say mariner , and row to a certain stone in form of a rock , which lie in the sea near unto the shore . and hither come first 2 or 3 Indians and lay down one of those oyster , and a garland make of parats feather , or sparrow feather paint red ; they lay down also certain plume of white feather , and other of blue colour . in the mean while we see continual Indians assemble to the shore by ten and ten , and so by little and little they come in squadron ; 245 and one of they assoon as he see the boat begin to leap forward and backward with so great nimbleness , that doubtless he seem to all of we a man of great agility , and we take no small pleasure while we behold he fetch those gambol : but the rest of the Indians which stand at the mouth of the fresh water run towards he , and cry unto he , forbid he to use those gesture , because we be come thither in peaceable sort , and by this mean he come with the rest to the water place , where by little and little in this manner there assemble above a hundred of they all in order , with certain staff with cord to fling they , and with their bow and arrow , and they be all paint . in the mean while our chichimeco - interpreter bear in the he of California , be come unto we , and the captain again command a mariner to strip himself , and to swim and lay upon the say rock certain bell , and more bead , and when he have lay they there , the Indians make sign that he shall go away ; and so they come thither and take they , and our man draw near with their boat . the captain command the indian our chichimeco to speak unto they , but they can not understand he , so that we assure believe , that they understand not the language of the he of California . this day be Tuesday until night the Indians stay at this water place , take some of our bead , and give unto we their feather and other thing , and when it be very late they depart . the morrow follow be Wednesday very early the captain command that our buttes shall be make ready , that before break of day , and before the Indians shall take the hill , which stand over the water place , we may be land in good order : which be put in execution : for we go on shore with as many as can go , save those that have charge to take in the water , and such as be to stay on shipboard , which in all be about fourteen or fifteen person , in as good order as we can devise : for we be four crossbow , two 246 ... I539 ' harquebuzier , and eight or nine target , and the most part of we carry very good sling , and every one eighteen river stone , which weapon the captain invent , because the