hand , and tell i , that of such cloth there be great store in Totonteac , and that the store of woolpeople of that country wear the same . whereat i clot ^ and laugh , and say that it be nothing else but such fofgnteac 0 apparel of cotton as they wear . and they reply : we will have thou think that we understand , that that apparel which thou wear , and that which we wear be of diverse sort . understand thou , that in Cevola all the house be full of that apparel which we wear , but in Totonteac there be certain little beast , from who they take that thing wherewith such apparel as thou wear , be make . i pray they to inform i more plain of this matter . and they tell i that the say beast be about the bigness of the two 133 collar ofturqueses two or three time double . branch or spaniel which Stephan carry with he , and they say that there be great store of that cattle in Totonteac . Chap . 3 . he enter into a desert , and the Indians suffer he to want nothing necessary . follow his voyage , he come into a fertile valley , and have certain knowledge give he ( as he have before ) of the state of Cevola and of Totonteac ; and that the coast of the sea in 35 . degree trend much to the westward : and also of the kingdom of Marata and Acus . the next day i enter into the desert , and where i be to dine , i find bower make , and victual in abundance by a river side : and at night i find bower and victual in like sort , and after that manner i find for 4 . day travel : all which time the wilderness continue . at the end of these four day , i enter into a valley very well inhabit with people . at the first village there meet i many man and woman with victual , and all of they have turquese hang at their nostril and ear , and some have collar of turquese like those which the lord of the village before i come to the desert , and his two brethren wear : save that they wear they but single about their neck , and these people wear they three or four time double , and go in good apparel , and skin of ox : and the woman wear of the say turquese at their nostril and ear , and very good waistcoat and other garment . here there be as great knowledge of Cevola , as in Nueva Espanna of temis - titan , and in Peru of Cuzco : and they tell we particular the manner of their house , lodging , street and marketplace , as man that have be oftentimes there , and as those which be furnish from thence with thing necessary for the service of their household , as those also have do , which i already have pass . i tell they it be impossible that the house shall be 134 make in such sort as they inform i , and they for my better understanding take earth or ash , and pour water thereupon , and show i how they lay stone upon it , and how the building grow up , as they continue lay stone thereon , until it mount aloft . i ask they whether the man of that country have wing to mount up unto those loft : whereat they laugh , and show i a ladder in as good sort as i my self be able to describe it . than they take a staff and hold it over their head , and say that the loft be so high one above another . likewise here i have information of the woollen cloth of Totonteac , where they say be house like those of Cevola , and better and more in number , and that it be a great province , and have no governor . here i understand that the coast of the sea trended much towards the west : for unto the entrance of this first desert which i pass , the coast still stretch northward : and because the trending of the coast be a thtsgradu - thing of great importance , i be desirous to know and see it : and i see plain , that in 35 . degree the e ^ e ^ ees ' at coast stretch to the west , whereat i rejoice no the least . less , then of the good news within land , and so i return back to proceed on my journey . through the foresay valley i travail five day journey , which be inhabit with goodly people , and so abound with victual , that it suffice to feed above three thousand horseman : it be all well water and like a garden : the burroughs and town be half and a quarter of a league long , and in all these village , i find very ample report of Cevola , whereof they make such particular relation unto i , as people which go yearly thither to earn their live . here i find a man bear in Cevola , who tell i that he come thither , have escape from the governor or lieutenant of the town ; for the lord of these seven city live and abide in one of those town call Ahacus , and in the rest he appoint lieutenant Ahacus . 135 under he . this townsman of Cevola be a white man of a good complexion , somewhat well in year , and of far great capacity than the inhabitant of this valley , or then those which i have leave behind i . he say that he will go with i , that i may beg his pardon : and of he i learn many particular : he tell i that Cevola be a great city , inhabit with great store of people , and have many street and marketplace : and that in some part of this city there be certain very great house of five story high , wherein the chief of the city assemble themselves at certain day of the year . he say that the house be of lime and stone , accord as other have tell i before , and that the gate , and small pillar of the principali house be of Turqueses , and all the vessel wherein they be serve , and the other ornament of their house be of gold : and that the other six city be build like unto this , whereof some be big : and that Ahacus be the