news thereof long before , come forth to receive he with show of great joy . the food of this people and of all the rest of that province , which be great , be cony , hare , and dear which they kill , of all which they have great abundance . also they have great store of Maiz or indian wheat , gourd , and melon very good and plentiful : and there be many river full of excellent fish of diverse sort . they go almost naked , and the weapon that they use be bow and arrow , and live under the government and lordship of cacique like those of Mexico : they find no idol among they , neither can they understand that they worship any thing , whereupon they easy consent that the Spaniard shall set up cross , and be very well content therewith , after they be inform by our friar of the signification thereof , which be do by the interpreter that they carry with they ; by who mean they understand of other town , whither the say Conchos do conduct they , and bear they company above four and twenty league , all which way be inhabit with people of their own nation : and at all place where they come they be peaceable receive by advice that be send by the cacique from one town to another . have pass the four and twenty league aforesaid , they come unto another nation of Indians call Passaguates , who live after the manner of the foresay Conchos their borderer , and do unto they as the other have do , conduct they forward other four day journey , with advice of the caciques as before . the 189 A . D . 1581 - 83 . Antonio de Espejo his set forth from the valley of saint Bartholomew the ten of November 1582 . indian call Conchos . many river . Spaniard find in this journey many mine of silver , which accord to the judgement of skilful man , be very plentiful and rich in metal . a day journey from thence they meet with another nation call Tobosos , who so soon as they behold the countenance of our people flee unto the mountain , leave their town and house desolate . afterwards we understand that certain year pass there come unto that place certain soldier to seek mine , who carry away captive certain of the people of the country , which cause the rest of they to be so shey and fearful . the captain send messenger to call they back again , assure they that they shall not sustain any harm , and handle the matter so discreet , that many of they return , who he make much of , and give they gift , use they kind , and declare unto they by the interpreter , that their come be not to hurt any man : whereupon they be all quiet , and be content they shall set up cross , and declare the mystery of the same , make show that they be high please therewith . for proof whereof they accompany they on their voyage , as their neighbour have do , until they have bring they to a country inhabit by another nation , which be distant from they some 12 league . they use bow and arrow and go naked . the nation unto which the say Tobosos conduct they , be call jumanos , who the Spaniard by another name call Patarabueyes : their province be very great , contain many town and great store of people : their house be flat - rooffed , and build of lime and stone , and the street of their town be place in good order . all the man and woman have their face , arm and leg raze and pounce : they be a people of great stature , and of better government , than the rest which they have see in their former journey : and be well provide of victual , and furnish with plenty of wild beast , fowl and fish , by reason of mighty river which come from the north , whereof one be as great as 190 guadalquivir , which fall into the north sea or bay of Mexico . here be also many lake of salt water , which at a certain time of the year wax hard , and becomes very good salt . they be a warlike people , and soon make show thereof : for the first night that our people encamp there , with their arrow they slay five horse , and wound five other very sore , nor will not have leave one of they alive , if they have not be defend by our guard . have do this mischief , they abandon the town , and withdraw themselves to a mountain which be hard by , whither our captain go betimes in the morning , take with he five soldier well arm , and a interpreter call Peter a indian of their own nation , and with good persuasion appease they , cause they to descend to their town and house , and persuade they to give advice unto their neighbour , that they be man that will hurt no body , neither come they thither to take away their good : which he obtain easy by his wisdom , and by give unto the cacique certain bracelet of glass bead , with hat and other trifle , which he carry with he for the same purpose : so by this mean , and by the good entertainment which they give they , many of they accompany our Spaniard for certain day , always travel along the bank of the great river abovesaid ; along the which kit del ' norte . there be many town of the Indians of this nation , which continue for the space of twelve day travel , all which time the caciques have receive advice from one to another , come forth to entertain our people without their bow and arrow , and bring they plenty of victual , with other present and gift , especial hide and chamois - skin very well dress , so that those of Flanders do nothing exceed they . Theise people be all clothe , and seem to have some light of our holy faith : for they make sign of God , look up towards heaven , and call he in their language Apalito , a pall to . and acknowledge he for their lord , from who bountiful hand and mercy they confess that they have 191 receive their life and be , and these worldly good . many of they with their wife and child come unto the friar ( which the captain and soldier bring with they ) that he may cross and bless they . who demand of they , from who they have receive that knowledge of God , they answer , from three Christians , and one negro which pass that way , and remain certain day among they , who by the sign which they make , be Alvero nunnez , Cabe ? a de Vaca , and Dorantes , and Castillo Maldonado , and a negro