will my interpreter to use the like speech to that lord which he have do to the rest ; and that do , i give he a cross , which he receive with a very good will , as the other do : and this lord go a great way with i , until i be call unto from the other side of the river , where the former old man stand with much people : to who i give another cross , use the like speech to they which i have unto the rest , to wit , how they shall use it . then follow my way , i meet with another great company of people , with who come that very same old man who my interpreter under - 302 stand ; and when i see their lord which he show unto i , i pray he to come with i into my boat , which he do very willing , and so i go still up the river , and the old man come and show i who be the chief lord : and i speak unto they always with great courtesy , 8c all of they show that they rejoice much thereat , 8c speak very well of my coming thither . at night i withdraw my self into the midst of the river , 8c ask he many thing concern that country : and i find he as willing 8c well dispose to show they i , as i be desirous to know they . i ask he of Cevola : and he tell i he have be there , and that it be a goodly thing , 8c that the lord thereof be very well obey : and that there be other lord thereabouts , with who he be at continual war . i ask he whether they have silver 8c gold , and he behold certain bell , say they have metal of their colour . i inquire whether they make it there , and he answer i not , but that they bring it from a certain mountain , where a old woman dwell . i demand whether he have any knowledge of a river call Totonteac , he answer i not , but of another exceed mighty river , wherein there be such huge crocodile , that of their hide they make buckler , and that they worship the sun neither more nor less than those which i have pass : and when they offer unto he the fruit of the earth , they say : receive hereof , for thou have create they , and that they love he much , because he warm they ; and that when he break not forth , they be cold . herein reason with he , he begin somewhat to complain , say unto i , i know not wherefore the sun use these term with we , because he give we not clothe , nor people to spin nor to weave they , nor other thing which he give to many other , and he complain that those of that country will not suffer they to come there , and will not give they of their corn . i tell he that i will remedy this , whereat he remain very well satisfy . 3 ° 3 A . D . 1540 Cevola a goodly thing . gold and silver in a mountain near Cevola . a mighty river . this river seem to be northward by the cold . they be advertise by the Indians , wherefore the lord of Cevola kill the negro , which go with Frier Marco , and of many other thing : and of a old woman call Guatazaca , which live in a lake and eat no food . the description of a beast , of the skin whereof they make target . the suspicion that they conceive of they , that they be of those Christians which be see at Cevola , and how they cunning save themselves . the next day which be Sunday before break of day , begin their cry as they be wont : and this be the cry of 2 . or 3 . sort of people , which have lie all night near the river side , wait for i : and they take Maiz and other corn in their mouth , and sprinkle i therewith , say that that be the fashion which they use when they sacrifice unto the sun : afterward they give i of their victual to eat , and among other thing , they give i many white peason . i give they a cross as i have do to the rest : and in the mean season that old man tell they great matter of my do , and point i out with his finger , say , this be the lord , the son of the sun : and they make i to comb my beard , and to set my apparel handsome which i wear upon my back . and so great be the confidence that they have in i , that all of they tell i what thing have pass , and Dick pass among they , and what good or bad mind they bear one towards another . i ask they wherefore they impart unto i all their secret , and that old man answer i : thou be our lord , and we ought to hide nothing from our lord . after these thing , follow on our way , i begin again to inquire of he the state of Cevola , and whether he know that those of this country have ever see people like unto we : he answer i not , save one negro which wear about his leg and arm certain thing which do ring . your lordship 3 ° 4 be to call to mind how this negro which go with friar 2 % negro Marco be wont to wear bell , and feather on his arm and leg , and that he carry plate of diverse colour , and that it be not much above a year ago since he come into those part . i demand upon what occasion he be kill ; and he answer i , that the lord of Cevola inquire of he whether he have other brethren : he answer that he have a infinite number , and that they have great store of weapon with they , and that they be not very far from thence . which when he have hear , many of the chief man consult together , and resolve to