because we stand in much need thereof , for at the other place of the Indians we can get but a little . while we thus ride at anchor , we see a Canoa with 3 Indians put out into the sea from their cottage , and they go unto a fish place , among certain great and high weed , which grow in this sea among certain rock , the great part of which weed grow in 15 or 20 fathom depth ; and with great celerity they catch seven or eight fish , and return with they unto the Trinity , and give they unto they , and they in recompense give the indian certain trifle . after this the Indians stay at the stern of the ship , view the same above three hour space , and take the oar of our boat they try how they can row with they , whereat they take great pleasure ; and we which be in the admiral stir not a whit all this while , to give they the more assurance , that they shall not fly away , but shall see , that we mean to do they no harm , and that we be good people . as soon as we be come to anchor , and behold all that have pass between the Indians and those of the Trinity , after the indian be go to the shore in their canoas make of the body of tree , the general command the boat which be without to be these mighty deep and high weed be describe in the end of this treatise . bring unto he : and when it be come , he , and Francis Preciado , and two other go into it , and so we go aboard the Trinity . the Indians see people come out of the other ship into the Trinity , send two canoas unto the stern of the ship , and bring we a bottle of water , and we give unto they certain 263 bead , and continue talk with they a little while ; but evening approach the air grow somewhat cold . the indian return on shore to their lodging , and the general and we to our ship . the next day be Wednesday in the morning , the general command certain of we to take the boat and go ashore , to see if we can find any brook or well of fresh water in the house of the Indians , because he think it unpossible for they to dwell there without any water to drink . the father friar Raimund likewise go out in our company , because the day before see the indian come to the stern of the ship and parley with we , he think he may have speak a little with they , with the like familiarity . in like sort many mariner and soldier go out in the boat of the Trinity , and go altogether with their weapon towards the shore , somewhat above the lodging of the Indians , very early in the morning they watch the boat , and perceive that we will come on land , whereupon they send away their woman and child with certain of they , who carry their good up into certain exceed steep mountain and hill , and 5 or 6 of they come towards we , which be excellent well make , and of a good stature . two of they have bow and arrow , and other two 2 bastinade much thick than the wrist of a man hand , and other two with 2 long staff like javelin with very sharp point , and approach very near we be now come on shore . And begin by sign very fierce to brave we , they come so near we , that almost they strike with one of those staff one of our soldier call Garcia a man of good parentage , but the general command he to withdraw himself , and not to hurt any of they . in the mean season the general and friar Raimund step forth , the friar lap a garment about his arm , because they have take up stone in their hand , fear that they will do they some mischief . then begin both of they to speak unto they by sign and word , to be quiet , signify , that they mean they no 264 1540 - harme , but only be come to take water ; and the friar show they a drinking - cup ; but nothing will serve to make they leave that brag , and fling of stone : and the general continue still in a mind not to hurt they , command his man gentle to come near unto they , and that by sign they shall all show they , that they mean in no wise to hurt they , but that we be come on land only to take water . on the other side refuse utter to take knowledge of these thing they still insult more and more : whereupon Francis Preciado counsel the general to give he leave to kill one of they , because all the rest will flee away , whereby at our ease we may take water : but he reply that he will not have it so , but will they to looze the two mastiff Berecillo and Achillo : wherefore the dog be let loose , and as soon as they see they , they vanish immediate , betake they to their heal , and run up those cliff like goat . also other which come the great use from the mountain to succour they , betake they - ° fmas ^ ve ^^ self to flight . the dog overtake two or they , and indan . bit they a little , and we run after , lay hold on they , and they seem as fierce as wild and untamed beast , for 3 or 4 of we hold either of they , to cherish and pacific they , and to seek to give they some thing : but we avail not , for they bite we by the hand , and stoop down to take up stone for to strike we with they . we lead they a while in this manner , and come unto their lodging , where the general give a charge , that no man shall touch any thing of they , command Francis Preciado to see that this order be