with stone like those of Hochelaga . de Cardenas the second time that they strike i to the ground have not succour i with stride over i like a good knight , i have be in far great danger than i be . but it please God that the Indians yield themselves unto we , and that this city be take : and such store of Maiz be find therein , as our necessity require . the master of the field , and don Pedro de Tovar , and Fernando de Alvarado , and Paul de Melgosa captain of the footman escape with certain knock with stone : though none of they be wound with arrow , yet Agoniez Quarez be wound in one arm with the shot of a arrow , and one Torres a townsman of Panuco be shoot into the face with another , and two footman more have two small wound with arrow . and because my armour be gild and glitter , they 153 excellent house four or five loft high . all lay load on i , and therefore i be more wound than the rest , not that i do more than they , or put my self forward than the rest , for all these gentleman and soldier carry themselves as manful as be look for at their hand . i be now well recover i thank God , although somewhat bruise with stone . likewise in the skirmish which we have in the field , two or three other soldier be hurt , and three horse slay , one of don Lopez , the other of Viliega and the three of don Alonso Manrique , and seven or eight other horse be wound ; but both the man and horse be whole and sound . Chap . 3 . of the situation and state of the seven city call the kingdom of Cibola , and of the custom and quality of those people , and of the beast which be find there . it remain now to certify your honour of the seven city , and of the kingdom es and province whereof the father provinciali make report unto your lordship . and to be brief , i can assure your honour , he say the truth in nothing that he report , but all be quite contrary , save only the name of the city , and great house of stone : for although they be not wrought with turquese , nor with lime , nor brick , yet be they very excellent good house of three or four or five loft high , wherein be good lodging and fair chamber with lather in stead of stair , and certain cellar under the ground very good and pave , which be make for winter , they be in manner like stoove : and the lather which they have for their house be all in a manner moveable and portable , which be take away and set down when they please , and they be make of two piece of wood with their step , as we be . the seven city be seven small town , all make with these kind of house that i speak of : and they stand all within four league together , and they * 54 be all call the kingdom of Cibola , and every one Cibola be a of they have their particular name : and none of they be call Cibola , but altogether they be call Cibola . and this town which i call a city , i have name Granada , as well because it be somewhat like unto it , as also in remembrance of your lordship . in this town where i now remain , there may be some two hundred house , all compass with wall , and i think that with the rest of the house which be not so wall , they may be together five hundred . there five hundred be another town near this , which be one of the seven , bouse in and it be somewhat big than this , and another of the ’ same bigness that this be of , and the other four be somewhat less : and i send they all paint unto your faint ne - lordship with the voyage . and the parchment wherein [ essarl ^ zn a the picture be , be find here with other parchment . new tscovery it the people of this town seem unto i of a reasonable stature , and witty , yet they seem not to be such as they shall be , of that judgement and wit to build these house in such sort as they be . for the most part they go all naked , except their privy part which be cover : and they have paint mantle like those paint which i send unto your lordship . they have no cotton mantbes - wooll grow , because the country be cold , yet they wear mantel thereof as your honour may see by the show thereof : and true it be that there be find in their house certain yarn make of cotton wool . they wear their hair on their head like those of Mexico , and they be well nurture and condition : and they store of tur - have turquese i think good quantity , which with the lueses - rest of the good which they have , except their corn , they have convey away before i come thither : for i find no woman there , nor no youth under fifteen year old , nor no old folk above sixty , save two or three old folk , who stay behind to govern all the rest of the youth and man of war . there be find in a certain paper two point of emrald , and emrald . certain small stone break which be in colour some - 155 excellent and very great guinie cock . Gomara hist . gen . Cap . zi $ . say that that the cold be by reason of the high mountain . a wood of cedar . excellent grass . dear , hare , and cony . what like granate very bad , and other stone of crystal , which i give one of my servant to lay up to send they to your lordship , and he have lose they as he tell i . we find here guinie cock , but few . the indian tell i in all these seven city , that they eat they not , but that they keep they only for their feather . i believe they not , for they be excellent good , and great than those of Mexico