we can not proceed on our journey , we employ our self in catch a few fish for the Lent . from Shrovesunday be the 8 of February , on which day we set sail , we sail with a very scant wind , or rather a calm , until shrove - tewsday , on which we come within ken of the firm land , from whence we be put back these twenty league ( for in these two day and a half we sail some 20 small league ) and we lay in sight of the say point of the firm land . and on the Tewsday we be becalm , wait till God of his mercy will help we with a prosperous wind to proceed on our voyage . on Shrovesunday at night , to make good cheer withal we have so great wind and rain , that there be nothing in our ship which be not wet , and a very cold air . on Ash - wednesday at sunrising we strike sail near a point which we fall somewhat short withal in a great bay run into this firm land : and this be the place where we see five or six fire , and at the rise of the sun be so near the shore that we may well descry and view it at our pleasure we see it to be very pleasant , for we descry as far as we can discern with our eye , fair valley and small hill , with green shrub very pleasant to 268 behold , although there grow no tree there . the situation show their length and breadth . this day be little wind , it be in a manner calm , to our no small grief : and the father friar Raimund say we a dry mass , and give we ash , preach unto we accord to the time and state wherein we be : with which sermon we be great comfort . after noontide we have contrary wind , which still be our enemy in all our journey , at the least from the point of the port of Santa Cruz . here we be constrain to anchor in five fathom water , and after we ride at anchor we begin to view the country , and take delight in behold how goodly and pleasant it be , and near unto the sea we judge that we see a valley of white ground . at evening so great a tempest come upon we of wind and rain , that it be so fearful and dangerous a thing that a great can be express ; for it have like to have drive we upon the shore , and the chief pilot cast out another great anchor into the sea , yet all will not serve , for both these anchor can not stay the ship . whereupon all of we cry to God for mercy , attend to see how he will dispose of we ; who of his great goodness , while we be in this danger , vouchsafe a little to slake the tempest , and with great speed the chief pilot command the mariner to turn the capsten , and the general command and pray all the soldier to help to turn the capsten , which they be nothing slow to perform : and thus we begin to weigh our anchor , and in weigh of one which be far great than the other , the sea be so boisterous that it force the capsten in such sort , that the man which be at it can not rule the same , and it strike a negro of the general such a blow , that it cast he down along upon the deck , and do the like unto another mariner and one of the bar strike our fire - furnace so violent , that it cast it overboard into the sea . yet for all these trouble we weigh our anchor , and set sail , and albeit we have great tempest at sea , yet make we not 269 the point of Santa Cruz otherwise call Punta de balenas . account thereof in respect of the joy which we conceive to see our self free of the peril of be cast on that shore with our ship , especial see it fall out at midnight , at which time no man can have escape , but by a mere miracle from God . we sail up and down the sea all Thursday , and until Friday in the morning be then fourteen day of February , and the wave of the sea continual come rake over our deck . at length , on Saturday morning at break of day we can find no remedy against the contrary wind , notwithstanding the general be very obstinate to have we keep out at sea , although it be very tempestuous , lest we shall be drive to put back again , but no diligence nor remedy prevail : for the wind be so boisterous and so contrary , that they can not be worse , and the sea go still high , and swell more and more , and that in such sort , that we great fear we shall all perish . whereupon the pilot think it our best course to return to the isle of cedar , whither we have repair three or four time before by reason of the self same contrary wind , for we take this island for our father and mother , although we receive no other benefit thereby save this only , namely , to repair thither in these necessity , and to furnish our self with water , and with some small quantity of fish . be therefore arrive at this island , and ride under the shelter thereof , the contrary wind do always blow very strong , and here we take water which we drink , and wood for our fuel , and great desire , that the wind will be more favourable for proceed on our journey . and though we ride under the shelter of the isle , yet feel we the great fury of those wind , and the rage of the sea , and our ship never cease roll . at break of day the twenty of February we find the cable of our admiral crack , whereupon , to our great grief , we be constrain to set sail , to fall down low the space of a league , and the Trinity