one night the Indians run away , and in the morning they find thirty horse dead , which put the army in fear . in their journey they burn a certain town : and in another town which they assault , they kill certain Spaniards , and wound fifty horse , and the inhabitant draw into their town Francis de Ovando wound or dead , to eat and sacrifice he as they think , or peradventure to see more perfect , what manner of man the Spaniard be : for there be not find there any sign of sacrifice man . our people lay siege unto the town , but can not take it in more than five and forty day space . the townsman that be besiege , drink snow in stead of water : and see themselves forlese they make a fire , wherein they cast their mantle , feather , turquese and precious thing , that those stranger may not enjoy they . they issue out in a squadron with their woman and child in the midst , to make way by force , and to save themselves , but few escape the edge of our sword and the horse , and a certain river which be near the town . Seven Spaniards be slay in this conflict , and fourscore be wound , and many horse : whereby a man may see of what force resolution be in necessity . 164 many Indians return to the town with the woman and child , and defend themselves , until our man set fire on the town . in this country there be melon , melon . and white and red cotton , whereof they make far large mantel , then in other part of the Indies . from fmre ' tigue they go in four day journey to Cicuic , which day journey be a small town , and four league from thence they meet from Tiguex . with a new kind of ox wild and fierce , whereof the first day they kill fourscore , which suffice the army with flesh . from Cicuic they go to Quivira , which after Quivira . their account , be almost three hundred league distant , through mighty plain , and sandy heath so smooth , and wearisome , and bare of wood , that they make heap of ox - dung for want of stone and tree , that they may heap of ox not lose themselves at their return : for three horse be mg make fir lose on that plain , and one Spaniard , which go from his n ° w company on hunt . all that way and plain be as full of crookebacked ox , as the mountain Serena in Spain be of sheep : but there be no people but such as keep those cattle . they be a great succour for the hunger and want of bread which our people stand in . one day it rain in that plain a great shower of hail , as big as orange , which cause many tear , weakness , and vow . at length they come to Quivira and find Tatarrax , who they seek , a hoary head man , naked , and with a j ewell of copper hang at his neck , which be all his riches . the then Spaniards Spaniards see the false report of so famous riches , return to ti - returned to Tiguex , without see either cross or ^ x \ an ^ soto show or chnstiamtie : and from thence to Mexico . TheSpaniards in the end of march of the year 1542 . Francis vas - wouldhavein - quez fall from his horse in Tiguex , and with the fall habit the fell out of his wit , and become mad . which some countrey - tooke to be for grief , and other think it to be but counterfeit : for they be much offend with he , because he people not the country . Quivira be in forty degree : it be a temperate country , and have very good water , and much grass , i65 ship see on the sea coast of Quivira , which be 30 . day in sapling thither . Andrew de Campo travail from Quivira to Panuco . the cause why the Spaniard people not in Cibola . plum , mulberry , nut , melon and grape , which ripen very well . there be no cotton : and they apparel themselves with ox - hides and dear skin . they see ship on the sea coast , which bear Alcatrarzes or pelican of gold and silver in their prow , and be lade with merchandise , and they think they to be of Cathaya , and China , because they show our man by sign that they have sail thirty day . Frier John de Padilla stay behind in tigue , with another of his companion call friar Francis , and return to Quivira , with some dozen Indians of mechuacan , and with Andrew de Campo a Portugal ! , the gardener of Francis de solis : he take with he horse and mule with provision . he take sheep and hen of Castille , and ornament to say mass withal . the people of Quivira slay the friar , and the Portugal escape with certain Indians of mechuacan . who albeit at that time he escape death , yet can he not free himself out of captivity : for by and by after they catch he again . but ten month after he be take captive , he flee away with a couple of dog . as he travail , he bless the people with a cross , whereunto they offer much , and wheresoever he come , they give he alm , lodging , and food . he come to the country of the Chichimechas , and arrive at Panuco . when he come to Mexico , he wear his hair very long , and his beard tie up in a lace , and report strange thing of the land , river and mountain that he have pass . it grieve don Antonio de Mendosa very much that the army return home : for he have spend above threescore thousand peso of gold in the enterprise , and ought a great part thereof still . many seek to have dwell there ; but Francis Vasquez de Coronado , which be rich , and late marry to a fair wife , will not consent , say , that they can not maintain nor defend themselves in so poor a country , and so far from succour . they travail above nine hundred league in this country .