wind be against we . here we discover certain plain , in my judgement very great and green , and right before we we can not discern any mountain or wood , whereat we marveil to see so great a country . and we meet a indian in a Canoa on the shore whereon the sea do break , who stay to behold we a great while , and oftentimes he lift up himself to view we the better , and then return back along the coast : we use all diligence to see whether he will come out further from the shore , to give he chase , and to try whether we can catch he , but he very cunning view we without come near unto we , and return to the shore with his Canoa . here we see in the evening but one fire , and wit not whether it be do by the cunning of the Indians , because they will not have we know that there be people there , or that it be so indeed . from the say 16 day of November until the 24 of the same month we can not proceed on our way above 12 or 15 league : and look into our sea - chart , we find our self distant from the xaguge of the port of Santa Cruz about 70 league . they be 70 now on the 24 be Monday very early in the morn - teagtuffrom ing we begin to take very good view of that SantaCruz country , and all along the coast we see many fair plain with certain furrow make in the midst like unto half plain , the say plain still appear up into the country , with pleasant champion , because the grass which grow there be very beautiful , short , and green , and good pasture for cattle . howbeit because we ride so far off , we can not perfect judge what kind of grass it be , but it show very short and green , and without thorn . Theise plain on the right hand make a bay into a valley which seem to be a piece of a mountain : the rest show to be all plain without any thistle or weed , but full of grass good for cattle very green and fair , as i have say . 231 one of their ship by tempest be separate from the other , and afterward meet with her consort she report that the land stretch to the west by the mouth of the great lake . the pilot be of diverse judgement touch the state of this coast inhabit by Chichimecas . they enter into a haven to take in fresh water , and be sudden assail by two squadron of Indians . they defend themselves valiant , and the captain with some of his soldier be grievous wound . the 26 of this month be Wednesday at night the north wind take we , which still increase more and more so great that it put we to much trouble , for it continue two day , in which the sea be always boisterous ; and this night again we lose the Trinity be beat with the north wind aforesaid ( and we have sight of she on Monday the 24 ) wherewith we be all of we great aggrieve , both captain , soldier and mariner , because we see we be leave alone , and our ship call Santa Agueda wherein we be , be but bad condition , and this grieve we more than the trouble which we have with the boisterousness of the sea , imagine that if we shall lose the Trinity , or if any mishap shall fall unto we , we shall not be able to follow our voyage accord to our captain and our own land run desire . This say 24 day be Monday we see a the country with high mountain towards the northwest , oit west . anj seem that the land stretch on still forward , whereat we exceed rejoice , because we judge that the land grow always broad and broad , and that we shall meet with some speciali good thing . whereupon we desire that it will please God to send we good weather for our voyage , which hitherto we note . find always contrary , so that in 26 day we sail not above 70 league , and that with much trouble , sometime ride at anchor and sometime sail , and seek 232 the remedy and benefit of the shore to avoid peril . in this country which we discover the 26 day we always see ( as i have say ) along the shore , and within the land , goodly plain without any tree , in the midst whereof be a lake or gather together of the seawater , which ( to our judgement ) be above 12 league in compass , and the sea - coast reach to the mountain before mention . and this day we see our ship call the Trinity , which ride 2 league distant from we , which so soon as she see we , set sail , and we come together and rejoice great . they bring we great quantity a wonderful of grey fish , and of another kind : for at the point fi ^ nsplace of those mountain they find a fish which be very wonderful , for they suffer themselves to be take by hand : and they be so great that every one have much ado to find room to lay his fish in . they find also on the say point a fountain of fresh water which descend from those hill , and they tell we that at the same place they have find a narrow passage , whereby the sea enter into the say lake . they comfort we much with the report of these thing , and in tell we that the land trend to the west ; for the chief pilot think , and the other pilot be of the same opinion , that we shall find a good country . this night we set sail to go to that point to take in fresh water which we want , and to see this lake , and to put some man on shore : and after midnight the wind come upon we so forcible at the north that we can not stay there : whereupon we be constrain to put further into the sea ,