infinite number of people come together , which marvele to see i speak : and this indian turn on this side and on that side to speak unto they in . another language which my interpreter understand not . whereas he ask i what we be , i answer that we be Christians , and that we come from far to see they : and answer to the question , who have send i , i say , i be send by the sun , point unto he by sign as at the first , because they shall ix 289 t not take i in a lie . he begin again to ask i , how the sun have send i , see he go aloft in the sky and never stand still , and see these many year neither he nor their old man have ever see such as we be , of who they ever have any kind of knowledge , and that the sun till that hour have never send any other . i answer he that it be true that the sun make his course aloft in the sky , and do never stand still , yet nevertheless that they may well perceive that at his go down and rise in the morning he come near unto the earth , where his dwelling be , and that they ever see he come out of one place , and that he have make i in that land and country from whence he come , like as he have make many other which he send into other part , and that now he have send i to visit and view the same river , and the people that dwell near the same , that i shall speak unto they , and shall join with they in friendship , and shall give they thing which they have not , and that i shall charge they that they shall not make war one against another . whereunto he answer , that i shall tell he the cause why the sun have not send i no soon to pacific the war which have continue a long time among they , wherein many have be slay . i tell he the cause hereof be , because at that time i be but a child . than he ask the interpreter whether we take he with we perforce have take he in the war , or whether he come with we of his own accord . he answer he that he be with we of his own accord , and be very well apay of our company . he return to inquire , why we bring none save he only that understand we , and wherefore we understand not all other man , see we be the child of the sun : he answer , that the sun also have beget he , and give he a language to understand he , and i , and other : that the sun know well that they dwell there , but that because he have many other business , and because 290 i be but young he send i no soon . and he turn unto i say sudden : come thou therefore hither to be our lord , and that we shall serve thou ? i suppose that i shall not please he if i shall have say yea , answer he , not to be their lord , but rather to be their brother , and to give they such thing as i have . he ask i , whether the sun have beget i as he have beget other , and whether i be his kinsman or his son : i answer he that i be his son . he proceed to ask i whether the rest that be with i be also the child of the sun , i answer he not , but that they be bear all with i in one country , where i be bring up . than he cry out with a loud voice and say , see thou do we so much good , and will not have we to make war , and art the child of the sun , we will all receive thou for our lord , and always serve thou , therefore we pray thou that thou will not depart hence nor leave we : and sudden he turn to the people , and begin to tell they , that i be the child of the sun , and that therefore they shall all choose i for their lord . those Indians hear this , be astonish beyond measure , and come near still more and more to behold i . that indian also ask i other question , which to avoid tediousness i do not recite : and in this wise we pass the day , and see the night approach , i begin by all mean i can devise to get this fellow into our boat with we : and he refuse to go with we , the interpreter tell he that we will put he on the other side of the river , and upon this condition he enter into our boat , and there i make very much of he , and give he the best entertainment i can , put he always in security , and when i judge he to be out of all suspicion , i think it good to ask he somewhat of that country . and among the first thing that i ask he this be one , whether he have ever see any man like we , or have hear any report of they . he answer i not , save that he 291 the sun worship as God . have sometime hear of old man , that very far from that country there be other white man , and with beard like we , and that he know nothing else . i ask he also whether he know a place call Cevola , and a river call Totonteac , and he answer i not . whereupon perceive that he can not give i any knowledge of Francis Vazquez nor of his company , i determine to ask he other thing of that country , and of their manner of life : and begin to inquire of he , whether they hold that there be one God , creator of heaven and earth , or that they worship any other idol . and he answer i no : but that they esteem and reverence the sun above all other thing , because it warm they and make their crop to grow