with cane . flat raft make the next day be Thursday the fifteen of the say cane ' month about break of day four or five Indians show ix 257 r near unto their lodging , themselves at the head of that point , who as soon as they have spy we retire behind the point , and hide themselves among the bush upon certain small hill that be there , from whence they issue forth , and cover all the green hill and mountain , which be along that coast ; whereupon we gather that they have their dwelling there , in regard of the commodity of the water and the defence against ill weather and the benefit of fish . at sunrising we see the indian appear in great company , go up unto the hill in small troop , and from thence they stand and behold we . immediate we see five or six canoas come out into the sea a good distance from we , and those which be in they stand often on their tiptoe , to view and descry we the better . on the other side we stir not at all for all these their gesture , but stand still ride at anchor ; and the general seem not to be very willing to take any of they , but this day in the morning very early command the master mate to convey he to our other ship call the Trinity . thing pass in this sort , when about ten of the clock we see three canoas launch far into the sea to fish very near unto we , whereat we take great pleasure . at 12 of the clock the general return from the Trinity and command the boat and man to be make ready , as well soldier as mariner , and that we shall go on shore to see if we can get any wood and water , and catch one of those Indians to understand their language if it be possible : and so all the man that be ready go into the admiral boat , and go towards the Trinity which by this time with the other ship have a small gale of wind , wherewith they enter far within the point , and we discover the lodging and house of the Indians , and see near the water side those five or six canoas which at the first come out to view we , draw on shore , and over against this place the ship cast anchor in 30 and 35 fathom water , and we be very near the land ; whereat we marvel much to find so great 258 depth of water so near the shore . be go aboard our boat , we make towards the shore over against a village of the Indians , who as soon as they see we village of about to come on land , leave a hill whereon they stand the indians - to behold what we do , and come down to the shore , where we be prepare to come on land : but before they come against we they cause their woman and child to fly into the mountain with their good , and then come direct towards we , threaten we with certain great staff which they carry in their hand some 3 yard long and thick than a man wrist : but perceive that for all this we cease not to come near the sea shore to come on land , they begin to charge we with stone and to fling cruel at we , and they hit skirmish of 4 or c man , among who they smite the general with ilians two stone . in the mean while the other boat land stone . a little beneath , whereupon when they see that they be force to divide themselves to keep the rest of our company from come on land , they begin to be discourage , and do not assail the general boat so fierce , who begin to cause his people to go on shore with no small trouble ; for albeit he be near the land , yet as soon as they leap out of the boat they sink down , because they can find no fast foot ; and thus swim or otherwise as they can , first a soldier call Spinosa get on land , and next to he the general , and then some of the rest , and begin to make head against the Indians , and they come hasty with those staff in their hand , for other kind of weapon we see none , save bow and arrow of pinetree . after a short combat they break in piece the target of the general , and of Spinosa . in the mean while those of the other boat be get on land , but not without much difficulty , by reason of the multitude of stone which continual rain down upon they , and they strike Terazzo on the head a use very shroud blow , and have it not be for our target , against arrow many of we have be wound , and in great distress , and stone . 2 . 59 although our enemy be but few in number . in this manner all our company come on shore with swim and with great difficulty , and if they have not help one another , some of they have be drown . thus we land , and within a while after those of the other boat be come on land , the Indians betake themselves to flight , take their way towards the mountain , whether they have send their woman , child and good : on the other side we pursue they , and one of those Indians which come to assail the general boat , be slay upon the strand , and two or three other be wound , and some say more . while we pursue they in this manner our mastive dog Berecillo overtake one of they not far from we ( who because we be so wet can not run very theuseofma - fast ) and pull he down , have bite he cruel , arr ” against and doubtless he have hold he till we have come , Indians . unless it have happen that another of his companion have not follow that Indian which the dog have pull down , who with a staff which he have in his hand give the dog a cruel blow