governor die , all the good that they have be bury with they . and likewise all the while they eat , many of their man wait at their table to court they , and see they eat , and they eat with napkin , and that they have bath . on Thursday morning at break of day the Indians come with the like cry to the bank of the river , and with great desire to serve we , bring i meat to eat , and make i the like good cheer , which the other have do unto i , have understand what i be : and i give they cross , with the self same order which i do unto the former . And go far up the river , i come to a country where i find better government : for the inhabitant be whole obedient unto one only . but return again to confer with my interpreter touch the dwelling of those of Cevola , he tell i , that the lord of that country have a dog like that which i carry with i . afterwards when i call for dinner , this interpreter see certain dish carry in the first and late service , whereupon he tell i that the lord of Cevola have also such as those be , but that they be green , and that none other have of they save their governor , and that they be 4 . which he have get together this be then with that dog , and other thing , of a black man wentwlth which have a beard , but that he know not from what ™ rier Marco quarter he come thither , and that the king cause he the Niza . afterward to be kill , as he hear say . i ask he whether he know of any town that be near unto that place : he tell i that above the river he know some , and that among the rest there be a lord of a Quicoma . town call Quicoma , and another of a town call coama . Coama : and that they have great store of people under they . and after he have give i this information , he 300 i54 °- craved leave of i to return unto his companion . from hence i begin again to set sail , and within a day sail i find a town dispeople : where assoon as i be enter , by chance there arrive there 500 Indians with their bow and arrow , and with they be that principali Indian call naguachato , which i have leave behind , and bring with they certain cony cony and and yucas : and after i have friendly entertain they all , depart from they , i give they licence to return to their house . as i pass further by the desert , i come to certain cottage , out of which much people come towards i with a old man before they , cry in a language which my interpreter well understand , and he say unto those man : brethren , you see here that lord ; let we give he such as we have , see he do we pleasure , and have pass through so many discourteous people , to come to visit we . and have thus say , he ofired to the sun , and then to i in like sort as the rest have do . Theise have certain great bag and well make of the skin of fish call sea - bremes . and i understand that this be a town belong unto the lord of Quicoma , which people come thither only to gather the fruit of their harvest in summer ; and among they i find one which understand my interpreter very well : whereupon very easy i give they the like instruction of the cross which i have give to other behind . Theise people have cotton , but cotton . they be not very careful to use the same : because there be none among they that know the art of weave , and to make apparel thereof . they ask i how they shall set up their cross when they be come to their dwelling which be in the mountain , and whether a mountain . it be best to make a house about it , that it may not be wet , and whether they shall hang any thing upon the arm thereof . i say no ; and that it suffice to set it in a place where it may be see of all man , until i return : and lest peradventure any man of war shall come that way , they ofired i more man to go with 301 i , say that they be naughty man which i shall find above ; but i will have none : nevertheless 20 . of they go with i , which when i draw near unto those which be their enemy , they warn i thereof : and i find their centinel set upon their guard on their border . on Saturday morning i find a great squadron of people sit under a exceed great arbour , and another part of they without : and when i see that they rise not up , i pass along on my voyage : when they behold this , a old man rise up which say unto i , sir , why do you not receive victual to eat of we , see you have take food of other ? i answer , that i take nothing but that which be give i , and that i go to none but to such as request i . here without any stay they bring i victual , say unto i , that because i enter not into their house , and stay all day and all night in the river , and because i be the son of the sun , all man be to receive i for their lord . i make they sign to sit down , and call that old man which my interpreter understand , and ask he who that country be , and whether the lord thereof be there , he say , yea : and i call he to i ; and when he be come , i embrace he , show he great love : and when i see that all of they take great pleasure at the friendly entertainment which i give he , i put a shirt upon he , and give he other trifle , and