: and that of all thing which they do eat , they cast a little up into the air unto he . i ask he next whether they have any lord , and he say no : but that they know well that there be a great lord , but they know not well which way he dwell . and i tell he that he be in heaven , and that he be call Jesus Christ , and i go no far in divinity with he . i ask he whether they have any war , and for what occasion . he answer that they have war and that very great , and upon exceed small occasion : for when they have no cause to make war , they assemble together , and some of they say , let we go to make war in such a place , and then all of they set forward with their weapon . i ask they who command the army : he answer the elder and most valiant , and that when they say they shall proceed no far , that sudden they retire from the war . i pray he to tell i what they do with those man which they kill in battle : he answer i that they take out the heart of some of they , and eat they , and other they burn ; and he add , that if it have not be for my come , they shall have be now at war : and because i command they that they shall not war , and that they shall cease 292 from arm , therefore as long as i shall not command they to take arm , they will not begin to wage war against other , and they say among themselves , that see i be come unto they , they have give over their intention of make war , and that they have a good mind to live in peace . he complain of certain people which dwell behind in a mountain certain war - which make great war upon they , and slay many of people bethem 1 1 answer hun } that from henceforward they taint shall not need to fear any more , because i have command they to be quiet , and if they will not obey my commandment , i will chasten they and kill they . he inquire of i how i can kill they see we be so few , and they so many in number . and because it be now late and that i see by this time he be weary to stay any long with i , i let he go out of my boat , and therewith i dismiss he very well content . Chap . 4 . of naguachato and other chief man of those Indians they receive great store of victual , they cause they to set up a cross in their country , and he teach they to worship it . they have news of many people , of their diverse language , and custom in matrimony , how they punish adultery , of their opinion concern the dead , and of the sickness which they be subject unto . the next day betimes in the morning come the chief man among they call naguachato , and wish i to come on land because he have great store of victual to give i . and because i see my self in security i do so without doubt ; and incontinent a old man come with roll of that Maiz , and certain little gourd , and call i with a loud voice and use many gesture with his body and arm , come near unto i , and cause i to turn i unto that people , and he himself also turn unto they say unto 293 [ hl 431 - 1 these people be great incline to learn the christian faith . they , Sagueyca , and all the people answer with a great voice , hu , and he offer to the sun a little of every thing that he have there , and likewise a little more unto i ( although afterward he give i all the rest ) and do the like to all that be with i : and call out my interpreter , by mean of he i give they thank , tell they that because my boat be little i have not bring many thing to give they in exchange , but that i will come again another time and bring they , and that if they will go with i in my boat unto my ship which i have beneath at the river mouth , i will give they many thing . they answer that they will do so , be very glad in countenance . here by the help of my interpreter i seek to instruct they what the sign of the cross mean , and will they to bring i a piece of timber , whereof i cause a great cross to be make , and command all those that be with i that when it be make they shall worship it , and beseech the lord to grant his grace that that so great a people may come to the knowledge of his holy catholic faith : and this do i tell they by my interpreter that i leave they that sign , in token that i take they for my brethren , and that they shall keep it for i careful until i return , and that every morning at the sun rise they shall kneel before it . and they take it incontinent , and without suffer it to touch the ground they carry it to set it up in the midst of their house , where all of they may behold it ; and i will they always to worship it because it will preserve they from evil . they ask i how deep they shall set it in the ground , and i show they . great store of people follow the same , and they that stay behind inquire of i , how they shall join their hand , and how they shall kneel to worship the same ; and they seem to have great desire to learn it . this do , i take that chief man of the country , and go to our boat with he , i follow my journey up the 294 river , and all the company on both side of the shore accompany i with great good will , and serve i in draw of our boat