the viceroy , to inquire of he what be mean thereby , which present send and give order , that the ordinance aforesaid , and other thing of suspicion shall be remove , return answer to our general in the faith of a viceroy , that he will be our defence , and safety from all villainous treachery : this be upon Thursday in the morning . our general not be therewith satisfy , see they have secret convey a great number of man aboard a great hulk or ship of they of six hundred ton , which ship ride hard by the minion , he send again to the viceroy Robert Barret the master of the Jesus , a man that can speak the spanish tongue very well , and require that those man may be unshipt again , which be in that great hulk . the viceroy then perceive that their treason be thorough espy , stay our master , and sound the trumpet , and give order that his people shall upon all side charge upon our man , which ward on shore , and else where , which strike such a maze , and sudden fear among we , that many give place , and seek to recover our ship for the safety of themselves . the Spaniard which secret be hide in ambush at land be quick convey over to the island in their long boat , and so come to the island , they slay all our man that they can meet with , without mercy . the minion which have somewhat before prepare her self to avoid the danger , hale away and abide the first brunt of the 300 man that be in the great hulk : than they seek to fall aboard the Jesus , where be a cruel fight , and many of our man slay : but yet our man defend themselves , and keep they out : so the Jesus also get loose , and join with the minion , the fight wax hot upon all side : but they have win and get our ordinance on shore , do great annoy we . in this fight there be two great ship of the 406 Spaniard sink , and one burn , so that with their ship they be not able to harm we , but from the shore they beat we cruel with our own ordinance , in such sort that the Jesus be very sore spoil : and sudden the Spaniard have fire two great ship of their own , they come direct against we , which breed among our man a marvellous fear . howbeit the minion which have make her sail ready , shift for her self , without consent of the general , captain or master , so that very hardly our general can be receive into the minion : the most of our man that be in the Jesus shift for themselves , and follow the minion in the boat , and those which that small boat be not able to receive , be most cruel slay by the Spaniard . of our ship none escape save the minion and the Judith : and all such of our man as be not in they be enforce to abide the tyrannous cruelty of the Spaniard . for it be a certain truth , that whereas they have take certain of our man ashore , they take and hang they up by the arm upon high post until the blood burst out of their finger end : of which man so use , there be one Copstow , and certain other yet alive , who by the merciful providence of the almighty , be long since copstoweoneof m . Hawkins man return arrive here at home in England , carry still about with from ^ ueva they ( and shall to their grave ) the mark and token of Espanna . those inhumane and more than barbarous cruel deal . Chap . 3 . wherein be show , how that after we be escape from the Spaniard , we be like to perish with famine at the sea , and how our general , for the avoid thereof be constrain to put half of his man on land , and what misery we after that sustain among the savage people , and how again we fall into the hand of the Spaniard . after that the viceroy , don Martin Henriques , have thus contrary to his faith and promise , most cruel deal with our general master Hawkins , at saint John de 407 ullua , where most of his man be by the Spaniard slay and drown , and all his ship sink and burn , save the minion , and the Judith , which be a small bark of fifty ton , wherein be then captain master Francis Drake aforesaid : the same night the say bark lose we , we be in great necessity , and inforce to remove with the minion two bow - shoote from the spanish fleet , where we anchor all that night : and the next morning we weigh anchor , and recover a island a mile from the Spaniard , where a storm take we with a north wind , in which we be great distress , have but two cable and two anchor leave : for in the conflict before we have lose three cable and two anchor . the morrow after , the storm be cease and the weather fair , we weigh , and set sail , be many man in number , and but small store of victual to suffice we for any long time : by mean whereof we be in despair and fear that we shall perish through famine , so that some be in mind to yield themselves to the mercy of the Spaniard , other some to the savage or infidel , and wander thus certain day in these unknown sea , hunger constrain we to eat hide , cat and dog , mouse , rat , parrot and monkey : to be short , our hunger be so great , that we think it savoury and sweet whatsoever we can get to eat . and on the eight of October we come to land again , in the bottom of the bay of Mexico , where we hope to have find some inhabitant , that we may have have some relief of victual ,