to have bring it home , have not the ship be cast away . this monster will carry away and devour both man and horse . from hence we shape our course to Santa Martha , where we land , trade , and sell certain negro : there two of our company kill a monstrous adder , go towards his cave with a conie in his mouth : his body be as big as any man thigh , and seven foot long : upon his tail he have sixteen knot , every one as big as a great walnut , which they say , do show his age : his colour be green and yellow : they open he , and find two cony in his belly . from thence we sail to Cartagena , where we go in , more our ship , and will have trade with they , but they dare not for fear of the king : we bring up the minion against the castle , and shoot at the castle and town : than we land in a hand , where be many garden : there in a cave we find certain Botijos of wine , which we bring away with we , in recompense whereof , our general command to be set on shore woollen and linen cloth , to the value thereof . from hence by foul weather we be force to seek the port of saint John de ullua . in our way thwart of campeche 45 ° we meet with a Spaniard , a small ship , who be bind for Santo Domingo : he have in he a Spaniard call Augustin the villa nueva , who be the man that betray all the noble man in the Indies , and cause they to be behead , wherefore he with two friar flee to saint Domingo : they we take and bring with we into the port of saint John de ullua . our general make great account of he , and use he like a noble man : howbeit in the end he be one of they that betray we . when we have more our ship , and land , we mount the ordinance that we find there in the island , and for our safety keep watch and ward . the next day after we discover the spanish fleet , whereof lu ^ on a Spaniard be general : with he come a Spaniard call don Martin Henriquez , who the king of Hon Martin Spain send to be his viceroy of the Indies . he send Henriquez . a pinnace with a flag of truce unto our general , to know of what country those ship be that ride there in the king of Spain port ; who say , they be the queen of England ship , which come in there for victual for their money : wherefore if your general will come in here , he shall give i victual and all other necessary , and i will go out on the one side of the port , and he shall come in on the other side . the Spaniard return for answer , that he be a viceroy , and have a thousand man , and therefore he will come in . our general say , if he be a viceroy , i represent my queen person , and i be a viceroy as well as he : and if he have a thousand man , my powder and shot will take the better place . then the viceroy after counsel among themselves , yield to our general demand , swear by his king and his crown , by his commission and authority that he have from his king , that he will perform it , and thereupon pledge be give on both part . our general bear a godly and Christian mind , void of fraud and deceit , judge the Spaniard to have do the like , deliver to they six gentleman , not doubt to have receive the like from 451 Augustine de villa nueva a most thankless trey tour . the spanish viceadmiral fire . they : but the faithless Spaniard , in costly apparel give of the base of their company , as afterwards it be well know . Theise thing finish , proclamation be make on both side , that on pain of death no occasion shall be give , whereby any quarrel shall grow to the breach of the league , and then they peaceable enter the port , with great triumph on both side . the Spaniard present bring a great hulk , a ship of six hundred , and more she by the side of the minion , and they cut out port in their other ship , plant their ordinance towards we , in the night they fill the hulk with man , to lay the minion aboard , as the sequel do show , which make our general doubtful of their deal : wherefore , for that he can speak the spanish tongue , he send Robert Barret aboard the viceroy , to know his meaning in those deal , who will he with his company to come in to he , who he command present to be set in the bilboe , and forthwith a cornet ( for a watchword among the false Spaniard ) be sound for the enterprise of their pretend treason against our general , who Augustine the villa nova sit at dinner with he , shall then present have kill with a poynado which he have privy in his sleeve , which be espy and prevent by one John Chamberlayne , who take the poynado out of his sleeve . our general hasty rise up , and command he to be put prisoner in the steward room , and to be keep with two man . the faithless Spaniard , think all thing to their desire have be finish , sudden sound a trumpet , and therewith three hundred Spaniard enter the minion , whereat our general with a loud and fierce voice call unto we , say , God and saint George , upon those traitorous villain , and rescue the minion , i trust in God the day shall | be we : and with that the mariner and soldier leap out of the Jesus of Lubeck into the minion , and beat out the Spaniard , and with a shot out of she fire the Spaniard vice admiral , where the most part of 300 . Spaniard be 45 2 spoil , and blow over board with powder . their admiral also be on fire half a hour : we cut our cable , wound