, which be high than the rest of their body . they be marvellous wild and swift in run . they call they the beast or cow of Cibola . this Cibola be a city which the Spaniard find now of late , without any people in the same , goodly bnilding , fair chimney , window make of stone and timber excellent wrought , fair well with wheel to draw their water , and a place where they have bury their dead people , with many fair stone upon the grave . and the captain will not suffer his soldier to break up any part of these grave , say , he will come another time to do it . they ask certain people which they meet , whither the people of this city be go : and they make answer , they be go down a river , which be there by , very great , and there have build a city which be more for their commodity . this captain lack thing necessary for himself and his man , be fain to return back again , without find any treasure accord to his expectation : neither find they but few people , although they find beat way , which have be much haunt and frequent . the captain at his come back again , have a great 383 A . D . 1572 . PedroMorales Eif Nicolas Burgignon write the like of Copalla . the strange ox of Cibola . Cibola abandon . a great river near Cibola . water congeal to salt . dog of India describe . Cacao a fruit currant as money . fruit . hot spring . check of the governor , because he have not go forward , and see the end of that river . they have in the country , far from the sea side , stand water , which be salt : and in the month of April and may the water of they congeal into salt , which salt be all take for the king use and profit . their dog be all crooked back , as many as be of the country breed , and can run fast : their face be like the face of a pig or a hog , with sharp nose . in certain province which be call Guatimala , and Soconusco , there be grow great store of cacao , which be a berry like unto a almond : it be the best merchandise that be in all the Indies . the indian make drink of it , and in like manner meat to eat . it go current for money in any market or fair , and may buy any flesh , fish , bread or cheese , or other thing . there be many kind of fruit of the country , which be very good , as plantan , sapotes , guiave , pina , aluacatas , tunas , mamios , limon , orange , walnut very small and hard , with little meat in they , grape which the Spaniard bring into the country , and also wild grape , which be of the country , and be very small , quinse , peach , fig , and but few apple , and very small , and no pear : but there be melon and Calabasas or gourd . there be much honey , both of bee and also of a kind of tree which they call magueiz . this honey of magueiz be not so sweet as the other honey be , but it be better to be eat only with bread , than the other be ; and the tree serve for many thing , as the leaf make thread to sow any kind of bag , and be good to cover and thatch house , and for diverse other thing . they have in diverse place of the country many hot spring of water : as above all other , i have see one in the province of mechuacan . in a plain field without any mountain , there be a spring which have much water , and it be so hot , that if a whole quarter of beef be cast into it , within on half hour it will be as well sodden as it will be over a fire in half a day . i have see half a sheep 384 cast in , and immediate it have be sodden , and i have eat part of it . there be many hare , and some cony . there be no partridge , but abundance of quail . they have great store of fish in the south sea , and many oyster , and very great . the people do open the oyster , and take out the meat of they , and dry it as they do any other kind of fish , and keep they all the year : and when the time serve , they send they abroad into the country to sell , as all other fish . they have no salmon , nor trowt , nor peel , nor carp , tench , nor pike in all the country . there be in the country mighty high mountain , and hill , and snow upon they : they common burn ; and twice every day they cast out much smoke and ash at certain open place , which be in the top of they . there be among the wild people much manna . i have gather of the same , and have eat it , and it be good : for the apothecary send their servant at certain time , to gather of the same for purgation , and other use . there be in the mountain many wild hog , which all man may kill , and lion and tiger ; which tiger do much harm to man that travel in the wilderness . in this country , not long since , there be two poor man that find a marvellous rich i ; and when these man go to make a register of the same ( accord to the law and custom ) before the king officer , they think this mine not meet for such man as they be : and violent take the say mine for the king ; and give no part thereof unto the two poor man .