bring unto in Mexico , where without we be will to sit down . much people , man , woman , and child come wonder about we , many lament our misery , and some of their clergy ask we if we be Christians , we say , we praise God , we be as good Christians as they : they ask how they may know that , we say , by our confession . from thence we be carry in a Canow to a tanner house , which stand a little from the city : the next morning two friar and two priest come thither to we , and will we to bless our self , and say our prayer in the latin tongue , that they may understand we , many of our company do so , whereupon they return to the viceroy , and tell he that we be good Christians , and that they like we well , and then they bring we much relief , with clothes , our sick man be send to their hospital , where many be cure , and many die . from the tanner house we be lead to a gentleman place , where upon pain of death we be charge to abide , and not to come into the city , thither we have all thing necessary bring we : on Sunday and holy day much people come , and bring we great relief . the viceroy practise to hang we , and cause a pair of new gallows to be set up , to have execute we , whereunto the nobleman of that country will not consent , but pray he to stay until the ship of advice bring news from the king of Spain , what shall be do with we , for they say they can not find any thing by we , whereby they may lawful put we to death . the viceroy then command we to be send to a island there by , and he send for the bishop of Mexico , 4S8 who send four priest to the island , to examine and confess we , who say , that the viceroy will burn we , when we be examine and confess accord to the law of the country . they return to the bishop , and tell he that we be very good Christians . the bishop certify the viceroy of our examination and confession , and say that we be good Christians , therefore he will not meddle with we . then the viceroy send for our master , R . Barret , who he keep prisoner in his palace , until the fleet be depart for Spain . the rest of we he send to a town seven league from Mexico call Tescuco , to card wool among the indian slave , which drudgery we disdain , and conclude to beat our master , and so we do : wherefore they send to the viceroy , desire he for god sake and our lady , to send for we , for they will not keep we any long , they say that we be devil and no man . the viceroy send for we , and imprison we in a house in Mexico , from thence he send Anthony Goddard , and some other of our company with he into Spain , with Lu . ? on , the general that take we : the rest of we stay in Mexico two year after , and then be send prisoner into Spain , with don Juan de Velasco de Varre , admiral and general of the spanish fleet , who carry with he in his ship , to be present to the king of Spain , the anatomy of a giant , which be send from China to Mexico , to the viceroy don Martin Henriquez , to be send to the king of Spain for a great wonder . it do appear by the anatomy , that he be of a monstrous size , the skull of his head be near as big as half a bushel , his neck - bone , shoulder - plate , arme - bone , and all other lineament of his other part , be huge and monstrous to behold , the shank of his leg from the ankle to the knee be as long as from any man ankle up to his waste , and of bigness accord . at this time , and in this ship , be also send to be present to the king of Spain , two chest full of earth 459 1570 . Havana . with ginger grow in they , which be also send from China , to be send to the king of Spain . the ginger run in the ground like to liccoras , the blade grow out of it in length and proportion like unto the blade of wild garlic , which they cut every fifteen day , they use to water they twice a day , as we do our herb here in England , they put the blade in their pottage , and use they in their other meat , who excellent savour and taste be very delightful , and procure a good appetite . when we be ship in the port of saint John de ullua , the general call our master Robert Barret and we with he into his cabin , and ask we if we will fight against Englishmen if we meet they at the sea , we say that we will not fight against our crown , but if we meet with any other , we will do what we be able . he say if we have say otherwise he will not have believe we , and for that we shall be the better use , and have allowance as other man have : and he give a charge to every one of we , accord unto our knowledge , Robert Barret be place with the pilot , i be put in the gunner room , William cause with the boatswain , John bear with the quartermaster , Edward rider , and Geffrey Giles , with the ordinary mariner , Richard the master boy attend on he and the pilot : short after we depart from the port of saint John de ullua with all the fleet of Spain , for the port call Havana : we be 26 . day sail thither . there we come in , anchor , take in fresh water , and stay 16 . day for the fleet of number de dios , which be the fleet that bring the treasure from Peru . the general of that