burn , and in some place high way stone with they , and whether the english nation deny their obedience to the pope of Rome , as they have be certify out of Spain by their friend . to who i make answer , that it be so , that in deed they have in England put down all the religious house of friar and monk that be in England , and the image that be in their church and other place be take away , and use there no more : for that ( as they say ) the make of they , and put of they where they be adore , be clean contrary to the express commandment of almighty God , thou shall not make to thy self any grave image , etc and that for that cause they think it not lawful that they shall stand in the church , which be the house of adoration . one that be at the declare of these word , who be my master Gonsalo cereso , answer and say , if it be against the commandment of God , to have image in the church , that than he have spend a great deal of money in vain , for that two year past he have make in the monastery of Santo Domingo , in the say city of Mexico , a image of our lady of pure silver and gold , with pearl and precious stone , which cost he 7000 and odd peso , and every peso be 4 . S . 8 . d . of our money : which indeed be true , for that i have see it many time my self where it stand . at the table be another gentleman , who presume to defend the cause more than any other that be there , say , that they know well enough that they be make but of stock and stone , and that to they be no worship give , but that there be a certain veneration due unto they 351 after they be set up in the church , and that they be set there to a good intent : the one , for that they be book for the simple people , to make they understand the glory of the saint that be in heaven , and a shape of they to put we in remembrance to call upon they , to be our intercessor unto God for we , for that we be such miserable sinner , that we be not worthy to appear before God , and that use devotion to saint in heaven , they may obtain at God hand the soon , the thing that we demand of he . as for example , say he , imagine that a subject have offend his king upon the earth in any kind of respect , be it for the party to go bold to the king in person , and to demand pardon for his offence ? no , say he , the presumption be too great , and possible he may be repulse , and have a great rebuke for his labour . better it be for such a person to seek some private man near the king in his court , and make he acquaint with his matter , and let he be a mediator to his majesty for he , and for the matter he have to do with he , and so may he the better come to his purpose , and obtain the thing which he do demand : even so say he , it be with God and his saint in heaven : for we be wretched sinner : and not worthy to appear nor present our self before the majesty of God , to demand of he the thing that we have need of : therefore thou have need to be devout , and have devotion to the mother of God , and the saint of heaven , to be intercessor to God for thou , and so may thou the better obtain of God the thing that thou do demand . to this i answer , and say , sir , as touch the comparison you make of the intercessor to the king , how necessary they be , i will but ask you this question . set the case that this king you speak of , if he be so merciful , as , when he know that one , or any of his subject have offend he , he send for he to his own town , or to his own house , or palace , and say unto he , come hither , i know that thou have offend 352 many law , if thou do know thereof , and do repent thou of the same , with full intent to offend no more , i will forgive thy trespass , and remember it no more : say i , if this be do by the king own person , what then have this man need to go seek friendship at any of the king private servant hand , but go to the principal , see that he be ready to forgive thou , than thou be to demand forgiveness at his hand ? Even so be it with our gracious God , who call and cry out unto we throughout all the world , by the mouth of his prophet , apostle , and by his own mouth , say , come unto i all you that labour and be over lade , and i will refresh you : beside 1000 other offer and proffer which he do make unto we in his holy scripture . what then have we need of the saint help that be in heaven , whereas the lord himself do so free offer himself unto we ? at which say , many of the hearer be astonish , and say , that by that reason , i will give to understand , that the inn - vocation of saint be to be disannul , and by the law of God not command . i answer , that they be not my word but the word of God himself : look into the scripture your self , and you shall so find it . the talk be perceive to be prejudicial ! to the romish doctrine , and therefore it be command to be no more entreat of , and all remain unthink upon , have it not be for a villainous Portugal that be in the company , who say , basta ser ingle para saber todo esto y mass : who the next day , without impart any thing to any body ,