may easy go aland ; and by the tower there run a hill along by the water side , which easy with small store of ordinance subdu the town and port . the port within be so large that there may easy ride a thousand sail of ship without anchor or cable , for no wind be able to hurt they . there the smalforce inhabit within the town of Havana about three hundred of Havana . Spaniard , and about threescore soldier , which the king maintain there for the keep of a certain castle which he have of late erect , which have plant in it about twelve piece of small ordinance , and be compass round with a small ditch , wherethorow at their pleasure they may let in the sea . about two league from Havana there lie another town call Wanabacoa , in which there be dwell about a hundred Indians , and from this place 60 league there lie another town name Bahama , situate on the north side of the island . the chief city of this island of Cuba ( which be above 200 league in length ) be also call Sant Iago de Cuba , where dwell a bishop and about two hundred Spaniard ; which town stand on the south side of the island the commodi - about loo league from Havana . all the trade of this tie of Cuba . isiand js cattle , which they kill only for the hide that be bring thence into Spain : for which end the Spaniard maintain there many negro to kill their cattle , and foster a great number of hog , which be kill , and cut into small piece , they dry in the sun , and so make it provision for the ship which come for Spain . have remain in this island two month , i take hombre de ship in a frigate , and go over to number de dios , dw ’ and from thence by land to Panama , which stand upon Panama . the south sea . from number de dios to Panama be 17 league distance : from which town there run a river which be call the river of Chagre , which run within 5 league of Panama , to a place call cruze , through which river they carry their good , and disembark they at the say cruze , and from thence they be convey on mule back to Panama by land ; where they again 368 embark they in certain small ship in the south sea for all the coast of Peru . in one of these ship i go to Potossi , and from thence by land to Cusco , and from Potosi . thence to Paita . here i remain the space of seven month , and then return into the kingdom of Guatimala , and arrive in the province of Nicoia , and Nicaragua . from Nicaragua i travel by land to a province call Nicamula ( which lie towards the north sea in certain high mountain ) for that i can not pass through the kingdom of Guatimala at that time for water , wherewith all the low country of the province of Soconusco , lie by the south sea , be drown with the rain that fall above in the mountain , endure always from April to September : which season for that cause they call their winter . from this province i come into another call de Vera Paz , in which the chief city be also Vera Paz . call after that name , where there dwell a bishop and about forty Spaniard . among the mountain of this country towards the north sea , there be a province call la Candona , where be indian man of war which the king can not subdue , for that they have town and fort in a great lake of water above in the say mountain : the most part of they go naked , and some wear mantle of cotton wool . distant from this about 80 league , i come into another province call the province of Chiapa , wherein the chief city be call Sacatlan , chiapa 300 where there dwell a bishop and about a hundred a £ ue ^ fr < he Spaniard . in this country there be great store of ‘ Cotten wool , whereof the Indians make fine linen cloth , which the Christians buy and carry into Nova Hispania . the people of this province pay their tribute to the king all in cotton wool and feather . fourteen league from this city there be another call Chiapa , where be the fine gennet in all the Indies , which be carry hence to Mexico , 300 league from it . from this city i travel still through hill and mountain , till i come to the end of this province , to ix 369 2 a Ecatepec an a hill call Ecatepec , which in English signify the ^ ka he h w * nde : f ° r they say , it be the high hill ‘ that ever be discover : for from the top of it may be discover both the north and the south sea ; and it be in height suppose to be nine league . they which travel over it , lie always at the foot of it over night , and begin their journey about midnight , to travel to the top of it before the sun rise the next day , because the wind blow with such force afterward , that it be impossible for any man to go up : from the foot of this Tecoantepec . hill to Tecoantepec , the first town of Nova Hispania , be about fifteen league . and so from hence i journey to Mexico . he journey to by and by after i come to Mexico ( which be in the panuco . year 1572 ) in the company of another Spaniard , which be my companion in this journey , we go together towards the province of Panuco , which lie upon the coast of the north sea , and within three day journey Mestitlan . we enter a city call Mestitlan , where there dwell twelve Spaniard : the indian inhabitant there be about thirty thousand .