, be high and crooked land , whereof the north point lie under twelve degree and and there you iinde 35 . fathom deep , with white sand . from the aforesaid hand of Banton southward nine league , there begin and follow three island , one of they be call Bantonsilla , which be a small hand in form of a sugar loaf : the second Crymara , be somewhat great in length , reach east and west about two league : the three Itaa , or the he of goat , have certain hovel . by all these hand aforesaid you may pass with all sort of ship , whereof the foremost lie southward under twelve degree and j . from the hand of Bantonsilla , or small Banton , we hold our course northwest for the space of four league , to the channel between the hand call the verey , and the hand Marinduque , the verey lie on the south side under twelve degree and ( which be two small hand like two frigate ) and the hand Marinduque on the north side under twelve degree , and which be a great hand , stretch westnorthwest , and eastsoutheast , have in length 12 . and in breadth 7 . league . on the north side with the hand lu ^ on it make a long and small channel , run somewhat crooked , which be altogether full of shallows and sand , whereby no ship can pass through it . the further point westward of the same hand lie under thirteen degree and J . it be high land , on the east side have the form of a mine of brimstone or fiery hill , and on the west side the land run downward at the point thereof be round like 329 a loaf of bread : in the channel between it and the verey , there be 18 . fathom deep with small black sand . from the aforesaid channel of verey and marinduque , we hold our course westnorthwest twelve league to the land of Mindora , to the point or hook call Dumaryn , lie full under thirteen degree : five league forward from the say channel on the south side we leave a hand call Isla deal maestro del Campo , that be , the hand of the colonel , lie under twelve degree and which be a small and flat hand : in this course we have 45 fathom deep , with white sand . by this point or end of the hand Marinduque begins the hand of Myndoro , which have in length east and west five and twenty league , and in breadth twelve league , whereof the further point southward lie under thirteen degree , and the further point northward under thirteen degree and f . and the further point westward under thirteen degree . this hand with the hand of Lu . ? on make a channel of five league broad , and ten or twelve fathom deep with muddy ground of diverse colour , with white sand . five league forward from Marinduque lie the river of the town of Anagacu , which be so shallow , that no ship may enter into it . from thence two league further lie the hand call Bacco , which be three hand lie in a triangle , two of they be distant from the land about three hundred cubit , and between they and the land you may pass with small ship : and from the land to the other hand , be about two hundred cubit , where it be altogether shallows and sand , so that where the ship may pass outward about 150 . cubit from the land , you leave both the hand on the south side , run between the three hand and the river call Rio deal Bacco , somewhat more from the middle of the chanel towards the hand , which be about a league distant from the other : the channel be ten fathom deep , with mud and shell upon the ground : the river of 33 ° Bacco be so shallow , that no ship may enter into it . from this hand with the same course two league forward , you pass by the point el Capo de Rescaseo , where we cast out our lead , and find that a man may pass close by the land , and there you shall find great strong stream : and half a league forward with the same course , lie the town of Mindoro , which have a good haven for ship of three hundred ton . three league northward from the same haven lie the hand call Cafaa , stretch from east and west , be hilly ground . from the say town of Myndoro , we hold our course westnorthwest eight league , till we come to the point or hook of the sand call Tulen , lie upon the hand of Lu ^ on , which sand or bank reach into the sea half a league from the coast : you must keep about a hundred cubit from it , where you find eight fathom water , muddy and shel ground : you run along by those sand north , and north and by west for the space of two league , till you come to the river call Rio de anasebo : all the rest of the coast call de los limbone to the mouth or entry of the bay call manilla , ( which be four league ) be sail with the same course . the limbone ( which be hand so call ) be high in form like a pair of organ , with good haven for small ship , run along by the limbone : and two league beyond they on the south side , we leave the hand of fortan , and four hand more , but the three hand of Lubao , which be very low , lie under 13 . degree and J . and the limbone lie in the mouth or entry of the bay of manilla under 14 . degree and J . from thence we run northwest for the space of six league to the haven of cabite , keep along by the land lie on the west side , where it be shallow , and be call los Baixos deal Rio de Cannas , the shallows of the river of reed : all along this bay in the same course , there be from ten to four fathom deep . 331 A . D . i584 . the bay of manilla in 14 degree and one quarter . be by the point or hook of cabite , than we keep but a hundred pace from it , run Southwest , southsouthwest , and south , until we discover the whole mouth or entry of the bay , where we may anchor