go to the bishop of Mexico , and his provisor , and say , that in a place where he have be the day before , be a Englishman , who have say , that there be no need of saint in the church , nor of any invocation of saint , upon who denomination i be apprehend for the same word here rehearse , and none other thing , and thereupon be use , as before be write . now to speak somewhat of the description of the country , you shall understand , that the port of saint John de Sant Juan de ullua be a very little island low by the water side , the ullua - ix 353 z broad or long part thereof not above a bow shoot over , and stand within two furlong of the firm land . in my time there be but one house , and a little chapel to say mass in , in all the island : the side to the land ward be make by man hand , with freestone and gravel , and be 4 . fathom deep down right , wherefore the great ship that come in there do ride so near the shore of the island , that you may come and go aland upon their beak nose . they use to put great chain of iron in at their halser , and a anchor to the landward , and all little enough to more well their ship for fear of the northerly wind , which come off the coast of Florida , that sometime have carry ship , and house , and all away to the shore . the king be wont to have 20 . great mighty negro , who do serve for nothing else , but only to repair the say island , where the foul weather do hurt it . the country all thereabouts be very plain ground , and a mile from the sea side a great wilderness , with great quantity of red deer in the same , so that when the mariner of the ship be dispose , they go up into the wilderness , and do kill of the same , and bring they aboard to eat , for their recreation . the way and from this port to the next town , which be call distance from yera quoth be c . league almost by the sea side , till San Juan de ’ ... i 7 r . i , j ullua to vera you come within one league or the place , and than you Cruz , be five turn up towards the land , into a wood , till you come league . to a iide river hard by the say town side , which sometime of the year be dry without water . the town of Vera Cruz in my time , have not pass 300 . household , and serve but for the folk of the ship , to buy and bring their good aland , and deliver it to their owner , as also the owner and their factor to receive their good of the master of the ship . this town stand also in a very plain on the one side the river , and the other side be environ with much sand blow from the sea side with the tempest of weather , many time come upon that coast . this town also 354 • • .. 15581 be subject to great sickness , and in my time many of the mariner and officer of the ship do die with those disease , there accustom , and especial those that be not use to the country , nor know the danger thereof , but will common go in the sun in the heat of the day , and do eat fruit of the country with much disorder , and especial give themselves to woman company at their first come : whereupon they be cast into a burn ague , of the which few escape . half a day journey from Vera Cruz , towards Penta de Rin - Mexico , be a lodging of five or six house , call the cona ^°- rinconado , which be a place , where be a great pinnacle make of lime and stone , fast by a river side , where the Indians be wont to do their sacrifice unto their god , and it be plain and low ground betwixt that and vera Cruz , and also subject to sickness : but afterward half a day journey that you do begin to enter into the high land , you shall find as fair , good , and sweet country , as any in the world , and the far you go , the goodly and sweet than country be , till you come to Pueblo de los angel , which may be some 43 league Ruebh de las from vera Cruz , which be in my time a town of 600 . Angeles . household , or thereabouts , stand in a goodly soil . between Vera Cruz and that you shall come through many town of the Indians , and village , and many goodly field of meadow ground , river of fresh water , forest , and great wood , very pleasant to behold . from Pueblo de los angel , to Mexico , be 20 . league of very fair way and country , as before be declare . Mexico Mexico . be a city in my time , of not above 1500 . household of Spaniards inhabit there , but of indian people in the suburb of the say city , dwell above 300000 . as it be think , and many more . this city of Mexico be 65 . league from the north sea , and 75 . league from the south sea , so that it stand in the midst of the main land , betwixt the one sea and the other . it be situate in the midst of a lake of stand water , and environ round about with the same , save in many place , go 355 this be to be understand of his second come into Spain . out of the city , be many broad way through the say lake or water . this lake and city be environ also with great mountain round about , which be in compass above thirty league , and the say city , and lake of stand water , do stand in a great plain in the midst of it . this lake of stand water do proceed from the shed of the rain , that fall upon the say mountain , and so gather themselves together