fleet be call Diego flores de Valdes . after his come , when he have water his ship , both the fleet join in one , and don Juan de Velasco de Varre be the first fifteen day general of both the fleet , who turn through the channel of Bahama , his pilot have like to have cast away all the fleet upon the cape call cannaveral , which be prevent by i John Hortop , and our master Robert Barret : for i 460 be in the second watch escry land , and call to Robert Barret , bid he look over board , for i see land under the lee - bow of the ship : he call to the boatswain , and bid he let fly the fore sail sheet , and lie the helm upon the lee , and cast the ship about . when we be cast about , we be but in seven fathom water : we shoot off a piece , give advice to the fleet to cast about , and so they do . for this we be belove o the general , and all the fleet . the general be in a great rage , and swear by the king , that he will hang his pilot : for he say , that twice before he have almost cast away the admiral . when it be day , he command a piece to be shoot off , to call to council : the other admiral in his ship come up to he , and ask what the matter be , he say , that his pilot have cast away his ship and all the fleet , have it not be for two of the Englishman , and therefore he will hang he . the other admiral with many fair word persuade he to the contrary . when we come in the height of Bermuda , we this - a sea - monster cover a monster in the sea , who show himself three ™ ttesliafe time unto we from the middle upward , in which part °^ a man ' he be proportion like a man , of the complexion of a Mulato , or tawny indian . the general do command one of his clerk to put it in writing , and he certify the king and his noble thereof . present after this , for the space of sixteen day we have wonderful foul weather , and then God send we a fair wind , until such time as we discover the hand call faial . on s . James day we make racket , wheel , and other firework , to make pastime that night , as it be the order of the Spaniard . when we come near the land , our master R . Barret confer with we , to take the pinnace one night , when we come on the hand call Ter ? era , to free our self from the danger and bondage that we be go into , whereunto we agree : none have any pinnace astern then but our ship , which give great courage to our enterprise : we prepare a bag of bread , and a Botijo of water , which will have serve we nine day , and 461 provide our self to go : our master borrow a small compass of the master gunner of the ship , who lend it he , but suspect his intent , and close make the general privy to it , who for a time dissemble the matter . in the end see our pretense , he call R . Barret , command his head to be put in the stock , and a great pair of iron bolt on his leg , and the rest of we to be set in the stock by the leg . than he will a piece to be shoot off , and he send the pinnace for the other admiral , and all the captain , master and pilot of both fleet to come aboard of he . he command the mainyard to be strike down , and to put 2 . pilley , on every yard - arme one ; the hangman be call , and we be will to confess our self , for he swear by the king that he will hang we . when the other admiral , and the rest be come aboard , he call they into his counsel - chamber , and tell they that he will hang the master of the Englishman , and all his company . the admiral , who name be Diego Flores de Valdes , ask he wherefore : he say , that we have determine to rise in the night with the pinnace , and with a ball of firework to set the ship on fire , and go our way : therefore , say he , i will have you the captain , master , and pilot , to set your hand unto that , for i swear by the king that i will hang they , Diego flores de Valdes answer , i nor the captain , master , and pilot will not set our hand to that , for he say , if he have be prisoner as we be , he will have do the like himself . he counsel he to keep we fast in prison , till he come into Spain , and then send we to the contratation house in Sivil , where , if we have deserve death the law will pass on we , for he will not have it say that in such a fleet as that be , six man and a boy shall take the pinnace , and go away , and so he return to his ship again . when he be go , the general come to the main mast to we , and swear by the king , that we shall not come out of the stock till we come into Spain : within 462 16 day after we come over the bar of saint Lucar , and come up to the hurcado , than he put we into a pinnace in the stock , and send we prisoner to the contratation house in Seville . from thence after one year we break prison , on saint Stevens day at night , 7 . of our company escape , Robert Barret , i job Hortop , John Emerie , Humphrey Roberts , and John Gilbert be take , and bring back to the contratation house , where we remain in the stock till twelve tide be pass . than our keeper put up a