day do break , and so put our self in danger of cast away : the wind and sea grow so foul and strong , that within two hour after the storm begin , eight ship that be together be so disperse , that we can not see one another . one of the ship of our company be of the burden of 500 tun call the hulk of carrion , will not cast about to sea as we do , but go that night with the land , think in the morning to purchase the port of saint John de ullua , but miss the port go with the shore and be cast away . there be drown of that ship 75 . person , man , woman and child , and 64 . be save that can swim , and have mean to save themselves : among those that perish in that ship , be a gentleman who have be present the year before in saint Domingo , his wife and 4 . daughter with the rest of his servant and household . we with the other 7 . ship cast about into the sea , the storm 343 A . D . 1556 . during 10 . day with great might , boisterous wind , fog and rain : our ship be old and weak be so toss , that she open at the stern a fathom under water , and the best remedy we have be to stop it with bed and pilobier , and for fear of sink we throw and lighten into the sea all the good we have or can come by : but that will not serve . than we cut our main mast and throw all our ordinance into the sea save one piece , which early in a morning when we think we shall have sink , we shoot off , and as please God there be one of the ship of our company near unto we , which we see not by mean of the great fog , which hear the sound of the piece , and understand some of the company to be in great extremity , begin to make towards we , and when they come within hear of we , we desire they for the love of God to help to save we , for that we be all like to perish . they will we to hoist our foresail as much as we can and make towards they , for they will do their best to save we , and so we do : and we have no soon hoist our foresail , but there come a gale of wind and a piece of a sea , strike in the foresail , and carry sail and mast all overboard , so that than we think there be no hope of life . and then we begin to embrace one another , every man his friend , every wife her husband , and the child their father and mother , commit our soul to almighty God , think never to escape alive : yet it please God in the time of most need when all hope be pass , to aid we with his help hand , and cause the wind a little to cease , so that within two hour after , the other ship be able to come aboard we , and take into she with her boat man , woman and child , naked without hose or shoe upon many of our foot . i do remember that the last person that come out of the ship into the boat , be a woman black moor , who leap out of the ship into the boat with a young suck child in her arm , leap too short and fall into the sea , and be a good while under 344 the water before the boat can come to rescue she , and with the spread of her clothes rise above water again , and be catch by the coat and pull into the boat have still her child under her arm , both of they half drown , and yet her natural love towards her child will not let she let the child go . and when she come aboard the boat she hold her child so fast under her arm still , that two man be scant able to get it out . so we depart out of our ship and leave it in the sea : it be worth four hundred thousand ducat , ship and good when we leave it . and within three day after we arrive at our port of saint John de ullua in new Spain . i do remember that in the great and boisterous storm of this foul weather , in the night , there come upon the top of our main yard and main mast , a certain little light , much like unto the light of a little candle , which the Spaniard call the cuerpo santo , and say it be S . Elmo , who they cuerpo Santo . take to be the advocate of sailor . at the which sight the Spaniard fall down upon their knee and worship it , pray God and S . Elmo to cease the torment , and save they from the peril that they be in , with promise he that at their come on land , they will repair unto his chapel , and there cause mass to be say , and other ceremony to be do . the friar cast relic into the sea , to cause the sea to be still , and likewise say gospel , with other cross and ceremony upon the sea to make the storm to cease : which ( as they say ) do much good to weaken the fury of the storm . but i can not perceive it , nor give no credit to it , till it please God to send we the remedy and deliver we from the rage of the same , his name be praise therefore . this light continue aboard our ship about three hour , fly from mast to mast , and from top to top : and sometime it will be in two or three place at once . i inform my self of learned man afterward what that light shall be , and they say , that it be but a congelation of the wind and vapour of the sea congeal with the ex - 345 tremitie of the weather , which fly in the wind , many time do chance to hit on the mast and shrowd of the ship that be at sea in foul weather . and in