petition to the judge of the contratation house , that we may be send to the great prison house in Seville , for that we break prison , whereupon we be present lead thither , where we remain one month , and then from thence , to the castle of the inquisition house in Triana , where we continue one year : which expire , they bring we out in procession , every one of we have a candle in his hand , and the coat with saint Andrew cross on our back : they bring we up on a high scaffold , that be set up in the place of saint Francis , which be in the chief street of Seville : there they set we down upon bench , every one in his degree , and against we on another scaffold sit all the judge , and the clergy on their bench : the people wonder , and gaze on we , some pity our case , other say , burn those heretic . when we have sit there two hour , we have a sermon make to we : after which one call Bresinia , secretary to the inquisition , go up into the pulpit with the process , and call Robert Barret and John Gilbert , who two familiar of Robert Barret the inquisition bring from the scaffold before the judge , where the secretary read the sentence , which ' be that they shall be burn , and so they return to the scaffold , and be burn . then i job Hortop , and John bone be call , and Job Hortop bring to the place , as before , where we hear our hls cmdm - sentence , which be , that we shall go to the game , and there row at the oar end ten year , and then to be bring back to the inquisition house , to have the coat with saint Andrew cross put on our back , and 463 from thence to go to the everlasting prison remediless , and so we be return from the scaffold from whence we come . Thomas mark , and Thomas Ellis be call , and have sentence to serve in the galley eight year , and Humphrey Roberts , and John Emery to serve five year , and so be return to the bench on the scaffold , where we sit till four of clock in the afternoon . than we be lead again to the inquisition house , from whence we be bring . the next day in the morning Bresinia the treasurer come thither to we , and deliver to every one of we his sentence in write . i with the rest be send to the galley , where we be chain four and four together : every man daily allowance be 26 . ounce of course black biscuit and water , our clothing for the whole year two shirt , two pair of breech of course canvas , a red coat of course cloth , soon on , and soon off , and a gown of hair with a friar hood : our lodging be on the bare board , and bank of the galley , our head and beard be shave every month , hunger , thirst , cold , and stripe we lack none , till our several time expire . and after the time of 12 . year , for i serve two year above my sentence , i be send back to the inquisition house in Seville , and there have put on the coat with saint Andrew cross , i be send to the everlasting prison remediless , where i wear the coat 4 . year , and then upon great suit , i have it take off for 50 ducat , which Hernando the Soria treasurer of the king mint lend i , who i serve for it as a drudge 7 . year , and until the month 1590 . of October last , 1590 , and then i come from Seville to s . Lucar , where i make mean to come away in a flyboat , that be lade with wine and salt , which be Fleming good , the king of Spain subject , dwell in Sivil , marry to spanish woman , and swear to their king . in this month of October last , depart from saint Lucar , at sea , off the southermost cape , we meet a english ship , call the Galeon Dudley , who take the Fleming , and i out of he , and bring i to ports - 464 1590 . mouth , where they set i on land , the 2 . day of December last pass , 1590 . from thence i be send by 1590 . m . muns the lieutenant of Portsmouth , with letter to the R . honourable the earl of Sussex , who command his secretary to take my name and examination , how long i have be out of England , and with who i go , which he do . and on Christmas even i take my leave of his honour , and come to redriffe . the computation of my imprisonment . i suffer imprisonment in Mexico two year . in the contratation house in Seville one year . in the inquisition house in Triana one year . i be in the galley twelve year . in the everlasting prison remediless , with the coat with s . Andrews cross on my back 4 . year . and at liberty i serve as a drudge Hernando de Soria 3 . year , which be the full compliment of 23 . year . since my departure from England , until this time of my return , i be five time in great danger of death , beside the many peril i be in , in the galley . first in the port of saint John de ullua , where be on shore , with many other of our company , which be all slay save i , and two other that by swim get aboard the Jesus of Lubek . second , when we be rob by the wild Indians . third , after we come to Mexico , the viceroy will have hang we . four , because he can not have his mind to hang we , he will have burn we . five , the general that bring we into Spain , will have hang we at sea . thus have true set down unto you my travel , misery and danger , endure the space of 23 . year , i end .