far Tecoantepec . town to the eastward in all nova Hispania , which some time do belong to the mark de Valle , and because it be a very fit port , stand in the south sea , the king of Spain , upon a rebellion make by the say mark against he , take it from he , and do now possess it as his own . here in the year 1572 i see a piece of ordinance of brass , call a demy culverin , which come out of a ship call the Jesus of Lubec , which captain Hawkins leave in saint John de ullua , be in fight with the Spaniard in the year 1568 ; which piece they afterward carry 100 league by land over mighty mountain to the say city , to be embark there for the philippinas . leave Tecoantepec , i go still along by the south sea about 150 league in the desolate province of Soconusco , Soconusco . in which province there grow cacao , which the chris - 365 1570 . tian carry from thence into Nova Hispania , for that it will not grow in any cold country . the Indians of this country pay the king their tribute in cacao , give he four hundred cargas , and every carga be 24000 almond , which carga be worth in Mexico thirty piece of real of plate . they be man of great riches , and withal very proud : and in all this province throughout , there dwell not twenty Christians . i travel through Suchetepec . Guasacapan . another province call Suchetepec ; and thence to the province of Guasacapan : in both which province be very few people , the big town therein have not above two hundred Indians . the chief merchandise Guatimala . there , be cacao . hence i go to the city of Guatimala , which be the chief city of all this kingdom : in this city do inhabit about 80 Spaniard : and here the king have his governor , and council , to who all the people of the kingdom repair for justice . this city stand from the coast of the south sea 14 league within the land , and be very rich , by reason of the gold that they fetch out of the coast of Veragua . from this city to the eastward 60 sonsonate . league lie the province sonsonate , where i sell the merchandise i carry out of Nova Hispania . the chief san Salvador . city of this province be call saint Salvador , which lie 7 league from the coast of the south sea , and have a port Acaxutla . lie by the sea coast , call Acaxutla , where the ship arrive with the merchandise they bring from Nova Hispania ; and from thence lade back again the cacao : there dwell here to the number of threescore Spaniard . Nicoia a port where you ship which go to thephilippinas be build . from sonsonate i travel to Nicoia , which be in the kingdom of Nicaragua , in which port the king build all the ship that travel out of the Indies to the Malucos . i go forward from thence to Costa rica , where the Indians both man and woman go all naked , and the land lie between Panama , and the kingdom of Guatimala : and for that the Indians there live as warrior , i dare not pass by land , so that here in a town call S . Salvador i bestow that which i carry in annile ( which be a kind of thing to die blow withal ) which i carry with i to the port of Cavallos , lie in Puerto the ca - the kingdom of Honduras , which port be a mighty huge a ruh gulf , and at the come in on the one side of it there * a : e it lie a town of little force without ordinance or any other strength , have in it house of straw : at which town the Spaniard use yearly in the month of August to unlade four ship which come out of Spain lade with rich merchandise , and receive in here again their lade of a kind of merchandise call annile and Cochinilia ( although it be not of such value as that of Nova Hispania ) and silver of the mine of Tomaangua , and gold of Nicaragua , and hide , and Salsa perilla , the best in all the Indies : all which merchandise they return , and depart from thence always in the month of April follow , take their course by the island of Jamaica , in which island there dwell on the west side of it certain Spaniard of no great number . from this place they go to the cape of saint Anthony , which be the uttermost part of the westward of the island of Cuba , and from thence to Havana lie hard by , which be descrip - the chief port that the king of Spain have in all the country of the Indies , and of great importance : for all the ship , both from Peru , Hunduras , porto rico , s . Domingo , Jamaica , and all other place in his Indies , arrive there in their return to Spain , for that in this port they take in victual and water , and the most part of their lade : here they meet from all the foresay place always in the begin of may by the king commandment : at the entrance of this port it be so narrow , that there can scarce come in two ship together , although it be above six fathom deep in the narrow place of it . in the north side of the come in there stand a tower , in which there watch every day a man to descry the sail of ship which he can see on the sea ; and as many as he discover , so many banner he set upon the tower , that the people of the town ( which stand within the port about a mile from the tower ) may understand thereof . under this tower there 367 lie a sandy shore , where man