to another , to see that every man have his full provision accord to the commandment give . yet to speak true what i think , two good tall ship of war will have make a foul spoil among they . for in all this fleet there be not any that be strong and warlike appoint , save only the admiral , and vice - admiral : and again over and beside the weakness and the ill furnish of the rest , they be all so deep lade , that they have not be able ( if they have be charge ) to have hold out any long fight . well , thus we set sail , and have 442 a very ill passage home , the weather be so contrary . we keep our course in manner Northeast , and bring our self to the height of 42 . degree of latitude , to be sure not to meet with don Antonio his fleet , and be upon our voyage from the 4 . of June , until the 10 . of September , and never see land till we fall with the Arenas gordas hard by saint Lucar . and there be a order take that none shall go on shore until he have licence : as for i , i be know by one in the ship , who tell the master that i be a Englishman , which ( as God will ) it be my good hap to hear : for if i have not hear it , it have cost i my life . notwithstanding , i will not take any knowledge of it , and seem to be merry and pleasant , that we be all come so well in safety . present after , licence come that we shall go on shore , and i press to be go with the first : howbeit , the master come unto i , and say , sirrah , you must go with i to Sivil by water : i know his meaning well enough , and that he mean there to ofler i up as a sacrifice to the holy house . for the ignorant zeal of a number of these superstitious Spaniards be such , that they think that they have do God good service , when they have bring a lutheran heretic to the fire to be burn : for so do they account of we . well , i perceive all this , take upon i not to suspect any thing , but be still jocund 8c merry : howbeit , i know it stand i upon to shift for my self . and so wait my time when the master be in his cabin asleep , i convey my self secret down by the shrowd into the ship boat , and make no stay but cut the rope wherewithal she be moar , and so by the cable hale on shore , where i leap on land , and let the boat go whither it will . thus by the help of God i escape that day , 8c then never stay at saint Lucar , but go all night by the way which i have see other take towards Sivil : so that the next morning i come to Sivil , and seek i out a workmaster , that i may fall to my science , which be weave of taffeta ; and be entertain i set my self close to my work , 443 and dare not for my life once to stir abroad for fear of be know : and be thus at my work , within 4 . day after i hear one of my fellow say , that he hear there be great inquiry make for a Englishman that come home in the fleet : what a heretic Lutheran ( quoth i ) be it , i will to God i may know he , sure i will present he to the holy house . and thus i keep still within door at my work , and feign my self not well at ease , and that i will labour as i may to get i new clothes . And continue thus for the space of 3 . month i call for my wage , and buy i all thing new , different from the apparel that i do wear at sea , and yet dare not be overbold to walk abroad : and after understand that there be certain english ship at saint Lucar bind for England , i take a boat and go aboard one of they , and desire the master that i may have passage with he to go into England , and tell he secret that i be one of those which captain Hawkins do set on shore in the Indies : he very courteous pray i to have he excuse , for he dare not meddle with i , and pray i therefore to return from whence i come . which when i perceive , with a sorrowful heart , God know , i take my leave of he , not without watty cheek . and then i go to saint mary port , which be 3 . league from saint Lucar , where i put my self to be a soldier to go in the king of Spain galley , which be bind for Majorca , and come thither in he come the end of the Christmas holiday , i find there two ten english ship , the one of London , and the other of they from Majorca . west country , which be ready freight and stay but for a fair wind . to the master of the one , which be of the west country go i , and tell he that i have be 2 . year in Spain to learn the language , and that i be now desirous to go home and see my friend , for that i lack maintenance : and so have agree with he for my passage , i take ship . and thus through the providence of almighty God , after 16 . year absence , have sustain many and sundry great trouble and 444 misery , as by this discourse appear , i come home to this my native country of England in the year 1582 . in the month of February , in the ship call the landret , and arrive at pool .