they feed their hog withal . but many of our man which have be hurt by the indian at our first come on land , who wound be very sore and grievous , desire to have the help of their surgeon to cure their wound . the governor , and most of they all answer , that we shall have none other surgeon but the hangman , which shall sufficient heal we of all our grief : and thus revile we , and call we English dog , and Lutheran heretic , we remain the space of three day in this miserable state , not know what shall become of we , wait every hour to be bereave of our life . Chap . 4 . wherein be show how we be use in Panuco , and in what fear of death we be there , and how we be carry to Mexico to the viceroy , and of our imprisonment there and at Tescuco , with the courtesy and cruelty we receive during that time , and how in the end we be by proclamation give to serve as slave to sundry gentleman Spaniards . upon the four day after our come thither , and there remain in a perplexity , look every hour when we shall suffer death , there come a great number 416 of Indians and Spaniards weapon to fetch we out of the house , and among they we espy one that bring a great many of new halter , at the sight whereof we be great amaze , and make no other account but that we shall present have suffer death , and so cry and call to God for mercy and forgiveness of our sin , we prepare our self , make we ready to die : yet in the end , as the sequel show , their meaning be not so : for when we be come out of the house , with those halter they bind our arm behind we , and so couple we two and two together , they command we to march on through the town , and so along the country from place to place towards the city of Mexico , which be distant from Panuco west and by south the space of ninety league , have only but two Spaniard to conduct we , they be accompany with a great number of Indians ward on either side with bow and arrow , lest we shall escape from they . And travel in this order , upon the second day at night we come unto a town which the Indians call Nohele , and the Spaniard call it Santa maria : in which town there be a house of white friar , which do very courteous use we , and give we hot meat , as mutton and broth , and garment also to cover our self withal , make of white bay : we feed very greedy of the meat , and of the indian fruit , call noc - hole , which fruit be long and small , much like in fashion to a little cucumber . our greedy feed cause we to fall sick of hot burn ague . and here at this place one Thomas Baker one of our man die of a hurt : for he have be before shoot with a arrow into the throat at the first encounter . the next morrow about ten of the clock , we depart from thence , bind two 8c two together , and guard as before , and so travail on our way towards Mexico , till we come to a town within forty league of Mexico , name Mestitlan , where be a house of black friar : and in this town there be about the number of three hundred Spaniard , both man , woman , and child . ix 417 2d [ he . 477 - 1 the friar send we meat from the house ready dress , and the friar , and the man and woman use we very courteous , and give we some shirt and other such thing as we lack . here our man be very sick of their ague , and with eat of another fruit call in the indian tongue , guiaccos , which fruit do bind we so sore , that for the space of ten or twelve day we can not ease our self . the next morning we depart from thence with our two Spaniard and indian guard , as aforesaid . of these two Spaniards the one be a age man , who all the way do very courteous entreat we , and will careful go before to provide for we both meat and thing necessary to the uttermost of his power : the other be a young man who all the way travel with we , and never depart from we , who be a very cruel caitiff , and he carry a javelin in his hand , and sometime when as our man with very feebleness and faintness be not able to go so fast as he require they , he will take his javelin in both his hand , and strike they with the same between the neck and the shoulder so violent , that he will strike they down ; then will he cry , and say , Marchad , marchad ingleses perro , Luterianos , enemigos de dios : which be as much to say in english , as march , march on you english dog , lutheran , enemy to God . and the next day we come to a town call Pachuca , and there be two place of that name : as this town of Pachuca , and the mine of Pachuca , which be mine of silver , and be about six league distant from this town of Pachuca towards the northwest . here at this town the good old man our governor suffer we to stay two day and two night , have compassion of our sick and weak man , full sore against the mind of the young man his companion . from thence we take our journey , and travel four or five day by little village , and Stantias , which be farm or dairy house of the Spaniard , and ever as we have need , the good old man will still provide we sufficient of meat , fruit , and water to sustain we