it be make of linen cloth make of cotton wool , and fill full of flower , of red cadis and blow , and other colour . this garment come down to the knee , and then they have another cloth make after the same manner , and that go round about their waste , and reach to their shoe , and over this a white fine sheet upon their head , which go down half the leg . their hair be make up round with a hair lace about their head . and the man have a small pair of breech of the same cotton wool , and their shirt which hang over their breech , and a broad girdle about their middle , and a sheet with flower upon their back , and with a knot upon one shoulder , and a hat upon their head , and a pair of shoe . and this be all their apparel , although it be a cacique , which they use in all the country . the wall of the house of the Indians , be but plain , the house of but the stone be lay so close , that you shall not well Indians . perceive the joint between one stone and another , they be so fine cut : and by the mean that the stone be so workmanly do , and fine join together , there be some beauty in their wall . they be marvelous small and light , as pumy stone . they make their door 395 Mutezuma , and his riches . very little , so that there can go in but one man at a time . their window , and room within their house be small , and one room they have reserve for their friend , when they come to talk one with another , and that be always fair mat , and keep marvelous clean , and hang full of image , and their chair stand there to sit in . they eat their meat upon the ground , and sleep on the ground upon a mat , without any bed , both the gentleman , and other . the indian strike their fire with one stick in another , aswell the tame people , as the wild . for they know not how to do it with a iron , and a stone . in nova Hispania every io . or 12 . league they have a contrary speech , save only about Mexico : so there be a number of speech in the country . Mutezuma which be the last king of this country , be one of the rich prince which have be see in our time , or long before . he have all kind of beast which be then in the country , and all manner of bird , and fish , and all manner of worm , which creep upon the earth , and all tree , and flower , and herb , all fashion in silver and gold , which be the great part of all his treasure , and in these thing have he great joy , as the old indian report . and unto this day , they say that the treasure of Mutezuma be hide , and that the Spaniard have it not . this king will give none of his people freedom , nor forgive any of they that shall pay he tribute , though he be never so poor . for if it have be tell he that one of his tributary be poor , and that he be not able to pay his tribute accord to the custom , than he will have he bind to bring at such time as tribute shall be pay , a quill full of louse , say , he will have none free , but himself . he have as many wife or concubine , as he will have , and such as like he . always whensoever he go out of his court to pass the time , he be bear upon 4 . of his noble man shoulder set upon a table , some sav , of gold , and very rich dress with feather of diverse and 396 1572 . many colour and flower . he wash all his body every Indians day , be it never so cold . and unto this day so do all tkem the indian , and especial the woman . se ^ ever ^ the Spaniard keep the indian in great subjection . they may have in their house no sword nor dagger , nor knife with any point , nor may wear upon they any manner of arm , neither may they ride upon any horse nor mule , in any saddle nor bridle , neither may they drink wine , which they take for the great pain of all . they have attempt diverse time to make insurrection , but they have be overthrow immediate by their own great and beastly cowardliness . there remain some among the wild people , that unto cannibal . this day eat one another . i have see the bone of a Spaniard that have be as clean burnish , as though it have be do by man that have no other occupation . and many time people be carry away by they , but they never come again , whether they be man or woman . they have in the sea island of red salt in great abun - island of salt . dance , whereas they lade it from place to place about the sea coast : and they spend very much salt with salt their hide , and fish : and in their mine they occupy great quantity . they have much allume , and as good as allume . any that be in all the Levant , so that they need none of that commodity . they have also of their own grow , much Cana fistula , and much Salsa perilla , which cassia fistula . be marvelous good for many kind of disease . Salsa peri ^ a - there be in Florida many jarrefalcon , and many Florida . other kind of hawk , which the gentleman of Nova Hispania send for every year . the Spaniard have two fort there , chief to keep out the Frenchman from plant there .