he faithful do , not only in direct i which be my safe way to travail , but he also of himself keep i company for the space of three day , and ever as we come to the indian house ( who use and entertain we well ) he gather among they in money to the value of 20 . pezo , which at my departure from he he free give unto i . So come i to the city of Guatimala upon the south sea , which be distant from Mexico about 250 . league , where i stay 6 . day , for that my horse be weak . and from thence i travail still south and by east seven day journey , pass by certain indian town , until i come to a indian town distant from Mexico , direct south 309 . league . and here at this town inquire to go to the port de Cavallos in the north - east sea , it be answer that in travail thither i shall not come to any town in 10 . or 12 . day journey : so here i hire two Indians to be my guide , and i buy hen , and bread to serve we so long time , and take with we thing to kindle fire every night , because of wild beast , and to dress our meat : and every night when we rest , my indian guide will make two great fire , between the which we place our self , and my horse . and in the night time we shall hear the lion roar , with tiger , ounce , and other beast , and some of they we shall see in the night , which have eye shine like fire . And travail thus for the space of twelve day , 440 we come at last to the port of Cavallos upon the east Puerto de sea , distant from Guatimala south and by east , two cavau ° s - hundreth league , and from Mexico 450 . or thereabouts . this be a good harbour for ship , and be without either castle or bulwark . i have dispatch away my guide , go down to the haven , where i see certain ship load chief with canary wine , where i speak with one of the master , who ask i what country man i be , and i tell he that i be bear in Granado , and he say , that then i be his countryman . i require he that i may pass home with he in his ship , pay for my passage : and he say yea , so that i have a safe conduct , or letter testimonial to show , that he may incur no danger : for say he , it may be that you have kill some man , or be indebt , and will therefore run away . to that i answer , that there be not any such cause . way , in the end we grow to a price , that for 60 . pezo he will carry i into Spain : a glad man be i at this good hap , and i quick sell my horse , and make my provision of hen and bread to serve i in my passage ; and thus within 2 . day after we set sail , and never stay until we come to Havana , which be distant from puerto de Cavallos by sea 500 league : where we find the whole fleet of Spain , which be bind home from the Indies . and here i be hire for a soldier to serve in the admiral ship of the same fleet , wherein the general himself go . there land while i be here 4 . ship out of Spain , be all full of soldier and ordinance , of which number there be 200 . man land here , and 4 . great brass piece of ordinance , although the castle be before sufficient provide : 200 . man more be send to campeche , and certain ordinance : 200 . to Florida with ordinance : and 100 last to saint John ullua . as for ordinance there they have sufficient , and of the very same which be we , which we have in the Jesus , and those other which we have plant in the place , where the viceroy betray m . Hawkins our general , as have be declare . the 441 send of those soldier to every of those port , and the strengthen of they , be do by commandment from the king of Spain , who write also by they to the general of his fleet , give he in charge so to do , as also direct he what course he shall keep in his come home into Spain , charge he in any hand not to come nigh to the isle of azore , but to keep his course more to the northward , advertise he withal , what number and power of french ship of war , and other , don Antonio have at that time at ten ; era , and the isle aforesaid : which the general of the fleet well consider , and what great store of riches he have to bring home with he into Spain , do in all very dutifully observe and obey : for in truth he have in his say fleet 37 . sail of ship , and in every of they there be as good as 30 . pipe of silver one with another , beside great store of gold , Cochinilla , sugar , hide , and Cana fistula , with other apothecary drug . this our general , who be call don Pedro de Guzman , do provident take order for , for their most strength and defence , if need shall be , to the uttermost of his power , and command upon pain of death , that neither passenger nor soldier shall come aboard without his sword and harquebus , with shot and powder , to the end that they may be the better able to encounter the fleet of don Antonio , if they shall hap to meet with they , or any of they : and ever as the weather be fair , the say general will himself go aboard from one ship