the true and perfect description of a voyage perform and do by Francisco the gualle a spanish captain and pilot , for the viceroy of new Spain , from the haven of Acapulco in new Spain , to the island of the lu ^ ones or philippinas , unto the haven of manilla , and from thence to the haven of Macao in China , and from Macao back again to Acapulco , accomplish in the year of our lord , 1584 . Chap . 1 . he ten of march in the year of our lord 1582 we set sail out of the haven of Acapulco , lie in the country of new Spain , direct our course towards the island of the Lugones , or philippinas west Southwest , run in that manner for the space of twenty five league , till we come under sixteen degree , that so we may shun the calm by sail close by the shore . from thence forward we hold our course west for the space of 30 league , and be there , we run west , and west and by south , for the space of 1800 league , to the hand call Isla deal Enganno , which be the further hand lie in the south part of you hand call des los ladrone , that be , the hand of rover , or Islas de las Velas , under 13 . degree and in latitude septentrionali , and 164 . degree in longitude orientali , upon the fix meridionali line , which lie 326 right with the hand of Ter ^ era . from thence we hold our course westward for the space of 280 . league , till we come to the point call el capo de Espirito Santo , that be , the point of the holy ghost , lie in the hand Tandaya , the first hand of those that be call philippinas , lu ^ ones , or Manillas , which be a country with few hill , with some mine of brimstone in the middle thereof . from the point aforesaid , we sail west for the space of eighteen league to the point or entry of the channel , which run in between that hand and the hand of Lu ^ on . this point or entry lie scarce under 12 . degree . all the coast that stretch from the entry of the chanel to the point of el capo del Spirito santo , be not very fair . eight league from the say point lie a haven of indifferent greatness , call Baya de Lobos , that be , the bay of wolf , have a small hand in the mouth thereof : and within the channel about half a league from the end of the say hand lie a hand or cliff , and when you pass by the point in the middle of the channel , than you have five and twenty fathom deep , with brown sand : there we find so great a stream run westward , that it make the water to cast a skum as if it have be a sand , whereby it put we in fear , but cast out our lead , we find five and twenty fathom deep . from the aforesaid entry of the channel north , and north and by east about ten league , lie the island of catanduane , about a league distant from the land of lu ^ on , on the further point eastward , and from the same entry of the channel towards the west and Southwest lie the hand Capuli about six league from thence , stretch westsouth west , and eastnortheast , be five league long , and four league broad : and as we pass by it , it lie northward from we under twelve degree and | . and somewhat high land . four league from the aforesaid hand of Capuli northwestward lie the three hand of the haven of Bollon in the 327 hand of lufone , stretch north and south about four league , distant from the firm land half a league , whereof the further southward lie under thirteen degree : in this channel it be twenty fathom deep , with white sand , and a great stream , run southeast : we pass through the middle of the channel . from this channel we hold our course Southwest , and Southwest and by west , for the space of twenty league , until we come to the west end of the hand of Tycao , which reach east and west thirteen league . this point or hook lie under 12 . degree and in the middle between this hand and the hand Capuli there lie three hand call the faranias , and we run in the same course on the northside of all the hand , at the depth of 22 . fathom with white sand . from the aforesaid west point of the hand Tycao to the point of Buryas it be east and west to sail about the length of a league or a league and a half : we put into that channel , hold our course south , and south and by west about three league , until we be out of the channel at sixteen fathom deep , with half white and reddish sand in the channel , and at the mouth thereof , whereof the middle lie under 12 . degree and f . and there the stream run northward . the hand of Buryas stretch northwest and southeast , and be low land , whereof the northwest point be about three league from the coast of Lugon , but you can pass between they with any ship , but with small foist and bark of the country . this shallow channel lie under twelve degree : and run through the aforesaid channel between the hand Tycao and Buryas , as i say before , we sail southward about the isle of two league from the hand of masbate , which stretch masbate . past anj west 8 . league long , be in breadth 4 . league , and lie under 12 . degree and in the middle thereof , and be somewhat high land . from the say channel between Tycao and Buryas , we hold our course westnorthwest for thirteen 328 league , leave the hand masbate on the southside , and the hand Buryas on the north side : at the end of thirteen league we come by a hand call Banton , which be in form like a hat , under twelve degree and f . when we have sail the aforesaid thirteen league and eight league more , on the south side we leave the hand call rebuiam , which stretch northwest and northwest and by north , and southeast , and southeast and by south , for the space of eight league