diverse voyage make by Englishman to the famous city of Mexico , and to all or most part of the other principali province , city , town and place throughout the great and large kingdom of new Spain , even as far as Nicaragua and Panama , and thence to Peru : together with a description of the Spaniard form of government there : and sundry pleasant relation of the manner and custom of the natural inhabitant , and of the manifold rich commodity and strange rarity find in those part of the continent : and other matter most worthy the observation . the voyage of Robert Tomson merchant , into nova Hispania in the year 1555 . with diverse observation concern the state of the country : and certain accident touch himself . Obert Tomson bear in the town of Andover in Hampshire begin his travail out of England in An . 1553 . in the month of march : who depart out of the city of Bristol in a good ship call the bark young , in company of other merchant of the say city , within 8 . day after arrive at Lisbon in Portugal , where the say Robert Tomson remain 15 . day , at the end of which he ship himself for Spain in the say ship , and within 4 . day arrive in the bay of Cadiz in Andalusia , which be under the kingdom of Spain , and from thence go up to the city of Sivil by land , which be 20 . league , and there he repair to one John field house a english merchant , who have dwell in the say city of Sivil 18 . or 20 . year marry with wife and 338 child : in who house the say Tomson remain by the space of one whole year or thereabouts , for two cause : the one to learn the castillian tongue , the other to see the order of the country , and the custom of the people . at the end of which time have see the fleet of ship come out of the Indies to that city , with such great quantity of gold and silver , pearl , precious stone , sugar , hide , ginger , and diverse other rich commodity , he do determine with himself to seek mean and opportunity to pass over to see that rich country from whence such great quantity of rich commodity come . and it fall out that within short time after , the say John field ( where the say Tomson be lodge ) do determine to pass over into the west Indies , himself , with his wife , child , and family , and at the request of the say Tomson , he purchase a licence of the king to pass into the Indies , for himself , his wife and child , and among they also for the say Tomson to pass with they : so that present they make preparation of victuali and other necessary provision for the voyage . but the ship which be prepare to perform the voyage be all ready to depart , upon certain consideration by the king commandment be stay and arrest till further shall be know of the king pleasure . whereupon the say John field , with Robert Tomson depart out of Sivil and come down to saint Lucar 15 . league off , and see the stay make upon the ship of the say fleet , and be not assure when they will depart , determine to ship themselves for the isle of the canary , which be 250 . league from saint Lucar , and there to stay till the say fleet shall come thither : for that be continual their port to make stay at 6 . or 8 . day , to take in fresh water , bread , flesh , and other necessary . so that in the month of February in An . 1555 . then say Robert Tomson with the say John field and his company , ship themselves out of the town of saint Lucar in a carvel of the ci tie of Cadiz , and within 6 . 339 day they arrive at the port of the grand Canaria , where at our come the ship that ride in the say port begin to cry out of all measure with loud voice , in so much that the castle which stand fast by begin to shoot at we , and shoot 6 . or 7 . shot at we , and strike down our main mast , before we can hoist out our boat to go on land , to know what the cause of the shoot be , see that we be spanish ship , and be come into his country . so that be on land , and complain of the wrong and damage do unto we ; they answer , that they have think we have be French rover , that have come into the say port to do some harm to the ship that be there . for that 8 . day pass there go out of the say port a carveil much like unto we , laden with sugar and other merchandise for Spain and on the other side of the point of the say hand , meet with a Frenchman of war , who take the say carvell , and unlade out of she into the say french ship both man and good . And be demand of the say Spaniards what other ship remain in the port whence they come , they answer that there remain diverse other ship , and one lade with sugar ( as they be ) and ready to depart for Spain : upon the which news the Frenchman put 30 . tall man of their ship well appoint into the say carvel which they have take , and send she back again to the say port from whence she have depart the day before . and somewhat late towards the evening come into the port , not show past 3 . or 4 . man , and so come to a anchor hard by the other ship that be in the say port , and be see by the castle and by the say ship , they make no reckon of she , because they know she , and think that she have find contrary wind at the sea , or have forget something behind they , they have return back again for the same , and so make no account of she , but let she alone ride quiet among the other ship in the say port : so that about midnight the say carvel