this city stand upon certain high mountain , which be very thick plant with town very wholesome and fruitful , have plentiful fountain of water run through they . the high way of these hill be all set with fruit , and tree of diverse kind , and most pleasant . in every town as we pass through , the Indians present we with victual . within twenty Clanchinolte - league of this place there be another city call clanchi - fec - noltepec , belong to a gentleman , where there inhabit about forty thousand Indians ; and there be among they eight or nine friar of the order of saint Augustine , who have there a monastery . within three day after we de - guaxutla . part from this place , and come to a city call Guaxutla , where there be another monastery of friar of the same order : there dwell in this town about twelve Spaniard . from this place forward begin a province call Guastecan . Guastecan , which be all plain ground without any tancuylabo . hill . the first town we come unto be call tan - 370 cuylabo , in which there dwell many Indians , high of stature , have all their body paint with blue , and wear their hair long down to their knee , tie as woman use to do with their hair - lace . when they go out of their door , they carry with they their bow and arrow , be very great archer , go for the most part naked . in those country they take neither gold nor silver for exchange of any thing , but only salt , which they great esteem , and use it for a saltaprind - principall medicine for certain worm which breed in 7 their lip and in their gum . after nine day travel c n 1 e ' from this place , we come to a town call tampice , tampice a which be a port town upon the sea , wherein there port tmne - dwell , i think , forty Christians , of which number while we abide there , the Indians kill fourteen , as they be gather of salt , which be all the trade that they have in this place : it stand upon the entry of the river of Panuco , which be a mighty great river ; and Panuco . be it not for a sand that lie at the mouth of it , ship of five hundred ton may go up into it above three score league . from hence we go to Panuco , fourteen league from tampice , which in time pass have be a goodly city , where the king of Spain have his governor : but by reason that the Indians there destroy the christian , it lie in a manner waste , containing in it not above ten Christians with a priest . in this town i fall sick , where i lie one and forty day , have no other sustenance than fruit and water , which water i send for above six league off within the country . here i remain till my companion come to i , which have depart from i another way , retain in my company only a slave , which i bring with i from Mexico . and the last day in easter week my companion come to i , find i in a very weak state , by reason of the unholesomenesse of the place . notwithstanding my weakness , i be set on a horse , and a indian behind i to hold i , we go forward on our voyage all that day till night . the 371 next day in the morning we pass over the river in a canoa ; and be on the other side , i go my self before alone : and by reason there meet many way trale by the wild beast , i lose my way , and so travel through a great wood about two league : and at length fall into the hand of certain wild Indians , which be there in certain cottage make of straw ; who see i , come out to the number of twenty of they , with their bow and arrow , and speak unto i in their language , which i understand not : and so i make sign unto they to help i from my horse ; which they do by commandment of their lord , which be there with they ; and light down . they carry i under one of their cottage , and lay i upon a mat on the ground : and perceive that i can not understand they , they bring unto i a little indian wench of Mexico , of fifteen or sixteen year of age , who they command to ask i in her language from whence i come , and for what intent i be come among they : for ( say she ) do thou not know Christian , how that these people will kill and eat thou ? to who i answer , let they do with i what they will ; here now i be . Shee reply , say , thou may thank God thou be lean ; for they fear thou have the pock : otherwise they will eat thou . so i present to the king a little wine which i have with i in a bottle ; which he esteem above any treasure : for for wine they will sell their wife and child . afterwards the wench ask i what i will have , and whether i will eat any thing . i answer that i desire a little water to drink , for that the country be very hot : and she bring i a great Venice glass , gild , full of water . And marvel at the glass , i demand how they come by it . she tell Shallapa . i that the cacique bring it from Shallapa , a great town distant 30 league from this place on the hill , whereas dwell certain Christians , and certain friar of the order of saint Augustine , which this cacique with his people on a night slay ; and burn the friar monastery , 372 among