the course which sir Francis Drake hold from the haven of Guatulco in the south sea on the back side of Nueva Espanna , to the northwest of California as far as fourty three degree : and his return back along the say coast to thirty eight degree : where find a fair and goodly haven , he land , and stay there many week , and discover many excellent thing in the country and great show of rich minerail matter , and be offer the dominion of the country by the lord of the same , he take possession thereof in the behalf of her majesty , and name it Nova Albion . ee keep our course from the isle of canon ( which lie in eight degree of northerly latitude , and within two league of the main of Nicaragua , where we calk and trim our ship ) along the coast of Nueva Espanna , until we come to the haven and town of Guatulco , which ( as we be inform ) have but seventeen Spaniards dwell in it , and we find it to stand in fifteen degree and fifty minute . assoon as we be enter this haven we land , and go present to the town , and to the town house , where we find a judge sit in judgement , he be associate with three other officer , upon three negro that have conspire the burn of the town : both which judge , and prisoner we take , and bring they a shippeboord , and cause the chief judge to write his letter to the town , to command all the townsman to avoid , that we may safe water there . 319 which be do , and they depart , we ransack the town , and in one house we find a pot of the quantity of a bushel full of royal of plate , which we bring to our ship . and here one Thomas Moone one of our company , take a spanish gentleman as he be fly out of the town , and search he , he find a chain of gold about he , and other jewel , which we take and so let he go . at this place our general among other Spaniards , set a shore his Portugal pilot , which he take at the island of cape Verde , out of a ship of saint marie port of Portugal , and have set they a shore , we depart thence . our general at this place and time think himself both in respect of his private injury receive from the Spaniard , as also of their contempt and indignity offer to our country and prince in generail , sufficient satisfy , and revenge : and suppose that her majesty at his return will rest content with this service , purpose to continue no long upon the spanish coast , but begin to consider and to consult of the best way for his country . he think it not good to return by the strait , for two speciali cause : the one , lest the Spaniard shall there wait , and attend for he in great number and strength , who hand he be leave but one ship , can not possible escape . the other cause be the dangerous situation of the mouth of the strait of the south side , with continual ! storm rain and bluster , as he find by experience , beside the shoal and sand upon the coast , wherefore he think it not a good course to adventure that way : he resolve therefore to avoid these hazard , to go forward to the island of the Malucos , and therehence to sail the course of the Portugal by the cape of bona speranda . upon this resolution , he begin to think of his best way for the Malucos , and find himself , where he 320 now be , becalm , he see that of necessity he must be enforce to take a spanish course , namely to sail somewhat northerly to get a wind . we therefore set sail , and sail 800 league at the least for a good wind , and thus much we sail from the 16 of April after our old stile till the three of June . the five day of June be in forty three degree toward the pole arcticke , be speedy come out of the extreme heat , we find the air so cold , that our man be pinch with the same , complain of the extremity thereof , and the further we go , the more the cold increase upon we , whereupon we think it best for that time to seek land , and do so , find it not mountainous , but low plain land , and we draw back again without land , till we come within thirty eight degree towards the line . in which height it please God to send we into a fair and good bay , with a good wind to enter the same . in this bay we anchor the sevententh of June , and the people of the country , have their house close by the water side , show themselves unto we , and send a present to our general . when they come unto we , they great wonder at the thing which we bring , but our general ( accord to his natural and accustom humanity ) courteous entreat they , and liberal bestow on they necessary thing to cover their nakedness , whereupon they suppose we to be god , and will not be persuade to the contrary : the present which they send unto our general be feather , and call of net work . their house be dig round about with earth , and have from the uttermost brim of the circle cliff of wood set upon they , join close together at the top like a spire steeple , which by reason of that closeness be very warm . their bed be the ground with rush straw on it , and lie about the house , they have the fire in the midst . the man go naked , the woman take bulrush and ix 321 ten sir Francis Drake sail on the back side of America , to 43 degree of northerly latitude . 38 degree . a description of the people and country of Nova Albion . kemb they after the manner of hemp , and thereof make their loose garment , which be knit about their middle , hang down about their hip , have also about their shoulder a skin of deer , with the hair upon it . Theise woman be very obedient and serviceable to their husband . after they be depart from we , they come and visit we the second time , and bring with they feather and bag of tobacco for present : and when they come to the top of the hill ( at the bottom whereof we have pitch our tent ) they stay themselves , where one appoint for speaker , weary himself with make a long oration , which do , they leave their bow upon the hill and come down with their present . in the mean time the woman remain on the hill , torment themselves lamentable , tear their flesh from their cheek , whereby we perceive that they be about a sacrifice . in the mean time our general , with his company , go to prayer , and to read of the scripture , at which exercise they be attentive and seem great to be affect with it : but when they be come unto we they restore again unto we those thing which before we have bestow upon they . the news of our be there be spread through the country , the people that inhabit round about come down , and among they the king himself , a man of a goodly stature , and comely personage , with many other tall and warlike man : before who coming be send two