, our general set we on shore : they ask we whither we intend to go , we say to Panuco . the captain of the indian will we to give unto they some of our clothes and shirt , which we do : then he bid we give they all , but we will not so do , whereupon John cornish be then slay with a arrow , which a indian boy that stand by the captain shoot at he , wherefore he strike the boy on the neck with his bow , that he lie for dead , and will we to follow he , who bring we into a great field , where we find fresh water : he bid we sit down about the pond and drink , and he with his company will go in the mean space to kill five or six deer , and bring they 455 John cornish slay . James collier . 8 . Englishmen slay . Anotherriver . seven day travel to Panuco . we . we tarry there till three of the clock , but they come not : there one of our company who name be John Cooke , with four other depart from we into a grove to seek relief , where present they be take by the Indians , and strip as naked as ever they be bear , and so return to we . then we divide our self into two part , half to Anthony Goddard , and the rest to James collier , and thus several we seek for Panuco . Anthony Goddard with his company , bid we farewell , they pass a river , where the Indians rob many of they of their clothes , and so pass on their way , come to a stony hill , where they stay . James collier with his company that day pass the same river , and be also rob , and one of they slay by chance : we come that night unto the hill , where Anthony Goddard and his company rest , there we remain till morning , and then we march altogether from thence , enter between two grove , where the Indians rob we of all our clothes , and leave we naked , they hurt many , and kill eight of we . three day after we come to another river , there the indian show we the way to Panuco , and so leave we : we pass the river into the wilderness , where we make wreath of green grass , which we wound about our body , to keep we from the sun , and gnat of that country . we travel there seven day , and seven night , before we come to Panuco , feed on nothing but root , and guiavo , a fruit like figs . at our come to the river of Panuco two spanish horseman come over unto we in a canowe : they ask we how long we have be in the wilderness , and where our general be , for they know we to be of the company that have fight with their countryman : we tell they seven day and seven night , and for lack of victual our general set we on shore , and he be go away with his ship . they return to their governor , who send they with five canow to bring we all over , which do , they set we in array , where a hundred horseman with their lance , 456 come forcible upon we , but do not hurt we , they carry we prisoner to Panuco , where we remain one night . in the river of Panuco there be a fish like a calf , the Spaniard call it a Mallatin , he have a stone in his head , which the Indians use for the disease of the colic , in the night he come on land , and eat grass . i have eat of it , and it eat not much unlike to bacon . from thence we be send to Mexico , which be 90 league from Panuco . in our way thither , 20 league from the sea side , i do see white crab run up and down the sand , i have eat of they , and they be very good meat . there grow a fruit which the Spaniard call avocotte , it be proportion like a egg , and as black as a coal , have a stone in it , and it be a excellent good fruit . there also grow a strange tree which they call magueis , it serve they to many use , below by a manifold use the root they make a hole , whereat they do take out of tfMagueis . it twice every day a certain kind of liquour , which they see in a great kettle , till the three part be consume , and that it wax thick , it be as sweet as any honey , and they do eat it . within 20 . day after that they have take all the liquour from it , it wither , and they cut it down , and use it as we use our hemp here in England , which do , they convert it to many use : of some part they make mantle , rope , and thread : of the end they make needle to sow their saddle , pannei , and other furniture for their horse : of the rest they make tile to cover their house , and they put it to many other purpose . and thus we come to Mexico , which be seven or eight mile about , seat in a great fen , environ with 4 hill , it have but two way of entrance , and it be full of creek , in the which in their canow they pass from place to place , and to the island there within . in the Indies ordinary three time a year be wonderful earthquake , which put the people in great fear and danger : during the time of two year that i be in Mexico , i see they six time : when they come they throw down tree , 457 house , and church . there be a city 25 . league from Mexico , call Tlaxcalla , which be inhabit with a hundred thousand Indians , they go in white shirt , linen breech , and long mantle , and the woman wear about they a garment much like unto a flannel petticoat . the king palace be the first place we be