and within certain day the king officer resort thither to labour in the i , and they find two great hare and cony . sea fish . burn mountain . manna . wild hog , lion , and tiger . mine discover , not find again . mighty hill be come together ; so they find no place to work in . and in the time while i be among they , which be five year , there be a poor sheep - the mthour hear , who keep his sheep , happen to find a well ^ levaEs ™ of quicksilver ; and he go in like manner to manifest panna . the same , as the custom and manner be ; the king ix 385 2 b description of the indian person and manner . the people of Nueva espagna great coward . officer deal in like order as they do with the two poor man that find the rich i , take it quite from the shepherd : but when they go to fetch home the quicksilver , or part thereof , they can never find it again . so these thing have be declare unto the king , who have give commandment , that nothing be find in the field , as mine , and such like , shall be take away from any man . and many other thing have be do in this country , which man may count for great marvel . there be great abundance of sugar here , and they make diverse conserves , and very good , and send they into Peru , where as they sell they marvellous well , because they make none in those part . the people of the country be of a good stature , tawny colour , broad face , flat nose , and give much to drink both wine of Spain and also a certain kind of wine which they make with honey of magueiz , and root , and other thing which they use to put into the same . they call the same wine Puleo . they be soon drink , and give to much beastliness , and void of all goodness . in their drunkenness they use and commit sodomy ; and with their mother and daughter they have their pleasure and pastime . whereupon they be defend from the drink of wine , upon pain of money , aswell he that sell the wine as the indian that drink the same . and if this commandment be not , all the wine in Spain and in France be not sufficient for the west Indies only . they be of much simplicity , and great coward , void of all valour , and be great witch . they use diverse time to talk with the devil , to who they do certain sacrifice and oblation : many time they have be take with the same , and i have see they most cruel punish for that offence . the people be give to learn all manner of occupation and science , which for the most part they learn since the come of the Spaniard : i say all manner of 386 art . they be very artificiali in make of image with feather , or the proportion or figure of any man , in all kind of manner as he be . the fineness and excellency of this be wonder , that a barbarous people as they be , shall give themselves to so fine a art as this be . they be goldsmith , blacksmith , and coppersmith , carpenter , mason , shoemaker , tailor , saddler , embroiderers , and of all other kind of science : and they will do work so good cheap , that poor young man that go out of Spain to get their live , be not set on work : which be the occasion there be many idle people in the country . for the indian will live all the week with less than one groat ; which the Spaniard can do , nor any man else . they say , that they come of the lineage of a old man the Indians which come thither in a boat of wood , which they call a i & ioran ™ canoa . but they can tell whether it be before the ame * flood or after , neither can they give any reason of the flood , nor from whence they come . and when the Spaniard come first among they , they do certain sacrifice to a image make in stone , of their own invention . the stone be set upon a great hill , which they make of brick of earth : they call it their Cowa . and certain day in the year they do sacrifice , certain old man , and young child ; and only believe in the sun and the moon , say , that from they they the sun and have all thing that be needful for they . they have in m ° one these part great store of cotton wool , with which they ^ g0fC0ttm make a manner of linen cloth , which the Indians wear , ' both man and woman , and it serve for shirt and smock , and all other kind of garment , which they wear upon their body : and the Spaniard use it to all such purpose , especial such as can buy other . and if it be not for this kind of cloth , all manner of cloth that go out of Spain , i say linen cloth , will be sell out of all measure . the wild people go naked , without any thing upon the wild in - them . the woman wear the skin of a dear before dian - 387 the pomp of owner of mine . their privity , and nothing else upon all their body . they have no care for any thing , but only from day to day for that which they have need to eat . they be big man , and likewise the woman . they shoot in bow which they make of a cherry tree , and their arrow be of cane , with a sharp flint stone in the end of the same ; they will pierce any coat of mail : and they kill