do belong to the Incommenderos , which be the child of those Spaniard , who first conquer the land , to who the king give and grant the government of the city and town subdue for three life ) twelve real of plate , and a hannege of maiz , which be a wheat of the country , ( five of they make a quarter of english measure ) and of every widow woman he have six real , and half a hannege lucatan . the greatness of the king of Spain tribute out of the west Indies . of maiz . and so if any indian have twenty child in his house , he pay for every one of they , be above fifteen year old , after that rate . this wheat be due bring to the governor of every province and city , be sell in Mexico by the king governor there every year ; so that the money receive for it , be put into the king treasury there , and so be yearly carry from thence into Spain . of the Spaniard which be owner of the mine of gold and silver , he receive the five part of it , which he call his quinta , which be take out the quinto . of the heap , there be his arm set on it ; for otherwise it may not be ' bring out of the land into Spain , under pain of death . the mark of silver , which be eight ounce , when it come out of the mine , not have 375 the mark of the king seal upon it , be worth three and forty real of silver be 64 plate , and so it be current : and when they will bring it for real of plate . Spain , they carry it to the king treasure house , where his seal be set upon it ; and so it be raise in value thereby to threescore and four real of plate : and so the king have for his custom of every mark of plate one and twenty real . from the year of 1570 , which be the year that the pope bull come into the Indies , as be afore mention , he have receive both of the Indians which be tributary unto he , and also of all other belong to the incommenderos , of every one be above twelve year of age , four real of every bull . also they carry other pardon with they into the Indies , for such as be dead , although a hundred year before the Spaniard come into the country : which pardon the friar in their preach persuade the poor Indians to take , tell they that with give four real of plate for a mass , they will deliver their soul out of purgatory . of the Christians likewise dwell there he have fourteen real for every bull : and there be certain bull bring thither for the christian beside the former , which serve for pardon all such fault wherein they have trespass either against the king , by keep back his custom , or one against another by any other injury ; for every hundred crown whereof a man conscience do accuse he that he have deceive the king or any other , he must give ten for a bull , and so after that rate for every hundred which he have any the revenue way steal , and so be pardon the fault . the revenue bukandpar - ul after manner yield unto his treasury don come yearly above three million of gold , as i have be yearly to three credible inform , although of late both the Spaniard million . and Indians do refuse to take the bull ; for that they perceive he do make a yearly custom of it : only each indian take one pardon for all his household , ( whereas in former time every indian use to take one for every person in his house ) and tear the same 376 into small piece , and give to every one of his household a little piece , say thus , they need now no more , see in that which they buy the year before they have above ten thousand year pardon . Theise piece they stick up in the wall of the house where they lie . both the Christians and Indians be weary with these infinite tax and custom , which of late he have impose upon they , more than in the year before : so as the people of both sort do rebel rebellion « twice in the time that i be among they , and will have set up another king of themselves ; for which exac - cause the king have command upon pain of death , that tion . they shall not plant either wine or oil there , but shall always stand in need of they to be bring out of Spain , although there will more grow there in four year , then there grow in Spain in twenty , it be so fertile a country . and the king to keep the country always in sub - iection , and to his own use , have straight provide by reason law , upon pain or death , and loss or good , that none the of these country shall traffic with any other nation , tyainetofirbid although the people themselves do much now desire to firren traffic trade with any other then with they , and will undoubted do , if they fear not the peril ensue it thereupon . about Mexico , and other place in Nova Hispania , there grow a certain plant call maguei , which maguei . yield wine , vinegar , honey , and black sugar , and of the leaf of it dry they make hemp , rope , shoe which they use , and tile for their house : and at the end of every leaf there grow a sharp point like a awl , wherewith they use to bore or pierce through any thing . thus to make a end , i have here set down the sum of all the chief thing that i have observe and note in my seventeen year travel in those part .