ambassador to our general , to signify that their king be come , in do of which message , their speech be continue about half a hour . This end , they by sign request our general to send something by their hand to their king , as a token that his come may be in peace : wherein our general have satisfy they , they return with glad tiding to their king , who march to we with a princely majesty , the people cry continual after their manner , and as they draw near unto we , so do they 322 strive to behave themselves in their action with comeliness . in the fore front be a man of a goodly personage , who bear the sceptre , or mace before the king , whereupon hang two crown , a less and a big , with three chain of a merveilous length : the crown be make of knit work wrought artificial with feather of diverse colour ; the chain be make of a bony substance and few be the person among they that be admit to wear they : and of that number also the person be stint , as some ten , some twelve , etc next unto he which bear the sceptre , be the king himself , with his guard about his person , clad with conie skin , and other skin : after they follow the naked common these be like chain of Esurnoy in Canada and hochelage . sort of people , every one have his face paint , some with white , some with black , and other colour , and have in their hand one thing or other for a present , not so much as their child , but they also bring their present . in the mean time , our general gather his man together , and march within his fence place , make against their approach , a very warlike show . they be troop together in their order , and a general salutation be make , there be present a general silence . than he that bear the sceptre before the king , be inform by another , who they assign to that office , with a manly and lofty voice , proclaim that which the other speak to he in secret , continue half a hour : which end , and a general amen as it be give , the king with the whole number of man , and woman ( the child except ) come down without any weapon , who descend to the foot of the hill , set themselves in order . in come towards our bulwark and tent , the sceptre bearer begin a song , observe his measure in a dance , and that with a stately countenance , who the king with his guard , and every degree of person follow , do in like manner sing and dance , save only 323 the king resign his crown and kingdom to sir Francis drake . great riches in Nova Albion . the woman which dance and keep silence . the general permit they to enter within our bulwark , where they continue their song and dance a reasonable time . when they have satisfy themselves , they make sign to our general to sit down , to who the king , and diverse other make several oration , or rather supplication , that he will take their province and kingdom into his hand , and become their king , make sign that they will resign unto he their right and title of the whole land , and become his subject . in which to persuade we the better , the king and the rest , with one consent and with great reverence , joyful sing a song , do set the crown upon his head , enrich his neck with all their chain , and offer unto he many other thing , honour he by the name of Hioh , add thereunto as it seem a sign of triumph : which thing our general think not meet to reject , because he know not what honour and profit it may be to our country . wherefore in the name , and to the use of her majesty , he take the sceptre , crown and dignity of the say country in his hand , wish that the riches and treasure thereof may so convenient be transport to the enrich of her kingdom at home , as it abound in the same . the common sort of the people leave the king and his guard with our general , scatter themselves together with their sacrifice among our people , take a diligent view of every person ; and such as please their fancy , ( which be the young ) they enclose they about offer their sacrifice unto they with lamentable weep , scratch , and tear the flesh from their face with their nail , whereof issue abundance of blood . but we use sign to they of dislike this , and stay their hand from force , and direct they upwards to the live God , who only they ought to worship . they show unto we their wound , and crave help of they at our hand , whereupon we give they lotion , plaster and ointment agree to 324 ... I578 , the state of their grief , beseech God to cure their disease . Every third day they bring their sacrifice unto we , until they understand our meaning , that we have no pleasure in they : yet they can not be long absent from we , but daily frequent our company to the hour of our departure , which departure seem so grievous unto they , that their joy be turn into sorrow . they entreat we , that be absent we will remember they , and by stealth provide a sacrifice , which we mislike . our necessary business be end , our general great herd with his company travel up into the country to their ° f deer . village , where we find herd of deer by a thousand in a company , be most large and fat of body . we find the whole country to be a warren of a abundance of strange kind of cony , their body in bigness as be stran & conies - the Barbary cony , their head as the head of we , the foot of a want , and the tail of a rat be of great length : under her chin on either side a bag , into the which she gather her meat when she have fill her belly abroad . the people eat their body , and make great account of their skin , for their king coat be make of they . our general call this country , nova Albion , and Nova Albion . that for two cause : the one in respect of the white bank and cliff , which lie towards the sea : and the other , because it may have some affinity with our country in name , which sometime be so call . there be no part of earth here to be take up , gold and wherein there be not some speciali likelihood of gold or silver in the silver earth of Nova at our departure hence our general set up a monument of our be there ; as also of her majesty right and title to the same , namely a plate nail upon a fair great post , whereupon be engrave her majesty name , the day and year of our arrival there , with the free give up of the province and people into her majesty hand , together with her highness picture and arm , in 325 a piece of six penny of current english money under the plate , where under be also write the name of our general . it seem that the Spaniard hitherto have never be in this part of the country , neither do ever discover the land by many degree to the southward of this place .