people of the country . there be in these fair or market all manner of thing that may be invent , to sell , and in especial , thing of the country . the one of these fair be upon the Monday , which be call saint hypolitos fair , and saint James his fair be upon the Thursday , and upon Saturday be saint Johns fair . in this city be always the king governor or viceroy , and there be keep the term and parliament . and although there be other place of justice , yet this be above all : so that all man may appeal unto this 380 ! 572 , place , and may not appeal from this city , but only into Spain before the king : and it must be for a certain sum : and if it be under that sum , than there be no appellation from they . many river fall into this lake which the city stand in : but there be never any place find whither it go out . the indian know a way to drown the city , and way10 within these three year they will have practise the same : but they which shall have be the doer of ' it be hang : and ever since the city have be well watch both day and night , for fear lest at some time they may be deceive : for the indian love not the Spaniard . round about the town there be very many garden and orchard of the fruit of the country , marvellous fair , where the people have great recreation . the man of this city be marvellous vicious ; and in like manner the woman be dishonest of their body , more than they be in other city or town in this country . there be near about this city of Mexico many river crocodile . and stand water which have in they a monstrous kind of fish , which be marvellous raven , and a great devourer of man and cattle . he be wont to sleep upon the dry land many time , and if there come in the mean time any man or beast and wake or disquiet he , he speed well if he get from he . he be like unto a serpent , save that he do not fly , neither have he wing . there be west out of Mexico a port town which navigation be on the south sea , call Puerto de Acapulco , where as there be ship which they have ordinary for the navigation of China , which they have new find . this port be threescore league from Mexico . there be another port town which be call culiacan , on the south sea , which lie west and by north out of Mexico , and be 200 league from the same : and there the Spaniard make two ship to go seek the strait the northor gulf , which , as they say , be between the newfound - west - strei & ht . land and Greenland ; and they call it the Englishman 381 1572 . straight : which as yet be never full find . they say , that straight lie not far from the main land of China , which the Spaniard account to be marvellous rich . towards the north from Mexico there be great store the more northward , the rich silver mine . of silver mine . there be great quantity of silver find in these mine towards the north , than there be any other part : and as the most man of experience say always , they find the rich mine the more northerly . Theise mine be common upon great hill and stony ground , marvellous hard to be labour and wrought . out of some of the mine the Indians find a certain paint earth . kind of earth of diverse colour , wherewith they paint themselves in time of their dance , and other pastime which they use . in this country of Nova Hispania there be also gold mine . mine of gold , although the gold be common find in river , or very near unto river . and now in these day there be not so much gold find as there have be heretofore . there be many great river , and great store of fish in they , not like unto our kind of fish . and there be marvellous great wood , and as fair tree as may be see , of diverse sort , and especial fir tree , that NLesquiquez . may mast any ship that go upon the sea , oak and pineapple , and another tree which they call Mesquiquez : it bear a fruit like unto a peascod , marvellous sweet , which the wild people gather , and keep it all the year , and eat it in stead of bread . seven city by witchcraft not find of the seeker . the Spaniard have notice of seven city which old man of the indian show they shall lie towards the northwest from Mexico . they have use and use daily much diligence in seek of they , but they can find any one of they . they say that the witchcraft of the Indians be such , that when they come by these town they cast a mist upon they , so that they can see they . 382 they have understanding of another city which they call Copalla : and in like manner , at my be in the country , they have use much labour and diligence in the seek of it : they have find the lake on which it shall stand , and a canoa , the head whereof be wrought with copper curious , and can not find nor see any man nor the town which to their understanding shall stand on the same water , or very near the same . there be a great number of beast or cow in the country of Cibola , which be never bring thither by the Spaniard , but breed natural in the country . they be like unto our ox , save that they have long hair like a lion , and short home , and they have upon their shoulder a bunch like a camel