a notable discourse of m . John Chilton , touch the people , manner , mine , city , riches , force , and other memorable thing of new Spain , and other province in the west Indies , see and note by himself in the time of his travel , continue in those part , the space of seventeen or eighteen year . n the year of our lord 1561 , in the month of July , i John Chilton go out of this city of London into Spain , where i remain for the space of seven year , and from thence i sail into Nova Hispania , and so travel there , and by the south sea , unto Peru , the space of seventeen or eighteen year : and after that time expire , i return into Spain , and so in the year 1586 in the month of July , i arrive at the fbresayd city of London : where peruse the note which i have 360 1568 . take in the time of my travel in those year , i have set down as follow . in the year 1568 , in the month of march , be 1568 . desirous to see the world , i embark my self in the bay of Cadiz in Andaluzia , in a ship bind for the Cadiz .. isle of the canary , where she take in her lade , and set forth from thence for the voyage , in the month of June , the same year . within a month after , we fall with the isle of S . Domingo , and from thence direct to Nova Hispania , and come into the port of saint John San Juan de de ullua , which be a little island stand in the sea , ua - about two mile from the land , where the king maintaineth about 50 soldier , and captain , that keep the fort , and about 150 negro , who all the year long be occupy in carry of stone for building , and other use , and to help to make fast the ship that come in there , with their cable . there be build two bulwark at each end of a wall , that stand likewise in the say island , where the ship use to ride , make fast to the say wall with their cable , so near , that a man may leap ashore . from this port i journey by land to a town call Vera Cruz , stand by a river side , VeraCruz . where all the factor of the spanish merchant dwell , t111 - 4 $ 6d which receive the good of such ship as come thither , and also lade the same with such treasure and merchandise as they return back into Spain . they be in number about four hundred , who only remain there , during the time that the spanish fleet discharge , and be load again , which be from the end of August to the begin of April follow . and then for the unwholesomeness of the place they depart thence sixteen league further up within the country , to a town call Xalapa , a very Jalapa six - healthfull soil . there be never any woman deliver ten lea & ues - of child in this port of Vera Cruz : for so soon as they perceive themselves conceive with child , they get they into the country , to avoid the peril of the infect air , although they use every morning to drive through the town above two thousand head of cattle , to take away 361 Pueblo de los angel eight league . the ill vapour of the earth . from Xalapa seven league i come to another place , name Perota , wherein be certain house build of straw , call by the name of ventas , the inhabitant whereof be Spaniard , who accustom to harbour such traveller as be occasion to journey that way up into the land . it stand in a great wood of pine and cedar tree , the soil be very cold , by reason of store of snow which lie on the mountain there all the year long . there be in that place a infinite number of dear , of bigness like unto great mule , have also home of great length . from Perota nine league , i come to the Fuentes of Ozumba , which fuente be spring of water issue out of certain rock into the midst of the high way , where likewise be certain range , and house , for the use before mention . eight league ofif from this place i come to the city of the angel , so call by that name of the Spaniard , which inhabit there to the number of a thousand , beside a great number of Indians . this city stand in very plain field , have near adjoin to it many sumptuous city , as namely the city of Tlaxcalla , a city of two hundred thousand Indians , tributary to the king , although he exact no other tribute of they then a handful of wheat a piece , which amount to thirteen thousand hannege yearly , as have appear by the king book of account . and the reason why he content himself with this tribute , only for they , be , because they be the occasion that he take the city of Mexico , with who the tlaxcallians have war at the same time when the Spaniard come into the country . the governor of this city be a Spaniard , call among they the Alcalde maydr , who administer chief cause of justice both unto the Christians and Indians , refer small and light vice , as drunkenness and such like , to the judgement and discretion of such of the indian as be choose every year to rule among they , call by the name of alcalde . Theise Indians from fourteen year old 362 upward , pay unto the king for their yearly tribute one ounce of silver , and a hannege of maiz , which be value among they common at twelve real of plate . the widow among they pay half of this . the Indians both of