their attabaly , which be a kind of drum , they do assemble the people in all part of the city : before who it be then solemn proclaim , that whosoever will upon such a day repair to the market place , they shall hear the sentence of the holy inquisition against the 426 english heretic , lutheran , and also see the same put in execution . which be do , and the time approach of this cruel judgement , the night before they come to the prison where we be , with certain officer of that holy hellish house , bring with they certain fool coat which they have prepare for we , be call in their language s . benitos , which coat be make of yellow cotton and red cross upon they , both before and behind : they be so busy in put on their coat about we , and bring we out into a large yard , and place and point we in what order we shall go to the scaffold or place of judgement upon the morrow , that they do not once suffer we to sleep all that night long . the next morning be come , there be give to every one of we for our breakfast a cup of wine , and a slice of bread fry in honey , and so about eight of the clock in the morning , we set forth of the prison , every man alone in his yellow coat , and a rope about his neck , and a great green wax candle in his hand unlighted , have a Spaniard appoint to go upon either side of every one of we : and so march in this order and manner towards the scaffold in the market place , which be a bow shoot distant or thereabouts , we find a great assembly of people all the way , and such a throng , that certain of the inquisitor officer on horseback be constrain to make way , and so come to the scaffold , we go up by a pair of stair , and find seat ready make and prepare for we to sit down on , every man in order as he shall be call to receive his judgement . we be thus set down as we be appoint , present the inquisitor come up another pair of stair , and the viceroy and all the chief justice with they . when they be set down and place under the cloth of estate agree to their degree and call , then come up also a great number of friar , white , black and grey , about the number of 300 person , they be set in the place for they appoint . then be there a 427 solemn oyes make , and silence command , and then present begin their severe and cruel judgement . the cruel the first man that be call be one Roger the chief e ^ mtish ^ armourer of the Jesus , and he have judgement to have inquisitor three hundred stripe on horseback , and after condemn upon our poor to the galley as a slave for io year . countryman . after he be call John grey , John brown , John rider , John moon , James collier , and one Thomas Browne : these be adjudge to have 200 stripe on horseback , and after to be commit to the galley for the space of 8 year . then be call John key , and be adjudge to have 100 stripe on horseback , and condemn to serve in the galley for the space of 6 year . then be several call the number of 53 one after another , and every man have his several judgement , some to have 200 stripe on horseback , and some 100 , and condemn for slave to the galley , some for 6 year , some for 8 and some for 10 . and then be i mile Philips call , and be adjudge to serve in a monastery for 5 year , without any stripe , and to wear a fool coat , or saint Benito , during all that time . then be call John story , Richard Williams , David Alexander , Robert cook , Paul Horsewell and Thomas Hull : the six be condemn to serve in monastery without stripe , some for 3 year and some for four , and to wear the saint Benito during all the say time . which be do , and it now draw towards night , George rively , Peter momfrie , and Cornelius the Irishman , be call and have their judgement to be burn to ash , and so be present send away to the place of execution in the market place but a little from the scaffold , where they be quick burn and consume . and as for we that have receive our judgement , be 68 in number , we be carry back that night to prison again . and the next day in the morning be good Friday , the year of our lord 1575 , we 42 be all bring into a court of the inquisitor palace , where we find a horse in a readiness for every one of our man which be condemn to have stripe , and to be commit to the galley , which be in number 60 and so they be enforce to mount up on horseback naked from the middle upward , be carry to be show as a spectacle for all the people to behold throughout the chief and principali street of the city , and have the number of stripe to every one of they appoint , most cruel lay upon their naked body with long whip by sundry man appoint to be the executioner thereof : and before our man there go a couple of crier which cry as they go : behold these english dog , lutheran , enemy to God , and all the way as they go there be some of the inquisitor themselves , and of the familiar of that rakehel order , that cry to the executioner , strike , lay on those english heretic , lutheran , God enemy : and so this horrible spectacle be show round about the city , they return to the inquisitor house , with their back all gore blood , and swell with