, come down to we , present mill and cake of bread , which they have make of a kind of corn call Maiz , in bigness of a pease , the ear whereof be much like to a teasell , but a span in length , have thereon a number of grane . also they bring down to we hen , potato and pine , which we buy for bead , pewter whistle , glass , knife , and other trifle . these potato be the most delicate root that may be eat , and do far exceed our passenep or carat . their pine be of the bigness of two fist , the outside whereof be of the make of a pineapple , but it be soft like the rind of a Cucomber , and the inside eat like a apple , but it be more delicious than any sweet apple sugar . Theise Indians be of colour tawny like a olive , have every one of they both man and woman , hair all black , and no other colour , the woman wear the same hang down to their shoulder , and the man round , and without beard , neither man nor woman suffer any hair to grow in any part of their body , but daily pull it off as it grow . they go all naked , the man cover no part of their body but their yard , upon the which they wear a gourd or piece of cane , make fast with a third about their loin , leave the other part of their member uncover , whereof they take no shame . the woman also be uncover , save with a cloth which they wear a hand - breath , wherewith they cover their privity both before and behind . Theise people be very small feeder , for travel they carry but two 27 santa Fe . the description of the Indians of terra firma . small bottle of gourd , wherein they put in one then the use of juice of Sorrell whereof they have great store , and in sorrel . the o ^ er flower of their Maiz , which be moist , they eat , take sometime of the other . Theise man carry every man his bow and arrow , whereof some arrow be poison for war , which they keep in a cane together , which cane be of the bigness of a man arm , other some with broad head of iron wherewith they strike fish in the water : the experience whereof we see not once nor twice , but daily for the time we tarry there , for they be so good archer that armour of the Spaniard for fear thereof arm themselves and two ^ nche ^ horse with quilt canvas of two inche thick , thick . and leave no place of their body open to their enemy , save their eye which they may not hide , and yet oftentimes be they hit in that so small a the make of scantling : their poison be of such a force , that a their poison . man be strike therewith die within four and twenty hour , as the Spaniard do affirm , and in my judgement it be like there can be no strong poison as they make it , use thereunto apple which be very fair and red of colour , but be a strong poison , with the which together with venomous bat , viper , adder and other serpent , they make a medley , and therewith anoint the same . the manner of the young woman . the indian woman delight not when they be young in bear of child , because it make they have hang breast which they account to be great deform in they , and upon that occasion while they be young , they destroy their seed , say , that it be fit for old woman . Moreover , when they be deliver of child , they go straight to wash themselves , without make any further ceremony for it , not lie in bed as our woman do . the bed which they have be make of gossopine cotton , and wrought artificial of diverse colour , which they carry about with they when they travel , and make the same fast to two tree , lie therein they and their woman . the people 28 1565 . be sure gentle and tractable , and such as desire to live peaceable , or else have it be unpossible for the Spaniard to have conquer they as they do , and the more to live now peaceable , they be so many in number , and the Spaniard so few . from hence we depart the eight and twenty , and the next day we pass between the main land , and the island call Tortuga , a very low island , in the the of year of our lord God one thousand five hundred tortusa - sixty five aforesaid , and sail along the coast until the first of April , at which time the captain sail along in the Jesus pinnace to discern the coast , and see many caribe on shore , and some also in their canoas , which make token unto he of friendship , and show he gold , mean thereby that they will traffic for ware . whereupon he stay to see the manner of they , and so for two or three trifle they give such thing as they have about they , and depart : but the caribe be very importunate to have they come on shore , which if it have not be for want of ware to traffic with they , he will not have deny they , because the Indians which we see before be very gentle people , and such as do no man hurt . but as God will have it , he want that thing , which if he have have , will have be his confusion : for these be no such kind of people as we take they to be , but more devilish a thousand part and be eater and devourer of any man they can catch , as it be afterward declare unto we at Burboroata , by a caravel come out of Spain with certain soldier , and a captain generail send by the king for those eastward part of the Indians , who sail along in his pinnace , as our captain do to descry the coast , be by the caribe call a shore with