taste . fowl also there be many , both upon land and upon sea : but concern they on the land i be not able to name they , because my abode be there so short . but for the fowl of the fresh river , these two i note to be the chief , whereof the Flemengo be one , have all Flemings . red feather , and long red leg like a herne , a neck accord to the bill , red , whereof the upper neb hang a inch over the nether ; and a egript , which the egript . be all white as the swan , with leg like to a hearn - shaw , and of bigness accord , but it have in her tail feather of so fine a plume , that it pass the ostrich his feather . of the sea - foul above all other not common in England , i note the pellicane , which the pellicane . be feign to be the love bird that be ; which rather than her young shall want , will spare her heart blood out of her belly : but for all this lovingness she be very deform to behold ; for she be of colour russet : notwithstanding in guinea i have see of they as white as a swan , have leg like the same , and a body like a hearne , with a long neck , and a thick long beak , from the nether jaw whereof down to the breast pass a skin of such a bigness , as be able to receive a fish as big as one thigh , and this her big throat and long bill do make she seem so ugly . here i have declare the estate of Florida , and the commodity therein to this day know , which although it may seem unto some , by the mean that the plenty of gold and silver , be not so abundant as in other place , that the cost bestow upon the same mean to will not be aye to quit the charge : yet be i of the ° p ’ ni ° n > that by that which i have see in other Florida and island of the Indians , where such increase of cattle Virginia . have be , that of twelve head of beast in five and twenty year , do in the hide of they raise a thousand pound profit yearly , that the increase of cattle only will raise profit sufficient for the same : for we may consider , if so small a portion do raise so much gain in such short time , what will a great do in many year ? and sure i may this affirm , that the ground of the indian for the breed of cattle , be not in any point to be compare to this of Florida , which all the year long be so green , as any time in the summer with we : which sure be not to be marvel at , see the country stand in so watery a climate : for once a day without fail they have a shower of rain ; which by mean of the country it self , which be dry , and more fervent hot than we , do make all thing to flourish therein . and because there be not the thing we all seek for , be rather desirous of present gain , i do therefore affirm the attempt thereof to be more requisite for a prince , who be of power able to go through with the same , rather than for any subject . from thence we depart the 28 of July , upon our voyage homeward , have there all thing as may be most convenient for our purpose : and take leave of the Frenchman that there still remain , who with diligence determine to make as great speed after , as they can . thus by mean of contrary wind oftentimes , we prolong our voyage in such manner that victual scant with we , so that we be diverse time ( or rather the most part ) in despair of ever come home , have not God of his goodness better 62 provide for we , than our deserve . in which state of great misery , we be provoke to call upon he by fervent prayer , which move he to hear we , so that we have a prosperous wind , which do set we so far shoot , as to be upon the bank of newfound land , on saint bartholomews eve , and we sound thereupon , find ground at a hundred and thirty fathom , be that day somewhat becalm , and take a great number of fresh codfish , which great relieve we : and be very glad thereof , the next day we depart , and have linger little gale for the space of four or five day , at the end of which we see a couple of french ship , and have of they so much fish as will serve we plentiful for all the rest of the way , the captain pay for the same both gold and silver , to the just value thereof , unto the chief owner of the say ship , but they not look for any thing at all , be glad in themselves to meet with such good entertainment at sea , as they have at our hand . after which departure from they , with a good large wind the twenty of September we come to Padstow in Cornwall , God be thank , ThuirarrwaU in safety , with the loss of twenty person in all the tn p ^ 5 * 0 ™ ™ voyage , and with great profit to the venture or the say eptemi , er ^ voyage , as also to the whole realm , in bring home 1565 . both gold , silver , pearl and other jewel great store . he name therefore be praise for evermore . amen . the name of certain gentleman that be in this voyage . ' m . John Hawkins . m . John Chester , { sir William Chesters son . m . Anthony Parkhurst . " m . Fitzwilliam . m . Thomas Woorley . m . Edward Lacie , { with diverse other . the register and true account of all herein express have be approve by i John spark the young , who go upon the same voyage , and write the same .