but use a marvellous cry in their fight with leap and turn their tail , that it be most strange to see , and give we great pleasure to behold they . at the last , one be hurt with a harquebus upon the thigh , look upon his wound and wit not how it come , because he can not see the pellet . here master Hawkins perceive no good to be do among they , because we can not 16 find their town , and also not know how to go into Rio grande , for want of a pilot , which be the Rio grande . very occasion of our come thither : and find so many shoal , fear with our great ship to go in , and therefore depart on our pretend way to the idol . the idol . the 10 of December , we have a north - east wind , with rain and storm , which weather continue two day together , be the occasion that the Salomon , and tiger lose our company : for whereas the Jesus , and pinnace anchor at one of the island call Sambula , island the twelve day , the Salomon and tiger come not thither till the 14 . in this island we stay certain the cambase . day , go every day on shore to take the inhabitant , with burn and spoil their town , who before be sapy , and be conquer by the sambose , sapy . inhabitant beyond Sierra Leona . Theise Samboses have inhabit there three year before our come thither , and in so short space have so plant the ground , that they have great plenty of Mil , rise , root , pompion , Pullin , goat , of small fry dry , every house full of the country fruit plant by God providence , as Palmito tree , fruit like date , and sundry other in no place in all that country so abundant , whereby they live more delicious than other . Theise inhabitant have diverse of the sapy , which they take in the war as their slave , who only they keep to till the ground , in that they neither have the knowledge thereof , nor yet will work themselves , of who we take many in that place , but of the sambose none at all , for they flee into the main . all the sambose have white tooth as we have , far unlike to the sapy which do inhabit about Rio grande , for their tooth be all file , which they do for a bravery , to set out themselves , and do jag their flesh , both leg , arm , and body , as workemanlike , as a jerkinmaker with we pink a jerkin . Theise sapy be more civil than the sambose : for ten 17 b the Naples bury their dead with glide . the canoas of Africa . the firm of their town . whereas the sambose live most by the spoil of their enemy , both in take their victual , and eat they also . the sapy do not eat man flesh , unless in the war they be drive by necessity thereunto , which they have not use but by the example of the sambose , but live only with fruit , and cattle , whereof they have great store . this plenty be the occasion that the sapy desire not war , except they be thereunto provoke by the invasion of the sambose , whereas the sambose for want of food be enforce thereunto , and therefore be not wont only to take they that they kill , but also keep those that they take , until such time as they want meat , and then they kill they . there be also another occasion that provoke the sambose to war against the sapy which be for covetousness of their riches . for whereas the sapy have a order to bury their dead in certain place appoint for that purpose , with their gold about they , the sambose dig up the ground , to have the same treasure : for the sambose have not the like store of gold , that the sapy have . in this island of Sambula we find about 50 boat call almadye , or canoas , which be make of one piece of wood , dig out like a trough but of a good proportion , be about 8 yard long , and one in breadth , have a beakhead and a stern very proportionable make , and on the out side artificial carve , and paint red and blow : they be able to carry twenty or thirty man , but they be about the coast able to carry threescore and upward . in these canoas they row stand upright , with a oar somewhat long than a man , the end whereof be make about the breadth and length of a man hand , of the large sort . they row very swift , and in some of they four rower and one to steer make as much way , as a pair of oar in the Thames of London . their town be pretty divide with a main street at the enter in , that go through their town , and another overthwart street , which make their town cross way : their house be build in a rank very orderly in the face of the street , and they be make round , like a dove - cote , with stake set full of Palmito leave , in stead of a wall : they be not much more than a fathom large , and two of heighth , and thatch with Palmito leave very close , other some with reed , and over the roof thereof , for the better garnish of the same , there be a round bundle of reed , pretty contrive like a lover : in the inner part they make a loft of stick , whereupon they lie all their provision of victual : a place they reserve at their entrance for the kitchen , and the place they lie in be divide with certain mat artificial make with the rind of Palmito tree : their bedstead be of small staff lay along , and raise a foot from the ground , upon which be lay a mat , and another upon they when they listen : for other cover they have none . in the middle of the town there be a house large and high than the other