the voyage make by m . John Hawkins esquire , and afterward knight , captain of the Jesus of Lubek , one of her majesty ship , and general of the Salomon , and other two bark go in his company , to the coast of Guinea , and the Indies of Nova Hispania , begin in An . Dom . 1564 . after John Hawkins with the Jesus of Lubek , a ship of 700 . and the Salomon a ship of 140 . the tiger a bark of 50 . and the swallow of 30 . ton , be all well furnish with man to the number of one hundred threescore and ten , as also with ordinance and victuali requisite for such a voyage , depart out of Plymmouth the 18 . day of October , in the year of our lord 1564 . October 18 . with a prosperous wind : at which depart , in cut the foresail , a marvelous misfortune happen to one of the officer in the ship , who by the pully of the sheet be slay out of hand , be a sorrowful beginning to they all . and after their set out ten league to the sea , he meet the same day with the minion a ship of the minion , queen majesty , whereof be captain David carlet , and also her consort the John baptist of London , be merune bind bind to Guinea also , who hail one the other after far guinea . the custom of the sea with certain piece of ordinance for joy of their meeting : which do , the minion depart from he to seek her other consort the Merlin of London , which be a stern out of sight , leave in m . Hawkins company the John Baptist her other consort . thus sail forward on their way with a prosperous wind until the 21 . of the same month , at that time a great storm arise , the wind be at Northeast about nine a clock in the night , and continue so 23 . hour together , in which storm m . Hawkins lose the company 9 good order for a fleet in a long voyage . a dreadful mischance by fire . of the John Baptist aforesaid , and of his pinnace call the swallow , his other 3 . ship be sore beat with a storm . the 23 . day the swallow to his not small rejoice , come to he again in the night , 10 . league to the northward of cape Finister , he have put roomer , not be able to double the cape , in that there rise a contrary wind at Southwest . the 25 . the wind continue contrary , he put into a place in Galicia , call Ferroll , where he remain five day , and appoint all the master of his ship a order for the keep of good company in this manner : the small ship to be always ahead and aweather of the Jesus , and to speak twice a day with the Jesus at least : if in the day the ensign be over the poop of the Jesus , or in the night two light , then shall all the ship speak with she : if there be three light aboard the Jesus , then do she cast about : if the weather be extreme , that the small ship can keep company with the Jesus , than all to keep company with the Salomon , and forthwith to repair to the hand of Teneriffe , to the northward of the road of sirroes ; if any happen to any misfortune then to show two light , and to shoot off a piece of ordinance . if any lose company , and come in sight again , to make three yaw , and strike the Myson three time : serve God daily , love one another , preserve your victual , beware of fire , and keep good company . the 26 . day the minion come in also where he be , for the rejoice whereof he give they certain piece of ordinance , after the courtesy of the sea for their welcome : but the minion man have no mirth , because of their consort the Merline , who at their departure from master Hawkins upon the coast of England they go to seek , and have meet with she , keep company two day together , and at last by misfortune of fire ( through the negligence of one of their gunner ) the powder in the gunner room be set on fire , which with the first blast strike out her poop , and therewithal ! lose three man , beside many sore burn ( which escape by the brigan - io dine be at her stern ) and immediady , to the great loss of the owner , and most horrible sight to the beholder , she sink before their eye . the 20 . day of the month m . Hawkins with his consort and company of the minion , have now both the brigandine at her stern , weigh anchor , and set sail on their voyage , have a prosperous wind thereunto . the four of November they have sight of the hand of Madera , and the sixth day of Teneriffe , which they think to have be the canary , in that they suppose themselves to have be to the eastward of Teneriffe , and be not : but the minion be three or four league ahead of we , keep on her course to Teneriffe , have better sight thereof then the other have , and by that mean they part company . for m . Hawkins and his company go more to the west , upon which course have sail a while , he espy another hand , which he think to be Teneriffe , and be not able by mean of the fog upon the hill , to discern the same , nor yet to fetch it by night , go roomer until the morning , be the seven of November , which as yet he can not discern , but sail along the coast the space of two hour , to perceive some certain mark of Teneriffe , and find no likelihood thereof at all , account that to be , as it be in deed , than he of the lie of palm : and so sail forward , espy another hand pflmes - called Gomera , and also Teneriffe , with