at night we depart from Teneriffe , and the 20 . of the same we have sight of ten caravel , that be fish at sea , with who we will have speak , but they fear we , flee into a place of Barbary , call Cape de las barbas . the twenty , the ship pinnace with two man in she , sail by the ship , be overthrow by the oversight of they that go in she , the wind be so great , that before they be espy , and the ship have cast about for they , she be drive half a league to leeward of the pinnace , and have lose sight of she , so that there be small hope of recovery , have not God help and the captain diligence be , who have well mark which way the pinnace be by the sun , appoint 24 of the lusty rower in the great boat , to row to the windward , and so recover , contrary to all man expectation , both the pinnace and the man sit upon the keel of she . the 25 he come to cape Blanco , which be upon the coast of Africa , and a place where the Portugal do ride , that fish there in the month of November especial , and be a very good place of fish , for pargoe , Mullet , and dog fish . in this place the Portugal have no hold for their defence , but have rescue of the barbarian , who they entertain as their soldier , for the time of their be there and for their fish upon that coast of Africa , do pay a certain tribute to the king of the moor . the people of that part of Africa be tawny , have long hair without any apparel , save before their privy member . their weapon in war be bow and arrow . the 26 we depart from saint Avis bay , within cape Blanco , where we refresh our self with fish , 14 and other necessary : and the 29 we come to cape cape Verde Verde , which lie in 14 degree , and a half . Theise in h degree . people be all black , and be call negro , without any apparel , save before their privity : of stature goodly man , and well like by reason of their food , which pass all other guyneans for kine , goat , pullin , rise , fruit , and fish . here we take fish with head like cony , and tooth nothing vary , of a jolly thickness , but not past a foot long , and be not to be eat without flay or cut off his head . to speak somewhat of the sundry sort of these guyneans : the people of cape Verde be call Leophares , and Leophares . count the goodly man of all other , save the congo , which do inhabit on this side the cape de buena esperanza . Theise Leophares have war against the leloffe , which be borderer by they : their weapon be bow and arrow , target , and short dagger , dart also , but vary from other negro : for whereas the other use a long dart to fight with in their hand , they carry five or six small one a piece , which they cast with . Theise man also be more civil than any other , because of their daily traffic with the Frenchman , and be of nature very gentle and love : for ca while we be there , we take in a Frenchman , who be one of the 19 that go to Brasile , in a bark of diepe , of 60 ton , and be a sea board of cape Verde , 200 league , the plank of their bark with a sea break out upon they so sudden , that much a do they have to save themselves in their boat : but by god providence , the wind be westerly , which be rare see there , they get to the shore , to the isle Brava , and in great penury get to cape Verde , where they remain six week , and have meat and drink of the same people . the say Frenchman have forsake his fellow , which be three league off from the shore , and wander with the negro too and fro , fortune to come to the water side : and commune with certain of his countryman , which be 15 the traffic of the french in our ship , by their persuasion come away with we : but his entertainment among they be such , that he desire it not : but through the importunate request of his countryman , consent at the last . here we stay but one night , and part of the day : for the 7 of December we come away , in that pretend to have take negro there perforce , the minion man give they there to understand of our come , and our pretence , wherefore they do avoid the snare we have lay for they . the 8 of December we anchor by a small island alcatrarse or call Alcatrarsa , wherein at our go a shore , we find ganet . nothing but sea - bird , as we call they ganet , but by the Portugal , call Alcatrarses , who for that cause give the say island the same name . herein half of our boat be lade with young and old fowl , who not be use to the sight of man , fly so about we , that we strike they down with pole . in this place the two ship ride , the two bark , with the sapy , their boat , go into a island of the sapy , call la Formio , to see if they can take any of they , and there land to the number of 80 in armour , and espy certain make to they , but they flee in such order into the wood , that it boot they not to follow : so go on their way forward till they come to a river , which they can not pass over , they espy on the otherside two man , who with their bow and arrow shoot terrible at they . whereupon we discharge certain harquebuss to they again , but the ignorant people weigh it not , because they know not the danger thereof :