the which he make , and sail all night , come in the morning the next day to the port of Adecia , where he find his pinnace which have depart from he the sixth of the month , be in the weather of he , and espy the pike of Teneriffe all a high , bear thither . at his arrival somewhat before he come to anchor , he hoist out his ship pinnace row a shore , intend to have send one with a letter to Peter de ponte , one of the governor of the hand , who dwell a league from the shore : but as he pretend to have land , sudden there appear upon the two point of the road , man level of base and harquebuss to they , with diverse other to the number of fourscore , with halberd , pike , sword and target , which happen so contrary to his expectation , that it do great amaze he , and the more , because he be now in their danger , not know well how to avoid it without some mischief . wherefore he determine to call to they for the better appease of the matter , declare his name , and profess himself to be a especial friend to Peter de ponte , and that he have sundry thing for he which he great desire . and in the mean time , while he be thus talk with they , whereby he make they to hold their hand , he will the mariner to row away , so that at last he get out of their danger : and then ask for Peter de ponte , one of his son be signior Nicolas de Ponte , come forth , who he perceive , desire to put his man aside , and he himself will leap a shore and common with he , which they do : so that after communication have between they of sundry thing , and of the fear they both have , master Hawkins desire to have certain necessary provide for he . in the mean space , while these thing be provide , he trim the main mast of the Jesus which in the storm aforesaid be spring : here he sojourn 7 . day , refresh himself and his man . santa Cruz . in the which time Peter de ponte dwell at saint Cruz , a city 20 . league off , come to he , and give he as gentle a brief de - entertainment as if he have be his own brother . to scription of the speak somewhat of these hand , be call in old commodity of f t , c . , ’ s - , n • . • the Canarie time insulae fortunatae , by the mean of the nourish hand . thereof , the fruitfulness of they do sure exceed far all other that i have hear of : for they make wine better than any in Spain , they have grape of such bigness , that they may be compare to damson , and in taste inferior to none : for sugar , sucket , raisin of the sun , and many other fruit , abundance : for rosine and raw silk , there be great store , they want neither corn , pullet , cattle , nor yet wild foul : they have many camel also , which be young , be eat of the people for victual , and be old , they be use for carriage of necessary : who property be as he be teach to kneel at the take of his load , and unlade again : he nature be to engender backward contrary to other beast : of understanding very good , but of shape very deform , with a little belly , long misshape leg , and foot very broad of flesh , without a hoof , all whole , save the great toe , a back bear up like a molehill , a large and thin neck , with a little head , with a bunch of hard flesh , which nature have give he in his breast to lean upon . this beast live hardly , and be content with straw and stubble , but of force strong , be well able to carry 500 weight . in one of these hand call Fierro , there be by Fierro . the report of the inhabitant , a certain tree that rain continual , by the drop whereof the inhabitant and cattle be satisfy with water , for other water have they none in all the hand . and it rain in such abundance , that it be incredible unto a man to believe such a virtue to be in a tree , but it be know to be a divine matter , and a thing ordain by God , at who power therein we ought not to marvel , see he do by his providence as we read in the scripture , when the child of Israel be go into the land of promise , feed they with manna from heaven , for the space of 40 . year . of the tree aforesaid we see in guinie many , be of great tree dropheight , drop continual , but not so abundant as ™ ater tn the other , because the leaf be narrow , and be like mme ' the leaf of a pear tree . about these hand be certain flit hand , which have be oftentimes see , and when man approach near they , they vanish : as the like have be of these hand now know by the report of the inhabitant , which be not find of long time one after the other : and therefore it shall seem he be not yet bear to who God have appoint the find of they . in this hand of Teneriffe there be a hill call the pike , because it be pike , which be in heighth by the pike of their report twenty league , have both winter and teneriffe - summer abundance of snow in the top of it : this pike cape Blanco . may be see in a clear day fifty league off , but it show as though it be a black cloud a great heighth in the element . i have hear of none to be compare with this in heighth , but in the India i have see many , and in my judgement not inferior to the pike , and so the Spaniard write . the 15 . of November