the land , and so be a defence for the minion till night , and then to take such relief of victuali and other necessary from the Jesus , as the time will suffer we , and to leave she . as we be thus determine , and have place the minion from the shot of the land , sudden the Spaniard have fire two great ship which be come direct with we , and have no mean to avoid the fire , it breed among our man a marvellous fear , so that some say , let we depart with the minion , other say , let we see whither the wind will carry the fire from we . but to be short , the minion man which have always their sail in a readiness , think to make sure work , and so without either consent of the captain or master cut their sail , so that very hardly i be receive into the minion . the most part of the man that be leave alive in the Jesus , make shift and follow the minion in a small boat , the rest which the little boat be not able to receive , be enforce to abide the mercy of the Spaniard t0 ( which i doubt be very little ) so with the minion tyrants ^ on ^ and Ju ( iith ( a small bark of 50 ton ) we at storm , escape , which bark the same night forsake we in our great misery : we be now remove with the minion from the spanish ship two bowshootes , and there ride all that night : the next morning we recover a hand a mile from the Spaniard , where there take we a north 1568 . wind , and be leave only with two anchor and two cable ( for in this conflict we lose three cable and two anchor ) we think always upon death which ever be present , but God preserve we to a long time . the weather wax reasonable , and the Saturday we set sail , and have a great number of man and little victual our hope of life wax less and less : some ^ es desire to yield to the Spaniard , some rather desire to obtain a place where they may give themselves to the infidel , and some have rather abide with a little pittance hard choice . the mercy of God at sea : so thus with many sorrowful heart we wander in a unknown sea by the space of 14 day , till hunger enforce we to seek the land , for hide be think very good meat , rat , cat , mouse and misery . dog , none escape that may be get , parrot and monkey that be have in great price , be think there very profitable if they serve the turn one dinner : thus in the end the 8 day of October we come to the land in the bottom of the same bay of Mexico in 23 degree and a half , where we hope to have find inhabitant of the Spaniard , relief of victual , and place for the repair of our ship , which be so sore beat with shot from our enemy and bruise with shoot off our own ordinance , that our weary and weak arm be scarce able to defend and keep out water . but all thing happen to the contrary , for we find neither people , victuali , nor haven of relief , but a place where have fair weather with some peril we may land a boat : our people be force with hunger desire to be set on land , whereunto i consent . and such as be willing to land i put they apart , and such as be desirous to go homewards , i put apart , so that they be indifferent part a hundred of one side hundred and a hundred of the other side : these hundred man we set a land with all diligence in this little place beforesaid , an ^ a which be land , we determine there to take in fresh half . water , and so with our little remain of victual to take the sea . the next day have a land with i fifty of our 73 hundred man that remain for the speedy prepare of our water aboard , there arise a extreme storm , so that in three day we can by no mean repair aboard our ship : the ship also be in such peril that every hour we look for shipwreck . but yet God again have mercy on we , and send fair weather , we have aboard our water , and depart the sixteenth day of October , after which day we have fair and prosperous weather till the sixteenth day of November , which day God be praise we be clear from the coast of the Indies , and out of the channel and gulf of Bahama , which be between the cape of Florida , and the island of Lucayo . after this grow near to the cold country , our man be oppress with famine , die continual , and they that be leave , grow into such weakness that we be scant able to manage our ship , and the wind be always ill for we to recover England , we determine to go with Galicia in Spain , with intent there to relieve our company and other extreme want . And be arrive the last day of December in a place near unto Vigo call Ponte Vedra , our man with excess of fresh meat grow into miserable disease , and die a great part of they . this matter be bear out as long as it may be , but in the end although there be none of our man suffer to go a land , yet by access of the Spaniard , our feebleness be know to they . whereupon they cease not to seek by all mean to betray we , but with all speed possible we depart to Vigo , where we have some help of certain english ship and twelve fresh man , wherewith we repair our want as we may , and depart the 20 day of January 1568 arrive in mount bay in Cornwall the 25 of the same month , praise be God therefore . if all the misery and troublesome affair of this sorrowful voyage shall be perfect and thorough write , there shall need a painful man with his pen , and as great a time as he have that write the life and death of the martyr . John Hawkins .