can find none of they . and though our man return all free from peril of the enemy , yet the most part of the say ten person present fall sick , and diverse other of our company : so that within 14 day 8 or 9 of our man die of a disease call there the Calentura , which be a hot and vehement fever . And pass between Chagre and Veragua , we take a frigate , and some Veragua . quantity of gold we find therein . in this frigate be 23 Spaniard who we set on shore , and two Fleming , they we bring into England with we : we have therein also four cast piece of ordinance , 3 harquebuss on crock , 16 spanish caliver , and a book of navigation : and in this frigate some of our company come homeward into England . thus pass forward in our course , we come to Veragua , where captain Barker , and Philip Roche his master , fight upon the foresay quarrel , in which combat the captain be hurt a little in the cheek . here we sink our admiral the ragged staff , because of her great leakage , and embark part of our company in the spanish frigate , which immediate before we have surprise . from hence ( by the direction of certain Indians ) we sail into the gulf of the Honduras : the bay of there we take a bark wherein be rial of plate , to honduras - the value of 100 pound , Maiz or indian wheat , hen , beef and other small thing . in this bark also be certain Spaniard , whereof one be the Scrivano or a conspiracy against the captain . m . Andrew Barker and 8 other slay by the Spaniard . the town of Truxillo sack by the english . secretary of Carthagena , who ( be a man of some note ) be put to his ransom , which be pay in gold : the rest be dismiss free . and after pass by diverse island , we arrive at a island call S . Francisco , be in the mouth of the great bay , call the Honduras . and within two day next after our arrival there , William Coxe and diverse other ( which for certain cause shall | be nameless ) come aboard the ship wherein the captain then be , and dispossess he as well of the say ship , as of the treasure in the same , and forthwith put our captain with violence on shore , where he arid one germane Weiborne fight together , and be both wound . after this our captain desirous to come on board , be resist by the person aforesaid , who answer he that he shall not come on board till they be ready to depart . our man have appoint ten person of their company for the keep of this island of S . Francisco : but about break of the day , on a certain morning , sixty Spaniards arrive secret in the island , surprise our people on the sudden , what time there be thirty of our man on shore : in which surprise they slay our captain , m . Andrew Barker with eight other , namely , one wild of Bristol , and Michael our chirurgeon , Richard of Bristol , Thomas Sampoole , Thomas freeman , Thomas nightingale , Robert Jackson , Walter Newton ; and the captain boy and one other be hurt . now after that William Coxe , and the rest ( which be aboard the bark ) perceive that the captain , and some other be slay , he receive they that be live into the ship , have before that time refuse some of they . after this misfortune they go to a island distant from thence a league , where Coxe divide a chain of gold ( which be find in the captain chest after his death ) among the company . after this Coxe go in a pinesse ( which we take at the isle of Sant Francisco ) with certain other of our man in a skyffe , to the town of Truxillio , in the bay of Honduras , 86 which town they surprise , and have therein wine and oil as much as they will , and diverse other good thing , but no gold nor silver , nor any other treasure which they will confess . but before they can return to their company , those that be in the bark be have in chase by man of war , whereby they be enforce every man to shift for himself : so for haste they leave those that be in the skiff ( be 8 person ) in the bay of Honduras : what become of they afterward God know . hereupon we determine to sail for England , and be in the main sea homeward bind , about 60 league from the isle of S . Francisco , the frigate wherein be the treasure for the adventurer , and that which pertain to the captain to the value of 2000 pound , be overset with sail , with a flaw of wind be overthrow , and all the good therein perish : therein also be 14 person drown , and nine save , whereof William Coxe and William Gillam be two . after this fillip Roche , master of the the death of admiral call the ragged staff , die . and thus at p , ufy length , ( by the help of God ) we arrive in the isle of silly near Cornwall where we leave our frigate which their arrival we build new upon the shore of the Honduras , have the isle of in she at our land ten botisio of oil , and the four cast piece that be in John Oxnams frigate ( which the year before be take in the strait of Dariene ) three harquebuss on crock , certain caliver , and certame certain treasure : where William Cox and Andrew j ^ nQxnam Browne divide the treasure among their company , recover deliver to some five pound , to some six pound , to from the some seven pound , to some more , as every man be Spaniards . thought to have deserve . the bark and the rest of the ordinance be leave in the island , to the use of Andrew Browne . diverse of our company , upon our arrival at Plymouth be commit to prison at the suit of m . John Barker of Bristol , brother unto our captain m . Andrew Barker , as accessary to our captain death , and betrayer of he unto the enemy . and after straight examination of many of we , by letter of direction from her majesty privy counsel , the chief malefactor be only chastise with long imprisonment , where indeed before God they have deserve to die : whereof some , although they escape the rigor of man law , yet can they not avoid the heavy judgement of God , but short after come to miserable end . which may be example to other to show themselves faithful and obedient in all honest cause to their captain and governor .