the voyage of master Andrew Barker of Bristol , with two ship , the one call the ragged staff , the other the bear , to the coast of terra firma , and the bay of Honduras in the west Indies , in the year 1576 . wherein the reason be premise which move he to set forth this voyage against the Spaniard : collect out of certain note and examination touch this enterprise by m . Richard Hakluyt . irst of all Andrew Barker have abode in one of the canary island call tenerif for a certain time , and return home left behind he Charles Chester ( the son of Dominic Chester merchant of Bristol ) to learn the language . now the say Andrew Barker forthwith upon his arrival in England , in November , 1574 , freight a small ship ( name the Speedwell of Bristol ) to go for the canary with cloth and other merchandise of a great value . he send also one John draw of Bastable - as his factor to make sale and dispose of the say good , who when he arrive at tenerif , land the merchandise , and send home the bark with some small quantity of wine , make account to sell the say ware to great advantage in provide wine and sugar for the lade of another ship , which Andrew Barker have appoint to send thither . also accord to this his purpose the say Andrew in march follow send a ship call the Christopher of Dartmouth , captain whereof be one Henry Roberts of Bristol : who when he have land in tenerif , and be in good hope to find the lade of his ship in a readiness , contrary to his expectation , be sudden cast into prison : the Spaniard allege that Andrew Barker be accuse to the inquisition by Charles 82 Chester , whereupon his good be confiscate , his factor John Drue be attach , and he also ( the say captain Roberts ) be as they suppose barkers partner , be in like sort to be imprison . in fine all the foresay commodity appertain to the say Andrew and his brother m . John Barker and other to the value of 1700 pound and upward ( as it do appear by proof of record in the admiralty ) be utter lose , be confiscate to the say inquisition . howbeit captain Roberts by the mean of a friar be deliver out of prison ( which cost he all the merchandise he bring with he in his ship ) and so return with dead fraught to the sum of 200 pound that afterward Andrew Barker discharge . in recompense of which injury ( for that no suit prevail against the inquisition of Spain ) and also to recover his loss of the Spaniard themselves , at his own charge with the help of his friend he furnish two bark for the west Indies , the great of which bark be call the ragged staff , himself be captain , and Philip Roche master thereof , the other name the bear have one William Coxe of Limehouse for her master and captain . and thus all our company be embark at Plimmoth on Whitsonday in the begin of June , we set forward , and in our course we meet with a ship of London , and afterward with another ship , but take nothing from either of they . our first arrival be at one of the island of cape Verde , name Del sal , vz . the isle of salt , where we take certain fish Isla del sal . call tortoise : and there we remain one night and half the day follow . and from thence we come to the isle of Maio , be distant from Isla del sal , 14 or 15 league , where we take in fresh water and traffic with certain Portugal inhabit in it that place , of who we have some victual for knife and bead : and there we remain one day and one night : but our trumpeter be treacherous slay by those Portugal , in revenge of which murder we set two village on fire two of their small village . from this island urnt - we shape our course over the main ocean towards the isle of the west Indies , and arrive happy at the island of Tnmdad . Trinidad , and have conference with certain Indians inhabitant thereof , who give we very friendly and courteous entertainment : and here we set up a pinnace which we carry forth in the ragged staff , and traffic with the foresay Indians for victual . and after we have spend six day in this place we the isle of depart , and arrive next at the isle of Margarita , Margarita . where we take a small spanish ship have in her certain pitch and 30 tun of canary wine whereof we reserve 4 or 5 ton to our self , dismiss they without any further damage . Thence ( have the isle of remain there a day ) we set sail to the island of Curazao . Curazao , where we remain a day and a night , and take in fresh water , at what time by the inhabitant of that island ( be few of they Spaniard , and the most part Indians ) 14 of our man be treacherous hurt , but none slay . and from thence we depart for the main land southwards , to a certain bay , and there we abide 3 day , but nothing of any reckon be cape de la there achieve . from thence we arrive at cape de Vela ' la Vela , where grow a contention between our captain m . Andrew Barker , and his master Philip Roche , upon comparison make between they concern the knowledge of navigation , and about other quarrel , which quarrel afterward be a occasion of further mischief . Tulu . hence we sail to the bay of Tulu ( which be about 18 league southwestward from Carthagena ) where we take a frigate and certain treasure therein to the value of 500 pound , namely bar of gold , and lingot of silver , and some quantity of corriento or coin in rial of plate , and certain green stone call emerald , whereof one very great , be set in gold , be find tie secret about the thigh of a friar . here have stay three day , and now be pursue by spanish man of war , we depart with the say treasure , and leave the frigate behind we , all 84 Andrew Barker which treasure at that instant be commit to the keep of our captain Andrew Barker . from thence we pass to number de dios , and so forth to the mouth of the river of Chagre 18 league distant from number de dios towards the northwest . there we land io of our man , who travel up into the wood three or four day to seek the Simerons , ( which be certain valiant negro flee from their cruel master the Spaniard , arid be become mortali enemy , ready to join with the english and french against they ) but in their search they