the town with some circumstance , as 66 partly by the Spaniard desire of negro , and partly by friendship of the treasurer , we obtain a secret trade : whereupon the Spaniard resort to we by night , and buy of we to the number of 200 negro : in all other place where we trade the Spaniard inhabitant be glad of we and trade willing . at Cartagena the last town we think to have Cartagena . see on the coast , we can by no mean obtain to deal with any Spaniard , the governor be so straight , and because our trade be so near finish we think not good either to adventure any land , or to detract further time , but in peace depart from thence the 24 of July , hope to have escape the time of their storm which then soon after begin to reign , the which they call Furicanos , but pass by the west Furicanos . end of Cuba , towards the coast of Florida there happen to we the 12 day of August a extreme storm which continue by the space of four day , which so beat the Jesus , that we cut down all her high building , her rudder also be sore shake , and withal be in so extreme a leak that we be rather upon the point to leave she then to keep she any long , yet hope to bring all to good pass , we seek the coast of Florida , where we find no place nor haven for our ship , because of the shalownesse of the coast : thus be in great despair , and take with a new storm storm . which continue other 3 day , we be enforce to take for our succour the port which serve the city of Mexico call saint John de ullua , which stand in 19 degree : in seek of which port we take in our way 3 ship which carry passenger to the number of a hundred , which passenger we hope shall be a mean to we the better to obtain victual for our money , Sc a quiet place for the repair of our fleet . short after this the 16 of September we enter the [ i3j - 523d port of saint John de ullua and in our entry the ° a Spaniard think we to be the fleet of Spain , the chief officer of the country come aboard we , which the Spaniard be deceive of their expectation be great disdeceived . may : but immediate when they see our demand be nothing but victual , be recomfort . i find also in the same port twelve ship which have in they by report two hundred thousand pound in gold and silver , all which ( be in my possession , with the king hand as also the passenger before in my way thitherward stay ) i set at liberty , without the take from they the weight of a groat : only because i will not be delay of my dispatch , i stay two man of estimation and send post immediate to Mexico , which be two hundred mile from we , to the president and Councell there , show they of our arrival there by the force of weather , and the necessity of the repair of our Oure request , ship and victual , which want we require as friend to king Philip to be furnish of for our money : and that the president and Councell there shall with all convenient speed take order , that at the arrival of the spanish fleet , which be daily look for , there may not cause of quarrel rise between we and they , but for the better maintenance of amity , their commandment might be have in that behalf . this message be send away the sixteenth day of September at night , be the very day of our arrival , in the next morning which be the seventeenth day of the same month , we see open of the haven thirteen great ship , the fleet of and understand they to be the fleet of Spain , i Spain . send immediate to advertise the general of the fleet of my be there , do he to understand , that before i will suffer they to enter the port , there shall some order of condition pass between we for our safe be there , and maintenance of peace . now it be to the manner be understand that this port be make by a little hand stone not three foot above the water in the high one ua . piace , a ( j but a bow - shoot of length any way , this hand stand from the main land two bow shoot or more , also it be to be understand that there be not in all this coast any other place for ship to arrive in safety , 68 because the north wind have there such violence , that unless the ship be very safe more with their anchor fasten upon this hand , there be no remedy for these north wind but death : also the place of north wind the haven be so little , that of necessity the ship must ride one aboard the other , so that we can not give place to they , nor they to we : and here i begin to bewail that which after follow , for now , say i , i be in two danger , and force to receive the one of they . that be , either i must have keep out the fleet from enter the port , the which with god help i be very well able to do , or else suffer they to enter in with their accustom treason , which they never fade to execute , where they may have opportunity , to compass it by any mean : if i have keep they out , then have there be present shipwreck of all the fleet which amount in value to six million , which be in value of our money 1800000 . livre . which i consider i8ooz & w * w i be not able to answer , fear the queen majesty poundindignation in so weighty a matter . thus with my self revolve the doubt , i think rather better to abide the jutt of the uncertainty , than the certain tie . the uncertain doubt i account be their treason which by good policy i hope may be prevent , and therefore as choose the least mischief i proceed to condition . now be our first messenger come and return from the fleet with report of