the voyage of John Oxnam of Plymouth , to the west India , and over the strait of Dariene into the south sea . anno 1575 . write by the foresay Lopez Vaz in the say discourse . here be another Englishman , who hear of the spoil that Francis Drake have do upon the coast of Nueva Espanna , and of his good adventure and safe return home , be thereby provoke to undertake the like enterprise , with a ship of 140 ton , and 70 man , and come thither , and have also conference with the foresay negro : and hear that the gold and silver which come upon the mule from Panama to number de dios , be now conduct with soldier , he determine to do that which never any man before enterprise : and land in that place where Francis Drake before have have his conference with the negro . this man cover his ship after he have bring she aground with bough of tree , and hide his great ordinance in the ground , and so not leave any man in his ship , he take two small piece of ordinance , and his caliver , and good store of victual , and so go with the negro about twelve league into the main land , to a river that go to the south sea , and there he cut wood and make a pinnace , which be five and forty foot by the keel , and have make this pinnace , he go into the south sea , carry six negro with he to be his guide , and so go to the hand of pearl , which be five 8c twenty league from Panama , which be in the way that they come from Peru to Panama , and there he be ten day without show himself to any man , to A . D . 1575 - the hand of pearl 25 . league from Panama . see if he may get any ship that come from Peru : at last there come a small bark by , which come from Peru from a place call Quito , which he take and find in her sixty thousand pezo of gold , and much victual . but not content himself with this prize , he stay long without send away his prize or any of the man , and in the end of six day after , he take another bark which come from Lima , in which he take a hundred thousand pezo of silver in bar , with the which he think to have go , and enter the river , but first he go into the island to see if he can find any pearl : where he find a few , and so return to his pinnace again , and so sail to the river from whence he come , and come near to the mouth of the say river , he send away the two prize that he take , and with his pinnace he go up the river . the negro that dwell in the island of pearl , the same night that he go from they , go in canoas to Panama , and the governor within two day send four bark 100 man , 25 in every one , and negro to row with the captain John de Ortega , which go to the island of pearl , and there have intelligence , which way the english man be go , and follow they he meet by the way the ship which the english man have take , of who he learn , that the english man be go up the river , and he go thither , when he come to the mouth of the river , the captain of Panama know not which way to take , because there be three partition in the river to go up in , and be determine to go up the great of the three river , he see come down a lesser river many feather of hen , which the Englishman have pull to eat , and be glad thereof , he go up that river where he see the feather , and after that he have be in that river four day , he descry the Englishman pinnace upon the sand , and come to she , there be no more than six Englishman , whereof they kill one , and the other five escape away , and in the pinnace he find nothing but victual : but this captain of Panama not herewith satisfy , determine to seek out the Englishman by land , and leave twenty man in his pinnace , he with 80 shot go up the country : he have not go half a league , but he find a house make of bough , where they find all the Englishman good , and the gold and silver also , and carry it back to their pinnace , the Spaniard be determine to go away , without follow the english man any further . but at the end of three day , the english captain come to the river with all his man , and above 200 negro , and set upon the Spaniard with great fury : but the Spaniard have the advantage of tree which they stand behind , do easy prevail , and kill eleven Englishman , and five negro , and take other seven Englishman alive , but of the Spaniard , two be slay and five sore hurt . among other thing , the Spaniard inquire of the Englishman which they take , why they go not away in fifteen day liberty which they have . they answer , that their captain have command they to carry all that gold and silver which they have , to the place where they have leave their ship , and they have promise he to carry it , although they make three or four journey of it , for he promise to give they part of it beside their wage , but the mariner will have it by and by , and so their captain be angry because they will not take his word , fall out with they , and they with he , in so much that one of the company will have kill the captain , so that the captain will not have they to carry the treasure , but say he will seek negro to carry it , and so he go and seek for negro , and bring those negro to carry it , he meet with the five english man that he have leave in his pinnace which run from the Spaniard , and the rest also which run from the house , and they tell he what the Spaniard have do , and then make friendship with all his man , he promise they half of all the treasure if they get 79 A . D . I575 - a skirmish between the english man , and . the Spaniard . it from the Spaniard , and the negro promise to help he with their bow and arrow , and thereupon they come to seek the Spaniard , and now that some of his company be kill and take , he think it best to return to his ship , and to pass back for England . the spanish captain hear this , have bury the dead body , and have get all thing into his bark , and take the english man and their pinnace with he , he return to Panama : so the voyage of that english man do not prosper with he , as he think it will have do . now when the four bark be come to Panama , they send advise also to number de dios , and they of number de dios send also from they other four bark which ( as the Spaniard say ) find the english ship where she be hide , and bring she to number de dios : and that the viceroy of Peru not think it good to suffer fifty english man to remain in the country , send a servant of his call Diego de Frees , with a hundred and fifty shot into the mountain to seek they out , who find they make of certain canoas to go into the north sea , and there to take some bark or other : some of they be sick , and be take , betray to they and the rest flee with the negro , who in the end Spaniard . ' ' ' . 0 .... - - betray they to the Spaniard , so that they be bring to Panama . and the justice of Panama ask the english captain whether he have the queen licence , or the licence of any other prince or lord for his attempt . and he answer he have none , whereupon he and all his company be condemn to dye , and so be all execute , save the captain , the master , the pilot , and five boy which be carry to Lima , and there the captain be execute with the other two , but the boy be yet live . the king of Spain have intelligence of these matter , send 300 man of war against those negro which have assist those english man , which before be slave unto the Spaniard , and as before be say , 80 ! 575 - fled from their master unto those mountain , and so join themselves to the Englishman , to the end they may the better revenge themselves on the Spaniard . at the first come of these 300 soldier , they take many of the negro , and execute great justice upon they : but after a season , the negro grow wise and wary , and prevent the Spaniard , so that none of they can be take . the Spaniard of that country marveil much at this one thing , to see that since the conquer of this land , there have be many Frenchmen , that have come to those country , but never see English man there but only those two of who i have speak . and although there have many Frenchmen be on the coast , yet never dare they put foot upon land , only those two english man adventure it , and do such exploit , as be before remember . all these thing come to the hear of the the english king of Spain , he provide two galley well appoint to keep those coast : and the first year they take ’ six or seven french ship . and after that this be king of Spain know , there be no more Englishman or Frenchman to build galley of war that dare adventure to approach the coast , then until this present year 1586 , that the aforesaid Francis ' Drake , with a strong fleet of 24 ship arrive there , and make spoil of Santo Domingo , Carthagena , and saint Augustine , thing that be know to all the world . but it be likely that if the king of Spain live , he will in time provide sufficient remedy , to keep his country and subject from the invasion of other nation . ten 81