sea . this place of strength be furnish with six great piece , demi - culverin , and saker , which shoot 117 direct in front upon we as we approach . now without this wall upon the inner side of the strait , they have bring likewise two great galley with their prowess to the shore , have plant in they eleven piece of ordinance , which do beat all cross the strait , and flank our come on . in these two galley be plant three or four hundred small shot , and on the land in the guard only of this place , three hundred shot and pike . they in this their full readiness to receive we , spare not their shot both great and small . but our lieutenant general , take the advantage of the dark ( the day light as yet not break out ) approach by the low ground , accord to the express direction which himself have former give , the same be the sea - wash shore , where the water be somewhat fall , so as most of all their shot be in vain . our lieutenant general command our shot to forbear shoot until we be come to the wall side , and so with pike roundly together we approach the place , where we soon find out the barricade of pipe or butt , to be the meet place for our assault , which , notwithstanding it be well furnish with pike and shot , be without stay attempt by we : down go the butt of earth , and pell mell come our sword and pike together , after our shot have first give their volley , even at the enemy nose . our pike be somewhat long than they , and our body better arm ; for very few of they be arm : with which advantage our sword and pike grow too hard for they , and they drive to give place . in this furious entry , the lieutenant general slay with his own hand the chief ensign bearer of the Spaniard , who fight very manful to his life end . we follow into the town with they , and give they no leisure to breathe , we win the marketplace , albeit they make head , and fight a while before we get it , and so we be once seize and assure of 118 1586 . that , they be content to suffer we to lodge within their town , and themselves to go to their wife , who they have carry into other place of the country before our come thither . at every street end they have raise very fine Barricados of earth - work , with trench without they , as well make as ever we see any work do : at the enter whereof be some little resistance , but soon overcome it be , with few slay or hurt . they have join with they many Indians , who they have place in corner of advantage , all bowman , with their arrow most villanous empoison , so as if they do but break the skin , the party so touch die without great marvel : some they slay of our people with their arrow : some they likewise mischieve to death with certain prick of small stick sharp point , of a foot and a half long , the one end put into the ground , the other empoison , stick fast up , right against our come in the way , as we shall approach from our land towards the town , whereof they have plant a wonderful number in the ordinary way : but our keep the sea - wash shore miss the great part of they very happy . i overpass many particular matter , as the hurt of captain Samson at sword blow in the first enter , unto who be commit the charge of the pike of the vanguard by his lot and turn ; as also of the take of Alonso Bravo the chief commander of Ahnto Bravo that place by captain Goring , after the say captain have first hurt he with his sword : unto which captain be commit the charge of the shot of the say vanguard . captain winter be likewise by his turn of the vanguard in this attempt , where also the lieutenant general march himself : the say captain winter through a great desire to serve by land , have now exchange his charge by sea with captain Cecil for his band of footman . 119 captain Powel the sergeant mayor have by his turn the charge of the four company which make the battle . captain Morgan , who at saint Domingo be of the vanguard , have now by turn his charge upon the company of the rearward . every man as well of one part as of another , come so willing on to the service , as the enemy be not able to endure the fury of such hot assault . we stay here six week , and the sickness with mortality before speak of still continue among we , though not with the same fury as at the first : and such as be touch with the say sickness , escape death , very few or almost none can recover their strength : yea , many of they be much decay in their memory , insomuch that it be grow a ordinary judgement , when one be hear to speak foolish , to say he have be sick of the calenture , which be the spanish name of their burn ague : for as i tell you before , it be a very burn and pestilent ague . the originali cause thereof , be impute to the evening or first night air , which they term la serena , wherein they say and hold very firm opinion , that who so be then abroad in the open air , shall certain be infect to the death , not be of the indian or natural race of those country people : by hold their watch , our man be thus subject to the infectious air , which at saint Iago be most dangerous and deadly of all other place . with the inconvenience of continual mortality , we be force to give over our intend enterprise to go with number de dios , and so overland to Panama , where we shall have strike the stroke for the treasure , and full recompense of our tedious travail . and thus at Cartagena we take our first resolution to return homeward : the form of which resolution i think good here to put down under the principali captain hand , as follow .