nothing but blow , yet if they will bring he hatchet , knife , and jewes - harp , he bid they assure i , he have a mine of gold , and can refine it , and will trade with i : for token whereof , he send i 3 . or 4 . croissant or half moon of gold weigh a noble a piece or more , and two bracelet of silver . also he tell they of another rich nation , that sprinkle their body with the powder of gold , and seem to be gild , and far beyond they a great town call el 208 Dorado , with many other thing . my man be satisfy , and think their company too few to stay among these savage , and their victuali spend , return . This Balthasar my Indian their guide run from they : which distress cause they to borrow of Armago new guide , who bring they home another way through a river call Braha by the high land of Paria , and so to my ship . they account Orocoa 150 . mile distant , so they row in my boat above 250 . mile . their absence from i be 16 . day , make but one night abode any where . the report of this make i attempt my company to go with they again . but now they be worse than before ; for unless i will have go my self alone , not one man will go with i ( not albeit i have have commission to hang or kill they ) for my man come home in very pitiful case almost dead for famine ; and indeed such be their misery , as they drink not in three day , for so long they be out of the fresh river , before they recover the ship , and yet the boat be fill with as much victuali , as it can hold . in this time of my boat absence there come to i a pinnace of Plymouth , of which captain Popham captain pop - before name be chief , who give we great comfort . ham arrival . and if i have not lose my pinnace , wherein i may have carry victual and some man , we have discover further the secret of those place . also this captain and i stay some six or eight day long for sir Walter Ralegh ( who , as we surmize , have some purpose for this discovery ) to the end , that by our intelligence and his boat we may have do some good : but it seem he come not in six or eight week after . so captain Popham and i hold it not convenient to stay they depart any long : therefore new water our self at Paracoa , fr ™ we set sail to see further of the Indies , leave the isle nnt a ' of Trinidad the 12 . day of march . the 13 . i take a a prize take small prize of sack 25 . league to the northward of a north of the island which i sail by , call Granata . this prize ranata . ten 209 oh the isle of Santa Cruz and Inferno . Cape roxo . they disemboque by the isle of Zacheo . the shold call Abreojos , that be , open thy eye , or look out . Bermuda . flores and Cuervo . a fight of two day with a spanish armada of 600 ton . they arrive at saint Ives in Cornwall in may 1595 . refresh we well : yet mean to sei she at the isle of Sant Juan de Puerto rico , and shape our course thither by the island of Santa Cruz and Infierno , i coast all the south side of the say isle of saint John , till i come to a anchor at cape Roxo : where ride 14 . day to expect saint Domingo man , which oftentimes fall with the island of Mona , and find none ( neither will the Spaniards of S . Juan de puerto rico buy my prize ) i unlade she , take in the good , and after burn she . This end , i disemboque ( where few Englishmen have do before , by reason of the great danger between this island of saint Juan de puerto rico and Hispaniola ) by a little island call Zacheo . and after careful double the shoulde of Abreojos , i cause the master , ( hear by a pilot , that the spanish fleet mean now to put out of Havana ) to bear for the meridian of the isle of Bermuda , hope there to find the fleet disperse . the fleet i find not , but foul weather enough to scatter many fleet ; which companion leave i not in great extremity , till i come to the isle of Flores and Cuervo : whither i make the more haste , hope to meet some great fleet of her majesty my sovereign , as 1 have intelligence , and to give they advise of this rich spanish fleet : but find none , and my victual almost spend , i direct my course for England . return alone , and worse man by half then i go forth , my fortune be to meet a great armada of this fleet of some 600 . ton well appoint , with who i fight board and board for two day , be no way able in all possibility with fifty man to board a man of war of six hundred ton . and have spend all my powder i be constrain to leave she , yet in such distress without sail and mast , and hull so often shoot through with my great ordinance between wind and water , that be three hundred league from land , i dare say , it be impossible for she to escape sink . thus leave she by necessity in this miserable estate , i make for England , where i arrive at saint Ives in Cornwall 210 about the latter end of May 1595 , escape most dangerous in a great fog the rock of silly . thus by the providence of God land safe , i be kind entertain by all my friend , and after a short time learn more certainty of the sink of that great ship , be also repute rich by diverse intelligence out of Spain : which we then suppose not , and be doubtful whether she have be of Biscay or S . John de Luz in France lade with fish only from Newfoundland . in this voyage i and my fleet take , sink and burn nine spanish ship ; which be loss to they , though i get nothing .