a relation of the port , harbour , fort and city in the west Indies which have be surveyed , edify , finish , make and mend , with those which have be build , in a certain survey by the king of Spain his direction and commandment : write by Baptista Antonio , surveyor in those part for the say king . anno 1587 . santa Marta . make of cane , irst santa Marta the principali city of nta Marta the bishopric or diocese of the coast s ^ mte w ա- of Tierra firma , or the firm land , lie Mfe * m a in 10 . degree and i , the city be situate upon a sandy bay adjoin unto the sea side , contain in it about 30 . household ; all the house be and cover over with Palmito tree , and some of they be cover with tile . they have traffic with none , but with the Indians of the say country , which do bring unto the city for to sell earthen pot and pipkin , and coverlit of Cotton wool , and great earthen jar . also they do traffic to Cartagena . it be a country which have but small store of cattle , because it be all mountainous , and have small store of people . there be a very good harbour before the say town , environ with mighty hill and great rock , which reach even unto the sea side , the which high land do great succour the harbour , as also two hand which lie about of a league on the north side : so that although they be subject to easterly wind , and that with great storm , yet they do no great harm to go on land . within this harbour there be a place which be call la Caldera , where in time past they be wont to trim and carene their ship . as touch the harbour , there be no cause to fortify it , nor to make 135 any account of it , by reason there be no trade nor tramque to this place from any other place , accord as i have certify your majesty thereof . and also because here be but few dweller or inhabitant , and loose every day so many as it do , by reason that it be every day rob a new course and spoil by the enemy . but if your majesty will an ' t ^ b the command that the fleet of Nova Hispania may direct way1 of ' santa t ^ le ^ r course to this harbour be in their way , and here Marta less to water and refresh themselves , all the pilot do say subject to that the fleet may proceed on their voyage from this danger then place , still go before the wind , and so go to the tnarS cape of saint Anthony which lie on the hand of Cuba , and from thence go their direct course to Nova Hispania ; and by this mean the fleet shall have no occasion to pass so many danger as they do , by reason of the Huricanos or stormy wind which many time do come upon they , when they be upon the coast of Hispaniola : and this be the cause that there be so many ship cast away , as your majesty do well know . and as concern this course accord as i have certify your majesty , they shall come into no danger at all , nor shall make any further way about ; so by this mean both the fleet may come from Spain in company , and then come to saint Marta , and the fleet of Nova Hispania may come into this harbour , and the fleet which do go unto the firm land , may go direct to Cartagena as they do . than your majesty may send to fortify the say harbour , and the fortification must be thus : that on the morro or mount which be in the enter in of the say harbour , there be build a little fort , and so to plant some small quantity of ordinance . and hard by on the south side , there to build a little tower , and another sconce , where we may plant some more ordinance . so by this mean not only the ship may ride here in security , but also it will be a defence for those which dwell here in the town : and the better to effect this purpose , there be hard by the town great 136 store of Lyme , stone , sand , and timber , if occasion shall serve . Cartagena . CArtagena be a city , and the principali place of the bishopric ; it lie fourty league from Santa Marta : it stand in scant u . degree . the say city Cartagena be situate upon a sandy bank or bay like unto a hand : sljuate m both it have about 450 . dweller therein . there be very fair ' building therein : as concern their house , they be make of stone , and there be three monastery , of which two of they be of friar which be within the city , the one call Santo Domingo , and the other call Santo Augustin , and the other which be call saint Francis , which stand without the city about 30 . pace off . and for to go unto the say friary , you must go upon a Causey make of stone , and water on both side . this city have great trade out of Spain , and out of the new kingdom of Granada , and out of the hand there adjoin , from Peru , and from all the coast of this firm land , and of the fish of the pearl of Rio de la Hacha , and of Margarita : it be a very sound country . this city have a very good harbour , and sufficient to receive great store of ship : this say harbour have two entrance in , the one of they lie half a league from the city , where all the ship do enter into the say harbour : the mouth or enter in of the say harbour be 1400 . yard or pace in breadth , and very deep water . the other enter in which be call la boca chica , or little mouth , lie a league beyond this place to the westwards . it be 900