of a very cool fresh taste , and as please as any thing may be . i have hear some hold opinion , that it be very restorative . the plantan grow in cod , somewhat like to bean , but be big and long , and much more thick together on the stalk , and when it wax ripe , the meat which fill the rind of the cod become yellow , and be exceed sweet and pleasant . in this time of our be there happen to come a Portugal to the western fort , with a flag of truce , to who captain Samson be send with captain Goring , who come to the say messenger , he first ask they what nation they be , they answer Englishmen , he then require to know if war be between England and Spain , to which they answer that they know not , but if he will go to their general he can best resolve he of such particular , and for his assurance of passage and repassage , these captain make offer to engage their credit , which he refuse for that he be not send from his governor . than they tell he , if 106 his governor do desire to take a course for the common benefit of the people and country , his best way be to come and present himself unto our noble and merciful governor sir Francis Drake , whereby he may be assure to find favour , both for himself and they inhabitant . otherwise within three day we shall march over the land , and consume with fire all inhabit place , and put to the sword all such live soul as we shall chance upon : so thus much he take for the conclusion of his answer , and depart , he promise to return the next day , but we never hear more of he . upon the four and twenty of November , the general accompany with the lieutenant general and six hundred man march forth to a village twelve mile within the land , call saint Domingo , where the governor and the bishop with all the better sort be lodge , and by eight of the clock we come to it , find the place abandon , and the people flee into the mountain : so we make stand a while to ease our self , and partly to see if any will come to speak to we . after we have well rest our self , the general command the troop to march away homeward , in which retreat the enemy show themselves , both horse and foot , though not such force as dare encounter we : and so in pass sometime at the gaze with they , it wax late and towards night before we can recover home to saint Iago . on Monday the six and twenty of November , the general command all the pinnace with the boat , to use all diligence to embark the Annie into such ship as every man belong . the lieutenant general in like sort command captain Goring and lieutenant Tucker , with one hundred shot to make a stand in the market place , until our force be whole embark , the viceadmiral make stay with his pinnace and certain boat in the harbour , to bring the say last 107 a wise course to be imitate in all great action . company aboard the ship . also the general will forthwith the galley with two pinnace to take into they the company of captain Barton , and the company of captain big , under the lead of captain Samson , to seek out such munition as be hide in the ground , at the town of Praya or Playa , have be promise to be show it by a prisoner , which be take the day before . the captain aforesaid come to the Playa , land their man , and have place the troop in their best strength , captain Samson take the prisoner , and will he to show that he have promise , the which he can not , or at least will not : but they search all suspect place , find two piece of ordinance , one of iron , a other of brass . in the after noon the general anchor with the rest of the fleet before the Playa , come himself ashore , will we to burn the town and make all haste aboard , the which be do by six of the clock the same day , and our self embark again the same night , and so we put off to sea Southwest . but before our departure from the town of saint Iago , we establish order for the better government of the army , every man muster to his captain , and oath be minister to acknowledge her majesty supreme governor , as also every man to do his uttermost endeavour to advance the service of the action , and to yield due obedience unto the direction of the general and his officer . by this provident counsel , and lay down this good foundation before hand , all thing go forward in a ' due course , to the achieve of our happy enterprise . in all the time of our be here , neither the governor for the king of Spain , ( which be a Portugal ) neither the bishop , who authority be great , neither the inhabitant of the town , or island ever come at we ( which we expect they shall have do ) to entreat we to leave they some part of their needful provision , 108 or at the least , to spare the ruin of their town at our go away . the cause of this their unreasonable distrust ( as i do take it ) be the fresh remembrance of the great wrong they have do to old m . William Hawkins of Plymouth , in the voyage he make 4 . or 5 . the treason of year before , when as they do both break their promise , the fortug . al5 and murder many of his man , whereof i judge you have understand , and therefore it be needless to be re - Hawkins . peat . but since they come not at we , we leave write in sundry place , as also in the spittle house , ( which building be only appoint to be spare ) the great discontentment and scorn we take at this their refrain to come unto we , as also at the rude manner of kill , and savage kind of handle the dead body of one of our boy find by they