, which have be there 14 month before we come thither : Helena . so we send our boat on shore with some ten man , they find this english man in the chapel ; who by reason of the heat of the climate be enforce to keep himself out of the sun our company hear one sing in the chapel , suppose it have be some Portugal ! , thrust open the door , and go in unto he : but the poor man see so many come in upon he on the sudden , and think they to be Portugal , be first in such a fear , not have see any man in 14 month before , the strange and afterward know they to be Englishman , and fg ^ reand some of they of his acquaintance , in such joy , that what sudden joy . between excessive sudden fear and joy , he become dis tract of his wit , to our great sorrow . here we find of his dry some 40 goat . the party have make he for want of apparel two suit of goat skin with the hairy side outward , like unto the savage of Canada . here we stay all this month . this man live until we come to the west Indies , and then he die . in the month of June 1593 we arrive at the island of Trinidad in the west Indies , hope there to find refresh : but we can not get any , by reason that the Spaniard have take it . here we be imbay between the island and the main ; and for want of victual the company will have forsake the ship : 197 Trinidad in the west Indies . whereupon the captain be enforce to swear everyman not to forsake the ship until we shall see further occasion . out of this bay , call Boca de Dragone , it please God to deliver we ; from whence we direct our course for the isle of saint Juan de Puerto rico , but fall with the small isle of Mona , where we abide some fifteen day , find in that place some small refresh . and here arrive a ship of Caen in Normandy , whereof be captain one Monsieur Charles de la Barbotiere , who great refresh we with bread and other provision , which we great want . and so we take our leaf the one of the other . in July have foul weather at Mona , we be force to weigh anchor , and to set sail , direct our course for CapeTiburon . cape Tiburon : and in double of the cape we have a gust from the shore , which carry away all our sail from the yard : so that we have leave but one new forecourse to help our self withal : which canvas the aforesaid Frenchman do help we withal . also have double the foresay cape in the distress aforenamed , the foresay capitan de la Barbotiere with his pinnace give chase unto we again ; who be come near unto we , i go aboard he , certify he what distress we be in . the gentleman reply to i again , that there be not any thing in his ship , but what he can spare he will help we withal . so to conclude , we agree with he for canvas . Moreover , he say that if we will go with Qr Guanaba . he to a harbour call * gonnavy , which be to the northward of cape Tiburon , that than he will help we with fresh victual enough . whereupon i return aboard our ship , and certify our captain of all : who make it know unto the company ; which no soon hear of it , but they will all go in . so here we stay with the aforesaid Frenchman 15 day : but small refresh we can get , because the Spaniard stand in some fear of the Frenchman of war , suppose our ship to be a Portugal , and that we be his prize : nevertheless he certify they to the contrary . and in stay 198 so long with he , and have little refresh , our company begin to be in a mutiny , and make report that the captain and i go aboard the Frenchman but to make good cheer , and have not any care of they : but i protest before God , that our care be to get victual whereby we may have be go from he . but in the mean time a great part of our company have conspire to take away the Frenchman pinnace , and with she to board the man of war . while these thing be in complot , one of their consort go aboard the Frenchman , and certify he of all the conspiracy . whereupon the captain of the french ship send for our captain and i to come aboard to dinner : and we stay with he all the afternoon , be invite unto supper : and be at supper , he himself will not a great while come to we : but at length he come . at his come we ask of he what news . who answer we , that either we must depart from he , or else he must go seek some other harbour . whereupon i tell captain Lancaster ; who pray i to tell he that rather than we will be any hindrance unto he , we will be go . but in the mean time , while we be thus talk together , the Frenchman weigh and set sail : which we perceive , and ask he what he mean by it . he reply to the captain and i , that he keep we for his security , and that our man have purpose as be aforesaid . when he come thwart our ship , it blow a pretty gale of wind : the boat be astern of they , have in her two moor and two man of Pegu , which we have give they , break away . then be the Frenchman worse than before , and do threaten we very sore that we shall pay his voyage . in the mean time the Edward see we past , weigh and set sail to go for England : and they do share among they all the captain victual and i , when they see the Frenchman keep we as prisoner . So the next morning we go to seek out the Frenchman pinnace : which be at Laguna we shoot off a piece , and so she come to we , have in her three moor of 199 they wrack upon Bermuda the 17 of December 1593 . our company , Edmund Barker our lieutenant , and one John west , and Richard Lucland one of the mutinous crew . the which i tell the Frenchman off ; and he can not deny , but that there be such a thing pretend . than i be put into the french pinnace to seek their boat : and in the mean time they will go to see if they can overtake our ship . and the next day we shall meet again at cape S . Nicolas : so the next morning we meet together all three of we , but hear no news of his boat . so he have Spaniard and negro aboard of we , request to have they . our captain desire he to send his boat aboard our ship , and he shall have they with all his heart . so with much ado he send his boat and have they . than he demand of they , if his boat be not aboard the ship . they answer no . so that than