, by reason that the water do ebb and flow twice a day , and then when it be ebb water it will be all ozy and muddy ground and rock , so that in no wise at a low water the enemy can wade over the mud to come to this city , and it reach from the island till you come to the bridge call Paita . two league from this city there lie a harbour call Perico down to the westward : this be 153 5 . or 6 . million of gold wonderful silver . [ hl 556 - 1 the harbour of Perico . sea . a very sure harbour by reason of 3 . Islands which do join in manner of a half moon , they lie half a league from the main , the island do enclose the harbour round about , the harbour be a very high land , and the hand be but reasonable high , there be good store of fresh water : also there have never any ship be cast away in this harbour , for there be 7 . fathom water at full sea , and 3 or 4 fathom at low water , and very good ground for their anker , and when they will trim their ship , they may hale they ashore . all those ship and bark which come from Peru with gold , silver or any other kind of commodity , do first come to a anchor in this harbour , and if they have a contrary weather they can come into the harbour of Panama ; and for so much as the harbour have no defence for the safeguard of the ship , if a man of war shall chance to come into the harbour , all the bark with the treasure may be very easy take . and likewise these bark and ship which do navigate in the south sea carry not so much as one piece of ordinance or a rapier to defend they withal . from this place to Venta de cruze be not pass 5 league ; so that if any pinnace shall happen to arrive there , no doubt but they may rob and take all your treasure which be in those bark , by reason that from the shore they can be rescue nor help , because it be a island and refuge for all ship and bark . if it will please your majesty here may some fort or defence be make in the middlemost island , and some ordinance plant , and this may be make with little charge , because in the say island there be all kind of necessary fit for that purpose , so by this mean your majesty may have both the harbour and the city very well keep . and likewise there be another enter into the south sea which be call the river of Francisca , which lie on this side of the Cabe ? a de Cativa , and this river do come into another river which be call Caracol , and be 154 five league from this city ; and once before these Simerons bring into this place certain Frenchmen . the river of Chagre . the river of Chagre lie in 9 degree and one tierce . the mouth of this river be in the north sea 18 . league from number de dios , and 13 . league Thue five from Puerto bello : there be carve up this river certain 8 * " a , e quantity ot those merchandise which be unlade at ground or number de dios which come from Spain . from the champion mouth of this river to Venta de cruze be eighteen eountrey . league . from this place where the bark unlade their commodity , they be carry upon mule to Panama , which be but five league off from this place . this river have great store of water in the winter . and the bark which belong to this river be common of 320 . quintals that be of 16 . ton in burden : but in the summer there be but small store of water : so than the bark have much to do to get up this river : and in many place these bark be constrain to unlade their commodity ; and be draw by man strength and force a good way up the river , and therefore if it will please your majesty to command that all those good may be first unlade in Puerto bello , and there to build a little castle in the mouth of the say river , and at the foot of the castle to build a storehouse to unlade and keep all the say good , and there to build other bark of less burden : than these will serve for summer , and the great bark for the winter . if it will please your majesty , there may a very good high way be make on the one side of the river , and so they may be tow , for it may be make and not with much cost because it be all plain ground , and there be grow upon the say river great store of timber and tree which do lie over - thwart the say river ; so that they be very cumbersome and great annoyance unto the say boat , aswell those 155 that go up the say river , as also that do come down the say river . and therefore if it may please your majesty to command , that Puerto bello may be inhabit , and the town make near the river side , every thing will be a great deal better cheap , if the commodity be carry up the river : for it be a great danger to carry they up by land , for it be daily see that the mule do many time fall and break their neck with their lade upon their back , as well the treasure as other kind of commodity , because it be such a bad way . and your majesty may be at this charge and spend your revenue of number de dios and Panama , which do yearly yield 12 or 14 thousand pezo , and this be once do it will be a great aid and benefit to those , which do trade and traffic , and to those merchants which do send their good overland , and ease they much of pain and purse , because the - oth be a most filthy way , as any be in the world .