i will remain accord to your majesty commandment , with the bull or indulgence . our lord keep your majesty many year in his holy service . from the city de los Reyes the first of march 1590 . Frier Alonso bishop of mechuacan . a letter of don John de Miramontes suasola to don John Garcias de Penalosa from Arica on the coast of Peru the ten of march 1590 . ft my long travel and bid success , my fortune bring i to the Indies ; where be void of all hope , and full of grief , i be become a soldier : a thing in this country which be most hate of all other thing , not only of man , but of the wild beast : and be a occupation which be choose of idle person . the occasion of this be , that there have be in these sea , and yet be certain English rover : and in seek of they i have travel these three year : the one of the year a soldier , and the other two year i have go for captain and ensign - bearer . and at this time here be arrive don Garcias english man in the south sea seek 3 year . Urtado de Mendosa viceroy of these realm : who have 169 this be m . Chidleys fleet , whereof the delight be in the strait ofMagelan in January and Feb . 1589 . choose i to be chief ensign - bearer of a army which depart from hence to scour the coast . for here we have news of the enemy , which be come upon the coast : for we have stay for their come these four month the same way which they must come , in a haven call Arica , which be the first entry of Peru . so i have 90 pezo a month , beside other profit , at nine real the pezo ; and four share at nine real the pezo . so that i have 1800 pezo every year of pay : for the viceroy be my dear friend , and make great account of i . and i have always 400 ducat in my chest to go like a man . i beseech God send we quietness . but yet it be the part of a gentleman to serve the king his master in these action . and thus i rest . from the harbour of Arica the ten of march 1590 . i kiss your worship hand , and be at your commandment don John de Miramontes suasola . there be four great galleon of 350 ton a piece , which be in Arica man of war , with a general , admiral , vice - admiral , with great store of soldier which keep this haven : for the viceroy have intelligence this be m . that there be certain Englishman of war come fleet thither . this haven of Arica be the best harbour in all ' the south sea : for all the silver which come from the mine of Potossi , be ship in this harbour , and so bring to Lima . and likewise all the commodity which come from Spain , and all the king quicksilver , be unlade in this harbour , and so carry to the city of Lima and other place , where the mine of silver be . 170 a letter of the licentiate Christopher Uslano to Gonsalvo de Solana in the city of Encisa in Spain , write from the city of Potossi in Peru the 20 . of July 1590 , touch a great plague in Peru , and the shortness of the passage from the river of plate into Potossi in Peru . he last year 1588 i receive letter from your worship and from my sister : and since that time i have receive none , nor in the fleet which come to Cartagena 1589 . and this year 1590 there have famine . bene great want of corn in this kingdom of Potossi : for that there have be no rain in this kingdom of long time . for in march the husbandman use to sow their corn : and in April winter do begin . and if in April there be no rain , the corn which be sow will consume away : and so for want of rain we have have two bid year of corn . and likewise here have be in these country of Potossi , and in the city de la paz , great sickness among the plague . Indians , Mullatos , and mestizo , call the small pock , and a certain plague , which have destroy all this country . and there have no old people die , nor Spaniard , but only this country people , from one year to 30 year of age : so for want of Indians we can not work in the mine . this sickness run all along the coast of Peru , and have pass into the strait of magalane , whence we have news that those soldier which be send from Spain thither to build those fort be most of they dead , and especial the workman which come to make the fort . the general don Diego de abolos have write to his majesty to send more soldier and more workman , whereby these three fort may be build accord to the king commandment . this sickness come first from Carta - 171 gena to this country , which be 1000 league distant : and , as i say , it have go all Peru over , to the utter Peru utter undo of this country : i pray God to cease it . i the ^ plame pray you w ^ en you write any letter to i , send they in those ship which come to saint Thome , and take in negro . and there be great store of ship which go to saint Thome for negro , and it be but 15 . day sail over a gulf to Brasill . and from Brasill their ship bring their negro to a haven call a short pas - the haven of Buenos Aeres , which be within the entrance ^ buenos1 Aeres mig ^ tie river of plate . and from this harbour in the river of kind of spanish and Portugal commodity be carry plate to Peru , to this city of Potossi in cart and on horse : for it be but 10 . or 12 . day journey , and the country be very plain for cart to travail