of two point . the first , to know if there be any war between Spain and England . the second , why our merchant with their good be embarge or arrest . thus depart captain Samson with the say messenger to the city , where he find the governor and people much amaze of such a sudden accident . 100 the general with the advice and counsel of m . carleil his lieutenant general , who be in the galley with he , think not good to make any stand , till such time as they be within the shot of the city , where they may be ready upon the return of captain Samson , to make a sudden attempt if cause do require before it be dark . captain Samson return with his message in this sort . first , touch peace or war the governor say he know of no war , and that it lie not in he to make any , he be so mean a subject as he be . and as for the stay of the merchant with their good , it be the king pleasure , but not with intent to endamage any man . and that the king counter - commandment be ( which have be receive in that place some sevennight before ) that english merchant with their good shall be discharge : for the more verify whereof , he send such merchant as be in the town of our nation , who traffic those part : which be at large declare to our general by they , counsel be take what might best be do . and for that the night approach , it be think needful to land our force , which be do in the shut up of the day , and have quarter our self to our most advantage , with sufficient guard upon every strait , we think to rest our self for that night there . the governor send we some refresh , as bread , wine , oil , apple , grape , marmalad and such like . about midnight the weather begin to overcast , insomuch that it be think meet to repair aboard , then to make any long abode on land , and before we can recover the fleet , a great tempest arise , which cause many of our ship to drive from their anchorhold , and some be force to sea in great peril , as the bark Talbot , the bark Hawkins , and the Speedwell , which Speedewel be only drive into England , the other recover we again : the extremity of the storm last three day , which no soon begin to assuage , but m . carleil our lieutenant general be send with his own ship and three other : as also with the galley and with diverse ioi pinnace , to see what he may do above Vigo , where he take many boat and some caravel , diverse lade with thing of small value , but chief with household stufie , run into the high country , and among the rest , he find one boat lade with the principal church - stuff of the high church of Vigo , where also be their great cross of silver , of very fair emboss work , and double gilt all over , have cost they a great mass of money . they complain to have lose in all kind of good above thirty thousand ducat in this place . the next day the general with his whole fleet go from up the isle of Bayon , to a very good harbour above Vigo , where m . carleil stay his come , aswell for the more quiet ride of his ship , as also for the good commodity of fresh water , which the place there do afourd full well . in the mean time the governor of Galicia have rear such force as he may , his number by estimate be some two thousand foot , and three hundred horse , and march from Bayon to this part of the country , which lie in sight of our fleet , where make a stand , he send to parley with our general , which be grant by our general , so it may be in boat upon the water : and for safety of their person , there be pledge deliver on both side : which do , the governor of Galicia put himself with two other into our viceadmirals skiff , the same have be send to the shore for he , and in like sort our general go in his own skiffe ; where it be by they agree , we shall furnish our self with fresh water , to be take by our own people quiet on the land , and have all other such necessary , pay for the same , as the place will affburd . when all our business be end , we depart , and take our way by the island of Canaria , which be esteem some three hundred league from this part of Spain , and fall purposely with Palma , with intention to have take our pleasure of that place , for the full digest of many thing into order , and the better 102 furnish our store with such several good thing as it afford very abundant , we be force by the vile sea - gate , which at that present fall out , and by the naughtiness of the land place , be but one , and that under the favour of many platform well furnish with great ordinance , to depart with the receit of many of their canon - shot , some into our ship , and some beside , some of they be in very deed full canon high . but the only or chief mischief be the dangerous sea - surge , which at shore all alongst plain threaten the overthrow of as many pinnace and boat , as for that time shall have attempt any land at all . now see the expectation of this attempt frustrate by the cause aforesaid , we think it meet to fall with the isle Hierro , to see if we can find any better fortune : and come to the island , we land a thousand man in a valley under a high mountain , where we stay some two or three hour , in which time the inhabitant , accompany with a young fellow bear in England , who dwell there with they , come unto we , show their state to be so poor , that they be all ready to starve , which be not untrue : and therefore without any thing get , we be all