they yield to give a thousand crown for the abbey , leave we to take our pleasure upon the blockhouse , which they say they be not able to ransom , have stretch themselves to the uttermost of their power : and therefore the say blockhouse be by we undermine , and so with blow up in piece . while this latter contract be in make , our whole fleet of ship fall down towards the harbour mouth , where they anchor the three time , and employ their man in fetch of fresh water aboard the ship for our voyage homeward , which water be have in a great well , 126 gun powder 1586 . that be in the island by the harbour mouth : which island the island of be a very pleasant place as have be see , have in cam - it many sort of goodly and very pleasant fruit , as the orange tree and other , be set orderly in walk of great length together . insomuch as the whole island be some two or three mile about , be cast into ground of gardening and orchard . after six week abode in this place , we put to sea the last of march , where after two or three day a great ship which we have take at saint Domingo , and thereupon be call the new year gift , fall into a great leak , be lade with ordinance , hide , and other spoil , and in the night she lose the company of our fleet ; which be miss the next morning by the general , he cast about with the whole fleet , fear some great mischance to be happen unto she , as in very deed it so fall out : for her leak be so great , that her man be all tire with pump . but at the last have find she and the bark Talbot in her company , which stay by great hap with she , they be ready to take their man out of she , for the save of they . and so the general be full advertise of their great extremity , make sail direct back again to Cartagena with the whole fleet , where have stay eight or ten day more , about the unlade of this ship , and the bestow thereof and her man into other ship , we depart once again to sea , direct our course towards the cape S . Antony , be the westermost part of Cuba , where we arrive the seven and twenty of April . but because fresh water can not present be find , we weigh anchor , and depart , think in few day to recover the matan ^ as , a place to the eastward of Havana . after we have sail some fourteen day , we be bring to cape S . Anthony again , through lack of favourable wind : but than our scarcity be grow such , as need make we look a little better for water , which we find in sufficient quantity , be indeed , as i judge , none other then rain water new fall , and gather [ three . 54 . 6 . ] 127 a most commendable example of diligence in a general . up by make pit in a plot of marsh ground , some three hundred pase from the sea side . i do wrong if i shall forget the good example of the general at this place , who to encourage other , and to hasten the get of fresh water aboard the ship , take no less pain himself then the mean ; as also at saint Domingo , Cartagena , and all other place , have always so vigilant a care and foresight in the good order of his fleet , accompany they , as it be say , with such wonderful travel ! of body , as doubtless have he be the mean person , as he be the chief , he have yet deserve the first place of honour : and no less happy doe we account he , for be associate with master Carliel his lieutenant general , by who experience , prudent counsel , and gallant performance he achieve so many and happy enterprise of the war , by who also he be very great assist , in set down the needful order , law , and course of justice , and the due administration of the same upon all occasion . after three day spend in water our ship , we depart now the second time from this cape of S . Anthony the thirteenth of May , and proceed about the cape of Florida , we never touch any where ; but coast alongst Florida , and keep the shore still in sight , the 28 . of May early in the morning we descry on the shore a place build like a beacon , which be in deed a scaffold upon four long mast raise on end , for man to discover to the seaward , be in the latitude of thirty degree , or very near thereunto . our pinnace man , and come to the shore , we march up alongst the river side , to see what place the enemy hold there : for none among we have any knowledge thereof at all . here the general take occasion to march with the company himself in person , the lieutenant generail have the vanguard ; and go a mile up or somewhat more by the river side , we may discern on the other side of the river over against we , a fort which new have 128 be build by the Spaniard : and some mile or thereabouts above the fort be a little town or village without wall , build of wooden house , as the plot do plain show . we forthwith prepare to have ordinance for the battery ; and one piece be a little before the evening plant , and the first shot be make by the lieutenant general himself at their ensign , strike through the ensign , as we afterward understand by a french man , which come unto we from they . one shot more be then make , which strike the foot of the fort wall , which be all