a brief note of a voyage to the east Indies , begin the 10 of April 1591 , wherein be three tall ship , the Penelope of captain Raimond , admiral , the merchant royal , whereof be captain , Samuel Foxcroft , viceadmiral , the Edward Bonaventure , whereof be captain , m . James Lancaster , rear - admiral , with a small pinnace . write by Henry may , who in his return homeward by the west Indies , suffer shipwreck upon the isle of Bermuda , whereof here be annex a large description . he ten of April 1591 we depart from Plymmouth with the ship aforesaid . in May follow we arrive at grand Canaria one of the fortunate island . also towards the end of this month we take a Portugal ship be bind for Brasil , within three degree to the northward of the equinoctial , which serve great to our refresh . the 29 of July follow we come to Aguada Saldania a good harbour near the cape of Buona Speranza , where we stay about a month with the merchant royal , which by reason of sickness in our fleet be send home for England with diverse weak man . here we buy a ox for a knife of three penny , a sheep for a break knife or any other odd trifle , of the people which be negro , clad in cloak or mantle of raw hide , both man and woman . the 8 of September the Penelope and the Edward Bonaventure weigh anchor , and that day we double the cape of Buona Speranza . the 12 follow we be take with a extreme tempest or huricano . this evening we see a great sea break over our admiral the Penelope , and their light strike out : and after that we never see they 194 J592 ' any more . in October follow we in the Edward fall with the westermost part of the isle of saint Laurence about midnight , know not where we be . also the next day we come to a anchor at Quitangone a Quitangone place on the main land of Africa , which be two or three mozam - league to the northward of Mozambique , where the * ' Portugal of the isle of Mozambique fetch all their fresh water . here we take a pangaia , with a Portugal boy in it ; which be a vessel like a barge , with one mat - saile of Coco nut leave . the barge be sow together with the rind of tree , and pin with wooden pin . in this pangaia we have certain corn call millio , hen , and some fardel of blue Calicut cloth . the Portugal ! boy we take with we , and dismiss the rest . from this place we go for a island call Comoro , upon the ° f coast of melinde , which stand about 11 degree to the ComonSouth of the equinoctial : in which island we stay all November , find the people black and very comely , but very treacherous and cruel : for the day before we depart from thence they kill thirty of our man on shore , among who be William Mace our master , and two of his mate it ; the one of they be in the boat with he to fetch water , the other be on shore against our ship ; they have first betray our boat . from hence we go for the isle of Zanzibar , on the coast of melinde , they winter whereas we stay and winter until the begin of of r t r n • ° ° Zanzibar . February follow . the second of February 1592 we weigh anchor , and set sail direct for the east Indies ; but have calm and contrary wind , we be until the month of June before we can recover the coast of India near Calicut ; whereby many of our man die for want of refresh . in this month of June we come to a anchor at the isle of Pulo pinaom , whereas we stay until the first ° f day of September , our man be very sick , and die Pul ° ptnmm - apace . this day we set sail , and direct our course for Malaca : and we have not be far at sea , but we take a ship of the kingdom of pegu of some fourscore 195 they return homeward . ton with wooden anchor , and about fifty man in she , with a pinnace of some eighteen ton at her stern , both lade with pepper . but their pinnace steal from we in a gust in the morning . here we may have take two ship more of Pegu lade likewise with pepper and rice . in this month also we take a great Portugal ship of six or seven hundred tun , lade chief with victual , chest of hat , pintado , and Calicut clothes . beside this we take another Portugal ship of some hundred tun , lade with victual , rice , calico , pintado , and other commodity . Theise ship be bind for Malaca with victual : for those of goa , of saint Thomas , and of other place in the Indies do victuali iter , because that victual there be very scarce . in the month of November 1592 we shape our course for the island of Nicubar lie certain league to the northwest of the famous island of Sumatra ; whereas within short time we come to anchor : and here we have very good refresh : for after we arrive there , the people ( who we find in religion Mahumetans ) come aboard we in their canoas , with hen , coco , plantans , and other fruit : and within two day they bring unto we real of plate , give we they for Calicut cloth : which real they find by dive in the sea , which be lose not long before in two Portugal ship which be bind for China , and be cast away there . this be the further place that we be at to the southeast : and here because our company by this time be much waste and diminish , we resolve to turn back to the isle of Zeilan . wherefore we weigh anchor in the month of November , and arrive at Zeilan about the end of the same month . in this island grow great store of excellent cinamom , and the best diamond in the world . here our captain mean to stay to make up our voyage : whereof he conceive great hope , by certain intelligence which we have receive ; but the company , which be in all but 33 man and boy , be in a mutiny , and every day ready to go together by the ear ( the captain be sick 196 and like for to die ) will not stay , but will needs go home . the 8 of December 1592 we set sail homeward , but some 15 day before we have sight of the cape of good hope , we be force to share our bread , by reason we have certain fly in our ship , which devour most part of our bread before we be aware : so that when we come to share , we have but 31 pound of bread a man to carry we into England , with a small quantity of rice a day . the last of march 1593 we double the cape of bona Speranza . they double the cape of bona sper - anza . the isle of in April next ensue we come to anchor at the island of saint Helena , whereas we find a english man a tailer