spoil by the pirate . the first be on the north sea in a certain place which 1 . place . lie fourteen league from number de dios , the place be call aele to the eastwards , where once before certain man of war have enter into those sea . the other place be number de dios , although this be a bad 2 - flueplace and naughty way , and full of water and a very as dirty way : for three part of the year the country people do travel upon those water , and a other very bid way , which be the go up of certain rock and mountain which they must climb , call the mountain of Capira , which be of height three quarter of a league , so in this place with very small store of soldier we can defend our self from the fury of the enemy , so these dweller do say that in summer the way be very good without either dirt or water . the other entrance be up the river of Chagre , which 3 - place . river mouth lie eighteen league from number de dios to the westwards fall into the north sea , and this be the place which the citizen of Panama do most fear , for they may come up this river to Venta de the place of cruze , and so from thence march to this city , which be but five league offi so up this river there go boat and bark which do carry 320 . quintals weight . these be they which carry the most part of the merchandise which do come from Spain to be transport to Peru , and from Venta de cruze it be carry to Limaret which be three league off that place , and the dweller do report that it be a very good way : and if any man of war will attempt to come into these sea , they may very easy come up this river as far as Venta de cruze , and from thence march unto this city , and if the enemy will , they may bring their pinnace ready make in four quarter , and so take in sunder , may 151 rebellion fear , in the west Indies . afterward set they together again : as it be report that Francis Drake have use it once before when he come that voyage ; and so he may attempt we both by sea and land . and forasmuch as the most part of these people be merchant , they will not fight , but only keep their own person in safety , and save their good ; as it have be see heretofore in other place of these Indies . so if it will please your majesty to cause these house to be strong fortify , consider it stand in a very good place if any sudden alarm shall happen , than the citizen with their good may get themselves to this place , and so escape the terror of the enemy : and so this will be a good security for all the treasure which do come from Peru . so all the pirate and rebel , which have rob in these part , have go about what they can to stop this passage , and so by this mean to stop the trade of Spain , and to set soldier in this place , for to intercept and take your majesty treasure , whereby none may be carry into Spain . therefore it behoove your majesty to fortify these place very strong . these place be fortify in this manner , your majesty shall have all your gold and silver bring home in safety which come from Peru . and all those commodity which be lade in Spain may come safe to this place . and if perchance any rebel shall rise in these part , which will rebel against your majesty , which God forbid , and if they shall chance to join with any of these pirate , have this place so well fortify , and Puerto bello in the north part , and so to send some garrison your majesty need not to fear : for here in this harbour be always 10 or 12 bark of 60 or 50 ton apiece , which do belong to this harbour . so if any of these place shall | be intercept , than your majesty have no other place fit than this to land your majesty soldier , for than they have but 18 . league to march by land , and present they may be 152 ship to supply these place which shall stand in most need of they . in all the coast of Peru there be no harbour that have any ship but only this place , and the city of Lima , where there be some ship and bark . the harbour be thus open without any defence , a man of war may very easy come to this place , as i have certify your majesty , through the streit of magellane , and arrive at that instant , when those bark , do come from Peru with your majesty gold and silver , for sometime they bring 5 or 6 million in those bark ; so the enemy may come and take all their treasure , and not lose one man , because here be not one man to resist he , therefore this place be thus fortify , the treasure may be keep in the fort . there be a trench make round about your majesty house which be build of timber : the precedent and judge do cause it to be make , for that here be news bring that there be certain man of war , and pirate come for these part . so this trench be thus maintain until such time as your majesty pleasure be to the contrary , and in such wise that your soldier may fight lie behind the trench ; so there be order give to build a platform upon the plain ground , and so to plant such ordinance in those place , as shall be think most convenient . if it will please your majesty , here we may make a sconce or fort towards the land side , and so trench it round about and build it with stone , because here be a place and all thing ready for the same purpose ; and by this mean the ci tie will be secure keep : as for the sea there be no danger at all