neither be there any good water : and it be subject to northerly wind and easterly wind , which continual do blow upon this coast : many of the great ship which do come to this place do unlade half their commodity between the two ledge of rock , for that there be but little water in the harbour : and after that a ship have unlade half of her good , than she go to the second rock , as it do appear by the platform , but the small ship come near unto another rock on the west side . if the wind chance to come to the north and northwest , and that it overblow , than such great ship as then be in the road must of force more themselves with six cable a head , especial in a storm , and yet nevertheless sometime they be drive ashore and so cast away , and all because they dare not vier cable enough , because of so many shelf and rock which be in both those place : also the ship do roll very much in the harbour , by reason in foul weather the sea will be mighty grow , which be the cause that their cable do oftentimes break , and their ruther be unhanged , the cause thereof be by reason the ship do ride but in little water , yet go there a great sea . the city be build and situate very well if it be a good harbour , it stand upon the Eastside upon a rock where they may build a very good fort , accord to the platform for the safeguard of this harbour : but see it be but a bad haven and shallow water , therefore i do think that it be not needful for your majesty to be at any charge in fortify that place , but only a trench to be make of earth or clay , so that these townsman may defend themselves from danger of 3 . or 4 . ship . the city of Panama be eighteen league from number de dios , the way be exceed bad thitherwards ; yet notwithstanding all the silver be bring this way to number de dios , as well your majesty treasure 143 number de dios in 9 deg . and one tierce . as other merchandise ; so likewise the most part of those commodity which be carry to Peru , and the rest of the merchandise be carry to the river of Chagre which be some 18 league from this city and it be bring up by this river within five league of Panama unto a inn or lodge call Venta de cruze , and from this place afterward they be transport to Panama upon mule . the high way which go from number de dios to Panama may be very well mend , only to remove this way and to stop it quite up , and so to make it again upon the side of a mountain . this city lie in nine degree and one tierce , and if your majesty will give order that this city shall be pluck down and new build again in Puerto bello , than you be to make a new way through the mountain of Capira , by reason it may not be frequent and because the high way be very bad : with little charge they may be break and so shut up , and the channel of this harbour may be stop with the timber of those old ship which be lay up here every year , and then afterward may be cast a great number of stone into the same , and so by this mean to dam up the harbour : and here be great want of stone to ballast the ship : wherefore they be fain to go to a island three league from Cartagena call Isla de los bastimentos , and this be a thing very needful for this country , as by experience i have see . Puerto bello . puerto bello lie five league from number de dios westward : it be a very good harbour and sufficient to receive great store of ship , and have very good ankering , and fresh water : for near the shore you shall find some six fathom water , and in the midst of the same harbour you shall find twelve fathom , very good and clean ground or sand , without either bank or rock . there be twelve small river or brook of water which do belong to this harbour , and so do meet all together : 144 so that the fleet may at all time provide themselves off fresh water so much as shall serve their turn . and like wise there be in this place great store of timber to build ship , and stone to ballast ship . also the harbour have no danger at all in come in , but only when the wind be westerly , which be seidome see upon this coast . the wind which do most blow upon this coast be northerly wind , and they be more dangerous and hurtful than the easterly wind be . within this harbour there lie a small creek safe from all wind that can blow . this creek be about five hundred yard long , and so many in breadth , and in the enter in of this creek mouth it be some 300 . yard broad , and four fathom and a half of water : and enter further in , six fathom , all oaze and muddy ground : so that if a ship shall chance to strike or come aground , she can take no harm be soft oaze ; also it do ebb and flow accord as i have certify your majesty already . and likewise the come in and go out of this harbour be very good ; and with all kind of weather a ship may set sail from this place except with a westerly wind : and all this coast be very clean where a ship at all time may come to anchor without the harbour mouth . this harbour be environ round about with wood : and at the end of this harbour there be certain land which be overflow with water : it may be easy dry up and wall round about , so this land will serve very well to feed cattle . for that be the chief thing which do belong to any city or town , and of this pasture ground there be great want in number de dios