, ground , and grave my caravel . than i command all my man to lie on shore , after i have cause to be make for they a little sconce like a half moon for their defence , be jealous of the Spaniard , of who estate i can gather no certainty , till from Margarita Antony Berreo for his defence have get some 300 . soldier , a great number than i be able to encounter withal , have then but 50 . man , because my caravel before their come be send away . the Simerones of the island trade with i still in like a treasonable practice of the Spaniard . sort . and the Spaniard now provide for i , begin to send messenger to i in kindness . notwithstanding though i have no reason to assault they , because they be both poor 8c strong , yet for my experi - they march from one side of the island to the other . ence and pleasure i march 4 . long march upon the island , 8c the last from one side of the island to the other , which be some 50 . mile : go and come through a most monstrous thick wood ( for so be most part of the island ) 8c lodging my self in indian town . the country be fertile , and full of fruit , strange beast , and fowl , whereof munkei , babion 8c parats be in great abundance . be much delight with this island , and mean to stay here some time about discover the main right against the same ( the entrance into the captalne Harpers intelligence of Guiana . empire of Guiana ) be show the discovery thereof by captain Popham , who receive the discovery of the say empire from one captain harper , which be a prisoner learned of the Spaniard at the canary in the self same manner almost , as sir Walter Ralegh very discreet have write . the intelligence of harper , i conceive , the captain have yet to show 206 in spanish . this discovery of Guiana i great desire : yet lest i shall adventure all occasion upon it only , i send my two caravel from i the 17 . day of HistwoCara - February , to try their fortune in the Indies not appoint any other place to meet but England , fur - e nish they with all the provision that i can spare , and divide my victual equal with they , know they be able to do more good in the Indies then great ship . the caravel be go , i begin to inquire private of the savage concern the main over against we , and learn that the name of the kingdom join to the sea - coast be in order these . the kingdom of Morucca , the kingdom of Seawano , the Seawano call kingdom of waliame , the kingdom of caribe , the filter in stir kingdom of yguirie , and right against the northermost s 0 part of Trinidad , the main be call the high land of covery cia - paria , the rest a very low land . Morucco i learn to want . be full of a green stone call Tacarao , which be good ^ Walter for the stone . in Seawano i hear of a mine of gold ff ^ aima to be in a town call Wackerew , the captain name andwikeri ’ in Semaracon . of waliame i will speak last , because his discovery . therein i make most discovery . the caribe i learn to be man - eater or cannibal , and great enemy to the islander of Trinidad . the kingdom of yguiri i hear to be full of a metal call by the indian arara , which be either copper ( as i can learn ) or very base gold . in the high land of Paria i be inform by diverse of these Indians , that there be some Perota , which with they be silver , and great store of most excellent cane - tobacco . but lasdy to come to waliame , it be the first kingdom of the empire of Guiana . the great wealth which i understand to be therein , and the assurance that i have by a indian , my interpreter , of a golden mine in a town of this kingdom call Orocoa , in the river ( as he call it ) of owrinoicke be much to be esteem . this indian speak Spanish , and whatsoever he know , he reveal it to my self only by a private interpreter , not in word alone , but offer upon pain of life to be guide 207 this Indians name be Balthasar , who afterward give our man the slip at their great need . the river of Amana and the kingdom of TivlAvas be both mention by sir Walter Ralegh . a people sprinkle with powder of gold . himself to any place that he speak of . this discovery of the mine i mention to my company , who altogether mutine against my go , because they something fear the villainy of Abraham Kendal , who will by no mean go . i then want my lose pinnace , and be constrain to send 14 . man in my shipboat for this discovery , with most of the discreet man in my ship , and give they their direction to follow , write under my own hand . they go from i , and enter into one of the mouth by the break land , which river go under the name of the great river Orenoque , the foreland whereof be call Capulio bear south and by west , want a four part , from the point of Curiapan aforesaid , be 4 . leag distant . they find the main ( as China be report ) full of fresh river run one into another , abound with fish , and a land all woody , seem to have great store of strange beast and fowl , and very populous . they enter into a small river call Cabota , the people name Veriotaus , a courteous people . the next river they pass be call Mana in the kingdom of Tivitivas , where the king offer to bring a Canoa full of this golden oar , and to this purpose send a Canoa , which return and bring my man this answer , that Armago captain of the town of Orocoa and the mine refuse they , but if they will come thither , he himself will make they answer . upon this my boat go , and at his appoint place he meet they with some 100 man in canoas , and tell they that by force they shall have