: but we so gall they with our musket , that we put they from our quarter . than they wind their galley , come up into our stern , and with the way that the galley have , do so violent thrust in the board of our captain cabin , that her nose come into it , mind to give we all their prow , and so to sink we . but we be resolute , so ply they with our small shot , that they can have no time to discharge their great ordinance : and when they begin to approach , we heave into they a ball of fire , and by that mean put they off : whereupon they once again fall astern of we , and give we a prow . then have the second time put they off , we go to prayer , and sing the first part of the 25 . psalm , praise God for our safe deliverance . This be do , we may see 2 . galley and a frigate all three of they bend themselves together to encounter we : hereupon we ( eftsoon commend our estate into the hand of God ) arm our self , and resolve ( for the honour of God , her majesty , and our country ) to fight it out till the last man . then shake a pike of fire in defiance of the enemy , and weave they amain , we bid they come aboard : and a Englishman in the galley make answer , that they will come aboard present . So manage ourselves to our furniture , and every moment expect the assault , we hear they parley to this effect , that they determine to keep we company till the morning , and then to make a end with we : then give we another shot from one of the galley , they fall astern . thus our fight continue with the ship and with the galley , from seven of the clock in the morning till eleven at night . howbeit God ( which never fail they that put their trust in he ) send we a gale of wind about two of the clock in the morning at Eastnortheast , which be for the prevent of their cruelty , and the save of our 181 a fight from 7 . in the morning till 11 . at night . live . also ( the lord be praise for it ) in all this dangerous fight , we have not one man slay , and . but 2 . hurt : but our sail and rope be so rend with their shot , that it be wonderful to behold : our main mast also be shoot clean through , whereby we be in exceed great danger . thus our consort forsake we , and leave we in these extremity . the next day be the 14 . of June in the morning , we see all our adversary to leeward of we , and they espy we , chase we till 10 . of the clock , and then see they can not prevail , give we over . so that day about 5 . of the clock in the afternoon , we bear up to the southwest , in hope to find our consort , but we have no sight of they at that time , nor afterward . then stand we in all that night for the cape of S . Anthony , hope there to see our admiral accord to his direction . the 15 . day of June early in the morning , we descry the spanish fleet again , be within 5 . league of cape S . Anthony . than ( have no sight of our consort ) we stand for the place accord to the direction of our owner sir George Carey , where we do ply for the space of 23 . day , and never can see any sail but two frigate , which we give chase unto the 24 . of June , and can not fetch they up . thus we give God most humble thanks for our safe deliverance from the cruel enemy , which have be more mighty by the providence of God , than any tongue can express : to who be all praise , honour , and glory , both now and ever , amen . Appendix . the bark call the content have but one minion ; one falcon , one saker , and 2 . port - base . she continue fight ( from seven in the morning till sunset ) with 3 . armada of 600 . and 700 . ton apiece , and one small ship of 100 ton , not be above musket shoot from any of they . and before the sun be set , there come up to her two of the king galley . beside , the armada shoot their great ordinance continual at she , not so few 182 as 500 time . and the side , hull , and mast of the content be sow thick with musket bullet . Moreover , all their sheat , top and shrowd be almost cut insunder with their great and small shot . there pass from the galy ( each whereof come thrice up to she , and discharge five great piece at a time , out of every their prowess forthright , within three yard of her poop ) through her main sail 19 great shot , through her main topsail four : through her foresail seven : through her fore - top - saile five : and through her main mast one . the upper part of the content be hurt in five place . only 13 man continue this fight , the rest be in hold . a frigate of the Spaniard ( be afterward take ) confess , that there be in the galley above 40 . Spaniards slay , and many be hurt in that combat . person that continue the ' Charles cream . Thomas Godfrey . Giles Thornton . John pell . John bourel . Ralph grey . William their . the name of those 13 fight . Nicolas Lisle , captain . m . major , lieutenant . William king , master . John Barwick , mrs . mate . William Clement , gunner . Thomas houldship , boatswain . the name of the rest be John John John John John Pie . smith . white . butcher . brook . these follow . ' John Towpenie . Edmund Giggs . William Bateman . William white . Laurence shelly .