, “ woa ®^^^^ on 30 at ™ 2021 * “ °' 24 ' " ‘ ° h ‘‘ ps : / / doi . org / 10 . 1017 / CBO97 ' 11072 ' 6337 . 014 your majesty heretofore of . our lord keep your majesty many year . from Havana the 20 of October , 1590 . your majesty servant , who royal foot i kiss , John de Trexeda governor of Havana . a letter send to don Petro de Xibar one of his majesty privy counsel of the west Indies , from don Diego Mendez de Valdes governor of S . Juan de Puerto Rico the 20 of November 1590 , touch the state of that city and island . receive your honour letter the 20 of February , whereby i receive great content , to hear that your honour be in good health . as touch the imprisonment of our cousin don Pedro de Valdes , it do grieve i to the very soul . i beseech God to send he his liberty : and likewise the imprisonment of Diego flores de Valdes grieve i very much : i pray God to send good justice . the m . of the field Juan de Texela , and the m . workman Juan Baptista Antonio arrive here in safety , and have view this city with all the circuit round about and the situation as i have inform his majesty thereof . they have mark a place to build a strong fort , whereat the country remain very well content . and it stand in a good situation , and in a convenient place on a high mount which do lie upon the enter in of the harbour , and so cut over to a point of land , leave in the fort as much space as will contain 3000 person , without join thereunto any part of the coast . So the m . deal campo have name the fort Citadella . he leave i great store of iron work , tool eight workman , and 200 negro , which be the king . and the island do find 400 pioner which be continual at work . his majesty have send i a ten i6t i * Pedro de Valdes , prisoner in England . John Baptista Antonio the generail inge - nour of the west Indies . a strong fort new build in saint Juan de Puerto Rico . warrant to spend the provision of the island , and to take those rent which his majesty have here , and to certify his majesty what there be want for the maintain of the workman and that they may have all thing necessary . so i have send to Nueva Espanna , for such thing as be here want . i have write to the m . of the field , which be go to Havana , inform he that it do great import that the work with all expedition shall go forward , see that it be begin for the defence of the island . and we do defend it as well as we can from the enemy , in respect of the great danger which otherwise may happen , if the enemy shall come and find it begin , and not end . and likewise that his majesty will send i that which i do request . and the most principal thing of all be , to send more negro . And send i all these thing which be needful , i trust in God i shall in short time build up the fort , to defend Thisfirt be we from the enemy . the fort must be build triangle t ^ en by the wjse . for reach infO the bay : and we shall be able berland to plant in the same 40 piece of good ordinance , canon , 1598 . demi - canon , and culverin . the m . of the field , have promise to send i some from Havana . for that he be determine to cast some there , by reason of the great copper mine store of copper , which now of late be find in Havana : ^ H ^ vana ™ f ° r ere we have as yet but small store of ordinance to ’ defend we . i look for 5 canon which his majesty shall send from Spain , with shot and powder and all kind of weapon , because that here be great want in the island . his majesty have send the whole number of 200 soldier 200 soldier , and in the company there come two SdePuertoRico captain . the corpse de guard be keep in the market 1500fight place : and twice in a month i muster all the man in man inn . Juan the hand , and find very near 1500 fight man , and depuerto Rico go horseman . the fort when it be end will be the san ' strong that his majesty have in all the Indies . and now the people of the country sleep in security . for the boldness of common before , the Englishman will come and beard the english . we t0 haven mouth . God keep your honour , and 162 send you long health . from Puerto Rico the 20 of November 1590 . the governor Diego Mendez de Valdes . a letter to John Lopez canavate , alderman in the town of canavate in Spain write from his servant Juan de Porva canavate , from Havana the seventeenth of October 1590 , touch the state of the say place . he be to give you to understand , that since my departure from saint Lucar i have write unto you twice of my arrival here , and what success i have have . and now you shall understand that i be determine to go for Nueva Espanna . for i stay but opportunity of time . for here be great watch daily keep and great look to the soldier in keep of they together , for run away . but nevertheless i hope in God , to find some friend to convey i away from hence . this country be so close and narrow , that if a man steal not away hide in some ship , it be not possible for he to escape , nor to go a league out of the town , no way but by sea . and because the harbour be so close , it be the best harbour and the sure in the world . the harbour be make in this order . the entry in toward