for the bay of Honduras , and about the nine of May we discover in the afternoon a sail thwart of the bay of Truxillo , with who we stand , and have a spanish flag out , they mistrust we not , until we have almost fetch they up : and then we go off with our boat , and take they within shot of the castle , and with our boat we go and fetch three or four frigate which T & ? thought ride afore the town , the castle play upon we with somefieete their ordinance .. 0 from ^ aine , our captain have understanding by the Spaniard , fir so they that there be three ship more at Puerto de Cavallos , expect . stand along that night for that place , but it fall out to be so calm , that it be the fifteen day of may or ever we come there , the ship have peradventure discover we , steal alongst the shore towards Truxillo , so that be void of that hope , we land ; the inhabitant forsake the town , flee into the mountain . we remain in the town all night , and the next day till towards night : where we find 5 . or 6 . tun of quick silver , 16 . tun of old sack , sheep , young kid , great store of poultry , some store of money , and good linen , silk , cotton - cloth , and such like ; we also take three bell out of their church , and destroy their image . the town be of 200 house , and wealthy ; and that year there be four rich ship lade from thence : but we 187 spare it , because we find other contentment . and have take our pleasure of the town , as aforesaid , we return aboard our ship , stand back again for Truxillo , we discover one of the ship which be lade at Puerto de Cavallos : but they have espy we before , as it shall seem ; for they have convey away as much as possible they can ashore , and set their ship on fire ; which so soon as we have descry , we make to she with our boat , and quench the fire , and load up with hide the ship which we take at our first come ; for she have but a thousand hide in she , and certain jar of balsamum : which be accomplish , we sink the ship with the rest of the good , and so stand alongst again for Truxillo . it fall out to be so calm , that we be two and twenty day sail back that we have sail in six day , which be about forty league : so that when we come before Truxillo , which be about the six of June , we find another of the ship there , but close under the castle , her ruther unhanged , her sail take from the yard , etc notwithstanding we enter she , but they have place such a company of musketeer under a rampire , which they have make with hide and such like , that it be too hot for we to abide , and so betake we to our ship again , and stand out of the bay into the sea , we discover great store of shot entrench in those place where they suspect we will have land . that night there fall such a storm of rain , thunder , lighten and tempestuous weather , that our ship be disperse either from other . and have determine all of we to meet at a certain island , where we purpose to water and refresh our self ; by mean of the storm and other contagious weather which follow , we be frustrate of that hope . we have lose our prize , and certain frigate with the man . two of our ship go to seek our prize and our man : and other two of we came homeward . and so we part , not hear either of other until we come into England . 188 our place of meeting shall have be at the tortuga ' s near unto the point of Florida , but the golden dragon and the prudence be put to leeward of this place : nevertheless we fall with certain island within the point of Florida , where the captain of the dragon m . Christopher Newport send his pinnace on shore with certain shot to seek for fresh water , where we find none ; but find the savage very courteous unto we , who come breast high into the sea , and bring we a line to hall in our boat on shore , and show we that up into the land northward be fresh water , and much gold . and one Michael bag of Ipswich boatswains mate of the dragon , have give he by one of the savage for a old rusty hatchet , a piece of gold wound hollow , and about the bigness and value of a english angel , which the savage ware hang about his knee , with two piece of fine silver plate , whereof one then say savage give John lock , master mate of the dragon , be fourteen groat in value , for a old knife : the other piece he give to one William Wright a sailer , for a old knife : which piece of silver be in form like unto the boss of a bridle . Theise Savages be far more civil than those of Dominica : for beside their courtesy , they cover their privity with a plait mat of green straw , about three handful deep , which come round about their waste , with the bush hang down behind . the next day in the morning very early , there come a frigate of the island of Cuba of 30 ton , put in by weather , which be bind for Havana , wherein be fifty hog ; to which we give chase all that day , pass the gulf of Bahama , and about five of the clock in the afternoon , after a shot or two make at she , she yield unto we : we hoist out our boat , and go aboard , where we find some five Spaniard , five and fifty hog , and about some two hundred weight of excellent tobacco roll up in seyne . we lighten they of their hog and tobacco , and send the man away with their frigate . in this voyage we take and sack four town , 189 seventeen frigate , and two ship , whereof eight be take in the bay of the Honduras ; of all which we bring but two into England : the rest we sink , burn , and one of they we send away with their man . and to make up the full number of twenty , the Spaniard themselves set one on fire in the bay of the Honduras , lest we shall be master of it . we shape our course from Florida homeward by the isle of Flores one of the azore , where we water , find sir John Burgh there , who take we to be Spaniard , and make up unto we ; with who we join in the take the mighty Portugal carrack call Madre de Dios , and our captain m . Christopher Newport with diverse of we be place in she as captain by the general sir John Burgh to conduct she into England , where we arrive in Dartmouth the seven of September 1592 .