wherefore we ankor that night some two league to the eastward of it , and in the morning i go on land , and nine more with i , to see if we can discover the town , but we can not , we go above a league up into the country , but can not see any village or town . So return back , we meet our general , with diverse other which come ashore with he , with who we march into the country again , but can see nothing , and so return . at the water side captain Prowse die . there we remain all that day on land , by reason the wind blow so much that we can not get aboard until the evening . after our 223 come aboard a boat which we send into the bay , return and bring we news , that there ride a bark within the bay , and by all likelihood the town shall be there . so present our general go into the bay with the darling and some of the small caravel . the ten day in the morning , the rest of our ship come into the bay , and our man land the same day , about io or two of the clock in the night , Sc so march on towards the town : but in the way they have make barricado , and keep they very strong . notwithstanding the courage of our man be such , as that they fear nothing , and force they to leave their force , and fly . have win this barricado they there remain until the next day be the 11 of June , and then early in the morning they march on towards the town , where by the way , the enemy often time come to skirmish with they , but always flee . in fine they win the town without any great loss of man , God be thank . have get the town , they find nothing in it at all ; for they have intelligence from Sant Iago , how we have use they before , which cause they to convey all their good into the mountain and wood : find nothing in it , our general cause it to be set on fire , think it not good to remain there , but to return again , back to the ship : and the great cause be by reason of the departure of captain Sommers : who the day before in a most furious tempest , be in the pinnace , with some 50 man at anchor , have his cable break and lose all his anchor , and so be fain to put to sea to save himself , otherwise they have be in danger of perish . thus our general and his company , return back again the twelve day and embarked themselves , and depart away with all speed to seek captain Sommers . the 13 towards night , he come where captain Sommers be , and find he ride , but not by any anchor , but by two base , which they have make for to stay their bark by : at which meeting the company be very glad . than they determine to 224 Amias Preston and George Sommers a . d .. J595 - go into a mighty great bay , to a town call Laguna : the bay of but the bay be so deep and shall withal , that we return back again , after we have stand in two day and a night . so we sail over towards the isle of Hispaniola the sixteenth of June : and the twenty day Hispaniola . we see it . the 21 we ankor under cape Tiburon . here we water , and stay until the 25 of the same . after our departure out of the bay of Laguna , a great sickness fall among our fleet , and there die about eighty man of the same . this sickness be the flux of the belly , which be a common disease in that country . we remain about this island until the eight and twenty of this month . than we depart from thence , and the second of July arrive at the island of Jamaica . Jamaica . before our come hither , the three ship of Hampton have forsake we , and leave our company . and the darling wherein be captain Jones , be send the death of to discover some other secret matter , in which dis - captaineJones . covery the valiant gentleman end his life . so our whole fleet be now but our generail , with captain Sommers , and a small pinnace . we stay at this isle of Jamaica until the sixth of July , in which mean time we land to see if we can kill any beef , but we can not , they be so wild : here be great store of they , and great plenty of freshfish . we depart hence the 6 of July , and pass by the island , call Caimanes , and the isle de Pinos , and the 12 of the say month by cape de Corrientes where we cape de cor - watered , and the same night , we set sail towards the riente . cape of saint Anthony , be the westermost part of the isle of Cuba . the 13 day in the morning we be under this cape , and the same day we meet with the honourable knight , sir Walter Ralegh , return from his painful , and happy discovery of Guiana , and his surprise of the isle of Trinidad . so with glad heart , we keep he and his fleet of three ship company till the twenty day at night , what time we lose they . in all which time nothing of moment fall out , save ten 225 p that we give chase to a couple of frigate , but can not fetch they . afterwards we ply to recover Havana , until the five and twenty of July : than we set our course for the head of the martyr , the 27 we be in sight of they . the 28 we enter the gulf of Bahama : than we set the bank of our course homeward towards Newfoundland , but we Newfoundland coul ( l not fetch it , but be on the bank , and take fish there the 20 day of August . the same night we set sail to come home , by reason the wind be contrary to go in with Newfoundland . So the ten day of September , we arrive in safety ( God be thank ) in Milford haven in wale , have perform so long a voyage in the space of six month , or somewhat less .