a excellent ruttier for the island of the west Indies , and for Tierra firma , and Nueva Espanna . f a man depart from the bar of saint Lucar in summer time , he must steer southwest until he have sight of Punta de Naga , which be in the isle of tenerif . the mark to know it be these . a high point slope to the sea , and at the easter point it have two down fall like partition , and they show to be separate from the main of the island and stand in 28 degree and a half . and if thou will have sight of the grand Canaria , and find thy self with Punta de Naga , thou shall then steer Southwest and by south , and so thou shall have sight of Canaria which stand in 28 degree . and thou must come to anchor on the southeast side 280 of the island . but i advise thou , if it be in winter time , that thou keep another course , and that as follow . the course that a man must keep depart in winter for the Indies from Sant Lucar . depart from Sant Lucar in winter thou shall go west and by south keep along the coast , because if thou go far from the coast , thou shall meet with the wind off the sea until thou be as high shot as cape Cantin , which be a low flat cape with the sea . cape Cantin . and thou shall see a great wood before thou come at a great wood this cape , call Casa deal Cavallero . and from thence before you thou shall steer thy old course , that be southwest and by south for the isle of Alegranza , and Lancerota ; and ' when thou be north and south with Alegranza , thou shall steer thence Southwest , and so thou shall see the Canaria , which be a round high land , and stand in twenty eight degree . what thou must do if a contrary wind take thou fifty league off the shore . when thou be fifty league shoot on thy way into the sea Southwest off , and there thou chance to meet with a contrary wind off the sea , and if it force thou to put room , than thou shall steer Northeast and by east , and shall hall with sight of Cabos del plata , which show when thou be a seaboord so far as thou may descry they , to be like two point of white sand : and if it be clear thou shall see within the land certain high hill lie northwest and by west call las Sierras de Zahara , and be three league from land thou shall have thirty fathom water , and sand : and from thence to the bay of Cadiz thou shall go along northwest by the coast : and if thou be in thirty or forty fathom , thou shall have oaze ; but if thou be in less than thirty fathom , thou shall have other sound ; which if it chance , than thou be against s . 281 the bay of Cadiz . san Pedro Pedro and if it be by day thou shall see the ermi - san Sebastian . tage of gaunt Sebastian , which seem to be a ship under sail . and thou shall go into the bay take los puercos . heed of the Puercos , give they a good birth off . and if thou chance to be benight when thou fall with the bay , and will go into the bay , thou shall carry thy lead in thy hand , and be sound : and find thy self in rocky ground , thou shall steer north because of shun the puercos : and yet give they not thediamant . too great a birth because of the diamant , and so thou may go in , sound when thou think good . And be benight and then not east and west with the bay , and if thou do not go into it , then make the large board thou can keep off till day . the canary . if thou be at the canary and will sail to Nueva Espanna , thou shall sail four and twenty hour south because of the calm of Fierro . and from thence thou shall go westsouthwest , until thou find thy self in twenty degree . and than thou must go west and the isle de - by south , which be the course for the isle Deseada . and seada in the from Deseada thou shall go west and by north , be - westcause of the variation of the compass . And fall with * degree of Deseada , thou shall find it to rise low with the sea : latitude . and it stand in 15 degree . and the eastermost part be the sharp , and small than the west point . and if thou be go for Tierra firma , thou shall go west and by south until thou come to Dominica , and there on the northwest side be a river , where thou mark to may water . the mark to know it be a certain know domi - high land full of hill . And see it when thou be mca by . far ogr to the it make in the midst a partition ; so that a man will think it divide the island in two part . and this island stand in 14 degree and a half . i advise thou that if thou will go for Nueva Guadalupe . Espanna , and so do pass between Guadalupe and monserate . monserate to the westward , that be thus open off the entrance betwixt they thou shall go westnorthwest , 282 and so shall have sight of Santa Cruz , which stand Santa Cruz . in seventeen degree and a half . and the mark to know it be these . it be a island not very high , and lie east and west , and at the east end it be low than at the west end . and go forward on thy course thou shall run westnorthwest , and so thou shall go to have sight of the isle of San Juan de Puerto rico , which be a island S . Juan the lie east and west , and stand in eighteen degree . P ^ to rico . and the mark be these .