amity . the ten day the Spaniard conclude for the ransom of the town for 24000 ducat , and one prisoner promise to pay for his ransom 4000 ducat . 234 the fourteenth day they bring in the town ransom in pearl , but rate so dear as the general after conference with they , mislike it , send it back again , give they four hour respite to clear themselves with their treasure . the sixteenth the governor come into the town about dinner , and upon conference with the general tell he plain , that he care not for the town , neither will he ransom it : and that the pearl be bring in without his command or consent , and that his detract of time so long be only to send the other town word , that be not of force to withstand we , whereby they may convey all their good , cattle , and wealth into the wood out of danger . So the general give the governor leave to depart accord to promise , have two hour to withdraw himself in safety . the seventeenth sir Thomas Baskervil with the Eliza beth Constance , the phoenix , the caravel with four or five pinnace go some five league to the westward , and land , march some four league up into the country to a place call Tapia , which he take and Tapia take . burn certain village and farm house about it . he have some resistance as he pass over a river , but have but one man hurt , which he bring aboard alive with he : he march one league far and burn a village call Sallamca , and so return with some prisoner , Sallamca the soldier have get some pillage . burn . the 18 the Rancheria , and the town of Rio de la Hacha be burn clean down to the ground , the church and a lady house only except , which by her letter write to the general be preserve . that day we set sail and fall to leeward , to meet with sir Thomas Baskervil . the 19 we weigh and stand to leeward for cape Cape de de Aguja , which the twenty at sun rise we see . Aguja . it be a cape subject much to flaw , by reason it be a very high land : and within the cape lie a island within 235 the mouth of the sound , which have a white cliff or spot in the westnorthwest part of the island . the land all about the cape rise all in hammock or break steepy hill . a league Southwest within that , ( for so fall the land thereabouts ) there stand on the top of a cliff a watchhouse : and a little within that a small island : you may go in between the main and it , or to leeward if you lust : and hard within that be Santa Martha the road and town of Santa Martha , which at 11 of take . the clock we take , the people all be flee , except a few Spaniard , negro and Indians , , which in a bravado at our land give we some 30 or 40 shot , and so run away . that night their lieutenant general be take and some little pillage bring in out of the wood : for in the town nothing be leave but the house sweep clean . in all the main be not a rich place for gold : for the hop be mix with the earth in every place , and also in the sand a little to the leeward of the town . in the bay we have a bad ride by reason of a small moon , for every small moon make foul weather all the main along . the 21 , the general cause the town to be burn , and all the ship to weigh , and stand out , many of the soldier be embark where the general have appoint , in the small ship which ride near the shore . we lose that night the company of the phoenix , captain Austin , Peter Lemond , and the garland pinnace , which stand along the shore , and be chase off by galley out of Carthagena Peter Lemond with nine of our man be take , the rest come safe to our fleet . the 26 we see the hand some twelve league to the eastward of number de Dios stand in towards the shore , but towards night we stand to the oflin until the next day . number de the 27 we come into the mouth of number de dios , Dios take , and by one of the clock take the town , the people 236 be all flee except some too Spaniards , which keep the fort , and play upon we , have in the fort some 3 or 4 small piece of ordinance , and one of they break in discharge at we . they give we also a volley of small shot : but see our resolution in run upon they they all flee and take the wood . the town be big , have large street , house very hie , all build of timber , but one church very fair and large wrought all of timber likewise . Nothing be leave in the town of value : there be a show in their shop of great store of merchandise that have be there . there be a mill above the town , and upon the top of another hill in the wood stand a little watchhouse , where we take twenty sow of silver , two bar of gold , some money in coin , beside other pillage . the town be situate in a watery soil , and subject much to rain , very unhealthy as any place in the Indies , have great store of orange , plantan , cassavy - root , and such other fruit ; but very dangerous to be eat for breed of disease . to the eastward of the town within the bay run out a fresh river of excellent good water , with house , and all about it garden : half a league from hence due east into the country be a indian town , whither as we march a little before our come away with a hundred man they have break down a bridge to hinder our passage , where they lie in ambush with some twenty or thirty small shot , and bow and arrow