. from hence we sail to a isle call Fuego , be a very Isla deal Fuego . small isle , with a very high hill in the midst of it , which continual burn : this isle be invincible by nature , high cliff round about , yet by diligent search we find a small path where we land our man with exceed much difficulty , and so be master of the isle the eleven of September , where we take in water , but the isle yield we nothing but miserable infection . one night we have a shower of ash which fall so thick into our ship from that burn hill of Fuego , that you may write your name with your finger upon the upper deck . depart from this place the twenty of September , we shape our course for Dominica a isle in the 271 west India : but before we come thither our man fall general down , so that the hole can not relieve the sick , the disease be so vile that man grow loathsome unto themselves , frantic and desperate rave , among who our good general part be not the least ; for his disease be vehement , the grief of his mind , the lamentation of his man , and the loss of those who he love be to he torment more than durable : all which with patience and humility in prayer he humble himself unto . but have not his mind be invincible and his desire above the ordinary course of man , it have be impossible that life shall now have rest in he : but God ( i hope ) have preserve he to some exceed good purpose . Dominica . arrive at Dominica the seventeenth of October , with two excellent all our man sick and feeble , we find there two hot hot bath . bath , wherein our weak man wash themselves be great comfort : and the Indians of this place use we with great kindness , so that we be all perfect well before we depart from this place . for here we stay Margarita . until the 2 5 of November . from Dominica we sail to Margarita , between the isle and the main , think to meet with the pearl dredger , but we find they not . And come to the point of Araia in the road of Cumana , we see a flemish ship ride ; the merchant and man whereof come aboard we , and bring with they my lord admiral pass . by which mean our general will in no sort meddle with they , yet they be very rich . depart thence by cape Coadera , go for cape de la Vela at the isle buenaire our fliboat be cast away , and some of the man lose , but the most part save . coast all the shore from cape de la Vela , be bind for saint Martha , we take a small frigate lade with guiny corn , the eleven of September : she have in her money to the value of 500 pound , linen cloth and china silk , all which our general bestow upon his company to comfort they after their long sustain misery : out of which 272 Antonius scherleyns ANGLVS , e - qucs aurat . magni Sophi perfarum ad cxfarem 6s chriftianos principe extero , legate we . sir Anthony Shirley frigate we have 2 good pilot for those coast : for our pilot , that promise many thing before we come thither , be now absent in the wolf , who , we think , do wilful loose we . arrive at saint Martha , two Santa Marta league west from the town in a fair bay , we land the 12 of September , and so march to the town be often time encounter by the way , and in a narrow way at our descent down a hill , they have place two cast piece of brass , which we recover , and so enter the town , the enemy fly before we . while we abide in this town , there come one don Martin de Castilia , a gentleman of good education and a very great traveller , who know the whole state of the west India , Malucos , and philippinas : he have be in China , and make many relation to our general , his purpose be to save the town from burn , wherein he prevail , but ransom i know of none we have : for this gentleman make many great protestation of great poverty to be in that place . so we depart , only take their ordinance , and a prisoner lose there by sir Francis Drake , with some relief of victual . Having stay there all the time of Christmas , we depart thence on newyere day , with term of great content to our general in the Spaniard great submission unto he , for they be now within a league of we with 700 soldier . And be challenge by he to defend their town like man of worth , they do notwithstanding entreat favour with great humility . while we be at saint Martha , the wolf come again unto we : so we shape our course for Jamaica , and miss the road , be constrain to sail round about the isle , a thing not before do . in this place the wolf absolute again forsake we with the small bark that we take at saint Iago , and return for England with hard news of our ruin , but by God favourable help we arrive in the road of Jamaica the 29 of January , which be very dangerous to enter by reason of the shold and rock that lie before it . here we land and march 6 mile into the country , where the town stand ; ten 273 sister the I | will and chief town oj Jamaica take . the people all on horseback make show of great matter , but do nothing . now be master of the town and whole isle , the people submit themselves to our general mercy : and here they provide for we great store of dry beef , and cassavi meal , a base food , yet the best that the country yield , to continue at sea . this isle be a marvelous fertile isle , and be as a garden or store house for diverse part of the main . it be full of plain champion ground , which in the