the wind be large , thou may go east and by south until thou see the coast to lie Northeast and Southwest : and if the wind be scant , then go turn up : and take good heed that every evening at sun go down thou have sight of the land , and so thou must do be in the channel , until thou bring thy self into the midst of the channel : and thou must lie off from the go down of the sun , until the end of the first watch with thy corpse alone , without any more sail ; and from midnight forward cast about , and lie the other way with the like sail until day : and thus thou must do until thou bring thy self into the chanel . and if be in the chanel thou find the wind large , thou shall stir Northeast , with a care to go clean off the shold of the mimbre or the osiar . and if be in the chanel thou meet with the wind at north , than thou must turn with a little sail 4 . glass one way , and 4 . another , as thou think good . and if thou can not bear sail , than thou may go with all thy sail down , except when thou will cast about , thou may loose some small sail to wind thy ship . i advise thou , that when thou be come out of the chanel , thou shall be in 28 . degree . and if it be 298 in summer , thou shall go north - east until thou be in 39 degree and i , which be the height of Flores : and thou shall go to the northward of Bermuda . and if la Bermuda . thou think good to go in more degree , to have the seawind , thou shall go by the same height , as i have say : and if thou shall find the wind off the sea , thou have no need to go in more height : and from thence thou shall go east and by south : and thou must go thus because of the variation of the compass . the variation and thus thou shall find the isle of Flores and Cuervo , ° ft , u which stand in 39 degree i , and in 40 . large . Theise ' mark be these . * thou may go from betwixt Flores and Cuervo , Flores and and must go east southeast , and so thou shall have cuerv0 - sight of the island of sail , which be the island of S . saint George . George . And be at the land thou shall go along it , and when thou have double a certain little Headland that lie in the east point , than thou shall stir east and by north , and east . and thus go , thou shall have sight of Terzera , which be in 39 degree . the Terzera . mark be these . * and behind a certain black land something high , which be call el Brasil , stand the city call Angra . go from Terzera , thou shall run east Northeast , until thou bring thy self northwest , and southeast with the cape of saint Vincent . the cape of and thou may work thus be in summer : for s - vincent - alwayes thou shall have the wind at northwest . And be northwest and southeast with this cape , thou shall stir southeast and by east , and thou shall so fall with the land 6 . or 7 . league to the windward off they the wind cape on the coast , which lie north and south : than thou shall go along the coast to the south , until thou , 1 . see the cape . and the cape stand in 37 . degree : themarke of the mark be these . it be a cape not very high , and be cape . black , slope to the sea . and from thence thou shall Vincent . double they asagresal southeast : and so run , thou shall then go east unto the cape of saint mary : and thfcape of from this cape go east Northeast , and so thou shall saint marry . 299 the course in winter from the chanel of Bahama . the variation of the compass . many lose upon Bermuda by negligence . the isle of saint marie . faial . the bar of saint Lucar . Sierras de Monchico . run to have sight of Arenas Gordas : and than thou shall see present a little hill towards the east which be call Cabeza de Pedro Garcia . and if thou be benight , and come into 8 . or 9 fathom , than i wish thou to come to anchor , until it be day , and then call for a pilot , that may by some mean carry thou into harbour . i advise thou , if in the winter time thou be shoot out of the narrow of the chanel of Bahama , and will go for Spain , that thou must go east Northeast , until thou be in 30 . degree rather less than moor ; and than thou may go east and by south , because of the variation of the compass . And stir hence east southeast , thou shall go on the southside of Bermuda : and must go with great care , because many have be lose here about this island , because of their negligence . and when thou be sure thou be past this island , then go east Northeast , until thou be in the height of seven and thirty degree : which be in the height of the island of saint marie . And go thus , and not see land , but see the sea to break , make account it be the rock call las Hormigas . and if thou think good to go to faial , thou shall go till thou be in 38 . degree scant , and than thou shall go east , and so shall have sight of faial . the mark of it be these . * come out from faial , and leave all the island , than all go east and by south until thou bring thy self in 37 . degree , which be the height of cape saint Vincent : and then go east ,