man , in some 4 or 6 , and in other 12 or 14 , and bring in they plantan , pino , and potatos , and truck with we , for hatchet , knife , and small bead - stone . here in refresh of our man , we find a excellent hot bath hard join to a cold river side : wherein our hlesome sick man bathe themselves , and be soon recover on ^ a in of their sickness . this be a goodly island , and some - 215 thing high land , but all overgrow with wood . the 14 we depart from thence , and the 16 sail southwestward , we have sight of Granada , but land not there . the isle call the 17 we arrive at the Testigos and anchor there , and Testigos , consort with the 3 ship of Hampton , wherein captain Willis be . the 18 we land our man and take view and muster of all , and the same night set sail away . the 19 we have sight of Margarita , where the Spaniard by their Indians fish for pearl : we stand in very near the road , but see nothing there . therefore we go no further in , but stand from it again . the same day towards night , we have sight of a little island , between Margarita and the main , call coach . we come near it in the night with our ship within some 3 league , and there anchor under the main side , and about midnight we man our pinnace and boat , and in the morning about break of day , we land on the island , wherein be few or none inhabitant , but they common come from Margarita in boat on the Monday , and remain there fish for pearl until the Saturday , and then return and carry all that they have take to Margarita . certain here we take some few Spaniards and Negros their t ^ taken s ^ aves an ^ and some small quantity of pearl . intheyletf e remain on this hand the 20 and 21 , in which time Cache where we go a fish with our seine , and take good store they fish fir of mullet and other fish , and among the rest draw pearl . a shore in the seine a fish call by the Spaniard Lagarto , and by the Indians Caiman , which be indeed a crocodile , for it have 4 foot and a long tail , and a wide mouth , and long tooth , and will devour man . some of these lagartos be in length 16 foot , some 20 foot , and some 30 foot : they have musk in they , and live as well on the land , as in the water . the 21 of may we depart for Cumana , think to have get in that night to have land : but the current strike so strong out of the bay that we can not recover the town till day light . in the morning we espy 2 sail before the town , but can not fetch they . here we ply 216 too and again in the sound all the forenoon , but can not get up so far as the town . Theise 2 sail come room to we , after they see that we be at a anchor , and come somewhat near we , and send their skyph aboard our admiral . they be 2 flyboat of Middleburgh which trade there , 8c have secret advertise the country of our come , to our great hindrance : but we know it not at our first arrival . here they of Cumana perceive that we will land , come to parley with we , and tell we , if we will land , we may easy take the town , for they mean not to withstand we , but that they have carry all their good into the mountain , but , if we will not land to burn and spoil the town , they will give we some reasonable ransom , and any victual that we want . so our general agree with they , receive their ransom , and depart without land . but at our first arrival in this bay , our general long boat be send forth well man , and take 3 caravel , but find little or nothing of value in they : save in one be some side of bacon , and some maiz and guiny - wheat . here we stay till the 23 of may , 8c in the evening we set sail , and depart from thence . and the 26 of the same we think to have land at a fort that stand by the sea - coast in the caraco , as you go for saint Iago . this be a marvelous high land , as high as the pike of tenerif . we can not land here over night , by reason of the roughness of the sea , which go in that place , 8c there be but one little creek against the fort , to come in with your boat . So , we perceive no fit place to land , by reason of the sea , stand away some league to the westward , about a little headland , there we anchor all night : and the 27 in the morning we all land in safety , none resist we . than we present set our self in array , and march towards the fort , 8c take it without any resistance . here we remain all the rest of this day until the 28 , about three of the clock in the afternoon . we find nothing in this fort but a 217 two jlieboat of Middleburgh forewarn the Spaniard of our come . the town of Cumana ransom . three caravel take . a fort near the caraco take . all our action betray by dangerous spy out of England . little meal , or 2 or 3 ton of wine , which by reason of some disorder among the company overcharge themselves with the wine , our general for the most part cause to be spill . while we remain here , some of our company range the wood , find the governor of the fort where he lie asleep , bring he to our general : who examine he touch the state of the city of saint Iago de Leon . who declare unto we that they have news of our come a month before , and that they of the town have make preparation for our come : and that if we do go the common beat way , it be never possible for we to pass , for that they have make in the midst of the way