, but all low and even with the sea , and full of palm tree and other tree . mark of the river of Panuco . if you fall with the river of Panuco ( between which and the foresay villa rica stand the island call Isla de Lobos or the isle of seal ) the mark be these . from the mouth of the river it make a great bay without , and at the end of this bay upon the northside there be oazy , low , and bare ground altogether without tree , and at the out end of the oazy low place upon the west side it make a low homock like to a lizards head : and when you see the aforesaid cliff , you shall be in the open of the mouth of the say river , and then shall you see a little low tower have on the top of it a cross , which the fisherman call Marien : and this bar have on it 2 . fathom water , and 2 . and and you need not to stay for the tide , for that it flow not there : and that you may the better know whether you be in this bay which i have mention , or not , you shall see certain hill at west Southwest , which be call las sierras de tarquia ; and forthwith also you shall see the oazy place that i speak of , which go to the mouth of the river where stand a town call S . Luis de tampice , and from thence to Panuco you have 9 league by land . 318 the mark of Isla de lobos , or the isle of seal . i Sia de lobos be a small island nothing so big as the card do show it , and in it be a little grove or wood of palm tree , and all the rest of the island be without tree , and round about it be sundry playa or strand , and it be enclose round about with arrazife or shoald , and chief towards the main land . and from thence to cape Roxo or the red cape be 3 . Cabo roxo . league . and if you will come to anchor at this island to a water water , for that there be water in it , you may ride on all the south side close by the point that stretch to the westward , and you may pass by the east side of it , and ride in 22 . fathom , and until you come to 15 . fathom , all be clean ground . mark of the river of Tuspa . if you fall with the river of Tuspa , you must beware the sholde which run 5 . or 6 . league into the sea : and upon this river of Tuspa within the land there be high hill which lie north - east and Southwest , and have their end upon the bay of cassone : and the bay of upon the river you shall perceive a white cliff , which cassone . will show unto you like the castle of saint Juan de ullua . mark of the river of saint Peter and S . Paul . if you chance to fall with the bay of cassone , and upon the river of saint Peter and S . Paul , take heed : for the say bay be a deep bay , and the hill of Tuspa have their end upon this bay . and in the mouth of this river of saint Peter and S . Paul be two hammock of white sand , the westermost be big than that on the north - east . and by and by you shall perceive the water to change white which come out of the river , and sound you shall find sand mix with clay upon your lead ; and look upon the west 319 all these be upon the coast of Tabasco . Las sierras de s . Pablo . Punta delgada , or the slender point . Cabezas anegada be sink head or rock under water . comedera de pescado . side , and you shall see the Sierras or mountain of saint Paul , which be two , and that on the north side be high than the other . mark of Almeria . if you shall chance to fall or come upon the plain of Almeria , it be a land full of many hammock , some with tufte of tree on they , and some bear with white sand , and in 60 . fathom you shall have clay or oaze , and in 30 . fathom to the landward sand . and from thence to Punta de hidalgo or Punta delgada the coast lie north - east and Southwest . sounding of Villa rica . if you fall with villa Rica in 30 . fathom , you shall find clay or oaze , and in some place stone , and near the land you shall have sand : and upon the port of saint Juan de ullua you shall have in some place clay or oaze , and in some place herring bone , and in other place maze and , and upon the rock call Cabezas anegada you shall have small black sand at 17 . fathom two league from land . and if you see a coast that lie north - east and Southwest , and another northwest and southeast , you shall be upon saint Paul : and if you shall be upon Cabezas anegada , you shall find in 30 . fathom great sand and black , and in 28 . fathom you shall have the sand white like the shave of free stone : and from saint Paul to the bar of Vera Cruz it be clay or oaze , and from thence to saint Juan de ullua you have many deep , which at one sound bring you clay , and at another sand , and at another clay and maze together , and herring bone : and in some 35 . or 40 . fathom you shall find rocky ground , and in some place sand , and in some other place herring bone : and we call this comedera de pescado , or the food of fish . 320 the course from Cabo de Corrientes and Cabo de S . Anton upon the west end of Cuba , towards Nueva Espanna , within the isle call los Alacranes , or the scorpion . f you sail from cape de Corrientes toward Nueva Espanna on the inside of the alacranes , you must stir west : and when you think you