two hour and better . at sun set all the fleet tack about to the eastward , we continue our course to the westward for cape de los Corrientes , suppose we shall have meet with more of their consort . in this conflict in the defiance we have five man slay , three english man , a greek and a negro . that night some half hour after , their fleet keep upon their weather quarter , we see a mighty smoke qne of the rise out of one of their great ship which stay behind : punish great which happen by mean of powder as we think , burn . and present after she be all on a light fire , and so be consume and all burn , as we may well perceive . the next day be the second of march in the morning by break of day we be hard aboard cape de los Corrientes , which be a bare low cape , have a bush of tree high than the rest some mile to the eastward of the cape . all Cuba be full of wood on the southside . the spanish fleet which then be but 14 not more than we be , keep still upon our weather quarter , but dare not to come room with we although our admiral stay for they . assoon as we have clear our self of the cape 3 of their best sailor come room with the Salomon , which be so near the land that she can not double the cape , but tack about to the eastward , and so be both a stern and also to leeward of all our fleet : but when we see the Spaniard work , the defiance tack about to rescue she : which the Spaniard see , and have not forget the fight which she 243 make the night before , they loof up into the midst of their fleet again , and then all the fleet stay until the Salomon come up , and so stand along for cape Zante cape S . Antonio , which we come in sight of by two Antonio . } n after noon , be a low cape also , and to the Southwest a white sandy bay , where 3 or 4 ship may very well water . there be a good road for north and easterly wind : there the Spaniard begin to fall a stern . that night we stand away a glass or two northwest , and northnorthwest , and Northeast , and in the morning - watch south , and in the morning have sight of Cuba about the east part of the organ , which be dangerous rock lie 8 league off upon the north part of Cuba , present assoon as you pass cape S . Anthony : than we stand to the eastward of the land , the wind at Southsouthwest , and at 6 at night have foul weather , but after be becalm all night . the 5 the wind come scant . the 7 we see a high land like a crown , which appear so 13 or 14 league to the westward of Havana , and another place in Cuba call the table , 8 league to the eastward the crown . of the crown . the land over Havana make two small mountain like a woman breast or pap . here we find no great current until we come to the gulf of Bahama . the cape of the io we see the cape of Florida be but Florida . a reasonable low land and break hand to the southward of the cape . and at two in the afternoon we lose sight of the land 12 league to the northward of the cape . after we have disemboque , we stand west till midnight , and be in 28 degree , and then stand Northeast till the 13 at night , when we be in 31 degree . and after the wind scant with a great storm , in which we lose the Bonaventure , and the little John , they bear on head . than we stand with our larboard tack eastsoutheast . the 19 we be in 29 degree our course Eastnortheast . the 21 we have a great stormy gale of wind 244 last voyage of drake and Hawkins a . d . j596 - and much rain but large . and then all the rest of our fleet fall a stern except the hope , which bear a head : so that there keep no more with the admiral , but the defiance , the adventure , and the phoenix . the 28 we be in 39 degree , and stand away for Flores , which the 8 of April we see , and the 9 come to a anchor on the southside , where we water because the defiance when we come in have but two butt of water . we barter with the Portugal for some fresh victual , and set here on shore at our come away out of the admiral our two Portugal pilot ; which sir Francis Drake carry out of England with he . the 10 be Easter - eve at night we set sail the wind serve we to lie some slent in our course . that night and easter day we have much rain : the wind come up at Northeast , we beat it up some 30 league to the eastward , and then about to the west , and so again to the east , and try , and the next board to the west . on Thursday towards night , be the 16 we have sight of Corvo again , we try all that night : and on Friday towards night we come to a anchor to the westward of the point of Santa Cruz under Flores : but before midnight we drive , and set sail the next day stand away north - east . about three of the clock in the afternoon the wind come up again at north . on Sunday the 19 by two of the clock in the afternoon we have make 20 league a east way : and then the wind come up a good gale at northwest , and so Northeast with a fly sheet we make the best way we can : but be disperse by bad weather we arrive about the begin of may in the west part of England . and the last ship which come in together to Plymouth be the defiance , the garland , the adventure , and the phoenix .