the spanish general may the more plain appear , the say Henry Savile do answer particular to every untruth in the same letter contained , as hereafter follow . the answer to the spanish letter . first the general do say , that Francis Drake die at number de dios , as he have intelligence by a indian . he general send this news into his the general country confirm with his hand and first news , and ■ * - 0 .. - - his best news seal of arm : it be the first news in his letter , and it be the best news that he can send into Spain . for it do ease the stomach of the timorous Spaniard great to hear of the death of he , who life be a scourge and a continual plague unto they : but it be a point of great simplicity , and scarce beseem a general , to tie the credit of his report local to any place upon the report of a silly indian slave . for it have be sufficient to have ' sayd , that Francis Drake be certain dead , without publish the lie in print , by name number de dios : for it be most certain sir Francis Drake die betwixt the hand of Escudo , and Puerto bello : but the general be ravish with the sudden joy of this report as a man that have escape a great danger of the enemy , do break out into a insolent kind of brag of his valour at sea , and heap one lie upon another , do not cease until he have draw they into sequence , and so do commend they unto Peter the doctor , as censor of his learned work . 253 be in part lie news . second , the general do write unto the doctor , that Francis Drake die for very grief that he have lose so many bark and man . a thing very strange that the general or the indian who he do vouch for his lie , shall have such speculation in the body of he who they never see , as to deliver for truth unto his country , the very cause or disease whereof he die : and this second report of he be more gross than the first . for admit the mistake of the place may be tolerable ; notwithstanding , this precise affirm the cause of his death do manifest prove that the general do don Bernal - make no conscience to lie . and as concern the < rno m lie loss of any bark or man in our navy , by the impudent . valour of Spaniard before sir Francis Drake his death , we have none ( one small pinnace except ) which we assure know be take by chance , fall single into a fleet of five frigate ( of which be general don Pedro Telio ) near unto the hand of Dominica , and not by the valour of don Bernaldino : the which the success five frigate of the king afterwards have but ill success , of the king for one of they we burn in the harbour of saint Juan de Puerto rico , and one other be sink in the same harbour , and the other three be burn among many other ship at the take of Cadiz . this i think in wise man judgement , will seem a silly cause to make a man sorrow to death . for true it be , sir the certain Francis Drake die of the flux which he have grow ‘ sirtrmcis ^ upon eight day before his death , and yield drake die up his spirit like a christian to his creator quiet in his cabin . and when the general shall survey his loss , he shall find it more than the loss of the english , and the most of he , destroy by the bullet : but the death of sir Francis Drake be of so great comfort unto the Spaniard , that it be think to be a sufficient amends , although their whole fleet have be utter lose . 254 third , the general do say of his own credit , and not by intelligence from any indian or other , that on the eleven of march last he meet the english fleet at the he of Pinos , be fourteen good ship : who although they have the wind of he , yet he set upon they three time with all their ship : but the english fleet flee , and refuse to fight , shoot now and then a shot , but especial the vice - admiral . this three lie of the general don Bernaldino Delgadillo de Avellaneda ( who name for the prolixity thereof may be draw somewhat near the length of a cable ) have not colour of protection , but it have a just proportion in measure to the lie of old Bernardino de Mendoza his countryman , concern the A payee of overthrow of her majesty navy in the year one spanish she thousand five hundred eighty and eight . for except don Bernaldino the general do purpose to win the whetstone from don Bernardino de Mendoza the old spanish Iyer ; i can conjecture why he shall write to his country for a truth , that he chase the english navy with nine ship , and do three several time give the onset to the english fleet , who be fourteen good ship ( as he say ) do fly and refuse to fight ; consider that the spanish vice - admiral ( if he be live ) the spanish and many other can witness the contrary : who fight vice - admiral like a true valiant man , depart from the fight with a turn and batter ship to save she from sink . it neither can i imagine that there be any one in the spanish fleet ( don Bernaldino except ) that will say they be less than twenty sail of ship when they meet the english fleet : and the spanish navy can witness that they receive such store of bullet from the english fleet , that they be glad to depart , and in despite of they the english navy do hold their determine course : and take a view of the spanish fleet the next day , their number be not above thirteen after the fight . 255 ’ * the translation of the spanish word lanchas be here mistake . this lie be make in the general own forge . ship , which do argue that they be either sink or flee to harbour to save themselves . four , the general say , that the english fleet flee away , and leave their * oar for haste behind they in the sea . it be strange that they shall leave behind they oar in the sea , since there be not in the english fleet either galley or galliass , which require the use of oar : as for the oar of their ship - boat and other such small vessel , they have stow they aboard their ship , and be not impediment unto they , but most necessary for they to use , and therefore not