out of the sea be a hill , and the hill be not very high , it stand east and west , and upon it be some little rise and they be not very high , and upon these rise stand two round hammock close together , you shall see the teat of Havana . the teat of to know along the shore when you be against the ^ avana - harbour of Xaroca , the mark be these . a little to the harbour the westward one league , you shall see along the shore ° fxanca - a hill that be break , and that break hill be over the harbour of Xaroca : and then a little more to the westward a league , there be another break hill and you shall see that north and south from these break hill be a flat off . and from that to Havana be 7 . league : and it be all clean ground , and you may go along the shore till you come to Havana . to know mark to the harbour of Havana , you shall see before you come ttie - at it one little rock ot stone not very high , and smooth Havana . towards the sea : upon the rock stand a little white tower , wherein they keep watch . and then if you have the wind large , you shall see the harbour open , and than you may bear in with it . your ship be of great burden , when you be within , then keep on the west side , because on the east side , on the west end of the rock aforesaid , there lie a ledge to the westward which have but three or four fathom i upon it . if your ship be of small burden , you may run along the weather shore , until you come right against the castle ; and then half the bay over you may come to a anchor . [ how to 3 ° 3 how to work come through the old channel , if you be not mind to go over the pracella or shoald . if you will come through the old chanel , when you come as high as the shoalds , come upon your caio de Moa . course from the Caio de Moa , as i tell you , keep 2 . league from the pracel or shall : and then set our course west unto the low island of the firm land . and upon this course you shall ken the flat on the Caio Romano , point of Caio Romano : and within it be one flat high than the other , and smooth upon , and in the midst it make as it be break land ; and when you be in the chanel in the day time , you must take heed you come not near the shore by 2 . league , and by your sound no near than 3 . fathom . and you must take heed still when you night come to keep 2 . or three league off for fear of the shoald . and in the night you must go northwest as be aforesaid . and also you must take heed that you keep in the middle of the chanel , as near as you can towards they shall . And find much wind and be benight , from midnight till day stir west northwest , and when it be towards day , than you may edge towards the flat as be aforesaid . Alcane de Barasoga . Savano . Basque . the flat of Mecala . and as you stir hence one day and one night from Caio Romano to the inward of the channel , you shall see the firm land of Cuba , and other mark ; and among the rest , a round hamocke , which you may easy know . it be call Alcane de Barasoga . and from thence to Savano and to Basque be 6 . league , and likewise Havana 6 . league . and from thence to cross under the fort be 45 . league . and stir hence upon your course aforesaid . and if you have go from Barasoga 30 . league , you shall see none of the flat of Mecala : and give they a breadth off two or three league , and keep your course west northwest , as 3 ° 4 aforesaid , until it be day , and present you may edge round to the flat . and thus stir , keep your course until you see the hill of Camaloqua . and look that when you come from Caio de Moa , along the pracel or shall by night close by it , you shall not see what land it be , till it be day : and in the morning you shall set your course as be aforesaid until you see the shall , and in see it , you may stir on your course as be above mention , until you come to Havana . for to set your course from the point of Mance to Caio Romano , when you be north and south with the point of Mance , you shall stir thence west northwest , until you think you be Northeast and Southwest with the hill of Hama . and this hill be a high hill and smooth to the seaside . and from this hill to Caio Romano you shall stir northwest and by west : and upon this course you may be bold to see Caio Romano . and the mark of this flat be , that it make a high land and smooth upon the top : and in the midst of it , it show as it be break . and when you come to it , you must take heed you come not near it by 2 . league , because it be foul . and look that you bring not yourself too near the hill of Hama by night . for you must take heed of Caio Romano to keep off it until morning : in the morning you may go your course until you see it , and then set your course , as be abovesaid . take heed of that which be here say , for it have title reason . Sierras de Camahquea . Caio de Moa . Pracellas . Havana . Punta de Mance . sierra del Hama . caio Romano . the mark of the flat of Caio Romano . ten