, set upon we , and kill lieutenant Jones , hurt three or four and so flee into the wood , run before we and fire their own town , and then flee far into the wood : our man fire diverse other house in pursue they , and so return again : our general with sir Thomas be in the river mouth with thirty or forty man fill water about some mile from we . the road of number de Dios be a fair road : but on each side , as you come to ride before the town , lie a ledge of rock , but there be no danger because they 237 a indian town fire . be in sight . you may ride between they in three or four fathom water , and without if you will in eight or ten fathom , where neither castle nor fort can annoy you . the name of number de dios be great than their strength . for they have no castle nor fort , but only the little fort aforesaid stand on the top of a hill , although they may have make it strong if they will . the 29 sir Thomas Baskervil with 750 arm man , beside chirurgeon and provand boy , go for Panama . the last of December the general burn half the town , and the first of Januarie burn the rest , with all the frigate , bark and galliot , which be in the harbour and on the beach on shore , have house build over they to keep the pitch from melt . the second of January sir Thomas return with his soldier both weary and hungry , have march more than half the way to the south sea . the Spaniard play diverse time upon we both outward and homeward in the wood , the way be cut out of the wood and rock both very narrow , and full of mire and water . the march be so sore as never Englishman march before . Having march some ten league in a marvellous strait way , upon the top of a hill , through which we must needs pass , the Spaniard have set up a fort and keep it with some 80 or 90 man , who play upon we as we come up , before we be aware of they , and so kill some twenty or moor of we , among who be captain Marchant quartermaster general , and ensign Samson , Maurice Williams one of her majesty guard , beside diverse be hurt , as m . captain Nicholas Baskervil a valiant gentleman , with diverse other . then sir Thomas have perfect knowledge that they must pass two such fort more , if he get that , beside Panama to be very strong , the enemy know of our come long before . also our soldier have no victual leave , nor any mean 238 last voyage of drake and Hawkins a . d . ... * 596 - to get more : which consideration cause sir Thomas to return and give over his attempt . as he march thitherward he take a indian and send he to number de dios with letter of his return and proceed . the 5 we set sail at 12 of the clock , and stand to the westward . the 10 day we see a hand lie westward some the lie of 30 league call escudo , where we come to anchor Escudo . on the southside in 12 fathom water , fair sand and good ankorage . if you come into the eastern point , give it a birth , because of a ledge of rock , that lie out there from the end of the island : come to anchor we see a road , who see we , set sail , but that night with our pinnace we take he , he have nothing in he but a little maiz . the man be examine by the general confess he to be a advisor send from number de dios to all the port along the coast westward . this hand lie 9 or 10 league from the main , and be not past two league long full of wood , and have great store of fresh water in every part of the hand , and that very good . it be a sickly climate also , and give to much rain : here we wash our ship , and set up the rest of our pinnace . the 15 day captain plat die of sickness , and then sir Francis Drake begin to keep his cabin , and to complain of a scour or flux . the 23 we set sail and stand up again for Puerto bello , which be but 3 league to the westwards of number de Dios . the 28 at 4 of the clock in the morning our general the death of sir Francis Drake depart this life , have be sir Francis extreme sick of a flux , which begin the night before drake . to stop on he . he use some speech at or a little before his death , rise and apparel himself , but be bring to bed again within one hour die . he make his brother Thomas Drake and captain Jonas Bodenham executor , and m . Thomas drake son 239 his heir to all his land , except one manor which he give to captain Bodenham . the same day we ankor at Puerto bello , be the best harbour we find all along the main both for great ship and small . there stand a saker shoot off the shore at the eastern point a little hand : and there be betwixt the main and that 5 or 6 fathom : but the best come in be the open mouth betwixt that hand and another hand that lie to the westward with a range of rock . in Puerto bello be but 8 or 10 house , beside a great new house which they be in building for the governor that shall have be for that place : there be also a very strong fort all to the water side with flanker of great tree and stone fill with earth between : and have not our come disappoint their pretence , they will have make it one of the strong place in all the main . there they mean to have build a great town . we find there three piece of brass ordinance sink in the sea , which we weigh up , all the people be flee and their