direction : so be within musket shoot , the vice - admiral of the spanish fleet come near unto we , to who our vice - admiral John Traughton captain of the Elizabeth bonadventure give fight , betwixt who there be the great volley of small shot change that light have be hear at sea , which continue a long half hour . in which time the spanish fleet come in to fight . our general sir Thomas Baskervill be in the garland ( whereof Humphrey Reignolds be captain , be the next ship unto the Elizabeth bonadventure ) bear up to the enemy , play with his great ordinance hot until he come within musket shoot . Jonas boden - ham captain of the defiance , and Henry Savile captain of the adventure , come likewise in to fight with they . after the garland be within musket shot play her part , and make good fight for the space of a hour . the defiance bear up likewise and have her turn : after come the adventure again within musket shoot , who have change many a great bullet with they before , renew his fight , and continue it a hour with small shot . then come Thomas Drake captain of the hope , who last of all have his turn . thus have all the queen ship their course : the 262 merchant ship with other small vessel be without the queen ship , shoot when they see opportunity . after the enemy find no good to be do ( be well beat ) fall from we , the adventure play upon they with her great ordinance , make three of the last shoot at they : their vice - admiral with diverse other of their ship , be so beat that they leave off the fight , and be force to lie in the wind , for that they dare not lie of either board by reason of their many and great leak , which they have receive by our great shot . the general with the rest of their fleet tack about , fall in our wake , think to get the wind , which in the beginning we seek to hinder . but our general see that in hold the wind we shall shoot our self into the bay , give they the wind . all that night they keep themselves upon our broad side , notwithstanding our admiral carry his cresset - light all night , have great care of our small ship . this fight continue about four hour till it be near night , in the which fight , thanks be to God , there be slay so few person of our english fleet , as i think the like conflict have not be perform with so little loss of man : what harm befall the Spaniard in their fleet i leave to your judgement . yet our eye can witness their ship be sore beat and rack through , whereby there be such fall back and lie by the lee to stop their leak , as some of they be drive to haste away , and rather to run on shore to save themselves then sink in the sea : beside within two hour after our fight with they , we see one of their great ship on fire which burn into the sea , and all the stern of another of their ship blow up : and in the morning a ship of our fleet be run so near the land , that to double the cape de los Corrientes he must of necessity tack about and fall in the wake of the enemy , which cause our general in the garland and the defiance to tack about ; which two ship force the three ship of the 263 the spanish vice - admiral can witness , what stucesse they have in this fight . the english admiral carry his cresset light , notwithstanding the enemy be upon his broad side . the english receive little loss in this conflict . enemy ( which be put forth to take our ship , or else to cause she run on ground ) to return to their fleet to save themselves , hoist all their sail the remain - for haste : this morning they be fair by we have derofthe the wonderful [ n ( je of USj be but thirteen sail of their werehut ^ to be see : than we stroke our top sail thirteen think to have fight with they again , which they sail . perceive tack about from we , and after that never dare nor will come near we : what become of the rest of their fleet we know not , but true it be that they be in great distress mighty beat and tear , by have receive many bullet from we . all this day we have sight of they , but they show little will to fight or come near we , so we keep our course west , and by north , about six of the clock at night lose the sight of they . and this be a true discourse of our fight with the spanish fleet . the which the author hereof will justify with the adventure of his life , against any Spaniarde serve in that action , that shall contradict the same . Henry Savile . Thomas Baskervil knight , his approbation to the former twofold discourse of captain Savile . Thomas Baskervill knight , general ot her majesty late indian armada in the late conflict have between the spanish fleet and we , have peruse the spanish letter write by don Bernaldino Delgadillo de Avellaneda , general of the king of Spain navy , and also have peruse captain Henry Savile his answer unto the six exception in the general letter , with his discourse of the manner of our fight with the spanish fleet , do say that the say Henry Savile have answer the letter , and set down the order of the fight sincere accord to truth , for testimony of which i have hereunto set my hand . 264 and if don Bernaldino Delgadillo de Avellaneda the general shall take any exception to this my approbation , or stand in the justification of his lie letter write to doctor Peter Florez , precedent of the contractation house for the Indies , and by he for bernaldinos glory late put in print : i then say that he false lie , and that i will maintain against he with whatsoever arm he shall make choice of . and because the kingdom wherein we abide be enemy ( by reason of which there be no mean in either of they , to maintain that i have write ) let he make choice of any indifferent kingdom of equal distance from either realm , and i will there be ready to maintain as much as i have write : but if by my employment into France i be so stay by her majesty commandments , that i can out of that realm meet he in any other , i can see why he shall take any exception to that , consider the equality of the place , and that the army of both our prince be there resident . Thomas baskervile .