a principal ruttier contain most particular direction to sail from saint Lucar in andalusia by the isle of the canary , the small isle call las Antillas , along the south part of the isle of S . Juan de Puerto rico , Hispaniola and Cuba : and from Cabo de Corrientes , or Cabo de S . Anton without and within the little isle call los Alacranes , to the port of saint Juan de ullua in nueva espanna : and the course from thence back again by Havana , and through the channel of Bahama to Spain : together with the speciali mark of all the cape , island , and other place by the way ; and a brief declaration of their latitude and longitude . Punta de Naga . f you depart from the bar of saint Lucar de Barameda towards the west India in the summer time , you must stir away southwest until you come to the headland call Punta de Naga upon the isle of tenerif . but if your departure be from the say bar in the winter , you must stir away Southwest and by south , until you come to the height of cape Cantin on the coast of Barbary : the mark and sign whereof be these follow . the mark to know cape Cantin . cape Cantin be a low cape and small to the sea ward , and make a snout like the nose of a galley , and have upon the top of the point a heath or shrubby place , and on the top thereof stand two hammock , that to the seaward be high than the other ; but that on the Souther side show like a tower : and his cape be in 32 . degree and J . 306 and he that will seek from this cape to discover Punta de Naga beforesaid , must stir away Southwest and by west , until he bring himself north - east and Southwest with the same point , and then he must stir away south to fetch the say point . the sign of Punta de Naga . the say point or headland be a high point of land , and plain upon the top like a table , and without it there be two little rocky island ; and upon the north side of the say point be another point call Punta de hidalgo , and upon the top thereof be 2 . pick p ™ 1 ? and rock like unto the ear of a hare . 1 a ' the course from the canary to the west Indies . f you set sail from any of the island of the canary for the west India , you must stir away 30 . or 40 league due south , to the end you may avoid the calm of the island of Fierro : calm off and be so far distant from the say pterr °- island , then must you stir away west Southwest , until you find your self in 20 . degree , and then sail west and by south until you come to 15 . degree and and from thence stir away west and by north ; and so shall you make a west way by reason of the northwest of the compass : which west variation way will bring you to the island of Deseada . °^ the i ° i compass . the mark of the island of Deseada . this island Deseada lie east Northeast , and west Southwest , have no tree upon it , and it be proportion like a galley , and the north - east end thereof make a low nose like the snout of a galley ; and by come near it , and pass by the norther end thereof , you shall perceive white break patch like heap of sand with red strike in they : and the southwest 3 ° 7 deseada in 15 . degree and a half . end of this island make like the tilt of a galley . and this island stand in 15 . degree and J . mark of the island of monserate . monserate be a high island , and round , full of tree , and upon the east side thereof you shall perceive certain white spot like sheet : and be upon the south side at the very point of the island , somewhat off the land , it make like a little island , and put your self either east or west from that point , in the midst thereof will appear a great break land . mark of the island of Marigalanta . MArigalanta be a smooth island , and full of wood or tree , and as it be of the fashion of a galley upon her deck : and be on the southeast side about half a league off you shall make certain hammock of black stone , and certain white patch : but on the west side appear fair white sandy shore or plain . mark of the isle of Dominica . the island of Dominica lie northwest and southeast , and upon the northwest side it show more high : and if you come near it at full sea , it will show like two island , but by come near unto it , you shall perceive it to be but one : and upon the southeast side you shall make or see a plain and long point , and upon the same point appear a cliff like to the cliff of cape Tiburon ; and upon the north side a little from the land it show like a little island , and upon the top thereof be , as it be , a high steeple , and upon the norther side you shall perceive it like many white sheet . mark of the island of Guadalupe . the island of Guadalupe lie on the west of Deseada , and upon the southwest part thereof appear many high mountain , but upon the east side it make certain table , which be call the high part of guada - 308 lupe . and this island be cut north and south ; so that the canoas of India do pass from the north to the south of it , as if it be two island . mark of the isle of Matalina , or Martinino . the isle of Matalina be high and full of mountain , have in the midst thereof 3 . hammock : the middlemost homocke be high show like the great bowl of a hat . and upon the north side it appear like three little island . and in this island there be warlike Indians like those of Dominica .