the hospitali . i advise thou that if thou be benight when thou be near to saint Paul , and meet with a northerly wind after midnight , that then thy best way be to bring thy self into thy corpse , and lie by , ply to windward , and to seaward in 20 . fathom which depth thou shall have near the shore , to the northward : and be day , then go in with the harbour as thou can best , observe what be abovesaid . 295 las Sierras de Papalo . saint Paul . monte de Carneros . casa de buytron . the castle of saint Juan de ullua . the hospitali . and i advise thou that if thou come from Villa Rica , and find thy self in 20 . degree and a half , and see not land , and see that the water do alter , thou shall sound 60 . fathom water : and if in this depth thou have oaze , make account thou be east the river of anj west with the river of Almeria . this course be mena . from the cape of Santo Antonio to Nueva Espanna without or aseaboord the alacrane or scorpion . now follow how to work , if a man come betwixt the alacrane and the main . if thou go from the cape de Santo Antonio and will go for Nueva Espanna within the alacrane or Alacranes , thou must stir west and by south , and scorpion . wa ^ thou shall bring thy self in 20 . fathom ; and if thou keep this course find less water , then go west and by north , and that way thou shall bring thy self into 20 . fathom again , until thou have bring thy self north , and south with they the triangle , triangle . And be north and south with the triangle , Surta or than thou shall be also north and south with Surta : Zarza . from thence thou shall go Southwest : and by this the high hill coarse thou shall have sight of the high hill of saint of . Martin . Martin , which be certain high hill lie northwest and southeast , and they have a partition in the midst , and to the northwest they be high : and on the southeast part within the land , thou shall see something a high land , call pan de Minsapa , that be , the loaf of Minsapa , which be a round loaf not very high . the hill of saint Martin stand in 18 . degree less one five part . i advise thou that when thou fall with saint Martin , and will go with saint John de ullua , than thou shall go westnorthwest : and this be the course that thou must keep , if thou be far off at sea , i mean so far off as thou may well descry the hill of saint Martin . 296 but if thou be near to the land , than thou must go northwest and by west , and thou shall so come along the coast , and thou shall find the coast to be low land : and come this course thou shall have sight of certain little hill not very high : than thou shall fall with the point call Punta de Antoni Serro : and these hill lie over the river of Medelin . and if when thou be east and west , with the Volcan or hill that cast out fire , any man do ask thou , where the harbour of Sant Juan de ullua be , thou may true answer , west and by south , and it stand in 18 . degree and a half . the course to be keep from Nueva Espanna to the main of Spain in Europe . come from saint Juan de Ullua to go for Spain , thou shall stir north - east until thou be in 24 . degree : and so be thou shall go east until thou bring thy self in the sounding of the Tortugas , and thy ground will be white sand . i advise thou , that if it be by night , thou go east ; and find the water to wax shoalder , then go Southwest , with a care to keep thy lead go , until thou loose ground , and come into great depth , because thou may fall to the north of the Tortugas . And go from this sound for Havana thou must stir southsoutheast , because of the current that carry thou to the east . and if by this way thou have sight of a high land , that seem to be like a loaf , make account it be the loaf of Cabanas . and to the east of this loaf thou shall see a land that have a plain . it show to be low , even with the sea , and as smooth as the sea : and from this land to the east the land be low and low . and from thence to Havana thou must go east . and if the wind will not let thou go that course , thou must turn up till thou be upon the harbour of Havana . the mark of the point of Havana be these , that on the east side it have a high black land , which be slope 297 Rio de Medelin . s . Juan de ullua in 18 . deg . and a half . the Tortugas . the current to the east . pan de Cabanas . Havana . the shold of mimbre , that be , ofosiar . the chattel ! reachethtozi . degree . to the sea , with a little white tower on the top thereof : and as thou go into the port , thou must keep near the high black land , and when thou be hard to it , strike thy top sail in sign of peace to the castle , lest it shoot at thou . what course the Spaniard keep from Havana to Spain . if from Havana thou will set thy course for Spain , thou must go Northeast , and shall so have sight of the martyr , which stand in 24 . degree and a half . and the coast lie east and west . the mark be these , it show like head of tree , and in some place certain rock with white sandy bay . and if