or if he do depart from it he will burn it . the Spaniard then demand , what the ransom of it shall be . our general require 30000 ducat . whereunto he reply that it be very much . So have have some other conference together , he show he that he have be a soldier in Flanders a long time , and now be send thither by his king commandment . among other thing our general demand of he , what the reason be they have not wall the city , be so fair a thing as that be . the Spaniard reply , that he think it to be strong wall than any city in the world , meaning , by those huge and high mountain which the enemy must pass over before he can approach it ; which we find very true . thus with many other fair speech , he take his leave for that day , and tell our general , that he will go speak with the governor : ( but it may be himself , for any thing we know ) howbeit because our general have grant he free come and go , he suffer he to depart : who before his departure , request to have a token of our general , that he may show to the governor how he have speak with we , or else he doubt , that he will not believe he . whereupon our general give he a piece of 12 penny : so he depart and promise the next day by ten of the clock to return unto we with a answer : in which mean time nothing befall . the next day be the 2 of June , at his hour appoint , he return with his indian run by his horse side . so he be bring to the general , and there remain till after dinner , and dine in his company in the governor house that be . the dinner end , with the best entertainment which can be give he , they commune again about the ransom of the city . our general propose his old demand of 30000 ducat . the Spaniard first proffer he 2000 , than 3000 , last of all 4000 , and more he will not give . our general count it a 221 certain village about sant lagp fire . the ci tie of saint Iago burn . small sum of money among so many , do utter refuse it . So the Spaniard depart . but before his departure our general tell he , that if he come not to he again before the next day noon , with the ransom which he demand , he will set all on fire . that whole day pass , and the night also without any thing of moment , except some show of assault , by their approach towards our corpse du guard , and retire back again . the 3 day be come , in the morning some of our company go forth , a league or more from the town , and some two league and more unto certain village thereabouts , and set they on fire : but the enemy never come to resist they , so they return back again safe into the town , and bring certain indian prisoner with they , among who there be one which speak break spanish , which be examine , confess unto we of his own accord , how the general have send to the other town thereabouts for aid , and that he think they will be there with he that day . when we understand this , we grow into some distrust of the Spaniard treachery , and think upon the messenger , how he have use long delay with we : whereupon we be command present , every man to make ready to depart , and to fire the city : which forthwith be do . and after we have see it all on fire , and burn to ash , we take our leaf and so depart , and march away that day be the 3 of June , not that way we come , but by the great beat way . and when we have march half the way towards the water side , we come unto that strong barricado which they have make , and there lay all that night . here we find the spanish captain word to be true which we take at the fort by the water side : for this barricado be of such force , that 100 man in it well furnish , will have keep back from pass that way 100000 : first by reason of the huge and high mountain , next the steepness of they , on both side , last of all in regard of the fine contrive of it with the large trench , and other munition , which i cease to recite . the four 222 Amias Preston and George Sommers a . d . I595 ’ day of June in the morning we depart from thence : but before our departure , we overthrow on the one side of the steep hill two base of iron , which we find there plant by the enemy , and so set forward towards our ship , and by 12 of the clock come to the water side , and there remain in the fort which we have take before , until the five day at night : in which time we jade some small quantity of hide , and salsa - perilla , which we find there at our first land . So the five day at night we depart from thence , to go to a town call Coro : but before we depart , we set fire in the fort , Indians ' and all the indian house that be about it , and burn they . than we set sail , and stand along the coast , water side our spanish guide signify unto we , that there be burn . four sail of ship about five league from thence , in P11 - 58z ] a place call Checherebiche , and Caio , and Maio . So the 6 day in the morning we be thwart of the place , and there our general send away his long boat with captain Sommers , unto those place , where they find 3 of the ship : but the Spaniard have convey their sail ashore into the wood , so that they can not bring they off , but set fire in they and burn they . three Spanish from hence we stand along the shore , sail until the burnt - ninth day of June , on which day towards the evening we embark our self in our pinnace and small caravel , to land at Coros : but we have none that know the place certain :