de Cabrera , para que pueda imprimir la Relacion de la muerte de Francisco draque . la qual haga por do mese , y por ello no lo imprima otro alguno . So pena de diez will maravedi para la camara de sum magestad . Fecha en Sevilla a quinze de Mayo , de will y quinientos y noventa y sey annos . el Licenciado don Juan Bermudez y Figueroa . por sum mandado , Gregoria de Gutierez , Escrivano . 249 [ the spanish the copy of a letter which don Bernaldino Delgadillo de Avellaneda , general of the king of Spain his army , send unto doctor Peter Florez , precedent of the contractation house for the Indies , wherein he make mention of the success of the english army , after they depart from Panama , whereof be general Francis Drake , and of his death . Rome Cartagena i give relation unto your worship how i depart from the city of Lisbon , in the pursuit of the english army : although for the great haste the galleon can not be so well repair as be needful , and with foul weather one be lose , and a flyboat be burn . and have sail many day in pursuit of the enemy , until i arrive at Cartagena , and there take the advice of don Pedro de Acunna , governor of the city , and captain generail ( for we have great need of water , and to repair our ship ) we stay in that port : whereas i have intelligence by a indian that Francis Drake die in number de dios , for very grief that he have lose so many bark and man , as be afterward more manifest know . thus have give you a relation of all that happen hitherto , now i let you understand , that i leave this port the second of march , and take our course towards Havana , where i think to have find the english fleet . and have use all the diligence possible , upon Monday the eleven of the say month , about two of the clock in the afternoon , at the end of they he of Pinos , in the entrance of Guaniguanico , i meet with the english fleet , be fourteen very good ship : i draw towards they although they have the wind of we , and our 250 admiral who bear up towards the wind , with other two ship begin to draw near they , and although we set thus upon they , three time with all their ship , yet will they not set again upon we , and those of our man which be far off cry to they amain , be both within shot of artillery , musket , and caliver , whereby they receive evident hurt by we : they ply their great ordinance accord to their manner , and especial their vice - admiral , and see our resolution how sharp we be bend towards they , they with all expedition and speed possible prepare to fly away , hoist sail and leave their boat for haste in the sea : but i follow they , with nine ship all the night follow , and with four more the next day , till i make they double the cape of S . Antony , and to take the course towards the channel of Bahama , accord to the instruction from his majesty . it little avail we to be see , with less number of ship , neither yet all the diligence we can use , can cause they to stay or come near we , nor to shoot off one harquebus or piece of artillery , for they flee away as fast as they can , and their ship be half diminish , and that the best part of they : the rest they repair in Puerto bello , whereas they be about forty day , and so by that mean they be all well repair ; and our ship be very foul , because the time will not permit we to trim they : i have sail 2 month and a half in the admiral , since we depart from Cartagena , we have not repair their pump nor cleanse they : and the same day i depart thence , there come unto i a small pinnace in the like distress : our vice - admiral and the rest of our ship have the like impediment , but no great hindrance unto we , for aught i can perceive by our enemy : it be manifest what advantage they have of we , and by no mean be it possible for we to take they , unless we can have come to have find they at a anchor . nevertheless they leave we one good ship behind for 251 our share , well man , which tell i that drake die in number de dios , and that they have make for general of the english fleet the colonel Quebraran : and also by mean of the small time , be straight follow by we , they have no opportunity to take either water , wood or flesh , and they be also in such bad case , that i know not how they will be able to arrive in England . the number of man we have take be about a hundred and forty , and fifteen e noble captain of their best sort , and some of they rich , as well may appear by their behaviour : i have no other thing to write at this time . our lord keep you who best can , and as i desire . from Havana the 30 of march , 1596 ’ do Bernaldino Delgadillo de Avellaneda . the licenciat don John Bermudes of Figueroa lieutenant of the assistant of the city of Seville , and the province thereof , who do supply the office of the assistant in the absence of the right honourable the earl of Priego , give licence to Roderigo de Cabriera to imprint the relation of the death of Francis Drake , which only he may do for two month , and no other to imprint the same within the say term , upon pain of ten thousand maravedi for his majesty chamber . give in Seville the 15 of May 1596 . the licenciat don John Bermudes of Figueroa . by his assign Gregory Gutierez notary . this letter of the general don Bernaldino send into Spain declare the death of sir Francis drake and their suppose victory , be altogether receive for a undoubted truth , and so please be this news unto the Spaniarde , that there be present commandment give to publish the letter in print , that all the people of Spain may be partaker of this common joy : the which letter print in Seville , bear date the 15 of may , 1596 come to the hand of Henry Savile 252 esquire , who be employ in that service for the west Indies , and captain of her majesty good ship the adventure , under the conduct of sir Francis Drake , and sir John Hawkins , have cause the say print letter to be translate into english . and that the impudency of