have sail 35 . or 40 . leag . you shall sound upon the pracel , and you shall come upon » = = = ^ = = 1 many bristling of water , which , if it be fair weather , will seem a skull of fish . and before you come out of the bristling , if you sound you shall have depth as i have say . if you go from cape de S . Anton by the inside of the alacranes , you must stir away west and by south , and you shall find sound in the same order as i have say : you shall have white sand , and near the land you shall find it like the shave and pecking of free stone , and white sand like houre - glasse - sand , and sometime periwinkle or small shell . also if you sound in deep water , and on the sudden find rock , then know that you be upon the alacrane , and then stir away westsouthwest until you find clean ground , and till you bring your self into 18 . or 20 . fathom . and if you go deep your water , then stir away west , and by these depth you shall go sound ; and then take your heighth by sun or star , you must beware that you pass not 21 . degree and J . or 21 . degree and J . at the most ; and in this heighth , and at 18 . or 20 . fathom you shall follow your way : and if you deepen water , edge to the northwestward , and if you alter more your depth , edge to the southwestward , until you have get so far ahead as cape sisal , and discover the coast of campeche , which coast lie north and south , and you shall take up on your lead ten 321 ten Cabo de Corrientes . Cabo de S . Anton . cape sisal upon the coast of campeche in Yucatan or Isla de Arenas . white sand like hourglass sand , and sometime periwinkle or small shell ; and by and by you shall go increase depth , until you lose it , and so shall you pass between the triangle and the sandy hand . the course between the triangle and the sandy island to saint Juan de ullua . when you have lose your depth , stir away south 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 west to fetch the Sierras or hill of saint Martin : Martin . and to know the hill of saint Martin , there be 2 . hill stretch north - east and Southwest , and the southwest be great than that on the north - east , but the northermost hill be high , and make on the top a flat point and very high , and without it , it have a island which Roco partida . be call Roca partida , or the cleave rock : and if it be clear , on the southwest side a high land like a topsail will appear , and then shall you be north and or minsapa . south with the pan or loaf of Nisapa . note , that these Sierras or hill of Sant Martin be all black and full of tree , and make no show as villa rica do : and mark this , that by how much you come near they , so much the high will they show unto you : neither shall you find any bottom till you be at the very shore . the course from Roca partida or the cleave rock to saint Juan de ullua . if you depart from Roca partida or the cleave rock for Sant Juan de ullua , you must stir away westnorthwest , and so shall you fetch or fall with or Antoni - the point of Anton Mislardo : and if you happen to serro ' sound upon the sink rock call Cabezas anegada , you shall have black sand and 17 . fathom water , and you shall be but a league from the land , and if you be 2 . league from the land , you shall have 34 . fathom . 322 the course from Sant Juan de ullua in the bay of Mexico to Spain in Europe . god ' s you depart from saint Juan de ullua to Havana , you must stir away north - east until you bring your self in 25 . degree , and from thence you must stir away east from the little island call las Tortugas , until you have the sound of they ; and if you find white sand very small , you shall be east and west with they , and if your sound bee shel ground and periwinkle , or small shell or scale , then shall you be Northeast and Southwest , and the shell or scale must be read , and if at some time you take up black sand , then be you north and south with the say Tortugas . mark of the Tortugas . if you chance to fall with the Tortugas , they be 5 . or 6 . little island of white sand , low and close by the sea , save one which have on it some shrub or bush of tree : and they be in 25 . degree . the course from the Tortugas towards Havana . if you depart from the Tortugas towards Havana with a fresh wind , you must stir away Southwest : and if it be fair weather , and a small gale of wind , then stir south , that the current may not draw you in , nor set you too much to the westward : and if you fall with los organos , they be a rank of high and low hill with many sharp head like unto organ pipe and at the enter thereof on the south side be Rio de puercos , or the river of hog ; and at the further end be the deep bay call Baya honda , and there be the round loaf or heap call el pan de baya honda , that be to say , the loaf of the deep bay : and from this place until you come to cape 323 las Tortugas , the hill call los organo upon Cuba near Havana . Rio de puercos . Baya honda . the tower of Havana . de s . Anton all be sholde and flat 4 . or 5 . league into the sea , even as far as the say cape : and from Baya honda or the deep bay to