they have get out of Guiana . i send a present of iron to Carapana , and then set sail . in turn down the river we spend eight day . in many place where the channel lie we find twenty fathom depth : where it be shall , we have two fathom and a half , and that but in one or two place . of the worthiness of this river , because i can say enough , i will speak nothing . we have presume to call it by the name of Raleana , because your self be the first of our nation that ever enter the same , and i think it nothing inferior to Amazones , which be best know by the name of Orellana , the first discoverer thereof . by turn only , without help of oar to pass so long 476 away in so short a time , against the wind , may sufficient prove , that the channel be very large , good , and the chanel likely to second our hope in all that we can desire . ( > f ^- aleana ^ or without the mouth of this river , our pinnace , the this - very ° i ™ ge y coverer , who we lose near the coast of England , good . they come unto we . Shee fall with this land somewhat to meet with the southward of cape Cecyl , and have spend three pinnace . week and odd day in range alongst the coast , when she meet with we . William down the master inform i that they enter , and search these four river . in Wiapoco they sail so far , until the rock stop their passage . in Caiane they go up one day journey . in Cunanama they find many inhabitant . Curitini be the last river they have be in . whence , have no other mean to find Raleana , they be enforce to borrow a pilot against his will : who afterward i will have return with reward to his contentment ; but he will not . our english that to steal the first blessing of a untraded place , will perhaps secret hasten thither , may be behold to i for this caveat , if they take notice a good caveat . thereof . they may be assure , that this people , as they no way seek our harm , but use our man with all kindness : so be they impatient of such a wrong , as to have any of their people perforce take from they , and will doubtless seek revenge . the example of the like practice upon the coast of guinie , in the year 1566 , and again at Dominica , where Aiderman wat his ship hardly escape be take , may serve for our warning in like case to look for no good , before they be satisfy for this injury . when we have take aboard we such victual as be in the pinnace : we set fire in she , ( for her rudder can serve she to no long use ) and stop the flood , ply to windwarde with the ebb near the shore , until we be sixteen league to the eastward of the river mouth , and then stand off to sea , we fall in twenty four hour sail with Punta de galera 477 the northeaster most part of Trinidad . but have tabaco - island in sight , we first go thither . this island be plentiful of all thing , and a very good soil . it be not now inhabit , because the charibe of Dominica be evil neighbour unto it . they of Trinidad have a meaning and purpose to fly thither , when no long they can keep Trinidad . their only doubt be , that when they be seat there , the Spaniard will seek to possess it also . the governor of Margarita go late in a pinnace to view this island . Gilbert my pilot who sometime live there , note it for the best and fruitful ground that he know . thence we return to Punta de galera and anchor in ten fathom under the north side of the island some five or six mile from the say point . the flood - tide strike alongst the coast to the eastward very strong . we discharge a piece of ordinance , and afterward go to the shore in our boat : but no indian come unto we . i will have send John of Trinidad to procure some of they to speak with we : but he be altogether unwilling , allege that their dwelling be far within the mountain , and that he know no part of that side of the island . from this place we set sail for Santa Lucia , but fall with Granata , which we find not inhabit . saint Vincent we hardly recover , by turn under the lee of the island . the tobacco of this place be good : but the Indians be cannibal , promise we store , and delay we from day to day , seek only opportunity to betray , take , and eat we , as late they have devour the whole company of a french ship . this their treachery be by one of their slave reveal , from thenceforth they do all forbear to come unto we . to sit down on their low stool , when they by offer such ease , will seem to show courtesy , abode death to stranger , that shall trust they . at Matalino or Martinino we find not any inhabitant . last , we come to Dominica , where we can get no good tobacco . but have intelligence 478 of a spanish ship , that be take in of fresh water , at the northwest side of the island , we weigh anchor to seek he . he descry we , steal away by night . the Indians of this place have determine to remove , and joy ne with they of Guanipa , against the Spaniard , who late dispeople one of their island , and at our being there one of their canoas return from Guanipa , and certify we , that the ten spanish ship at Trinidad do ride , some of they at Conquerabia , the rest at the small hand near the disemboge place . here - hence we steer north