country will come to speak with we , but will all fly ; and if we follow they to their dwelling , they will burn their own town : and beside that , the way be long , the winter at hand , and that the river begin once to swell , it be impossible to stem the current , and that we can not in those small boat by any mean carry victuali for half the time , and that ( which indeed most discourage my company ) the king and lord of all the border of Guiana have decree that none of 377 they shall trade with any Christians for gold , because the same will be their own overthrow , and that for the love of gold the Christians mean to conquer and dispossess they of all together . many and the most of these i find to be true , but yet i resolve to make trial of all whatsoever happen , direct captain George Gifford my viceadmiral to take the lion whelp , and captain Calfield his bark the fwer of to turn to the eastward , against the mouth of a river Capuri . call Capuri , who entrance i have before send captain Whiddon , and John Dowglas the master , to discover , who find some nine foot water or better upon the flood , and five at low water , to who i have give instruction that they shall anchor at the edge of they shall , and upon the best of the flood to thrust over , which shall John Dowglas bwoy and beckon for they before : but they labour in vain ; for neither can they turn it up altogether so far to the east , neither do the flood continue so long , but the water fall year they can have pass the sand ; as we after find by a second experience : so as now we must either give over our enterprise , or leave our ship at adventure four hundred mile behind we , must run up in our ship boat , one barge , and two whery . but be doubtful how to carry victual for so long a time in such baby , or any strength of man , especial for that Berreo assure we that his son must be by that time come down with many soldier , i send away one king , master of the lion whelp , with his shipboat , to try another branch of a river in the bottom of the bay of Guanipa , which be call Amana , to prove if there be water to be find for either of the small ship to enter . but when he come to the mouth of Amana , he find it as the rest , but stay not to discover it thorough , because he be assure by a indian , his guide , that the cannibal of Guanipa will assail they with many canoas , and that they shoot poison arrow ; so as if he haste not back , they shall all be lose . 378 in the mean time , fear the worst , i cause all the carpenter we have , to cut down a Galego boat , which we mean to cast off , and to fit she with bank to row on , and in all thing to prepare she the best they can , so as she may be bring to draw but five foot , for so much we have on the bar of Capuri at low water . And doubt of king return , i send John Dowglas again in my long barge , aswell to relieve he , as also to make a perfect search in the bottom of that bay : for it have be hold for infallible , that whatsoever ship or boat shall fall therein , can never disemboque again , by reason of the violent current which set into the say bay , as also for that the breeze and easterly wind blow direct into the same . of which opinion i have hear John Hampton of Plymmouth , one of the great experience of England , and diverse other beside that have trade to Trinidad . i send with John Dowglas a old cacique of Trinidad for a pilot , who tell we that we can not return again by the bay or gulf , but that he know a by - branch which run within the land to the eastward , and that he think by it we may fall into Capuri , and so return in four day . John Dowglas search those river , and find four goodly entrance , whereof the least be as big as the Thames at Wolwich ; but in the bay thitherward it be shall , and but six foot water : so as we be now without hope of any ship or bark to pass over , and therefore resolve to go on with the boat , and the bottom of the Galego , in which we thrust 60 man . in the lion whelp boat and whery we carry 20 . captain Calfield in his whery carry ten more , and in my barge other ten , which make up a hundred : we have no other mean but to carry victuali for a month in the same , and also to lodge therein as we can , and to boil and dress our meat . captain Gifford have with he master Edward porter , captain Eynos , and eight more in his whery , with all their victuali , weapon , and provision . captain Calfield have with he my 379 John Hampton captain of the minion under sir John Hawkins in his voyage to saint Juan de ullua . cousin Butshead Gorges , and eight more . in the galley , of gentleman and officer my self have captain thin , my cousin John Greenvile , my nephew John Gilbert , captain Whiddon , captain Keymis , Edward handcocke , captain Clarke , lieutenant Hewes , Thomas Upton , captain fancy , Jerome Ferrar , Anthony Welles , William connocke , and above fifty more . we can not learn of Berreo any other way to enter but in branch , so far to windward , as it be impossible for we to recover : for we have as much sea to cross over in our whery , as between Dover and Calais , and in a great billow ,