come from England , they without far speech or delay , bring we to Wareo their captain , who entertain we most friendly , and then at large declare unto we , that he be late chase by the Spaniard from Moruga , one of the neighbour river to Raleana , or Orenoque : and that have burn his own house , and destroy his fruit and garden , he have leave his country and town to be possess by the Arwaccas who be a vagabond nation of Indians , which find no certain place of abode of their own , do for the most part serve and follow the Spaniard . he show i that he be of the nation of the laos , who be a mighty people , and of a late time be lord of all the sea coast so far as Trinidad , which they likewise possess . howbeit , that with a general consent , when the Spaniard first begin to borrow some of their wife , they all agree to change their habitation , and do now live unite for the most part towards the river of Amazones . but the especial cause of his present remove be , because two or three year past , twenty Spaniards come to his town , and seek to take his best wife from he : but before they carry she away , he at time and place of advantage kill half of they : the rest flee , most of they sore hurt . now in this case he think it best to dwell far enough from they . your indian pilot Ferdinando , who conduct you by Amana , and now abide near the 1596 . the lao a mlghtle nation . Ferdinando the indian pilot of sir head of Dessekebe , be one of this man subject : by Walter who ( as it may seem ) he have take good notice Ralegh . of our princess and country . for he descend more [ three . 674 . particular to inquire what force be come with we , 455 assure i of the Spaniard be in Trinidad , and that the Indians our friend betwixt hope and fear , have earnest expect our return from England these four or five month . when i have answer he , that at our departure we leave no Spaniards alive to annoy they ; that we now come only to discover , and trade with they ; and that if her majesty shall have send a power of man , where no enemy be to resist , the Indians may perhaps imagine , that we come rather to invade , than to defend they : he reply , that this course very well sort with the report which they have hear of our princess justice , rare grace , and virtue : the fame of who power in be able to vanquish the Spaniard , and singular goodness in undertake to succour and defend the afflict Indians , be now so general , that the nation far and near be all agree to join with we , and by all mean possible to assist we in expelling and root out the Spaniard from all part of the land : and that we be deceive , if we think this country not large enough to receive we , without molestation or intrusion upon the Indians , who want not choice of dwellingplace , if they forsake one to live in another : but stand in need of our presence at all time to aid they , and maintain their liberty , which to they be dear than land or live . he then far desire , that he with his people may have our favour against the Arwaccas , who not be content to enjoy their ground and house , have take from they many of their wife and child , the best of who fortune be , if they live , to live in perpetuali slavery under the Spaniard . we put he in good hope and comfort thereof . and he to deserve some part of this friendship , commend unto we a elderly man to be our pilot in bring we to Raleana . when we be ready to depart , he demand whether we brasil - wood , want any Urapo , which be the wood , that be usual carry from these part to Trinidad in canoas , and be there sell to the french for trade : he offer , if we will bring our ship near his port , to put in her lade thereof , 456 but because most of our cask be not iron - bound , and in make stowage - way to remove it , will have be the loss of our cider and other drink ; i therefore refer the take of any quantity to fit opportunity : think it sufficient at this time , to have only my boat lade thereof : which afterward in extremity of foul weather , before we can get aboard our ship , we be enforce in a dark night to heave all overboard : think our self happy , to have recover thither at seven day end , with safety of life only . all which time we can not where set foot on shore , but rest day and night wet and weatherbeaten in our covertlesse boat , which be sometime ready to sink under we . for we have in this place without comparison more rain , wind , and gust , then else where at any time . to be brief , my man become weak and sick , and if we have stay any long time out , i doubt whether the great part of we have ever come aboard again . i afterward understand by my indian pilot , that this weather be for most part of the year usual , near the island oncaiarie , which lie north from the unseasonable river Capurwacka some six league into the sea : and out that they hold opinion how this hand be keep by some qncaia ° ie evil spirit : for they very believe , that to sleep in the day time near it ( except it be after much drink ) be present death . the only season wherein little rain do fall there , be ( as i gather by their speech , they divide all time by their moon ) at our winter solstice . the mother - wind