Letters take at sea by captain George Popham . j594 - Alonso his letter from the grand Canaria to his brother be commander of saint Lucar , concern el Dorado . there have be certain letter receive here of late , of a land new discover call Nuevo Dorado , from the son of certain inhabitant of this city , who be in the discovery : they write of wonderful riches to be find in the say Dorado , and that gold there be in great abundance : the course to fall with it be fifty league to the windward of Margarita . [ alonsos letter ten 433 2 e alonsos letter from thence to certain merchant of Sant Lucar concern el Dorado . sir , we have no news worth the writing , save of a discovery late make by the Spaniard in a new land call Nuevo Dorado , which be two day sail to the windward of Margarita : there be gold in such abundance , as the like have not be hear of . we have it for certain in letter write from thence by some that be in the discovery , unto their parent here in this city . i purpose ( God will ) to bestow ten or twelve day in search of the say Dorado , as i pass in my voyage towards Carthagena , hope there to make some good sale of our commodity . i have send you therewith part of the information of the say discovery , that be send to his majesty . part of the copy that be send to his majesty , of the discovery of Nuevo Dorado . in the river of Pato otherwise call Orenoque , in the principali part thereof call Warismero , the 23 of April 1593 Domingo de vera master of the camp , and general for Antonio de Berreo governor and captain generail for our lord the king , betwixt the river of Pato and Papamene alias Orenoque , and mar - rannon , and of the hand of Trinidad , in presence of i Rodrigo de Caranza register for the sea , command all the soldier to be draw together and put in order of battle , the captain and soldier , and master of the camp stand in the midst of they , say unto they : sir , soldier , and captain , you understand long since that our general Antonio de Berreo , with the travel of eleven year , and expense of more than a hundred thousand pezo of gold , discover the royal province of Guiana and Dorado : of the which he take possession to govern the same , but through want of his people health , and necessary munition , he issue out at the hand Margarita , and from thence people Trinidad . 434 but now they have send i to learn out and discover the way most easy to enter , and to people the say province , and where the camp and army may best enter the same . by reason whereof i intend so to do in the name of his majesty , and the say governor Antonio de Berreo , and in token thereof i require you Francis Carillo , that you aid i to advance this cross that lie here on the ground , which they set on end towards the east , and the say master of the camp , the captain and soldier kneel down , and do due reverence unto the say cross , and thereupon the master of the camp take a bowl of water and drink it off , and take more and throw abroad on the ground : he also draw out his sword and cut the grass off the ground , and the bough off the tree say , i take this possession in the name of the king don Philip our master , and of his governor Antonio de Berreo : and because some make question of this possession , to they i answer , that in these our action be present the cacique , or principali don Antonio , otherwise call morequito , who land this be , who yield consent to the say possession , be glad thereof , and give his obedience to our lord the king , and in his name to the say governor Antonio de Berreo . and the say master of the camp kneel down be in his liberty , and all the captain and soldier say , that the possession be well take , and that they will defend it with their life , upon whosoever will say the contrary . and the say master bf the camp have his sword draw in his hand say unto i : register , that be here present , give i a instrument or testimoniali to confirm i in this possession , which i have take of this land , for the governor Antonio de Berreo , and if it be needful i will take it a new . and i require you all that be present to witness the same , and do further declare that i will go on , take the possession of all these land wheresoever i shall enter . Signed thus . Domingo de vera , and underneath , before i Rodrigo de Caranza , register of the army . 435 a nd in prosecution of the say possession , and the discovery of the way and province , the 27 of April of the say year , the master of the camp enter by little and little with all the camp and man of war , more than two league into the inland , and come to a town of a principali , and confer with he do let he understand by mean of Antonio Bisante the interpretor , that his majesty and Antonio de Berreo have send he to take the say possession . and the say friar Francis Carillo by the interpretor , deliver he certain thing of our holy catholique faith , to all which he answer , that they understand he well and will become Christians , and that with a very good will they shall advance the cross , in what part or place of the town it please they , for he be for the governor Antonio de Berreo , who be his master . thereupon the say master of the camp take a great cross , and set it on end toward the east ,