, and Arrawagotos . i far understand that this lake of Cassipa be so large , Cassipa a as it be above one day journey for one of their canoas gnat lake . to cross , which may be some fourty mile , and that thereinto fall diverse river , and that great store of grain of gold be find in the summer time when the lake fall by the bank , in those branch . there be also another goodly river beyond Caroli which the nver of be call arui , which also run through the lake Cassipa , arui - 405 Ewaipanomaa strange headless nation . and fall into Orenoque far west , make all that land between Caroli and arui a island , which be likewise a most beautiful country . next unto arui there be two river Atoica and Caora , and on that branch which be call Caora , be a nation of people , who head appear not above their shoulder ; which though it may be think a mere fable , yet for my own part i be resolve it be true , because every child in the province of Arromaia and Canuri affirm the same : they be call Ewaipanoma : they be report to have their eye in their shoulder , and their mouth in the middle of their breast , and that a long train of hair grow backward between their shoulder . the son of Topiawari , which i bring with i into England tell i that they be the most mighty man of all the land , and use bow , arrow , and club thrice as big as any of Guiana , or of the Orenoqueponi , and that one of the Iwarawakeri take a prisoner of they the year before our arrival there , and bring he into the border of Aromaia his father country . and far when i seem to doubt of it , he tell i that it be no wonder among they , but that they be as great a nation , and as common as any other in all the province , and have of late year slay many hundred of his father people , and of other nation their neighbour , but it be not my chance to hear of they till i be come away , and if i have but speak one word of it while i be there , i may have bring one of they with i to put the matter out of doubt . such a nation be write of by Mandevile , who report be hold for fable many year , and yet since the east Indies be discover , we find his relation true of such thing as heretofore be hold incredible : whether it be true or no , the matter be not great , neither can there be any profit in the imagination ; for my own part i see they not , but i be resolve that so many people do not all combine , or forethink to make the report . when i come to Cumana in the west Indies afterward by chance i speak with a Spaniard dwell not far from 406 1595 - thence , a man of great travel , and after he know that i have be in Guiana , and so far direct west as Caroli , the first question he ask i be , whether i have see any of the Ewaipanoma , which be those without head : who be esteem a most honest man of his word , and in all thing else , tell i that he have see many of they : i may not name he , because it may be for his disadvantage , but he be well know to monsieur mucherons son of London , and to Peter Mucheron merchant of the flemish ship that be there in trade , who also hear what he avow to be true of those people . the four river to the west of Caroli be Casnero the river of which fall into Orenoque on this side of Amapaia , casnen ' and that river be great than Danubius , or any of Europe : it rise on the south of Guiana from the mountain which divide Guiana from Amazones , and i think it to be navigable many hundred mile : but we have no time , mean , nor season of the year , to search those river for the cause aforesaid , the winter the winter be come upon we , although the winter and summer ° fgu ' lana - as touch cold and heat differ not , neither do the tree ever sensible lose their leaf , but have always fruit either ripe or green , and most of they both blossom , leaf , ripe fruit , and green at one time : but their winter only consist of terrible rain , and overflow of the river , with many great storm and gust , thunder and lightning , of which we have our fill , ere we return . on the north side , the first river that fall into Orenoque be Cari , beyond it on the same side be the river of Limo , between these two be a great nation of cannibal , and their chief town bear the name of the river , and be call Acamacari : at this town be a continual market of woman for three or four hatchet a piece , they be buy by the Arwacas , and by they sell into the west Indies . to the west of Limo be the river Pao , beyond it Caturi , beyond that Voari and Capuri which fall out of the great river of Meta , by 4 ° 7 which Berreo descend from Nuevo reyno de Granada . to the westward of Capuri be the province of Amapaia , where Berreo winter , and have so many of his people poison with the tawny water of the marsh of the anebas . above Amapaia towards Nuevo reyno fall in Meta , Pato , Meta , Pato , and Cassanar . to the west of those to - cassanar . ward the province of the ashaguas and Catetios be the river of Beta , Dawney , and Ubarro , and towards the frontier of Peru be the province of Thomebamba , and Caxamalca . adjoin to Quito in the north side of Peru be the river of Guiacar and Goauar : and on the other side