long we labour , that many day be spend , and we drive to draw our self to hard allowance , our bread even at the last , and no drink at all ; and our man and our self so weary and scorch , and doubtful withal , whether we shall ever perform it or no , the heat increase as we draw towards the line ; for we be now in five degree . they be in the further we go on ( our victuali decrease and degree . the air breed great faintness ) we grow weak and weak , when we have m ● st need of strength and ability ; for hourly the river run more violent than other against we , and the barge , whery , and ship boat of captain Gifford and captain Calfield , have spend all their provision ; so as we be bring into despair and discomfort , have we not persuade all the company that it be but only one day work more to attain the land where we shall be relieve of all we want , and if we return , that we be sure to starve by the way , and that the world will also laugh we to scorn . on the bank of these river be diverse sort of fruit good to eat , flower and tree of such variety , as be sufficient to make ten volume of herbal : we relieve our self many time with the fruit of the country , and sometime with foul and fish . we see bird of all colour , some carnation , some crimson , orenge - tawny , purple , watchet , and of ten 385 2 b all other sort both simple and mix , and it be unto we a great good pass of the time to behold they , beside the relief we find by kill some store of they with our fowl piece ; without which , have little or no bread , and less drink , but only the thick and trouble water of the river , we have be in a very hard case . our old pilot of the Ciawani ( who , as i say before , we take to redeem Ferdinando ) tell we , that if we will enter a branch of a river on the right hand with our barge and whery , and leave the galley at anchor the while in the great river , he will bring we to a town of the Arwacas , where we shall find store of bread , hen , fish , and of the country wine ; and persuade we , that depart from the galley at noon , we may return year night . i be very glad to hear this speech , and present take my bark , with eight musketeer , captain giffords whery , with himself and four musketeer , and captain Calfield with his whery , and as many ; and so we enter the mouth of this river : and because we be persuade that it be so near , we take no victuali with we at all . when we have row three hour , we marvel we see no sign of any dwell , and ask the pilot where the town be : he tell we a little further . after three hour more , the sun be almost set , we begin to suspect that he lead we that way to betray we : for he confess that those Spaniard which flee from Trinidad , and also those that remain with Carapana in Emeria , be join together in some village upon that river . but when it grow towards night ; and we demand where the place be ; he tell we but four reach more . when we have row four and four ; we see no sign ; and our poor watermen , even heartbroken , and tire , be ready to give up the ghost : for we have now come from the galley near forty mile . at the last we determine to hang the pilot ; and 386 if we have well know the way back again by night , he have sure go ; but our own necessity plead sufficient for his safety : for it be as dark as pitch , and the river begin so to narrow it self , and the tree to hang over from side to side , as we be drive with arm sword to cut a passage through those branch that cover the water . we be very desirous to find this town , hope of a feast , because we make but a short breakfast aboard the galley in the morning and it be now eight a clock at night , and our stomach begin to gnaw apace : but whether it be best to return or go on , we begin to doubt , suspect treason in the pilot more and more : but the poor old indian ever assure we that it be but a little further , but this one turn and that turn : and at the last about one a clock after midnight we see a light ; and row towards it , we hear the dog of the village . when we land we find few people ; for the lord of that place be go with diverse canoas above four hundred mile off , upon a journey towards the head of Orenoque to trade for gold , and to buy woman of the cannibal , who afterward unfortunate pass by we as we ride at a anchor in the port of morequito in the dark of the night , and yet come so near we , as his canoas grate against our barge : he leave one of his company at the port of morequito , by who we understand that he have bring thirty young woman , diverse plate of gold , and have great store of fine piece of cotton cloth , and cotton bed . in his house we have good store of bread , fish , hen , and indian drink , and so rest that night , and in the morning after we have trade with such of his people as come down , we return towards our gay , and bring with we some quantity of bread , fish , and hen . on both side of this river , we pass the most beauty - a most beautiful