from the foot to the head : and in this sort they sit drink by twenty , and hundred , and continue in drunkenness sometime six or seven day together . the same be also confirm by a letter write into Spain , which be intercept , which m . Robert Duddeley tell i he have see . upon this sight , and for the abundance of gold which he see in the city , the image of gold in their temple , the plate , armour , and shield of gold 361 the author of the name of el Dorado . the substance of this report be in the end of the navigation of the great river of Marannon , write by Gonzalo Fernando de Oviedo to cardinali bembo . Ramusio . fol . ^ . fol . 416 . sir Robert Duddeley . which they use in the war , he call it el Dorado . after the death of Ordas and Martinez , and after Orellana , who be employ by Gonzalo Pizarro , one Pedro de Osua a knight of Navarre attempt Guiana , take his way from Peru , and build his brigandine upon a river call Oia , which rise to the southward of Quito , and be very great . this river fall into Amazones , by which Osua with his company descend , and come out of that province which be call Mutylonez : and it seem to i that this empire be reserve for her majesty and the english nation , by reason of the hard success which all these and other Spaniard find in attempt the same , whereof i will speak brief , though impertinent in some read sort to my purpose . This Pedro de Osua have among ^ An ^ ta h * s troop a Biscain , call Agiri , a man mean bear , ' who bear no other office than a sergeant or alferez : but after certain month , when the soldier be grieve with travel , and consume with famine , and that no entrance can be find by the branch or body of Amazones , this Agiri raise a mutiny , of which he make himself the head , and so prevail , as he put Osua to the sword , and all his follower , take on he the whole charge and commandment , with a purpose not only to make himself emperor of Guiana , but also of Peru , and of all that side of the west Indies : he have of his party seven hundred soldier , and of those many promise to draw in other captain and company , to deliver up town and fort in Peru : but neither find by you say river any passage into Guiana , nor any possibility to return towards Peru by the same Amazon , by reason that you descent of the river make so great a current , he be enforce to disemboque at the mouth of the say Amazones , which can not be less than a thousand league from the place where they embark : from thence he coast the land till he arrive at Margarita to the north of Mompatar , which be at this day call Puerto de Tyranno , for that he there slay don Juan de villa Andreda , governor of Margarita , who be father to don 362 Juan Sarmiento , governor of Margarita when sir John Burgh land there , and attempt the island . Agiri put to the sword all other in the island that refuse to be of his party , and take with he certain Simerones , and other desperate companion . from thence he go to Cumana , and there slay the governor , and deal in all as at Margarita : he spoil all the coast of Caracas , and the province of Venezuela , and of Rio de la hacha ; and as i remember , it be the same year that sir John Hawkins sail to saint Juan de ullua in the Jesus of Lubeck : for himself tell i that he meet with such a one upon the coast that rebel , and have sail down all the river of Amazones . Agiri from thence land about sancta Marta , and sack it also , put to death so many as refuse to be his follower , purpose to invade Nuevo reyno de Granada , and to sack Pamplon , Merida , Lagrita , Tunxa , and the rest of the city of Nuevo reyno , and from thence again to enter Peru : but in a fight in the say Nuevo reyno he be overthrow , and find no way to escape , he first put to the sword his own child , foretell they that they shall not live to be defame or upbraid by the Spaniard after his death , who will have term they the child of a traitor or tyrant ; and that sithence he can not make they prince , he will yet deliver they from shame and reproach . Theise be the end and tragedy of Ordas , Martinez , Orellana ; Ozua , and Agiri . also soon after Ordas follow Jeronimo Ortal de Saragossa with 130 soldier , who fail his entrance by sea , be cast with the current on the coast of Paria , and people about saint Miguel de Neveri . it be then attempt by don Pedro de Silva , a portague of the family of Ruigomes de Silva , and by the favour which ruigome have with the king , he be set out , but he also shoot wide of the mark ; for be depart from Spain with his fleet , he enter by Marannon and Amazones , where by the nation of the river , and by the Amazon he be utter overthrow , and himself and all his 363 A . D . 1595 - the voyage of sirlohnDurgh to the west Indies . 1534 - gomar . cap . 84 . y 86 . do Pedro de Silva . do Gonzales Xlmenes de Casada . army defeat , only seven escape , and of those but two return . after he come Pedro Hernandez de Serpa , and land at Cumana in the west Indies , take his journey by land towards Orenoque , which may be some 120 league : but year he come to the border of the say river , he be set upon by a nation of the indian call