end be to be see in the chancery of saint Juan de Puerto rico , whereof Berreo have a copy , which appear to be the great encouragement aswell to Berreo as to other that former attempt the discovery and conquest . Orellana after he fail of the discovery of Guiana by the say river of Amazones , pass into Spain , and there obtain a patent of the king for the invasion and conquest , but die by sea about the island , and his fleet sever by tempest , the action for that time proceed not . Diego Ordas follow the enterprise , and depart Spain with 600 soldier , and 30 horse , who arrive on the coast of Guiana , be slay in a mutiny , with the most part of such as favour he , as also of the rebellious part , insomuch as his ship perish , and few or none return , neither be it certain know what become of the say Orgas , until Berreo find the anchor of his ship in the river of Orenoque ; but it be suppose , and so it be write by Lopez , that he perish on the sea , and of other writer diverse conceive and report . and hereof it come that Martin enter so far within the land , and arrive at that city of Inga the emperor ; for it chance that while Ordas with his army rest at the port of morequito ( who be either the first or second that attempt Guiana ) by some negligence , the whole store of powder provide for the service be set on fire ; and Martinez have the chief charge , be condemn by the general Ordas to be execute forthwith : 359 1595 - Juan Martinez the first that ever see Manoa . Fran . Lopez hist . gen . de las Ind . cap . 87 - diego de Ordas go forth with 600 soldier 1531 . Martinez be much favour by the soldier , have all the mean possible procure for his life ; but it can not be obtain in other sort then this : that he shall be set into a canoa alone without any victuali , only with his arm , and so turn loose into the great river : but it please God that the canoa be carry down the stream , and that certain of the guianians meet it the same evening : and have not at any time see any christian , nor any man of that colour , they carry Martinez into the land to be wonder at , and so from the great city town to town , until he come to the great city of of Manoa or Manoa ? the seat and residence of Inga the emperor . ° ra ° ' the emperor after he have behold he , know he to be a christian ( for it be not long before that his brethren Guascar and Atabalipa be vanquish by the Spaniard in Peru ) and cause he to be lodge in his palace , and well entertain . he live seven month in Manoa , but be not suffer to wander into the country any where . he be also bring thither all the way blindfold , lead by the Indians , until he come to the entrance of Manoa it self , and be fourteen or fifteen day in the passage . he avow at his death that he enter the city at noon , and then they uncover his face , and that he travel all that day till night through the city , and the next day from sun rise to sun set year he come to the palace of Inga . after that Martinez have live seven month in Manoa , and begin to understand the language of the country , Inga ask he whether he desire to return into his own country , or will willing abide with he . but Martinez not desirous to stay , obtain the favour of Inga to depart : with who he send diverse guianians to conduct he to the river of Orenoque , all load with as much gold as they can carry , which he give to Martinez at his departure : but when he be arrive near the river side , the borderer which be call Orenoqueponi rob he and his Guianians of all the treasure ( the borderer be at that time at war , which Inga have not conquer ) save only of two 360 great bottle of gourd , which be fill with bead of gold curious wrought , which those Orenoqueponi thought have be no other thing than his drink or meat , or grain for food , with which Martinez have liberty to pass : and so in canoas he fall down from the river of Orenoque to Trinidad , and from thence to Margarita , and also to saint Juan de puerto rico , where remain a long time for passage into Spain , he die . in the time of his extreme sickness , and when he be without hope of life , receive the sacrament at the hand of his confessor , he deliver these thing , with the relation of his travel , and also call for his calabaza or gourd of the gold bead which he give to the church and friar to be pray for . This Martinez be he that christen the city of Manoa by the name of el Dorado , and as Berreo inform i , upon this occasion : those Guianians , and also the borderer , and all other in that tract which i have see , be marvellous great drunkard ; in which vice , i think no nation can compare with they : and at the time of their solemn feast , when the emperor carowse with his captain , tributary , and governor , the manner be thus : all those that pledge he be first strip naked , and their body anoint all over with a kind of white balsamum ( by they call curca ) of which there be great plenty , and yet very dear among they , and it be of all other the most precious , whereof we have have good experience : when they be anoint all over , certain servant of the emperor , have prepare gold make into fine powder , blow it through hollow cane upon their naked body , until they be all shine