any liquour into their body , as they shall be marvelous provoke thereunto by drought , i say , if they drink before the wound be dress , or soon upon it , there be no way with they but present death . and so i will return again to our journey which for this third day we finish , and cast anchor again near the continent or the left hand between two mountain , the one call Aroami , and the other aio : i make no stay here but till midnight , for i fear hourly lest any rain shall fall , and then it have be impossible to have go any further up , notwithstanding that there be every day a very strong breeze , and easterly wind . i defer the search of the country on guiana - side , till my return down the river . the next day we sail by a great island in the middle of the river call Manoripano , and as we walk a while on the island , while the galley get a head of we , there come for we from the main a small Canoa with seven or eight guianians , to invite we to anchor at their port , but i defer till my return ; it be that cacique to who those nepoio go , which come with we from the town of Toparimaca : and so the five day we reach as high up as the province of Aromaia the country of morequito who Berreo execute , and anchor to the west of a island call Murrecotima , ten mile long and five broad : and that night the cacique aramiary , ( to who town we make our long and hungry voyage out of the river of Amana ) pass by we . the next day we arrive at the port of morequito , and ancker there , send away one of our pilot to seek the king of Aromaia , uncle to morequito slay by Berreo as aforesaid . the next day follow before noon he come to we on foot from his house , which be fourteen English mile ( himself be a hundred and ten year old ) and return on foot 398 the same day , and with he many of the borderer , with many woman and child , that come to wonder at our nation , and to bring we down victuali , which they do in great plenty , as venison , pork , hen , chicken , foul , fish , with diverse sort of excellent fruit and root , and great abundance of pina , the prince of fruit , that grow under the sun , especial those of Guiana . they bring we also store of bread , and of their wine , and a sort of paraquito , no big than wrennes , and of all other sort both small and great ; one of they give i a beast call by the Spaniard Armadilla , which they call Cassacam , which seem to be all bar over with small plate somewhat like to a rinoceros , with a white horn grow in his hinder part , as big as a great hunt horn , which they use to wind in stead of a trumpet . Monardus write that a little of the powder of that horn put into the ear , cure deafness . after this old king have rest a while in a little tent , that i cause to be set up , i begin by my interpreter to discourse with he of the death of morequito his predecessor , and afterward of the Spaniard , and ere i go any far i make he know the cause of my come thither , who servant i be , and that the queen pleasure be , i shall undertake the voyage for their defence , and to deliver they from the tyrannic of the Spaniard , dilate at large ( as i have do before to those of Trinidad ) her majesty greatness , her justice , her charity to all oppress nation , with as many of the rest of her beauty and virtue , as either i can express , or they conceive : all which be with great admiration attentive hear , and marvelously admire , i begin to sound the old man as touch Guiana , and the state thereof , what sort of common wealth it be , how govern , of what strength and policy , how far it extend , and what nation be friend or enemy adjoin , and final of the distance and way to enter the same : he tell i that 399 Orejones be the gentleman of Peru . Lop . de Gomar . Hist . gen . cap . 119 . himself and his people with all those down the river towards the sea , as far as Emeria , the province of Carapana , be of Guiana , but that they call themselves Orenoqueponi , and that all the nation between the river and those mountain in sight call wacarima , be of the same cast and appellation : and that on the other side of those mountain of Wacarima there be a large plain ( which after i discover in my return ) call the valley of Amariocapana , in all that valley the people be also of the ancient guianians . i ask what nation those be which inhabit on the far side of those mountain , beyond the valley of Amariocapana : he answer with a great sigh ( as a man which have inward feel of the loss of his country and liberty , especial for that his elder son be slay in a battle on that side of the mountain , who he most entire love ) that he remembered in his father life time when he be very old , and himself a young man , that there come down into that large valley of Guiana , a nation from so far off as the sun sleep , ( for such be his own word ) with so great a multitude as they can not be numbered nor resist , and that they wear large coat , and hat of crimson colour , which colour he express , by show a piece of red wood , wherewith my tent be support , and that they be call Orejones , and Epuremei , those that have slay and root out so many of