see far off the mountain adjoin to this gold my , and have measure their path near the same place this last year , can not judge it to be fifteen mile from we . i do well remember how come that way with Putijma the year before , he point to this same mountain , make sign to have i go with he thither . i understand his sign and mark the place , but mistake his meaning , imagine that he will have show i the overfall of the river cur - wara from the mountain . my Indian show i in what sort without dig they gather the gold in the sand of a small river , name Macawini , that spring and fall from the rock where this my be . and far tell i , that he be with Putijma , at what time morekito be to be execute by the Spaniard , and that then the chief of morekito his friend be in consultation , to show this my unto they if so they may redeem their captain life , but upon better advice , suppose they in this case to be implacable , and that this may prove a mean to loose not only their king , but their country also : they have to this day conceal it from they , be of all other the 468 rich and most plentiful ! . the age sort to keep this from common knowledge , have devise a fable of a dangerous dragon that haunt this place and de - vour all that come near it . but our indian , if when we return , we do bring store of strong wine ( which they love beyond measure ) with it will undertake so to charm this dragon , that he shall do we no harm . i , that for this end come from home , and in this journey have take much more pain to less purpose , will very glad from this mountain have take so good a proof to witness my be in the country : but withal consider that not one Indian of our know friend come unto we : that don Juan the cousin of Gualtero , who live here a revolt from the Spaniard , be now in election to be chief commander of all the indian force in these part , can in policy , for Gualtero his sake , who inheritance he seek to usurp , be a fast friend unto we : that the Spaniard abide in Winicapora ( for there be ten ) may well before we can do any thing , and return , cause some other of Berreo his man to join with they , in the way to intercept we : and forthink withal , that there be no mean but our self , to make know our discovery , if we return not ; in our misfortune the hope of follow this voyage will be bury : but beside all this , and the respect of such spial , as the Spaniard keep to observe our do , foreknow that if the enemy shall by our linger , stop our passage , which in one or two place of advantage , few of they may easy doe : it will be a question how with our ship to get out of the river , except first we can remove they : i think it best ( all other possibility set apart ) to seek in time to be free from the hazard of the aforesaid evil passage . while we be search at the shore for the Indians , my barge take a Canoa , with three man in 469 this transplant of Indians be worthy of consideration . her : the one a servant to Berreo , ( as before be mention ) the other two merchant of Cassavi . they have a letter send from the governor to be convey to Trinidad , which i receive . there be also a great hatchet , and twenty knife , wherewith this indian servant shall buy a Canoa , and hire Indians to carry she up the river towards Nuevo Reyno . This Canoa forsooth with four other be to be send to bring down Berreo his son with all his force , which now have be , i think , full three year in prepare . if five such boat be sufficient to convoy he , his man and all their provision : it may seem , he come with no great strength . this servant as he be a man of especial trust , and near Berreo : so appear he to have some insight in his proceed . he show i that the Indians , who with these knife shall be hire , be to pass up so high , as where some of the Cassanari do dwell in small village . that Berreo his purpose be , when they come thither to leave they there , and make they officer over the other Indians : and in their place some of the Cassanari shall return , who likewise shall be make justice and constable over they of Guiana : that from Trinidad he mean to remove most of the old inhabitant , that will be tractable ; and interpose they among the cassanarians of Guiana , and the guianians of the Cassanari . that the Arwaccas shall whole possess Trinidad , and the river side of Raleana . that they already be provide of threescore negro , to work the mine in these place . and that by this mean Berreo hope to keep these several nation in mutual enmity each against other , all to serve his turn , and never to become strong , or likely to join themselves against he . he far show i , that Topiawary , soon after our departure from the river , flee into the mountain , carry huge Godwyn with he , and leave a substitute in his country , as aforesaid : and that the next news 470 » 596 - they hear of he be , that he be dead , and the english boy eat by a tiger . that the Spaniard believe neither the one nor the other . that about the end of June , when the river shall be impassable , the ten ship shall depart from Trinidad . and that Berreo ever since his come to Guiana , have spend his time altogether in purvey of victual ,