all part within and near Guiana , do offer their service , and promise to provide victuali , and what else their country yield , desire only that some force of man may remain with they , to deliver they from oppression 473 and tyrannic . and now by generail consent ( though hatchet and knife be the only thing of request and useful unto they ) they have agree by no mean to trade with the Spaniard for any thing . far this old man show i , whence most of their gold come , which be form in so many fashion : whence their spleen - stone , and other of all sort be to be have in plenty : where gold be to be gather in the sand of their river : from what part the Spaniard , both by trade , and otherwise , have return much gold . this he utter with Carapana his consent ( i doubt not ) hope thereby to induce we to return again . for contrary to their law of secrecy , which in this case they do all general observe , sharp punish the breaker thereof , as enemy unto their native country : i find this man no whit scrupulous , but very free and liberali of speech in all thing . and because we may know , that we shall not want hand or help , in this or any other our enterprise , if perhaps we shall find cause to pass up to the head of this river : he declare that the Spaniard have no Indians to trust unto but some of the Arwaccas , which since they be not many , can be but of small force : that the charibe of Guanipa , the ciawanna among the Tivitivas , the shebaios , laos , Amaipagotos , Cassipagotos , Purpagotos , Samipagotos , Serowos , etai - guinams , Cassamari , with the rest of the nation far and near , be all ready , on what side soever the Spaniard shall stir , to fight against they : that the Pariagotos , through who country they must first pass , be alone sufficient to encounter they , such be the strength of their country , and the valour of the man . the indian hold opinion , that they be notable sorcerer , and invulnerable . in the mountain where they dwell , white stone be find of such hardness , that by no art or mean they can be pierce ; they imagine that these Pariagotos become invulnerable , by 474 eat these stone . the fable omit , happy they may prove good diamond . then he show how the Iwarewakeri have nou_r_ - ish grass in all place , where passage be , these three year , and that it be at this present so high , as some of the tree ; which they mean to burn , so soon as the Spaniard shall be within danger thereof . last , he show i that Wariarimagoto the emperor chief captain for those part , have gather together many thousand of the Epuremei , to keep the border of the empire ; and that he lie now on the south side of the mountain , some one day journey or little moor from the Spaniard . to be short , he certify i , that they all be resolve not to seek upon they ( for indeed they fear their shot ) but to defend their own , and to expect our come . in the mean time they take opportunity , when they find any of they straggle or divide from their strength , by little and little to lessen their number . wariaritna - goto one of the emperor of Guiana his chief cap -• taines up in arm against the Spaniard . the place where we be at anchor be but one day journey from Carapana : i therefore make motion to this captain to stay with two or three of his company aboard the ship , and to cause his man to bring i with my interpreter to Carapana his dwell : he answer i that it be not good so to do , lest perhaps some spy may inform the Spaniard thereof , whereby danger will grow to Carapana . for they have many time use many mean to reconcile he unto they : but he from time to time have daly with they , neither profess himself their enemy , nor in aught show they any friendship . now ( say he ) if the Spaniard shall by any mean come to knowledge , that you have confer together , they will take this occasion to persecute he with all extremity , as their open enemy , who they now neglect , or at the least fear not , as be a harmless old man . and for this cause only have Carapana forbear to come unto you . 47 by this i perceive , that to stay long for he ( though glad i can have be content to spend one sevennight more to speak with he ) will be purposeless . wherefore have assure so many of the Indians as at any time come unto we , of our speedy return , promise they plenty of knife , bead , and hatchet , if they will reserve their Cassavi , and provide store of their piece of gold for we : i desire this captain to be a mean that our friend of Trinidad may understand of our be in the river and that we mean to relieve they so soon , as convenient may be . he promise in Carapana his behalf , that this shall not be forget . one of the captain of the cyawanna , who do now dwell in the river Arawawo , near Trinidad , undertake also without fail to ascertain they thereof . i be the more careful herein , because so many , ship be here , i doubt lest they will take order that no indian shall speak with we . for so indeed it fall out . this captain of the cyawanna come likewise to join with we , and have provide fifteen canoas for that purpose . their dwell be late in Macureo , where the Spaniard one night steal on they , kill twenty of their man , and burn their house , because they refuse to trade with they for certain image of gold make with many head which