amapaias and Anebas , which be also marvelous rich in gold . the rest towards Peru we will omit . on the north of 423 Orenoque , between it and the west Indies be the wikiri , Saymi , and the rest before speak of , all mortali enemy to the Spaniard . on the south side of the main mouth of Orenoque , be the Arwacas ; and beyond they the cannibal and to the south of they the Amazones . to make mention of the several beast , bird , fish , fruit , flower , gum , sweet wood , and of their several religion and custom , will for the first require as many volume as those of Gesnerus , and for the rest another bundle of Decades . the religion of the Epuremei be the same which the Ingas , emperor of Peru use , which may be read in Cieza , and other spanish story , how they believe the immortality of the soul , worship the sun , and bury with they alive their best belove wife and treasure , as they likewise do in Pegu in the east Indies , and other place . the Orenoqueponi bury not their wife with they , but their jewel , hope to enjoy they again . the Arwacas dry the bone of their lord , and their wife and friend drink they in powder . in the grave of the peruvians the Spaniard find their great abundance of treasure : the like also be to be find among these people in every province . they have all many wife , and the lord fivefold to the common sort : their wife never eat with their husband , nor among the man , but serve their husband at meal , and afterwards feed by themselves . those that be past their young year , make all their bread and drink , and work their cotton bed , and do all else of service and labour , for the man do nothing but hunt , fish , play , and drink , when they be out of the war . i will enter no further into discourse of their manner , law and custom : and because i have not my self see the city of Inga , i can avow on my credit what i have hear , although it be very likely , that the emperor Inga have build and erect as magnificent palace in Guiana , as his ancestor do in Peru , which be for their 424 rich and rareness most marvellous and exceed all in Europe , and i think of the world , China except , which also the Spaniard ( which i have ) assure i to be true , as also the nation of the borderer , who be but savage to those of the inland , do cause much treasure to be bury with they : for i be inform of one of the cassique of the valley of Amariocapana which have bury with he a little before our arrival , a chair of gold most curious wrought , which be make either in macureguaray adjoin , or in Manoa : but if we shall have grieve they in their religion at the first , before they have be teach better , and have dig up their grave , we have lose they all : and therefore i hold my first resolution , that her majesty shall either accept or refuse the enterprise , ere any thing shall be do that might in any sort hinder the same . and if Peru have so many heap of gold , whereof those Ingas be prince , and that they delight so much therein ; no doubt but this which now live and reign in Manoa , have the same honour , and i be assure have more abundance of gold , within his territory , than all Peru and the west Indies . for the rest , which my self have see , i will promise these thing that follow , which i know to be true . those that be desirous to discover and to see many nation , may be satisfy within this river , which bring forth so many arm and branch lead to several country and province , above 2000 mile east and west , and 800 mile south and north , and of these , the most either rich in gold , or in other merchandize . the common soldier shall here fight for gold , and pay himself in steed of penny , with plate of half a foot broad , whereas he break his bone in other war for provant and penury . those commander and chieftain that shoot at honour and abundance , shall find there more rich and beautiful city , more temple adorn with golden image , more sepulchre fill with treasure , then either Cortes find in Mexico , 425 great riches . exceed commendation of the river of Orenoque . the holsome - nesse of the country . gold . Brasil wood . excellent die . or Pizarro in Peru : and the shine glory of this conquest will eclipse all those so far extend beam of the spanish nation . there be no country which yield more pleasure to the inhabitant , either for those common delight of hunt , hawk , fish , fowl , or the rest , than Guiana do . it have so many plain , clear river , abundance of pheasant , partridge , quail , rail , crane , herons , and all other fowl : deer of all sort , pork , hare , lion , tiger , leopard , and diverse other sort of beast , either for chase , or food . it have a kind of beast call Cama , or Anta , as big as a english beef , and in great plenty . to speak of the several sort of every kind , i fear will be troublesome to the reader , and therefore i will omit they , and conclude that both for health , good air , pleasure , and riches i be resolve it can be equal by any region either in the east or west . Moreover the country be so healthful , as of a hundred person and more ( which lie without shift most sluttish , and be every day almost melt with heat in row and march , and sudden wet again with great shower , and