twenty and or three day in discovery upon this coast . the channel Qreno ^ of this river have six or seven fathom depth , nine or ten mile off at sea , the bar lie far out , and at low water have not full two fathom . it high not above five foot , except at a spring tide . we anchor in ten fathom the first night : the next morning twelve canoas come unto we , furnish and provide of victual after their manner for the war . their captain name be Anwara , and Aparwa . Theise cassique , when the Spaniard make the last inroad in those part , be in the inland among the iwarawakeri their neighbour , by which occasion have lose some of their wife ( for not - spanish withstand their profession of Christianity , some of these Spaniard keep ten or twelve woman , think themselves well and sure bless , howsoever they live , if their town and house be religious cross ) they keep together 30 . canoas , hope at our come , which they have now long expect to recover this loss upon they and the Arwaccas , who in their absence have do this wrong . they show i this their purpose , and require to be join in league of friendship with we against our enemy . when of they i have learn so much of the present estate of the country , as they do know : they demand whether we have bring no more force with we , but only one ship ? i answer they as before i do the other , that we now come only to trade , not know until this present that any Spaniards be in Guiana ; that upon our return our whole fleet will hasten to set forward , and that in the mean time , we will now visit our friend , and help they so far as we can in any thing that we shall find needful present to be do . after long discourse ( for their chief man stay with i all night ) when he have cause i to spit in my right hand , with many other ceremony which they use in confirm friendship , he go to the shore , and one of his canoas he send to bring forwards the 463 muchikeri the name of the province where macu - rigueray the frst town of Guiana be situate . Parime an inland sea of salt water . other twenty : one other he cause to go up the river before we , to bring intelligence . then call together the chief of his company , they make small fire , and sit in their Hamacas , or indian bed , each one sort himself with his companion , recount among themselves the worthy deed , and death of their ancestor , execrate their enemy most despiteful , and magnify their friend with all title of praise and honour , that may be devise ; thus they sit talk , and take tobacco some two hour , and until their pipe be all spend ( for by they they measure the time of this their solemn conference ) no man must interrupt , or disturb they in any sort : for this be their religion , and prayer , which they now celebrate , keep a precise fast one whole day , in honour of the great prince of the north , their patroness and defender . their canoas be make ready , they accompany we , and in their way show we , where the shoalde of the river do lie . by this captain i learn , that Muchikeri be the name of the country where Macureguerai the first town of the empire of Guiana , that lie towards Raleana , be seat in a fair and exceed large plain , below the high mountain , that bear northwesterly from it , that it be but three day journey distant from Carapana his porte , and that Manoa be but six day far . that they themselves do pass in three day into the country of the iwarewakeri by the river amacur , which though it be not the direct , yet it be the ready way to Macureguarai , for that which lead to Carapana his dwell , be in some place difficult , and mountainous . that a nation of clothe people , call Cassanari , do dwell not far from the place , where the river do first take the name of Orenoque , and that far within , they border upon a sea of salt water , name Parime . that a great river , call Macurwini , pass through their country into Orenoque . that Manoa stand twenty day journey from the mouth Wiapoco : sixteen day from Barima , 464 thirteen day from Amacur , and ten day from Aratoori . that the best way unto it , be not by macureguerai . that of all other the charibe that dwell high up in Orenoque , know most the inland , and of those nation , and they speak no other language , than such as John your interpreter do well understand . he certify i of the headless man , and that their mouth in their breast be exceed wide . the name of their nation in the charibe language be Chiparemai , and the guianians call they Ewiapanomos . what i have hear of a sort of people more monstrous , i omit to mention , because it be no matter of difficulty to get one of they , and the report otherwise will appear fabulous . last he tell i of a inland river , name Cawrooma , adjoin to Aratoori , and that the quepyn mountains , where Carapana dwell , be hardly accessible . that the Amapagotos have image of gold of incredible bigness , and great store of unman horse of the Caracas breed : and they dwell five day journey up the river about Caroli . we with our fleet of canoas be now not far from carapanas port , when our intelligencer return and inform we that ten spaniards be late go with much trade to Barima , where these Indians dwell , to buy Cassavi bread ; and that within one day two other canoas of Spaniards be appoint to come by the river Amana , to Carapana his port . upon this occasion they take counsel , and in