of we as aforesaid . to Francis sparrow i give instruction to travel to Marcureguarai , with such merchandize as i leave with they , thereby to learn the place , and if it be possible , to go on to the great city of Manoa : which be do , we weigh anchor , and coast the Guiana on the river on Guiana side , because we come upon the north Southside . side , by the lane of the saima and wikiri . there come with we from Aromaia a cacique call putijma , that command the province of Warapana , ( which Putijma slay the nine Spaniard upon Caroli before speak of ) who desire we to rest in the porte of his country , promise to bring we unto a mountain adjoin to his town that have stone of the colour of gold , which he perform . and after we have rest there one night , i go my self in the morning with most of the gentleman of my company , over land towards the say mountain , march by a river Mana . side call Mana , leave on the right hand a town call Tuteritona , stand in the province of Tarracoa , of the which Wariaaremagoto be principali . beyond it lie another town towards the south , in the valley of Amariocapana , which bear the name of the say valley , who plain stretch themselves some sixty mile in length , east and west , as fair ground , and as beautiful field , as any man have ever see , with diverse copse scatter here and there by the river side , and all as full of dear as any forest or park in England , and in every lake and river the like abundance of fish and foul , of which Irraparragota be lord . from the river of Mana , we cross another river in Diana . the say beautiful valley call Oiana , and rest our self by a clear lake , which lie in the middle of the say Oiana , and one of our guide kindle we fire with two stick , we stay a while to dry our shirt , which with the heat hang very wet and heavy on our shoulder . afterwards we seek the ford to pass over towards the mountain call Iconuri , where 416 putijma foretell we of the mine . in this lake we see one of the great fish , as big as a wine pipe , which they call Manati , be most excellent and wholesome meat . but after i perceive , that to pass the say river will require half a day march more , i be not able my self to endure it , and therefore i send captain Keymis with six shot to go on , and give he order not to return to the port of Putijma , which be call chiparepare , but to take leisure , and to march down the say valley , as far as a river call Cumaca , where i promise to meet he again , Putijma himself promise also to be his guide : and as they march , they leave the town of Emparepana , and Capurepana , on the right hand , and march from Putijmas house down the say valley of Amariocapana , and we return the same day to the river side , see by the way many rock , like unto gold over , and on the left hand , a round mountain which consist of minerali stone . from hence we row down the stream , coast the province of Parino : as for the branch of river which i overpass in this discourse , those shall be better express in the description with the mountain of Ajo , Ara , and the rest , which be situate in the province of Parino and Carricurrina . when we be come as far down as the land call Ariacoa , ( where Orenoque divide it self into three great branch , each of they be most goodly river ) i send away captain Henry thin , and captain greenevile with the galley , the near way , and take with i captain Gifford , captain calfield , Edward porter , and captain Eynos with my own barge , and the two wherry , and go down that branch of Orenoque , which be call Cararoopana , which lead towards Emeria the province of Carapana , and towards the east sea , as well to find out captain Keymis , who i have send over land , as also to acquaint my self with Carapana , who be one of the great of all the lord of the Orenoqueponi : and when i come to the ten 417 2d A . D . * 595 - great fish call Manati most excellent meat . river of Cumaca ( to which Putijma promise to conduct captain Keymis ) i leave captain Eynos and master porter in the say river to expect his come , and the Emeria . rest of we row down the stream towards Emeria . in this branch call Cararoopana be also many goodly island , some of six mile long , some of ten , and some of twenty . when it grow towards sunset , we enter a branch of a river that fall into Orenoque winicapora . call winicapora : where i be en form of the mountain of crystal , to which in truth for the length of the way , and the evil season of the year , i be not able to march , nor abide any long upon the journey : we see it afar off and it appear like a white church - a mighty cata - tower of a exceed height . there fall over it a rack or overfall mjghty river which touch no part of the side of the ojviaer . mountain , but rush over the top of it , and fall to the ground with so terrible a noise and clamour , as if a thousand great bell be knock one against another . i think there be not in the world so strange a overfall , nor so wonderful to behold : Berreo tell i that there diamond and be diamond and other precious stone on it , and that other precious shine very far off : but what it have i know ' not , neither dare he or any of his