it the discovery of Guiana . n Thursday the 6 . of February in the year 1595 . we depart England , and the Sunday follow have sight of the north cape of Spain , the wind for the most part continue prosperous : we pass in sight of the burling , and the rock , and so onward for the canary , and fall with fuerte ventura the 17 of the same month , where we spend two or three day , and relieve our com - 348 pany with some fresh meat . from thence we coast by the grand Canaria , and so to tenerif , and stay there for the lion whelp your lordship ship , and for captain Amy as Preston and the rest . but when after 7 . or 8 . day we find they not , we depart and direct our course for Trinidad with my own ship , and a small theyleof bark of captain cross only ( for we have before lose Trinitia , i - sight of a small Galego on the coast of Spain , which come with we from Plymouth : ) we arrive at Trinidad the 22 . of march , cast anchor at point Curiapan , which the Spaniard call punta de Gallo , which be situate in 8 . degree or there about : we abide there 4 . or 5 . day , and in all that time we come not to the speech of any indian or Spaniard : on the coast we see a fire , as we sail from the point Caroa towards Curiapan , but for fear of the Cunapan . Spaniards none dare come to speak with we . i my self coast it in my barge close aboard the shore and land in every cove , the better to know the island , while the ship keep the channel . from Curiapan after a few day we turn up Northeast to recover that place which the Spaniard call Puerto de los espannole , and the inhabitant Conquerabia , and as before ( revictual my barge ) i leave the ship and keep by the shore , the better to come to speech with some of the inhabitant , and also to understand the river , water place , and port of the island , which ( as it be rude do ) my purpose be to send your lordship after a few day . from Curiapan i come to a port and seat of Indians call Parico , where we Parico . find a fresh water river , but see no people . from thence i row to another port , call by the natural Piche , and by the Spaniard Tierra de Brea : in the way Tierra de between both be diverse little brook of fresh water and one salt river that have store of oyster upon the branch of the tree , and be very salt and well taste . all their oyster grow upon those bough and spray , and not on the ground : the like be common see in other place of the west Indies , and else where . this tree be describe by Andrew Thevet in his french 349 antarctic , and the form figure in the book as a plant very strange , and by Pliny in his 12 . book of his natural history . but in this island , as also in Guiana there be very many of they . at this point call Tierra de Brea or Piche there be that abundance of stone pitch , that all the ship of the world may be therewith load from thence , and we make trial of it in trim our ship to be most excellent good , and melt not with the sun as the pitch of Norway , and therefore for ship trade the south part very profitable . from thence we go to the mountain foot call anniperima , and so pass the river Carone on which the spanish city be seat , we meet with our ship at Puerto de los Espannolles or Conquerabia . this island of Trinidad have the form of a sheephook , and be but narrow , the north part be very mountainous , the soil be very excellent and will bear sugar , ginger , or any other commodi tie that the Indies yield . it have store of dear , wild pork , fruit , fish and foul : it have also for bread sufficient maiz , cassavi , and of those root and fruit which be common every where in the west Indies . it have diverse beast which the Indies have not : the Spaniard confess that they find grain of gold in some of the river , but they have a purpose to enter Guiana ( the magazin of all rich metal ) care not to spend time in the search thereof any further . this island be call by the people thereof cairi , jand in it be diverse nation : those about Parico be call laio , those at Punta de Carao be of the Arwacas , and between Carao and Curiapan they be call Salvajos , between Carao and Punta de galera be the Nepojos , and those about the spanish city term themselves carinepagote : of the rest of the nation , and of other port and river i leave to speak here , be impertinent to my purpose , and mean to describe they as they be situate in the particular plot and description of the island , three part whereof i coast with my barge , that i may the better describe it . 35 ° meet with the ship at Puerta de los espannole , we find at the land place a company of Spaniards who keep a guard at the descent , and they offer a sign of peace , i send captain Whiddon to speak with they , who afterward to my great grief i leave bury in the say island after my return from Guiana , the death of be a man most honest and valiant . the Spaniard seem to be desirous to trade with we , and to enter into term of peace , more for doubt of their own strength then for aught else , and in the end upon pledge , some of they come aboard : the same evening there stale also aboard we in a small Canoa two Indians , the one of they be a cacique or lord