the governor . but Berreo send for he in the king name , and his messenger find he in the house of one Fashardo on the sudden year he be suspect , so as he can not then be convey away , vides dare not deny he , aswell to avoid the suspicion of the practice , as also for that a holy father be slay by he and his people . morequito offer Fashardo the weight of three quintal in gold , to let he escape : but the poor guianian , betray on all side , be deliver to the campmaster of Berreo , and be present execute . morequito after the death of this morequito , the soldier of execute • Berreo spoil his territory , and take diverse prisoner , among other they take the uncle of morequito , call Topiawari , who be now king of Aromaia ( who son i bring with i into England ) and be a man of great understanding and policy : he be above a hundred year old , and yet of a very able body . the Spaniard lead he in a chain seventeen day , and make he their guide from place to place between his country and Emeria , the province of Carapana aforesaid , and he be at last redeem for a hundred plate of gold , and diverse stone call Piedras hijada , or spleen - stone . now Berreo for execute of morequito , and other cruelty , spoil , and slaughter do in Aromaia , have lose the love of the Orenoqueponi , and of all the borderer , and dare not send any of his soldier any further into the land then to Carapana , town ° f which he call the port of Guiana : but from thence by the help of Carapana he have trade further into the G ^ ana , i country , and always appoint ten Spaniard to reside in carapanas town , by who favour , and by be conduct by his people , those ten search the country thereabouts , aswell for mine , as for other trade and commodity . they also have get a nephew of Morequito * who 375 some feme Spaniards be now seat in Dissequebe . they have christen , and name don Juan , of who they have great hope , endeavour by all mean to establish he in the say province . among many other trade , those Spaniard use canoas to pass to the river of Barema , Pawroma , and Dissequebe , which be on the south side of the mouth of Orenoque , and there buy woman and child from the cannibal , which be of that barbarous nature , as they will for three or four hatchet sell the son and daughter of their own brethren and sister , and for somewhat more , even their own daughter . hereof the Spaniard make great profit : for buy a maid of twelve or thirteen year for three or four hatchet , they sell they again at Margarita in the west Indies for fifty and a hundred pezo , which be so many crown . the master of my ship , John Dowglas , take one of the canoas which come lade from thence with people to be sell , and the most of they escape ; yet of those he bring , there be one as well favour , and as well shape as ever i see any in England , and afterward i see many of they , which but for their tawny colour may be compare to any of Europe . they also trade in those river for bread of Cassavi , of which they buy a hundred pound weight for a knife , and sell it at Margarita for ten pezo . they also recover great store of cotton , Brasill wood , and those bed which they call Hamacas or Brasill bed , wherein in hot country all the Spaniard use to lie common , and in no other , neither do we our self while we be there . by mean of which trade , for ransom of diverse of the guianians , and for exchange of hatchet and knife , Berreo recover some store of gold plate , eagle of gold , and image of man and diverse bird , and dispatch his campmaster for Spain , with all that he have gather , therewith to levy soldier , and by the show thereof to draw other to the love of the enterprise . and have send diverse image aswell of man as beast , bird and fish , so curious wrought 376 in gold , he doubt not but to persuade the king to yield to he some further help , especial for that this land have never be sack , the mine never wrought , and in the Indies their work be well spend , and the gold draw out with great labour and charge . he also dispatch messenger to his son in Nuevo reyno to levy all the force he can , 8c to come down the river Orenoque to Emeria , the province of Carapana , to meet he : he have also send to saint Iago de Leon on the coast of the Caracas , to buy horse and mule . after i have thus learn of his proceed past and purpose , i tell he that i have resolve to see Guiana , and that it be the end of my journey , and the cause of my come to Trinidad , as it be indeed , ( and for that purpose i send Jacob Whiddon the year before to get intelligence with who Berreo himself have speech at that time , and remember how inquisitive Jacob Whiddon be of his proceed , and of the country of Guiana ) Berreo be strike into a great melancholy and sadness , and use all the argument he can to dissuade i , and also assure the gentleman of my company that it will be labour lose , and that they shall suffer many misery if they proceed . and first he deliver that i can not enter any of the river with any bark or pinnace , or hardly with any ship boat , it be so low , sandy , and full of flat , and that his company be daily ground in their canoas , which draw but twelve inch water . he further say , that none of the