to trim trim she with the pitch of the country : and until ship . we hac | do , keep a corpse du guard , night and day on shore , which be upon Saturday follow the nine of April . all the while we be there we have a house of the caribe , and be kind use of they , and have victual , and every thing we need of they . and so take our leave on Tuesday be then the river of twelve of April , we come to the mouth of cusse - cusse - winne . wonderful [ nnej where the Arwaccas of Marrac and of the river have provide and bring to we such infinite store of potato , and guiney - wheate , that the steward say we have no stowage for they ; and so they be turn back , and we by that mean come to short allowance home ward bind , then ( if there have be any good care ) we need to have do . on Friday the fifteeneth of April , we put forth marawime . of marawinne , which be some four league over , and within one league and a half for the most part broad ; full of island , and diverse small river run into it : and it be between forty and fifty league , from the mouth to the fall , and lie for the most part south Southwest up , alter some 3 point , be almost straight . And stand along to the westward , this night we try with our main coarse and bonnet . on Saturday night we Sewramo . come to a anchor , in three fathom against Sewramo . on Sunday morning we think to have go into cuppa - namo : but send off our boat and find uncertain sound , sometime 3 fathom and present 9 foot , Coritine we stand along to Coritine , and come into it upon the river . Monday be the 18 of April : and the next night we come to anchor against Warrawalle in 10 fathom . on Wednesday the Indians of the town have hunt a doe , she take soil and come near our ship , and put off with our boat we take she , be like unto our deer in England , not altogether so fat , but very good flesh and great body . in this river we meet a bark call the John of London captain leigh be in she . And be both fall down within some five league of the mouth of the river , upon intelligence that one Marracon , ( who we bring along with we ) give we , namely that the river Desekebe , in which he dwell ( and wherein there be some three hundred Spaniard , which for the most part now be destroy and dead ) do lead so far into the country , that it come within a day journey of the lake call perima , whereupon Manoa be suppose the great lake to stand ; and that this river of Coritine do meet with ? er ‘ ma - desekebe up in the land : by mean whereof we make account to go up into the country , and to have discover a passage unto that rich city . So have conclude both ship , we stand up into the river again , and come to Warawalle the 24 of April there our ship ride until we go up to Mawranamo to speak with Marracon , to know the truth of these thing : who when we have find , he verify all that before he have speak : master Monax be the man that of Leonard of Cawe take all the intelligence : who be bring up with Antony Berreo can speak some spanish and marracons language also . and beside we our self by sign , and draw the two river on the ground , and the meeting of they aloft , do perceive as much . now come down with our boat the six and twenty of April we go up with our ship to Mawranama , where we mor they , and take some twenty out of both , upon Thursday the eight and twenty in the afternoon with two shallop and two canoas , in one of which Henry the indian be and some twenty Indians moor , we go up the river ; and by night get some three league far we lodge in the wood , and the next morning we with our boat and the two canoas went into a small river call they bring their ship up to the Mawranamo . tapuere , to a town call Macharibi , think to have have Casavi and other victual , which they be altogether unprovide of , by reason that they make no more ready than serve themselves from hand to mouth , live in this town for the most part by fish . by mean of go both into this river , though we row very hard it be noon before we overtake the big shallop wherein both the captain be . this night we come to a town call Vaperon , where we stay all Saturday and the night follow , for Casavi : whereof they bake good store for we being but a few leave in the town . for not a month before we come thither , the waccawa that dwell above the fall come down to the town , and slay some ten of they , and many of the rest flee away , so that we find most of the house empty . upon Sunday morning be may day , we go from this place , and by night get some twelve league beyond , and be past all town we lodge as before in the wood , and the next day come to the fall of the river ; up some of which fall we shoot with our boat , and go upon a rock there come some nine canoas up the river to we , and will have go up with we to kill the waccawayans , because they have kill some of they , as before be say . whereupon the captain and master Monax take advice : and because now they have learn , as they say , that five day journey far there be a fall not passable , and that by this mean they shall make the wacchawayans their enemy , which will turn to our great hurt , when sir Walter Ralegh shall come thither , have occasion to use this river , where we be inform be good store of gold , they resolve to return , though i yield diverse reason to the contrary . so upon Tuseday night , we come back to Vaperon , where we lodge . and upon Wednesday the four of May , we come to our ship : where it be report that the Spaniard be go ne out of Desekebe , which be not so : but as it seem in policy by they give out to make our man that we leave in our ship more careless