the three voyage set forth by sir Walter Ralegh to Guiana , with a pinnace call the Watte , in the year 1596 . write by m . Thomas Mash be a gentleman of the company . Pon Thursday the 14 . of October 1596 . we set sail from limehouse upon the river of Thames , and through much contrariety of wind and other accident , we make it the 27 . of December , before we can get out of Waimouth . the 25 . of Januarie in the morning we come to the north side of the island of grand Canaria , where we hope to have get a boat to serve we upon the coast of Guiana , but the wind be so great , that we can not launch our shalope : so we pass along by the road and the town , and at length see a boat lie on shore , which be too big for we , we rip up , and wooded our self with she . that day we descry a sail , which at length we find to be a flyboat of Dartmouth , of 200 . ton , bind to the island of Mayo for salt . we fall in consort with she , and that night stand for the southermost part of the island there to water , where we stay all the next day , and water at the southsouthwest part thereof . that night we weigh and stand away together southsoutheast , and south and by east , purpose by their persuasion to go for the river Doro . the 28 . of Januarie we make the furthermost part of Barbary ; and this morning we jor the u ^ outk meet with m . Benjamin wood with his fleet of 3 sail sea . xi i a bind for the straight of Magellan and China , to wit , the bear , the whelp , and the Benjamin : who tell we that there be no good to be do in the river Doro . Cape Blanco . whereupon we stand along with they for cape Blanco , unto which we come upon Sunday night next follow . and upon Monday morning the first of February , we see two ship in a sandy bay : so we stir in with they , which be Frenchman bind for the west Indies , and put all into the bay , where we refresh our self with fish , in which there be infinite store , and stay there until Thursday the 5 . at which time we stand up with the cape again , where ride the Frenchman and his pinnace , who put forth right afore we , and another Frenchman and his caravel well man : so all our 5 . English come to a anchor by they , where after kind greeting with many shot out of every ship both english and french , all our captains be invite to a feast aboard the french admiral : where after great cheer and kind entertainment , it be conclude on all hand to take the isle of Fogo , if God will give we leave . the same day we all weigh and stand along for the the island jsje of ga ^ unto which we come the 8 . of February , of and anchor altogether at a bay in the west part thereof : in which island we have good store of goat and fresh fish . there be no man dwell upon the island that we can see . we can find no fresh water upon it , but one stand puddle of bad water : it have four great mountain upon the 4 . corner of it . here the Frenchman ( as it seem being overcome with drink , have be aboard our general at a feast ) be on shore , one of the gentleman of their company be slay , and their chief captain sore wound : by reason whereof , and of the set together of a pinnace which they be about , the french admiral and the caravel stay behind . so we in the Watte , and the other 6 . ship weigh the 10 . of February , and stand away for the isle of Maio . this night the other two french ship that come from Sal with we ( as it seem of purpose , because their consort be not with they ) lose we . the next morning we see Maio . so we and the flyboat of Dartmouth compass the northermost part of the island , and master Benjamin wood in the china - fleete , the southermost , and come all to a anchor together at the southwest part thereof : where ride six sail of psalle of Fleming lade salt ; who have bring their horse and cart , and wheelbarrow , and plank for their m0j0r sa ’ barrow to run upon . here be abundance of salt in this island make by God hand without man labour . Theise tell we that there be thirty sail more , which fall to leeward of Fogo , who , as i hear since , beat it up with much ado , and come thither also for salt . this trade may be very beneficial to England , consider the dearness of salt . of goat on this island there be such store , as be incredible , but to those that have see they : and it be a wonder how they live one by the other , the ground be stony and barren . it be think that there be dwell in it some twenty mountainier , which get one of the Fleming man straggle , and God know what they do with he : for they see he no more . this island be somewhat low and round , have no great mountain upon it . here end our determination concern the invade of Fogo . and here we leave the flyboat of Dartmouth lade salt , and the china - fleete to refresh themselves with goat , who as i have hear since have at the village ( from whence the mountainier be flee into the further part of the island and rock ) great store of dry goat which they carry along with they : which be like to be a great help unto they in their long voyage . so upon Saturday the 12 of February at night we set sail and stand for the coast of Wiana , which we be bind for . upon Sunday the twenty of February we come into the main current that set from the cape of buena esperanza along the coast of Brasil , and so towards the west Indies , for the most part set away northwest . the Tuesday night follow , whereas before our course be westsouth west , we stand away west and by south : by reason whereof , and of the current that set we to the northward , we be the next day by noon twenty minute further to the northward then the day before . so that than we lay away Southwest , because we be loath