to fall to the northward of our place intend : which if we shall be put to leeward of , there be small hope leave to recover it . by Thursday we be within one degree i of the equinoctial line : therefore this day we hail away west and by south , and west among . this night we sound , but have no ground at 90 fathom . the next day in the morning the colour of the water begin to change , and to be more white , so we make another sound and have ground at thirty fathom , but see no land , and in the afternoon we hail away westnorthwest , northwest , and northnorthwest . in the night we sound diverse time , and have twelve , ten , and nine fathom water . all Saturday we have a thick red water , and have seven and eight fathom both day and night , and upon Sunday morning by day be the seven and twenty of February , we make the land which appear low , and trend near as we fall with it , south and by east , north and by west about two degree towards the north . right on head of we be a cape or head land , so that have we be shoot a little further into the bay , the wind be more northerly , we shall hardly have double it off . for with much ado make many board , and stop every tide , it be the Tuesday follow before we clear our self of the bay , and recover the cape . now the land trend northwest and by north , and southeast and by south . and still we be fain to anchor every tide sometime in four fathom , and sometime in three , as far as we can the river of Wiapoucou almost in 4 degree north . Thomas Masham ad . . * 597 - see land . so about night we see cape Cecill : and cape Cecil in after some two hour come to a anchor . between these 3 degree and two cape the land lie low and even . a half - upon Wednesday morning , have the wind large at Eastnortheast , we lay it away upon a board into the bay of Wiapoucou and come to a anchor in the river mouth in two fathom : over the bar there be little water , as 6 and 7 foot , and less in many place . and this river of Wiapoucou stand almost in 4 degree to the northward of the line . the next morning we weigh , and stand in with our pinnace by night , we get some eight league up the river . this day sometime we have but 5 foot water and draw 7 foot , but be soft oaze we go clear : and a little before we come to anchor , we be on ground upon a rock , but with some trouble and labour we get off and have no hurt . upon Friday the 4 of march towards night we come to the fall . the next day m . Leonard Berrie our captain , the master , my self and some 5 more , go through the wood , and spend all the day in search the head of the fall , but can not find it : for though we pass by many , yet be there more still one above the other . so that find no Indians in this river to buy victual of , neither any kind of thing that may entice we to come to so short allowance , as we must have do , if we have spend any long time here , find it over hard to pass the fall , we fall down the river again , and by Friday the 11 of march we clear our self of the river and bay . this river from the mouth to the fall be some 16 league , in many place a mile over , but for the most part half a mile . there be many island in it : as be also in most of the river upon the coast . this night we anchor against Cawo in two fathom ; whereinto we Cam . think to have put with our pinnace : but find the water so shall , and the sea so grow , that neither with our ship nor shallope we dare go in . on Saturday by noon we come to anchor under one the 7 hand , of the 7 island : upon which go on shore we find neither man nor beast , but great store of yellow plumb which be good to eat . upon Sunday after dinner our master William Dowie and 6 moor go off with our boat to a town Aramatto a call Aramatto ; where they find many inhabitant , great tosvne . anj bring victual and some tobacco with they , and one indian name caprima , who lie aboard all night , the next day be Monday the 14 of march go with TheCaribestf our captain into Wias , and there trade with the wiastractable caribe for such thing as they have . and afterward ' they of Aramatto come off with their canoas to we , and we go on shore to they : and from thence our captain send a canoa with seven man , which have every one of they a knife to go back to the river of Cawo , and to tell ritimo captain of that place , that because we can not come to he , we will Chiana a stay at Chiana for he , whither we entreat he to river and bay . come to we . so upon Thursday the 17 we stand in for Chiana , and come to a anchor without in the bay in 3 fathom that night : and have the caribe come continual to we with their canoas , which bring we great store of victual and some tobacco , show themselves very kind and love , and come all from their town , and dwell on shore by we until ritimo come : at who come they return all up to their town again , which be upon the Sunday follow . all this day we feast he and his train , and the next day we traffic with they for such thing as they bring , which be principal tobacco . after that they have make know their mind of the desire that they have to have the english come and kill the Spaniard , and to dwell in Orenoque and in the country , they depart with their 3 canoas the next day . and we with the help of the caribe of Chiana , have by their mean from the shore water , because the river mouth be salt , depart out of 6 the bay the Thursday follow , and pass by Macerea , couroura , and Manamanora , by reason of shoald , rock , and great wind , be a lee shore ; and for want of a good shalope ,