for our admiral appoint both these french and the Fleming to keep watch upon the river by night with their boat , every boat have in her 12 man at the least , and the boat well provide . this be for fear of fire ship or bark to come down , which our admiral have great care unto , and cause our ship to ride by cable and haulser , at all advantage to shun they , if by that mean they shall attempt to put we out of the harbour ; give commandment to we that watch in the town , that what fire soever we shall espy or see , not one man to start from his watch or quarter , unless we be by himself command to the contrary . now this order put in all thing , and have view all the good in the town , and think our self sufficient fortify , we begin to unlade our ship , which come as full lade in as they go forth , but not with so good merchandise . and this order be take about the unlade of they , and also the lade of good out of the town : our man be divide into half , and the one half wrought one day , and the other half the other day ; always those that wrought not keep the watch with their furniture in their hand and about they , and none step far off or wander from his colour , and those that wrought have all their weapon in good order set and place by they , so that at a instant every one know where to go to his furniture : and this be very careful look unto . the three day after our come in , come down from the high town , which may be about four mile off upon a hill , three or four of the principali gentleman of the country , and say that from the bishop , themselves , and the rest , they will have some conference with our admiral . this news be bring to the admiral , he hang down his head for a small season ; and when he have muse a while , he answer , i must go aboard of the Fleming upon business that import i , and therefore let they stay if they will : and so he go and sit there with the Fleming from nine of the clock till two at the afternoon . in this space diverse messenger go to the admiral , to come away , for these gentleman stay . to who he give 54 this answer : be they not go yet ? and about two of the clock he come aland , and then they tell he they be depart . many of the better sort of our man marvel , and think much , because he will not vouchsafe to come and have conference with such man of account as they seem to be . but the admiral make they this answer , sir , i have be bring up among this people , i have live among they as a gentleman , serve with they as a soldier , and live among they as a merchant , so that i shall have some understanding of their demeanour and nature ; and i know when they can prevail with the sword by force , than they deal with their deceivable tongue ; for faith and truth they have none , neither will use any , unless it be to their own advantage . and this i give you warning , that if you give they parley , they will betray we ; and for my part , of all nation in the world , it will grieve i most to be overtake by this nation and the Spaniard : and i be glad it be my fortune to pay they with one of their own fetch , for i warrant you they understand i better than you think they do . and with this i pray you be satisfy ; i hope it be for all our good : for what shall we gain by parley , when ( by the help of God ) we have get already that we come for , shall we venture that we have get with our sword , to see if they can take it from we by word and policy ? there be no wisdom in so do . you know what it have cost we , and how many man lie wound that be not yet hole of this other night hurt : and therefore from henceforth i give this commission , that if any be take , he be send away with this order , although he come as a friend , that if either he or any other approach we from henceforth , he shall | be hang out of hand : and other course then this i will not take with they . which course be follow , for within 3 or 4 day after it be perform by two take in the night : and after that we be never trouble with spy ; and although diverse slave come run from their man to we , by which we understand much of their work and pretence , yet the admiral will entertain few of they . in this mean time that we begin to work , the Portugal with the country people be not idle , for see we so busy , about six night after our come in , they privy in the night cast up a trench in the sand about a sacar shoot from our ship , mind there to plant ordinance , which will have offend our ship great ; and they will not have be able to have ride there to take in their lade , which now begin to go aboard of they . the admiral hear - ing this , about 3 of the clock in ; then after noon marshal our man , and he and all the rest of the captain march towards they . the Portugal and Indians perceive our come , begin to withdraw themselves within the trench , mean ( as it shall appear ) to fight it out there : but we make no stand , neither do it behove we , but present approach the trench with our musket and pike , afore their trench be thorough finish : so that by god help we enter they . and the Portugal and Indians leave the