, we be fall above half a mile down to the northward , below the harbour , which be a great inconvenience unto we : so that before we can get up again , the ebb be come upon we , and thereby we be force to hover before the harbour till two of the clock in the afternoon , in the sight of all the town . in this mean time , our ship ride before the fort without the harbour , about a demy - colvering shot off : in the which time pass many shot between the fort and the ship , and especial between the admiral ship and they : but no great harm be do on either part . all this while our admiral keep the man ready hover in the gay and the boat . the Hollander that ride in the mouth of the harbour , see our resolution , lay out haulser , and wound themselves out of the way of we . our admiral be very joyful , and give great encouragement to all his man : for , to pass these three great Hollander , he hold it the great danger of all . about 12 of the clock the governor of the town send a Portugal aboard the admiral ship , to know what he will have , and wherefore he come . he return he this answer : that he want the carrack good , and for they he come , and they he will have , and that he shall short see . in this process of time , the townsman and inhabitant which see so much ship , and perceive we to be enemy , gather themselves together , three or four ensign of man , esteem to the number of some six hundred at the least . Theise come to the fort or platform lie over against the entry of the harbour , and there attend our land : but before our admiral set forward with his boat , he give express order to all that have charge of govern the boat or galley , to run they with such violence against the shore , that they shall be all cast away without recovery , and not one man to stay in they , whereby our man may have no manner of retreat to trust unto , but only to God and their weapon . now be the time come of the flood , be about two of the clock in the afternoon , when our admiral set forward , and enter the harbour with the small galley , and all the rest of the boat follow he , the Hollander that ride in the mouth of the harbour , nothing impeach he : but now the fort begin to play with their ordinance upon the galley and the boat ; and one of their shot take away a great piece of our ensign out of the galley . but our sail be set , it be no time for we to make any stay , but with all the force we can we run the galley upon the shore right under the fort , within a coit cast of it , with such violence , that we break she back ; and she sink present : for there where we land , go a breach xi 49 penny of the sea , which present cast she away . the boat come after do the like . at our arrival , those in the fort have lade all their ordinance , be seven piece of brass , to discharge they upon we at our land ; which indeed they do : for our admiral leap into the water , all the rest follow he , off come these piece of ordinance : but almighty God be praise , they in the fort , with fear to see we land in their face , have pike their ordinance so steep downward with their mouth , that they shoot all their shot in the sand , although , as i say before , it be not above a coit cast at the most between the place we land and the face of the fort : so that they only shoot off one of our man arm , without do any moor hurt ; which be to we a great blessing of God : for if those ordinance have be well level , a great number of we have lose our life at that instant . our admiral see this , cry out , encourage his man , upon they , upon they ; all ( by God help ) be we : and they therewith run to the fort with all violence . those four ensign of man that be set to defend our land , see this resolution , begin to go back , and retire into certain bush that be by the same fort ; and be follow , flee through a certain oaze which be dry , be then but the fin of the beginning of the tide : and so abandon the fort , Fernambuck and leave it with their ordinance to we . this day of take . our be ; va ] ] be their Good - friday , when by custom they usual whip themselves : but God send we now for a general scourge to they all , whereby that labour among they may be well spare . the fort be take with all their ordinance , the admiral wave to the ship , will they to weigh and come in ; which they do with all speed , himself take order in leave certain man in keep the say fort , and place the ordinance towards the high town , from whence he suspect the great danger ; and put his man in order , march towards the low town , which be about some fourteen score from the fort : in which town lie all their merchandise and other good . approach to the town , he enter the same , the people embarking themselves in caravel and boat , with all the expedition they can . the base town , of above a hundred house , be thus take , we find in it great store of merchandize of all sort : as brasil - wood , sugar , calico - cloth , pepper , cynamon , clove , maze , nutmeg , with diverse other good thing , to the great comfort of we all . the admiral go up and down the town , and place at the