place , and leave unto we 4 good piece of brass ordinance , with powder and shot and diverse other necessary , and among the rest 5 small cart of that country , which to we be more worth than all the rest we take , for the lade of our good from the town to the water side : for without they we can not have tell what to have do , much of our good being so heavy , that without cart , we be not able to weyld they : all these thing we bring away and destroy all those platform that they have make , and then we have rest with they for certain day , in which we go forward , divide our merchandise with captain Venner accord to our consort , and go daily lade they aboard , every ship company accord as their turn fall out , but only the three dutch ship : for the good be put into their boat their own company jade themselves . and this far good chance or blessing of God we have to help we , that assoon as we have take our cart , the next morning come in a ship with some 60 negro , io PortugaU woman , and 40 Portugal : the woman and the negro we turn out of the town , but the Portugal our admiral keep to draw the cart when they be lade , which to we be a very great ease . for the country be very hot and ill for our nation to take any great travel in . in this town there be no fresh water to be have , and therefore we be every 5 or 6 day compel to pass over the river into the main land to get fresh water , which after the first or second time the Portugal keep and will have defend our water , so that we be drive to water of force , and at several time some of our man be hurt , and only two or three slay , and with this danger we be force to get our water . and as they molest we in our water , so they sleep not in other devise , but put in practice to burn our ship or remove they out of the harbour . for within some 20 day after our come in , they have prepare 5 caravel and fill they with such thing as will best take fire and burn : these they bring within a mile or little moor of our ship , and there set they on fire , for near they can not well come because of our watch of boat , for as be above say , the admiral have always 6 boat that keep watch above half a mile from the ship for fear of such exploit as these , which be the cause they can not fire they so near the ship as they will have do . but these fire caravel have the tide with they , and also the little wind that blow be in their favour ; which cause they to come down the stream the fast : which our boat perceive make to they with as much expedition as convenient they can , but the tide and wind both serve they , they approach towards the ship with great expedition . our man in the town begin to be in some fear of they , yet no man move or 57 ajx 1595 - start from his quarter more then if there have be nothing to do . also the master and such as be aboard , be somewhat amaze to see 5 so great fire to be come down among their ship , but they prepare for to clear they of it , as well as they can , be provide afore hand and judge that some such stratagem will be there use , the river be very fit therefore . but ( God be thank ) who be always with we and our best defence in this voyage ; by who assistance we perform this so great a attempt with so small force . our company in the boat so play the man when they see the fire come near our ship , that cast grapnel with iron chain on they , as every boat have one for that purpose , some they tow aground , and some they bring to a bitter or anchor , where they ride till all their force be burn out , and so we be deliver by God help from this fearful danger . within some 6 night after this , which may be about the 26 day after our come in and abode there , about 11 of the clock at night , come drive down other 3 great raft burn with the huge fire that i have see . Theise be exceed dangerous , for when our man approach they think to clap their grapnel upon they , as they have do upon the caravel the night before , they be prevent : for there stook out of the raft many pole which keep they from the body of the raft , that they can not come to throw their grapnel into they : and yet they have this inconvenience worse than all the rest which most trouble we . there stook out among the pole certain hollow trunk fill with such provision of firework that they cease not still ( as the fire come down to those trunk to set they on fire ) to spout out such sparkle , that our boat have powder in they for our man use , dare not for fear of tire themselves with their own powder come near those sparkle of the raft , but see they to drive near and near our ship , they wet certain clothes and lay upon their flask and bandeler and so venture upon they , and with 58 their grapnel take hold of they , and so tow they on ground , where they stook fast and be not burn out the next day in the morning . diverse log and timber come drive along by our ship , and burn , but with our boat we easy defend they . and thus ( God be praise ) we escape the second fire . a three fire be prepare , as a negro give we to understand , but this we prevent by our departure . for this three fire be very great preparation ; and we be credible inform of