mouth of the bay will open towards thou . and this bay stand in 20 degree . the course from the bay de Spirito Santo to the bay of saint Vincent , and the mark thereof . also the course from saint Vincent to the river of plate . Baia de Salvador 12 league north from Cabo frio . two small island . the height of cape Frio in 23 degree . Rio de jenero . Ailing from Spirito Santo for saint Vincent , thou may go along the coast , keep seven or eight league off , and must go to seek Cabo Frio , that be , the cold cape . and as thou come towards Cabo Frio , thou have a very great bay call Bahia de Salvador , that be , the bay of our saviour . and from thence thou have twelve league to Cabo Frio . and before thou come to Cabo Frio , thou have two small island . thou may go safe either a sea board of they , or else between they . thou shall understand that Cabo Frio have as it be a island in the midst of the face or show thereof , that do cut off the cape . thou may ride safe on the west side thereof ; for all be clean ground . understand that Cabo Frio stand in 23 degree : and from it to Rio de Jenero be twelve league . and this river of Jenero have in the mouth thereof 3 or 4 island . and if thou will go into this river de jenero , thou 82 may well go in between two island which stand in the entrance of the river on the south side : near unto this river there be a great hill seem to be a man with long hair . and take this for advise , that if thou be in the height of this river , thou shall see certain high hill within the land , which be like unto organ . and when thou see these organ , then make account thou be right against the river : and come near the land thou shall see a certain island very round , which lie to the southward , and be high and bare in the top . thou must know that the mouth of this river stand in 23 degree and one three part . and from this river to Angra , that be to say , the open haven , thou have 15 league . go not near the land there , except necessity compel thou . i advise thou , that from this river that i speak of , i mean from the entrance thereof , thou must go westsouthwest , and Southwest , and west and by south . and thou shall see a great island call Isla de San Sebastiano , and to the southward thereof another small island very high , call the island of Alcatrarzas , that be to say , the island of pelican : but come not near it , for it have dangerous shoald . and from hence thou may go west , and so thou shall fall right with the mouth of saint Vincent , and thou shall see a island . and if thou mean to go into saint Vincent thou must leave this island to the westward . and understand that saint Vincent lie in four and twenty degree . and when thou be in the mouth of this bay , or art near the mouth of it , than thou shall see many other island , and one among the rest to the seaward . and have these sight , thou have the best mark that be for these island , that i have tell thou of : and this island lie northwest and southeast with the mouth of saint Vincent . the situation of a hill like a man with long hair by Jenero . the organ certain high hill . Angra . a llha de san Sebastiano .. the isle of Alcatrarzas . saint Vincent in 24 degree . many island about you mouth of . Vincent , y one out to the seaward . 83 [ the course porto de pato . porto de don Roderigo . Laguna . Rio de Martin de Sousa . cananea . Rio de San Francisco . the course from saint Vincent to the river of plate . Rome S . Vincent to Cananea thou have 40 league : and the coast lie north - east and by east , and Southwest and by west . from Cananea to the river of saint Francisco be fifteen league , and the coast lie north - east and Southwest . there be a little island , which have as it be two bay , and a good road , and be in 26 degree and a quarter , and towards the main it be high and craggy . from san Francisco to Boca de Overniron be 26 league , and the coast lie north and south . also thou must mark that the river of San Francisco have a great entrance , and 3 small island , and to seaward it have a good road ; and the main be high and craggy . from this Boca the overniron to ilha de Arvoredo thou have no great mark be observe : but this Boca be a very great bay , and this bay be deep within the island , and be a good road , and have many island , and stand in 28 degree . and to the north of this island under the point there be a good road : and there be no other road hereabout but this , and it be under the island . from hence thou shall have sight of the isle call Santa Catharina , which be a great island about eight or nine league long , and lie north and south . and hard by even with this hand be porto de pato , which stand in 29 degree . and from porto de pato to Porto de don Roderigo be ten or eleven league : and the coast lie north and south . and from porto de don Roderigo to Laguna be 5 league . and this be a good harbour for all wind , except the north - east wind . from the Laguna to the river call Rio de Martin de Sousa be 42 league . and the coast be something 84 high , and lie north - east and by north , and Southwest and by south : and it have a island 2 league into the sea , pn 72 + j where ship may ride well . and from the river of Martin de Sousa to Rio de San Pedro be 52 league , Rio de S . and the coast lie north - east and Southwest . Pedro from this river of San Pedro there lie a point of sand a good league off and more , and it lie on the southwest side of the port . and from thence to Cabo Caio de santa de santa Maria be 42 league : and the coast lie Maria . Northeast and Southwest , and all be low land . also on the southeast side of Cabo de Santa maria there lie a isle two league off into the sea , and it have a good harbour betwixt it and the main . and note that the main be low land . the cape of Santa Maria stand in 35 degree , and at the point thereof it have a island a league into the sea .