gally - frigat set up . meet with the Salomon with no small joy to we all ; and there she have take of Spaniards and Portugal 24 sail of ship and caravel , fisherman , and have take out of they such necessary as she have need of . of these ship our captain take four along with he , with another that he have take himself , mean to employ they as occasion shall serve . at this place he understand of one of the pilot of those ship , that one of the carrack that come out of the east Indies , be cast away in the road of Fernambuc , and that all her good be lay upon the arrazife which be the low town . of these news we be all glad , and rejoice much ; for our hope be very good , see such a booty before we . of this good company and happy success we be all joyful , and have great hope of the blessing of God in performance of our intend voyage , and so after some parley and make frolic for joy of our meeting one with the other ( praise God for all ) we ply for Maio : where come to anchor , our general 8c the rest of the captain go ashore to view the place where we may in best safety set our gally - frigat together ; which frame we bring from England of purpose to land man in the country of Brasil . here we discharge our great prize of wine , and set she on fire : but before our come thither , you shall understand we have sight of four sail , which be captain Venner in his ship the Peregrine , and a proper biskaine which he take at cape blank , the welcome of Plymmouth 8c her pinnace : all which stand with we . but they see our flag , not expect such good fellow as we , do bear from we all they may ; which our people take very unkind , that be all friend they will neither inquire , nor tell we any news of our friend , but without make any show of kindness will so depart . as before i have say , the choice be make for the place to build the gally - frigat , ashore it be bring , where the carpenter apply their work , still cheer unto it by the general good gift bestow among they , and kind usage of the rest of the commander , not without great care of the captain for the safety of they all , by keep good watch : yet one negligent fellow , ’ which have no knowledge of the country , stray from his company , be by the Portugal take , and very kind use , and bring again unto we : for which good the general reward they well with gift very acceptable , which they take as kind . while we be thus busy employ about the foresay galley , we descry at sea four sail , which we have good hope will have prove Indies man , or some to have bring we what we look for : but they prove captain Venner with his fleet , as aforesaid , who , see we at anchor , anchor also ; where spend some time , and be acquaint with our general determination for land , consort with we , and their bill , accord to the manner of the sea , be make and sign on either part , we to have three part , and he the four , of all that shall be take , whereby our strength be increase , to all our comfort . three week or thereabouts we stay in this place before the gay be finish ; which do , put man into she , and fit she with oar , have fourteen bank on a side , a mast and sail , the commandment of she be commit unto m . wat , a honest skilful mariner . from thence we put again to sea , and go for the isle Brava , where we water : which do , we make no long stay after , but bend our course as direct as we can for the place , make our first fall with the land to the southward of cape S . Augustine ; from whence cape S . we ply still to our desire port of Fernambuck , and do so much , that about midnight we come before the 7 ^ 29 “ of harbour ; where some ply up and down , hold that march . the best policy , to forbear the enter till day may give they light , the harbour be hard , and therefore the more perilous . our ship be in safety well arrive , God be praise : and the generail in his boat go from ship to ship , will they to make ready such man as they can spare , with musket , pike , bill , bow , arrow , and what weapon they have to follow he . himself , with 80 man from his own ship , embark himself in the gay , which carry in her prow a good sacar , and two murder piece . our admiral spend all the night in give direction to every ship to have their man ready ship in their boat , for he intend to enter the harbour at the break of day , and to leave his ship without , till he have get the fort and the town : for he will not adventure the ship in , till the harbour be get . also he provide five ship , which he bring from cape blank , and put man in they as many as can convenient sail they , and no more , give they charge to enter the harbour with his boat : for at the entrance of the harbour ride three great holland ship , which our admiral doubt will impeach his go in ; and therefore he give order to the man of these five small ship , which be not above 60 ton a piece , if the Hollander do offer any resistance , to run aboard of they , and to set their own ship on fire , and escape in their boat , which they have for the same purpose , that by this mean they may not impeach our entrance . but when the morning be come