mark well that if thou look to the southward , and see no white ground such as i write of before , but that they be all behind thou to the northward : when a man then when thou see none to the southward , thou ^ th ^ balia1 may be bold to bear in with Bahia . and if when ' thou go into Bahia to the northwest , and see the sea to break , fear nothing : for it be the breach of a certain bank , whereon thou shall have always 5 or 6 fathom water : and this be sure of . thou shall understand that if thou come for this place from march to the end of April , i will wish thou not to fall to the southward of 13 degree and a half . And fall with the land , and not see the white sand , thou shall strive to go to the northward . And see the land in 13 degree and a half , thou shall have sight of a hill along the sea : and if thou be nigh the land , and can make it certain what land it be : thou shall mark if it be a round high hill the distance along the sea , that it be o morro de san Paulo , or , the Paulo hill saint p ^ l : and it lie black and bare on the from Bahia . top . and from thence to Bahia be ten league . and here along this hill on the northwest side Pio de tin - there be a great river call Tinsare : and it be a very sare a very good river . and in the entrance of Bahia there be ’ six or seven fathom water in the channel . and i advise thou that be in the height of 13 degree and a half , thou come not near the land , for it have a bay very dangerous . and if thou go from Bahia to Fernambuck , than i advise thou that thou take good heed of the coast on the north - east and Southwest , and thou shall go east , if the wind will suffer thou to go east : and so go thirty or forty league off to the sea . i advise thou that thou bear not in with the land of Fernambuck , but in the height of 9 or 10 degree , because that in 11 degree thou shall fall with the bay call a enseada de Vazabaris . also if thou come from Portugal and fall with the land in eleven degree , bear not in with it , neither come near it , for thou may hurt thy self in so do : but thou shall shun it , and go to the southward . for if thou lie to the north thou shall bring thy self into some trouble . this bay of all saint stand in thirteen degree . and from thence to Fernambuck thou have a hundred league : and the coast lie north - east and Southwest . and from thence to Rio das ilhas , that be , the river of the island the coast run north - east and Southwest , i mean take a quarter of the north and south . the course for Baia das ilhas , that be , the bay of the island , which lie on the say coast of Brasil , and the mark for the find of they . f thou go for Baia das ilhas thou must look for it in fifteen degree lack a quarter . if thou be mind as i say to go for these isle , if it be from march forward , thou shall fall with the land in 15 degree and a half , and though it be in 15 degree and f , it be all the better . and if thou have sight of certain high hill , that seem to reach to the sky , these hill be call as serras Raiemores . then have sight of these hill , 77 a dangerous bay in 13 degree and a half . the height of the bay call a enseada de Vazabaris . Baia de todo santos in 13 degree . Baia das ilhas lie in 15 degree lack a quarter . in what height a man must fall with this place in time of the north - east wind . Giemana . Mangues . thou shall go dung the coast ; and fear nothing , for there be no sholde along to the north . and when thou see the island , thou may make account they be these which thou seek , for there be no other on all this coast , and thou shall see a round hill along the sea . thou shall understand that on the north side of this hill be the go in of the river . but if it chance that thou find thy self in a time that will not suffer thou to go in , then go along the island give they a breadth off . and thou may well come to a anchor hard aboard they , for all be clean ground . and thou shall find eight or nine fathom , and from thence thou may go into the river hard aboard the shore . and if it chance that thou go from the north to the south all along the great island , thou must keep thy self from the land : and when thou have bring it eastnortheast , than thou may anchor two cable length from the shore : for all be clean ground . if thou chance to arrive on this coast in the time of the north - east wind , thou shall seek to fall with the land in fourteen degree . and if thou see a low land , thou may make account it be the land call Ciemana , and than thou shall see mangue : and also thou shall come along this coast to the south : and when thou see a end of the low land , than thou shall find a high land along the sea like the other that i have make mention of before , that be , all sandy along the sea coast . and thou must understand , that where the high land begin , there be a little river call Rio das Contas , but enter not into it : it have for a mark to be know by as it be a white mouth . and from thence to the island thou have nine league . and at the end of this high land to the southward of it thou shall find a great bay within the land , and than thou shall look to the westsouthwest , and shall see another high land , which lie as it be in the midst of the bay , and thou shall there see certain white house 78 • which be the ingenios or house wherein they make the white sugar of Lucas Giraldo . from thence thou shall see sugar house the isle be so far shoot as Rio de Contas . and thou shall see within the land a round hill which it be like monte de laud , and it have another copy on the south side . the course to sail to porto seguro , that be to say , the safe haven , lie on the foresaid coast of Brasil , and the mark to know the same by . in thou go for porto seguro and