of the Salomon , captain Cotton the admiral lieutenant , captain John Noyer a french captain of diepe , and another french captain of rochel , with m . John Barker and other to the number of 35 : for these be the foremost and hot in the pursuit of the ensign aforesaid , and by their forwardness come all to perish . at our return into the town the admiral come to we much bewail the death of so many good man as be lose , wonder what we mean to pass the express order that be give we . with this loss our man be much daunt , but our admiral begin again to encourage they , declare that the fortune of the war be sometime to win and sometime to loose . and therewithal ! he wish every man to prepare and make himself ready : for that night ( God will ) he will depart . for all our ship be ready and lade , and he will not stay any further fortune . the evening be come , the ship begin to weigh and go forth of the harbour , and God be thank of his goodness towards we who send we a fair wind to go forth withal , so that by two of the clock in the night we be all forth in safety . the enemy perceive our depart , plant a piece or two of ordinance , and shoot at we in the night , but do we no harm . we be at our come forth 15 sail , that be , 3 sail of Hollander , the one of 450 ton , the other of 350 ton , and the three of 300 ton , four sail of french and one ship which the admiral give the french captain , 3 sail of captain venner fleet of Plymouth , and 4 sail of our admiral fleet , all these be lade with marchan dize , and that of good worth . we stay in this harbour to pass all this business but only 31 day , and in this time we be occupy with skirmish and attempt of the enemy 11 . time ; in all which skirmish we have the better , only this last except . to God be the honour and praise of all , etc the whole fleet be out in safety , the next day in the morning the admiral give order to the whole Peranjeu 40 . fleet to sail towards peranjew a harbour lie some 40 league to the northward of Fernambucke , and there Fernambuck . to take in fresh water and to refresh themselves : and 62 to make provision for refresh , our admiral have send thither some 6 day before two french man in a small pinnace , which Frenchmen he have provide from diepe before his come out of England for that purpose . for both these two speak the indian language very perfect : for at this port of peranjew and a other call Potaju some 6 league to the northward the Frenchman have have trade for brasil - wood , and have lade from thence by the indian mean , who have fetch it for they some 20 league into the country upon their back , 3 or 4 ship every year . thus we all sail towards peranjew , at which place we arrive in the night , so that we be force to lie off and on with a stiff gale of wind , in which we lose the most part of our fleet , and they not know this coast put off to the sea , and so go direct for England . our admiral and some 4 sail more with he put into the harbour of peranjew , and there water and refresh himself very well , with hen , cony , hare and potatos , with other thing , which the two Frenchman have partly provide before his come : this be a very good harbour where Peranjeu a ship may ride and refresh very well . but , as i be give to understand since our come from thence , ’ the Portugal have attempt the place and do inhabit it , and have put the french from their accustom trade . here have water and refresh our self , we put to the sea , ply after the rest of our fleet which be go before , which we never hear of till our arrival in England at the down in the month of July , where we understand the rest of our consort to be pass up for London , captain Venner and his fleet to be at Plymouth , and the french ship to be safe arrive at diepe , which to we be very great comfort . at our set sail from the down , accord as the custom be , find the queen ship there , we salute they with certain ordinance . the gunner be careless , as they be many time of their powder , in discharge certain piece in you gunner room , set a barrel of powder on fire , which take fire in you gunner room , blow up the admiral caben , slay the gunner with 2 other outright , and hurt 20 more , of which 4 or 5 die . this powder make such a smoke in the ship with the fire that burn in the gunner room among all the fire work , that no man at the first wit what to do : but recall back their fear , they begin to cast water into the gunner room in such abundance ( for the queen ship now and also the other ship that be in our company come present to our help ) that ( God be praise ) we put out the fire and save all , and no great harm be do to the good . by this may be see that there be no sure safety of thing in this world . for now we make account to be out of all danger , where behold a great come upon we , than we suffer all the whole voyage . but the almighty be praise for ever , which deliver we out of this and many other in this voyage . our fire be well put out , and we take in fresh man ( God be praise ) we come to black - wall in safety . the king of Spain resolution to proceed in the discovery in conquest of Rio Grande .