the voyage intend towards China , wherein m . Edward Fenton be appoint general : write by m . luke ward his viceadmiral , and captain of the Edward Bonaventure , begin anno Dom . 1582 . he second of April i depart with the Edward Bonaventure from Blackwall , and the 19 of the same arrive in Nettle ride at Hampton , where i find ride the Gallion Leicester : and so remain there till the first of May , we set sail thence in the forenoon , be of we in the whole fleet four sail . 1 the Gallion Leicester of 400 ton admiral , whereof be general captain Edward Fenton , and William Hawkins the young lieutenant general in she , and Christopher hall , master . 2 than Edward Bonaventure of 300 ton viceadmiral , whereof be captain luke ward , and Thomas Perrie master . 3 than Francis of forty ton , whereof be captain John Drake , and William Markam master . 4 than Elizabeth of fifty ton , whereof be captain Thomas Skevington and Ralph Crane master . we spend by mean partly of business , and partly of contrary wind , the month of may upon the coast , and then leave the land we put off to sea , and proceed on our voyage intend by the grace of God for China : until the month of August follow , nothing fall out much worthy the knowledge of the world , which be not common to all navigant , but about the begin of August aforesaid , be somewhat near the coast of guinie , upon the shoot off a piece and the put out of a flag in the admiral , i go on board , and m . Walker , m . Shaw , m . GefFreis , our master and Pilot 172 with i , where the general counsel be assemble to consider of two point , viz . the first , whether it be necessary to water present or not , which be think very needful of all man , and so conclude . the second , where the best and apt place be to water in , which be think of the great number to be at Sierra leona on the coast of guinie , which be also conclude , and by the master and pilot agree to go hence southeast , which determine , we return aboard . the 3 day we go southeast and eastsoutheast , till six a clock at night that we see the land of guinie , which bare north - east of we about 12 league off , which see , we sound , and have no ground : then go i and our master and pilot aboard the admiral , and after many debatement conclude to run in Northeast by east , and at eleven at night we come aboard again , and go all night Northeast by east . the 4 at eight a clock in the forenoon we be within 2 league of the land , which bear off we north - east , which rise like a hill full of wood , and on each side low land : we be persuade by our pilot that it be the entrance into Sierra leona , go in Northeast until we be within a half league of the shore , and have bring the south point southeast by east off we . at eleven a clock find it a bay and not Sierra leona , we bring our tack aboard , and stand along west by north and west larboard tack . in this time our admiral pinnace row in , and go on land upon the south side of the bay , and then Elizabeth boat with she . they find house of bough , and in one of the house the tongue of a beast , and a bullock tongue fresh kill ; also a lake with plenty of fresh water , and fresh - water - fish in it have by the sea side : they find dry pomegranate , and pease like nut , with other unknown fruit under the tree . the Elizabeth run in , and bring the south point south by west of she , and anchor within falcon shoot of the shore in 173 A . D . 1582 . they arrive in the river oj Sierra leona . tree hang with oyster . seven fathom oaze , where they take fish with hook , while he stay for the boat . the 4 all the afternoon we run along the coast ( which lie northwest and by north , and southeast by south ) west , and within a point one way or the other , see the land under our lee three or four league off , and all night likewise . the 9 at three a clock in the morning our admiral shoot off a piece , and at four we weigh and go hence Northeast . at five in the morning we see the land along , and the island which we see the night before , and diverse other island about it , and so run in Northeast until we have bring our self thwart of the river , and then run in east about six at night , be a league within the river . our admiral shoot off a piece , and there we anchor in eight fathom sand . be at anchor , i man our boat and will have go aboard the admiral , but can not , the flood be bend so strong , and she ride half a mile beneath we in the tide , but we have no tide . the 10 in the morning at five a clock i send our skiff with our pilot in she to find a road , and a water place : in the mean time at six a clock we set sail with our ship , and be calm we tow with our boat until ten , and then anchor a mile short of the water place . after dinner i go on land with my skiff to find timber to fish our mast , and search along the shore we find a good water place : and further seek in the wood , which all the country be full of , and of diverse sort , we find Limmon tree