store of the wine of Chili , and 25000 . gold of Bal - pezoe of very pure and fine gold of Baldivia , amount divia . in vaiue to 37000 . ducat of spanish money , and above . so go on our course , we arrive next at a place call coquimbo in coquimbo , where our general send 14 . of his man on 29 . degree ianJ to fetch water : but they be espy by the Spaniard , 30 . mtnu es . who come with 300 . horseman and 200 footman , and slay one of our man with a piece , the rest come aboard in safety , and the Spaniard depart : we go on shore again , and bury our man , and the Spaniard come down again with a flag of truce , but we set sail and will not trust they . Tarapaza . from hence we go to a certain port call Tarapaza , where be land , we find by the sea side a Spaniard lie asleep , who have lie by he 13 . bar of silver , 114 which weigh 4000 ducat Spanish ; we take the silver , and leave the man . not far from hence go on land for fresh water , we meet with a Spaniard and a indian boy drive 8 . Llamas or sheep of Peru which be as big as ass ; every of which sheep have on his back 2 . bag of leather , each bag contain 50 . livre . weight of fine silver : so that bring both the sheep and their burden to the ship , we find in all the bag 800 . weight of silver . here hence we sail to a place call Arica , and - Arica in 18 . be enter the port , we find there three small bark 3 ° > min - which we rifle , and find in one of they 57 wedge of silver , each of they weigh about 20 pound weight , and every of these wedge be of the fashion and bigness of a brickbat . in all these 3 . bark we find not one person : for they mistrust no stranger , be all go aland to the town , which consist of about twenty house , which we will have ransack if our company have be better and more in number . but our general content with the spoil of the ship , leave the town and put off again to sea and set sail for Lima , and by the way meet with a small bark , which he board , and find in her good store of linen cloth , whereof take some quantity . he let she go . to Lima we come the 13 . day of February , and be Lima in 11 . enter the haven , we find there about twelve sail of 5 ° - ship lie fast moor at a anchor , have all their sail ‘ carry on shore ; for the master and merchant be here most secure , have never be assault by enemy , and at this time fear the approach of none such as we be . our general rifle these ship , and find in one of they a chest full of royal of plate , and good store of silk and linen cloth , and take the chest into his own ship , and good store of the silk and linen . in which ship he have news of another ship call the cacafuego which be go towards Paita , and that the same ship be lade with treasure : whereupon we stay no long here , but cut all the cable of the ship in the 115 the rich ship call the cacafuego take . cape de San Francisco in i , degree to the north . haven , we let they drive whither they will , either to sea or to the shore , and with all speed we follow the cacafuego towards Paita , think there to have find she : but before we arrive there , she be go from thence towards Panama , who our general still pursue , and by the way meet with a bark lade with rope and tackle for ship , which he board and search , and find in she 8o . li . weight of gold , and a crucifix of gold with goodly great emerald set in it which he take , and some of the cordage also for his own ship . from hence we depart , still follow the cacafuego , and our general promise our company , that whosoever can first descry she , shall have his chain of gold for his good news . it fortune that John Drake go up into the top , descry she about three of the clock , and about six of the clock we come to she and board she , and shoot at her three piece of ordinance , and strike down her mizzen , and be enter , we find in her great riches , as jewel and precious stone , thirteen chest full of royal of plate , four score pound weight of gold , and six and twenty ton of silver . the place where we take this prize , be call cape de San Francisco , about 150 . league from Panama . the pilot name of this ship be Francisco , and among other plate that our general find in this ship , he find two very fair guilt bowl of silver , which be the pilot : to who our general say : senior pilot , you have here two silver cup , but i must needs have one of they : which the pilot because he can not otherwise choose , yield unto , and give the other to the steward of our general ship . when this pilot depart from we , his boy say thus unto our general : captain , our ship shall be call no more the cacafuego , but the Cacaplata , and your ship shall be call the cacafuego : which pretty speech of the pilot boy minister matter of laughter to we , both then and long after . 116 when our general have do what he will with this cacafuego , he cast she off , and we go on our course still towards the west , and