, and march towards the chief place of habitation in this island ( as by the Portugal we be inform ) have travail to the mountain the space of three mile , and arrive there somewhat before the day break , we arrest our self to see day before we , which appear , we find the inhabitant to be flee : but the place , by reason that it be manure , we find to be more fruitful than the other part , especial the valley among the hill . rife grape in here we give our self a little refresh , as by very winter . ripe anj swee [ e grape , which the fruitfulness of the earth at that season of the year yield we : and that season be with we the depth of winter , it may seem strange that those fruit be then there grow : but the reason thereof be this , because they be between the Tropike and the equinoctial , the sun pass twice in the year through their zenith over their head , by mean whereof they have two summer , and be so near the heat of the line , they never lose the heat of the sun so much , but the fruit have their increase and continuance in the midst of winter . the island be wonderful store with goat and wild hen , and it have salt also without labour , save only that the people gather it into heap , which continual in great quantity be increase upon the sand by the flow of the sea , and the receive heat of the sun kern the same , so that of the increase thereof they keep a continual traffic with their neighbour . the descrip - among other thing we find here a kind of fruit cion of the tree cahe Cocos , which because it be not common know kos ^* we in England , i think good to make some description of it . 104 the tree bear no leaf nor branch , but at the very top the fruit grow in cluster , hard at the top of the stem of the tree , as big every several fruit as a man head : but have take off the uttermost bark , which you shall find to be very full of string or sinew , as i may term they , you shall come to a hard shell which may hold of quantity in liquor a pint common , or some a quart , and some less : within that shell of the thickness of half a inch good , you shall have a kind of hard substance and very white , no less good and sweet than almond : within that again a certain clear liquor , which be drink , you shall not only find it very delicate and . sweet , but most comfortable and cordial . after we have satisfy our self with some of these fruit , we march further into the island , and see great store of * cabritos alive , which be so chase by the inhabitant , that we can do no good towards our provision , but they have lay out as it be to stop our mouth withal , certain old dry cabritos , which be but ill , and small and few , we make no account of . A . D . 1578 . * or goat . be return to our ship , our general depart hence the 31 . of this month , and sail by the island the isle of saint of S . Iago , but far enough from the danger of the inhabitant , who shot and discharge at we three piece , but they all fall short of we , and do we not harm . the island be fair and large , and as it seem , rich and fruitful , and inhabit by the Portugal , but the mountain and high place of the island be say to be possess by the moor , who have be slave to the Portugal , to ease themselves , make escape to the desert place of the island , where they abide with great strength . be before this island , we espy two ship under sail , to the one of which we give chase , and in the end board she with a shipboat without resistance , which we find to be a good prize , and she yield unto we 105 a prize , and good store of wine : which prize our general commit to the custody of master doughty , and retain the % lfot take . p ^ ot > send the rest away with his pinnace , give they a butt of wine and some victual , and their wear clothes , and so they depart . the isle of the same night we come with the island call by the Portugal , ilha del fogo , that be , the burn island : in the northside whereof be a consume fire , the matter be say to be of sulphur , but notwithstanding it be like to be a commodious island , because the Portugal have build , and do inhabit there . upon the south side thereof lie a most pleasant and sweet island , the tree whereof be always green and fair to look upon , in respect whereof they call it ilha brava , that be , the brave island . from the bank thereof into the sea do run in many place reasonable stream of fresh water easy to be come by , but there be no convenient road for our ship : for such be the depth , that no ground can be have for anchor , and it be report , that ground be never find in that place , so that the top of Fogo burr ne not so high in the air , but the root of Brava be quench as low in the sea . be depart from these island , we draw towards the line , where we be becalm the space of 3 . week , but yet subject to diverse great storm , terrible lightning and much thunder : but with this misery we have the commodity of great store of fish , as dolphin , bonito , and fly fish , whereof some fall into our ship , wherehence they can not rise again for want of