there come not so much as a letter from he . for the king be sore displease at Pedro Sarmiento , because he make he believe that the narrow place of the strait be but a mile over : and that it may be fortify so that a boat can not pass : whereas Diego de Ribera , and other certify the king , that it be above a league broad , and that if a ship come with wind and current , all the ordinance in the world can not hurt it . wherefore the king think that Pedro Sarmiento have deceive he , in make he to lose so many man , and so much charge to no effect . and the governor of Baya see that the king write not unto he , will give he no more succour : so that Sarmiento be constrain to make a voyage for Spain 272 in the same ship , wherein he last sail towards the strait : and it be say that he be take in the sar - way by Englishman , and carry into England . This Sarmiento have carry the name to be the best navigator wait ? ra - in all Spain , and that he have sail the further of legh bark all other . after all this the captain of the river of is86 - jenero send a small ship with victual for the straight , which be put back also in forty degree . and this be all the discovery of the strait of Magellan , make as well by Spaniards as other nation unto this present year 1586 . it be four year since these poor and blaster can - miserable Spaniard be leave in the strait , from which time there have no succour go unto they , so oftkem , 6 god he know whether they be dead or alive . thus accord to my promise i have declare unto you to the uttermost of my knowledge , all thing concern the India , as far as the very strait of Magellan ; think to have proceed along the coast , as at the first ; but that the do of captain Drake and other captain which attempt to pass the say strait have cause i to be the long in this my pretend work . howbeit now let we proceed on forward from the strait to the coast of Chili : the distance between which two place no man have travel by land , in regard of the huge mountain cover with snow that lie in the way : yea i may well say , that it have not often be travel by sea ; for that all the ship which have pass that way have at the least go thirty league off the shore , to avoid the shold and many little island that lie near the main land ; and therefore the inland of that coast remain as yet unknown . the first town after you have pass the strait stand on the coast of Chili , and be call Castro , Castro upon be situate upon the worst place of all the coast , for there be but small store of gold with scarcity of victual , * ’ and a sharp cold air . the harbour belong to this town be compass about with so many sholde , xi 273 sister that it will serve but to receive small bark only . Baldivia . the next town to this be Baldivia . a description but before i pass any far i will here describe ' ‘ chili ’^^ unto you situati ° n and quality of Chili . this ' country stretch in length from north to south above two hundred league , contain in breadth but five and twenty league at the most . from the great ridge of mountain lie to the east of Chili run very many river into the sea , which river be the cause of diverse valley the fruitful in all the world , where bread , wine , and other victual river rich of mighty abound : and the say river also be very rich of gold . but to declare in few word the excellency of this province , i say that it may well be call a earthly paradise , save that it lack one only commodity , and that be peace . it be first discover on this manner : the Spaniard have conquer the kingdom of Peru , ( as i will hereafter show unto you ) find in the say kingdom great store of gold ; and ask the indian from whence it come , they answer , from Chili . upon which news don Diego de Almagro be one of the principali captain that conquer Peru make a voyage with three hundred horseman towards Chili , be constrain in his way to go over part of the snowy mountain , which way his indian guide conduct he , to the end that himself and all his company may die for cold . howbeit the Spaniard , though they lose some of their horse , Copiapo then come to the first town of Chili call Copiapo be next town of situate upon the first plain at the entrance of the say Peru province . but have news that the Indians be rise against the Spaniard of Peru and have enclose they , he return back without go any far . now this captain don Diego de Almagro be slay in the war of Peru , another call don Pedro de Baldivia march into Chili with four hundred horse , easy conquer that half of the country which be subject to the king of Peru . for know that Peru , be the chief country of their emperor , be over - 274 i572 - 87 - come by the Spaniard , they also immediate yield their land unto they . but the other half as it be Bl esta ^ Q the rich and the fruitful part , so God have people arauco - it with the most valiant and furious people in all America . the province which they inhabit call el Estado de PJ1 - 797 - ] arauco be but a small province about 20 league in ° length , and be govern by ten principali man of the