Jaques Humphrey a Frenchman save . 1583 . wind , and so till the 4 . of April : which day we see 4 . bird with long tail , which hover about the ship , and in the afternoon we see and take up many weed which drive thick in the sea , which we judge to be drive with the east wind from the isle of cape verde . from this day till the 11 . day we go our course sometime Northeast , sometime northwest according to the wind : upon this 11 . day George Coxe one of our carpenter , have the night before break up the hold , and steal wine , and drunken himself drink , be a desperate act . take in the room , leap overbord out of the beak head and so drown himself . the 12 . day we spy our foremast to be perish in the howne , and dare not bear our foretop sail upon it , but go hence with our sail , next hand , north all day and night . from hence to the 20 . day we go Northeast and variation of the compass . by north . this day i observe the variation of the compass : and i note that the south point of the compass carry more than half a point to the westwards . the 25 . day of may we go between the east north - east , and the north - east with a small gale till five a clock in the afternoon : then have we sight of land , which rise ragged to the northward like break land , we be about five league off : that isle bare Northeast by north of we , and the northermost part bear north by east of we , with a rock a sea board : we then sound and have fifty and five fathom grey sand , and maze great store in it : so we stand in Northeast till eight a clock , and then behold it again be within four league of it , bear as before , but we can not make it , for some think it to be the foreland of Fontenay , some judge it the isle of ussant : than we sound again in 55 . fathom brown sand , and little maze in it : at eight a clock at night we go about , and stand off south southwest one watch , than the wind shrink to the southwest , that we can 200 lie but south southwest six glass , so that at three a clock we cast about , and lie northwest six glass , and north northwest a watch be then eight a clock the next day . the 26 . day we lie as nigh as we can between the north and the north north - east , and see the same land again , and make it to be the foreland of Fontenay , and the rag to be the seam , which bear now east north - east of we : and we stand on till ten a clock , then be within two league of the rock and less , we cast about and stand off Southwest , because we can not double the uttermost rock : when we be about we drive to the southward very fast , for the ebb set we west southwest , and be spring tide , it horse we a pace to leeward , for the space of one hour : then with the flood which be come , we drive again to windward : at twelve at noon it be calm till 6 . afternoon , than we stand about larboard tack , south southwest one watch , then at midnight we cast about and stand over north till four aforenoon . the 27 . day have bring the land east southeast of we , we make it to be silly be before deceive , and go hence east by north to double Grimsbie , leave the bishop and his clerk to the southwestwards , which we before take to be the seam . at 7 . a clock in the afternoon we see the land end of England , which bare east by north off we , and be 7 . league off from silly . the 29 . day at six a clock , beforenoone we have bring the Ramhead north of we , and be within a league of it , and go in Northeast next hand , be thick and foggy , and little wind : so that at eleven a clock we get in within the island , and there by mistake of a sound , our ship come aground between the isle and the main , and there sit till 4 . a clock in the afternoon that it be half flood . the 30 . day about 9 a clock , with much ado i furnish away P . Jeffries , m . symberbe , and William 201 A . D . 1583 . the I | will of silly . we come to PUmmouth . towreson with letter , after dine at m . blaccoller , and make many salutation with diverse gentleman . 1583 . the 31 . i wrought aboard all day , and put our ship , and thing in order : afternoon i have pity of some poor man of Milbrooke , which be rob the night before by a pirate name Purser , which ride in Cawson bay , i consent to go out with the Edward in company of a small ship which they have furnish to be their master , so about five of the clock in the afternoon , come a hundred man of they aboard of i : about twelve a clock we set sail , and by three afore day we be get to the windward of he , than he set sail , and go hence to the eastwards , and outsail we , because our consort will not come near he : after a small chase which we give he to no effect , we return into our old road , and there moar the ship about nine of the clock in the forenoon , and hence go all the Milbrooke man again ashore from i . and thus i end a troublesome voyage .