: the Spaniard make answer that they be the messenger of a great lord , and that they come to speak with the prince himself : who send they word that they shall come with a very good will ; and so Atabalipa stay for they at a city call Caxamalca , be thirty league distant from the sea side . whither be come , they find the indian prince sit in a chariot of gold , carry upon man shoulder , and accompany with above 60000 Indians all ready arm for the war . then the Spaniard tell they that they be send from a 282 emperor ( unto who the pope have give all that land ) to convert they unto the christian faith . whereunto Atabalipa answer , that he will glad be friend with the emperor , because he be so great a monarch , but in no case with the pope , because he give to another that which be none of his own . A . D . 1572 - 87 . now while they be thus in talk , the Spaniard discharge their two field piece , and their caliver , set upon the Indians , cry Sant Iago . the Indians hear the noise of the ordinance and small shot , and see the fire , think that flame of fire have be come down from heaven upon they : whereupon they flee , and leave their prince as a booty for the Spaniard . who they at the first entreat very gentle , wish he not to fear , for that their come be only to seek for gold and silver . during the time of Atabalipas imprisonment , his captains have slay his brother Guascar , and have subdue all the mountain and plain country . upon which news Atabalipa tell the Spaniard , that if they will release he , he will give they all that they shall demand . this communication have continue a whole day , at length a soldier name Soto say unto Atabalipa : what will thou give we to set thou free ? the prince answer , i will give whatsoever you will demand . whereunto the soldier reply , thou shall give we this house full of gold and silver thus high , lift up his sword , and make a stroke upon the wall . and Atabalipa say , that if they will grant he respite to send into his kingdom , he will fulfil their demand . whereat the Spaniard much marvelling , give he three month time , but he have fill the house in two month and a half , a matter scarce credible , yet most true : for i know above twenty man that be there at that time , who all aflirme , that it be above ten million of gold and silver . howbeit for all this they let not the prince go , but think that in kill of he they shall become lord of the whole land , and so the Spaniard on a night strangle he . but 283 god the righteous judge see this villainous act , suffer none of those Spaniard to dye by the course of nature , but bring they to evil and shameful end . upon the news of these great riches there come store of people out of Spain , and inhabit many place in this country . the king in recompense of the good service of the two foresay partner , appoint Diego de Almagro governor of half the land , and Francisco Pizarro of the other half , who also he make a mark . but these two consort in part of a land belong unto other man , fall at variance and sharp war between themselves : and at length Pizarro have slay Almagro get all the land into his own hand . howbeit this prosperity of Pizarro continue not long : for a bastard - sonne of Diego de Almagro , to be revenge of his father death , slay Pizarro , for which act he lose his head . in this controversy between these two partner be slay also two brother of Pizarro , and the three be carry prisoner into Spain and there die in prison ; but the four call Gonsalvo Pizarro rebel with the whole country and become a cruel tyrant , vanquish many of the emperor captain in battle , and possess the country in peace for two year : howbeit be in the end overcome he lose his head like a traitor . and thus die they all a evil death that be cause of the death of that innocent king Atabalipa . and yet there be mutiny raise oftentimes by the Spaniard , but the Indians never rebel , after they have once peace grant unto they . the indian people of this land be part among the Spaniard , some be slave unto the gentleman that conquer their land , other some to other , and the residue to the king : and these Indians pay each man for his tribute seven pezo of fine gold , which be about ten ducat and a half . there be in this ricks ^ and ’ one country above forty city and town inhabit by archbishopric Spaniards : also they have here erect nine bishopin Peru . rick and one archbishopric . 284 now after this country be full conquer and bring in good order , certain Spaniards be desirous to discover the land on the other side of the snowy mountain , find a very wholesome country and there inhabit . the say province situate behind the mountain be call the province of Tucuman , wherein the province be five town inhabit by the Spaniard , the last of ° ftucuman - them call Cordova , from which town unto Santa fee Cordova . situate upon the river of plate it be seventie league . this town of Santa fee be build in that place , to seek a way to Peru by the river of plate . and from hence down the say river to Buenos air be 120 league , and from Buenos air unto Sealisland you have 40 league . now have put down all that i know concern the country of Peru , and of the way from the river of