determination . this day we take down our maintop , and topmast , and all the shrowd . about two a clock after noon our merchant return with their present , not have be at the town , because Steven repose by the way meet they on the river , and advise they to stay until there have be word send to the governor , who be unwilling to speak with they yet , but short will send their answer . the rest of this forenoon we spend in communication about the appoint of a purser for the Edward . also we sign a assent for come to this place : about which thing grow foul speech between the general and his lieutenant , after the old custom . the Indians then go we to supper : and be at supper , certain present . Indians come aboard , and bring the generail a strange crow , and potatos , and sugar cane , to who he give inn tin o - glass , great pin , and biscuit : and so we be late . also this afternoon i run over saint Vincent , and sound the bay a league over , 192 the channel of , . , s . Vincent depart , sound . towards island find the channel and flat , and return aboard again within two hour , have a good gale of wind . the 23 day our skiff go ashore to fish , and take pretty store : we send our maintop ashore to be mend , and many of our man to wash their clothes ; also i go my self with they aland , to take order that no man shall any way offend the Indians . in the mean time the general with all the rest of the chief gentleman , come ashore , and view the place , and appoint out the fit room to set up our smith forge , and oven portable wen to bake our biscuit , and place for our cooper to trim t0 tn - our water cask . the 24 day at four of the clock , before day , we hear one call for a boat on the north shore , to who i send my skifle , who bring aboard one name John John whithall , a english man , which be marry here in this whtthali - place , and with he two of his Indians ; who i entertained until i send word to the general to prepare himself to receive he : in which time he and i talk of many several particular . about six a clock i convey he aboard the goodcounseu admiral : there he discover unto we what have be do at the town , as fortification , and send their t0 our wife away , etc advise we to receive no more delay , man . but to come up present before the town with our ship . about ten a clock come a canoa , and bring down Joseph Dory and Steven repose , who tell we that on Saturday the governor will meet our generail , and talk with he , pray we in the mean time to use our ordinary business of cooperage , carpenter work , fill water , fish , and wash , etc but not to set up forge , nor oven , until speech have with the governor . after this answer , we dine together aboard the gallion : after dinner we leave the messenger sit in the cabin , and go upon the poop ; where the generail demand the advice of his assistant , whether it be not best to stay these man while we have they or not , or whether it be best to go up with our ship to the town or no . xi 193 n whereunto each man pause to make answer : wherefore i deliver my opinion ; which be , that we be forbid to use violence to any nation for trade . the minion of second , i consider that diverse of our nation , wor -^ m ^ inbrasill merchant , and now adventurer in this voyage , for traffic . have set out the minion hither , and begin a trade , which with our forcible deal may be spoil , and our nation bring in hatred . last , that with force we be not like to attain so much commodity , as we be in possibility to have with courtesy . hereupon all be conclude , and they suffer to pass away : to who the generail give the three cloak - clothe , to Joseph Dory , to Paul Baudevese , and to Steven repose , to each of they one , which be before cut out for they : and so friendly we and they depart about two a clock after noon . three spanish about four of the clock this afternoon we see ship this - three sail of ship come bear in about the point , ' which assoon as they see we , anchor upon the bar , and put themselves in readiness , send from one ship to another with their boat , and blow off their ordinance , mean to take we : and we before night , get our man and other necessary from the shore , which be busy on land , arm our ship to defend our self . then go i aboard the admiral to know what he mean to do : who determine to set his watch in warlike sort ; and so he do : for after the trumpet and drum have sound , he shoot off a great piece , as they before have do ; and present the viceadmiral shoot at i , who i answer with another , and so cease . we then set up our maintop , and topmast , rig before eleven of the clock the same night . in the mean while they let slip their anchor and cable , and come drive and tow with their boat in upon we , mean to have board we : and be near our admiral , he hail they ; who refuse to tell of whence they be , think by spend of time to get 194 aboard of he : to who i call still to beware , and to shoot at they