in time . at length he let fly at they , yet be glad to let a anchor and cable slip to avoid they : then come they all drive down thwart my half , so that i be fain to let slip a anchor and cable to shun the gallion . all this while the ordinance and small shot ply of all part , and i be fain to send the gallion my skiff with a hauls to ride by , for she be loose , and with the flood drive up within i . then be the viceadmiral on my broad side , who be well pay before , yet i leave not gall of he , till i think our powder spend in vain to shoot at he , he be so tear , and break down by we . about four of the clock it rain so fast , that we can scant discern one the other , the moon be go down , yet rid the admiral , and the rearadmiral , but a little ahead of we : during which time , we pause , and make ready all our munition . the 25 day , by daylight , we see the viceadmiral sink hard by we , so that his yard which be hoist across , and his top , and that over head , be above water : most of their man be get away in their boat , save about fourty person which hang in the shrowd , and top , who i advise our general to send for away , and have make ready , and well man our pinnace ; but be upon the way go , the generail call they back , and will not suffer they to go . there be three of their boat also go for they from their ship ; at who i shoot , and make they to retire , and leave they upon the shrowd . at length our generail send for two of the man away : which his pinnace bring to he ; the one be heave over board , because he be sore hurt , not like to live ; and he be a Marsillian ; the other be a greek , bear in Zante , boatswain of the viceadmiral : the rest of the man , some swim away upon raft , some be drown , and some remain still hang on she . by this time it be fair daylight , and i call to our generail to r95 A . D . I583 - the fight betwixt the english in spanish ship at saint Vincent . the spanish viceadmiral sunhe by the english . this greek tell the general that there be 600 and odd in the 3 spanish ship . weigh , and drive down to they , who require i to go first and anchor on their quarter , and he will follow , and anchor on their bow . i weigh , and go down , and anchor by they ; yet not so near as i mean , for the ebb put i off to the northward . there rid i alone , spend shot at they , and they both at i , four hour , before our admiral anchor will come up ; during which time i have some spoil do ; but when our admiral come , she have her part , and ease i very well . at length our admiral begin to warp away , and be come without i , set sail , and begin to stand out into the sea : i go aboard of he to know his pleasure . who determine to get out of shot ; but can not , because the wind scant on they . the Edward before she can get up her anchor , endure many more shot , after the gallion be further off a good way than she , and sometime the gallion have two or three . thus we end about two of the clock after noon : the rest of this day and part of the night , we spend in mend , fit , and put our ordinance and furniture in order for the next morning , think they will have be with we . the 26 day in the morning we can not see they , because they be go up the river : we man our boat and pinnace , and weigh two anchor and one cable , that they let slip the night before : as our man be weigh the three anchor , the bwoy - rope break , and so we lose that anchor . our admiral have a anchor of twelve hundred , and a good cable of eleven inch , and we have a anchor about six hundred , with a piece of a base cable , and bwoy - rope nothing worth . after dinner i go aboard the admiral , to confer with he , who determine to go off to sea , and thither i carry Senor Pinto to interpret the indian language , with a indian name Peter , which flee from the bay where we rid in a canoa , and bring with he a Spaniard caliver , flask , and touch box , to go with 196 we , who our admiral boat meet , and bring he aboard to the admiral . he tell we that the Spaniard have bring many dead man on land , and bury they , and also land many hurt man in their bay , and that there be certain Spaniard go over through the wood to look after we . then the general , captain Hawkins , and master Maddox come aboard of i to view my hurt man , and harm of my ship , both man , ship , and tackle ; and i also go aboard he to peruse his hurt , who have but one man , a sailer , slay . the 28 day in the morning die Lancelot Ashe , of a hurt ; who depart very godly . this day we stand to the northward : and in get in our anchor and skifie , we be put 3 league to leeward of fiddle I | will , but the gallion ride still . the 29 day in the morning , see my self put to where the