shore we sound , and have about fifteen or sixteen fathom water , and black sandy oz . we think to have go to the shore , and to have water , but we 207 they fall with a highland in 30 . degree | . a Portugal ship take , wherein be for pilot Abraham Cocke a Englishman , leave there before by the minion of London 1581 . five town upon the river of plate . can not discern any good harbour , and therefore we cast off to seaward again . the 12 . day we find our self in 32 . degree and 27 . minute . from the day of the nativity of Christ , till the 13 . day of this month , although the sun be very near unto we , yet we find no want of wind but variable as in England , and not so hot but that a man shoulder may well digest a freeze gown , and his belly the best Christmas cheer in England , yet we for our part have no want , but such as may content honest man . the ten day be about 8 . league from the shore , and a little short of the river of plate , it be my good hap to espy a sail , which be a small Portugal bind for the river to a town call Santa fee : and from thence by horse and cart , the merchant , and part of their good be to be transport into Peru . this ship be about the burden of 45 . or 50 . ton , we take that day about three of the clock , wherein there be for master or pilot a Englishman call Abraham cock bear in Lee . we examine he and the rest concern the state of the river , and they tell we that there be in the river five town , some of 70 . households , and some of more . the first town be about 50 . league up the river call Buenos Ayres , the rest some 40 . some 50 . league one from another , so that the uppermost town call Tucaman be 230 . league from the entrance of the river . in these town be great store of corn , cattle , wine , and sundry fruit , but no money of gold or silver : they make a certain kind of slight cloth , which they give in truck of sugar , rice , marmalade , and sucket , which be the commodity that this ship have . they have aboard also 45 . Negros , whereof every one in Peru yield 400 . ducat a piece , and beside these , there be as passenger in she , two Portugal woman and a child . the 11 . day we espy another sail , which be the 208 consort of this Portugal , and to he also we give chase , another and take he the same day : he be of the burden PortHZ , als ^ p of the other , and have in he good store of sugar , Mar - take ' malade , and succat , with diverse other thing , which we note down our book . in this ship also we find about 35 . negro woman , and four or five friar , of which one be a irish man , of the age of three or a irish friar four and twenty year , and two Portugal woman ta ^ ew also , which be bear in the river of Jenero . both these ship be buy in Brasil , by a young man which be factor for the bishop of Tucaman , and bishop of the friar be send for by that bishop to possess a tixaman ™ new monastery , which the bishop be then a build - p ^ king . the book , bead , and picture in she , cost ( as one of the Portugal confess ) above 1000 ducat . of these ship we learn , that m . John Drake , who the news go in consort with m . Fenton , have his bark cast away a little short of the river of plate , where they ’ be take captive by the savage , all save they which be slay in the take : the savage keep they for a time , and use they very hardly , yet at the last John drake and Richard Faireweather , and two or three Richard moor of their company with they get a Canoa , and ^ aireweathei . escape , and come to the first town of the Spaniard . Faireweather be marry in one of the town , but John Drake be carry to Tucaman by the pilot of this ship , and be live , and in good health the last year . concern this voyage of the Portugal they tell we that it be the third voyage that be make into the river of plate these 30 . year . the 12 . of January we come to seal island , and the seale - fands 14 . day to the green island , where go in our find and green - hard aboard the main 8 . fathom , 7 . and 6 . and never less than five fathom . there lie a ledge of rock in the fair way , betwixt the island and the main , so that you must be sure to borrow hard aboard the main , and leave the ledge on the larboard side . xi 209 oh one of the Portugal which we cane along with we in our ship seem to be a man of experience , and i enter into speech with he concern the state of Buenos Ayres , the river : he tell i that the town of Buenos Ayres be from the green island about seventie league , stand on the southside of the river , and from thence Santa fee . to Santa fee be ioo . league , stand on the same side also . at which town their ship do discharge all their good into small bark , which row and tow up the river to another town call ascension , which be from Santa fee 150 . league , where the boat discharge on shore , and so pass all the good by cart and horse to Tucaman , which be in Peru . the town of ascension stand in a very fertile place , reap corn twice in the year , with abundance of wine , cattle , and fruit . in the town of ascension and tucaman a rapier of 20 . rial of plate be worth 30 . ducat , a box of marmalade 20 . ducat ; a look glass a foot over be worth 30 . livre .