the master of the ship have no leisure to carry his silver on shore , be force to throw it into the sea in six fathom water , where his ship road , and so to run on shore in the ship boat . and captain Drake come aboard the ship be tell by a indian , that the master have throw the silver overboard . wherefore see that news begin to run of he from town to town he stay not here , but run along the coast : and because he will have no let , he cast off the ship which he have take at Sant Iago , with never a man in she , which ship be never hear of after . and so without stay any where he shape his course el Callao de for Lima , and come to the harbour of Lima call £ » « < ? . pi Callao , be two league distant from Lima it self , ( for Lima stand up into the land ) he arrive there one 262 day , before the news of he be bring to Lima , and find the man in the ship without suspicion . and as he enter into the port , there come in also a ship from Panama lade with merchandise , and he send his pinnace to take she : but the man forsake the ship betake they to their boat , and go on shore : and as the Englishman follow the boat , a Spaniard that be therein shoot a piece , and slay one of captain drake man in the pinnace . wherefore he follow the boat no far , but go with his pinnace into the harbour among fourteen sail of ship that lie there , in all which ship there be not a man that have so much as a sword or a piece to molest he , wherefore he do with less fear go from ship to ship , ask they if there be any ship go for Panama ; for he know well , that the ship which go for Panama carry both silver and gold , neither seek he for any thing else , for there be marchan dize enough for he in those ship , if he have be desirous to have have the same . so they tell he that three day pass there be a ship go for Panama which carry all the merchant silver thither . whereupon he present set sail towards Panama ; for when he come into this port it be about midnight , so that the Spaniard can not see what ship he have . at last the news come to Lima unto the viceroy of Peru , that there be enemy in the harbour , but they know not what they be . wherefore the viceroy and all the people be in great fear , lest some Spaniards have make a mutiny , and put themselves in arm : and so the next morning himself accompany with 2000 horseman and footman come from the city down to the water side , and find some of the Englishman arrow that be shoot at the boat , out of which their man be slay , they know they to be Englishmen : and then they be all in quiet , see it be but one ship , for as yet the ship lie becalm 3 day before the town . whereupon they forthwith provide 2 ship with 200 man in they , to board captain Drake or else to burn his ship ; and after the ship go 2 small pinnace , because that if any of the 263 ship shall be sink , they may save the man . but it be a day and a half before these thing can be make ready , and in the end go forth they find the english ship still becalm , and the calm be such , that the Spaniard can not come at they . the same night , the wind blow a fresh gale , the Spaniard return into the harbour , and captain Drake set forward to Panama . the cause of the Spaniard return be , for that they have no ordinance , nor victual to tarry any long out . then the viceroy cause six piece of ordinance to be make , neither can he make any more , in regard of the shortness of time : so with these three ship piece of ordinance , and three ship , and two hundred send after anj ££ t man jn tjjgm he send after captain drake ; who captatne r . drake . after he have wind stay no where , nor take any ship at all , notwithstanding he meet with many come from Panama lade with merchandise , but still he inquire after the ship that be go to Panama before he : of a rich prize which ship he have sight about the cape of Sant Francisco , eandsdrake master whereof be a biskaine , call Juan de Anton : at cape S . wh ° see this ship of the Englishman , think that Francisco the viceroy of Peru have send he some message , and situate one therefore strike all his sail : but so soon as he may ‘ north of the discern the ship somewhat better , he will then fain equinoctial . have go his way > f ° r he know that it be none of that coast , and then he begin to hoist his sail , but can by no mean get from captain drake because he be within the reach of his great ordinance , for the Spaniard not have so much as a rapier to defend themselves , read Nuno be soon constrain to yield . there be in this da Sylva con - ship above eight hundred and fifty thousand pezo ‘ treeuree of sdver , and forty thousand pezo of gold , all which silver and gold be custom ; but what store of treasure they have beside uncustomd i know not , for many time they carry almost as much more as they pay custom for ; otherwise the king will take it from they , if they shall be know to have any great sum ; wherefore every ship carry his bill