news of the Englishman : whereupon the captain of the town send out four horseman , which bring they to the town behind they , and the say captain clothe they , and provide lodging for they , and John Drake sit at the captain own table , and he entreat they all very well , think to send they for Spain . but the viceroy of Peru hear this news send for they , and they send he John drake ; but the other two they keep , because they be marry in the country . thus much concern their affair . upon these news also there be prepare fifty horseman to go over the river , both to seek the rest of the Englishman , and certain Spaniard which be among those savage people ; but i be not assure whether they go forward or no . now let we return to Diego Flores : who pass from the island of Santa Catelina towards the strait of Magellan in the middle of February , and come to the height of the river of plate , send the governor of Chili with three ship up the river to Buenos air , that he may from thence pass overland to Chili . of these three ship two be lose , but the man and provision be save ; and the three return for Spain . then Diego Flores with the other seven ship proceed on to the latitude of 52 . degree , whereas the mouth of the strait begin : but because it be the end of march , which there be the latter end of summer , the country be so full of snow , and withal there arise such a sudden storm , that he can not set Sarmiento and his man on shore , but be constrain the second time to return unto the river of Jenero upon the coast of Brasil ; where he hear news of the english ship by the two spanish ship that escape from they . upon which news he leave his lieutenant Diego de Ribera , and Pedro Sarmiento , that they may the next year return for the strait . and so Diego Flores himself with four » 70 ship which be yet remain unto he , and other four which the king send to succour he , set forth to four ship seek the Englishman ; but have run along all the m & . e se ^ t0 coast of Brasil he can not find they , because they ° res ' be go direct for England . whereupon shape his course unto a port call Parajua , and find there french five french ship , he burn three and take two , and s & s ken at the tort also which the £ renchman have build , and put Spaniard therein , but the Frenchman flee into the mountain to the savage . this do he return for Spain . in the mean season his lieutenant Diego de Ribera , and Pedro Sarmiento have the next year so good fedr0 arm ^- fortune , that they arrive safe in the strait with all their ship , and set on shore four hundred man : but Magellan because the ship boat can not land , be once with 400 man lade , they run that ship , which have all the victual 3 ° woman . and munition in she , on shore in a bay , and as the water do ebb they take all thing out of she . This be do , Diego de Ribera leave Sarmiento with four hundred man , thirty woman , and a ship , with victual for eight month : and with the other three ship he return , have remain in the strait but eight day . now Pedro Sarmiento build a town hombre de at the mouth of the strait on the north side , place Jesus therein a hundred and fifty man : and from thence he go by land , and send the ship further into the strait , and fifty league within the strait , at the narrow place of all , where there be a very good port , he build another town , which he name the town Ciudad deal of king Philip ; and will also have make a fort , and plant ordinance for the defence of the strait : ’ but the snow and winter be so intolerable , that he can not bring it to perfection . whereupon take about 25 mariner with he into the foresay ship , he say he will go see how his other people do , and so he sail to the strait mouth , unto the town which be first build ; where have continue a day 271 or two , he say that a storm put he from the strait by force and break his cable ; but his man affirm the contrary , that himself cut his cable ( God know the truth ) and so he pass to the river of Jenero ; and not find there any succour come from the king , he sail to Fernambuck , crave aid of the captain to furnish he with victual . and so the captain present freight his ship with victual and clothes for his people leave in the strait , and so sail thitherward . but between cape S . Augustin and Baya the wind come off the sea with such violence , that it force the ship to run on shore ; where Sarmiento have three of his man drown , and he with the rest hardly escape : and so this ship be lose with all the provision in she . from thence he pass by land to Baya where the governor of Brasil buy he a bark that lie in the harbour , lade the same with victual and clothes for sarmientos colony . with this provision and diverse other necessary for his people he take his voyage for the strait , and come to the height of four and forty degree , he meet on the sudden with such a furious storm , that he be force to throw his fraught overboard , and also to return to the river of Jenero . where stay a whole year for succour from the king ,