she , into they . the same day the Portugal which have hurt the Dutchman come to the shore , and dare we to come on land : whereupon we go into our pinnace with forty shot : but the cowardly villain run all away to the hill , from the water side : but master Lister with nine man follow they , and they flee still before they , and dare not stay their approach : so they come back again , and we fill water quiet , and at our pleasure . the three day of June our captain master Lister , have a great desire for the performance of this voyage , accord to my lord direction , go to our admiral , and request he to give he six butt of wine , one barrel of oil , three or four barrel of flesh , and to have Thomas hood and seven or eight seaman for some of our landman , and by God help he with the bark Clifford , will alone proceed for the south sea : but admiral mighty withstand his motion , and will grant no jot of his particular request . 224 the 7 of June , have no use at all of our prize , we burn one , and cast off another , and fill our own ship with the necessary of they . the 8 day we put off to sea , but yet with much ado come again to our anchor place , because of the weather . the 10 day the admiral send for we to come aboard he , and be come , he open a card before all the company , and tell we that my lord voyage for the south sea be overthrow for want of able man , and victual , and that therefore he think it best to ply for some of the island of the west India , or the azore , to see if they can meet with some good purchase , that may satisfy my lord . Theise word be take heavy of all the company , and no man will answer he , but keep silence , for very grief to see my lord hope thus deceive , and his great expense and cost cast away . the common sort see no other remedy , be content to return as well as he . the 16 day we espy a sail , whereupon our pinnace and dalamor give her chase , and put she ashore upon the island , where the man forsake she , and run away with such thing as they can convenient carry : our pinnace board she , and find little in she ; they another pin - tooke out of her nine chest of sugar , and one hog , ness taken - and 35 piece of pewter , and so leave she upon the sand . from this time forward we begin to ply northwards , july - and the first of July fall with the land again , where we they return fish , and find reasonable good store . i take the ° ri war ' latitude that day , and find our self in 10 degree and 22 minute . the 7 day we determine to fall with Fernambuck , and we come so near it , that dalamor ( as he tell we ) espy some of the ship that be in the harbour : yet notwithstanding we all fall to leeward of the river , and can not after that , by any mean recover the height of it again : but we cease not on all part to xi 225 p Fernambuck in the southerly latitude of 7 deg . 50 min . a low island in 3 degree and 49 minute . August . endeavour the best we can , and oftentimes lose company for a day or two , one of another , but there be no remedy , but patience , for to Fernambuck we can not come , have so much overshoot it to the northward , and the wind keep at the south and Southwest . the 20 day i take the sun in 5 degree 50 minute , which be 2 degree to the northward of Fernambuck , and the further we go , the more untoward do the rest of our ship work , either to come into haven , or to keep company one with another . and true i suppose , that by reason of the froward course of the admiral , he mean of purpose to lose we : for i know not how the near we endeavour to be to he , the further off will he beef from we , and we see that , keep on our own course , and look to our self as well as we can . the 24 day our whole company be call together to consultation , for our best course : some will go for the west India , some direct north for England ; and in conclusion , the great part be bend to ply for our own country , consider our necessity of victual and fresh water , and yet if any place be offer we in the way , not to omit it , to seek to fill water . the 26 day in the morning , we espy a low island , but we lose it again , and can descry it no more . this day we find our self in 3 degree and 49 minute . the 27 day we search what water we have leave we , and find but nine butt only , so that our captain allow but a pint of water for a man a day , to preserve it as much as may be , wherewith every man be content , and we be then in number fifty man and boy . the first of August we find our self 5 degree to the northward of the line , all which month we continue our course homeward , without touch any where : towards the end whereof , a sorrowful accident 226 1572 - 87 . fall out in our hulk , which be divide from we in thehulkeof a calm , fall afire by some great negligence , and per - ^ s ^ ngJ > urnt ish by that mean in the sea , we be not able man ne ^ any way to help the ship , or to save the man . gence . the 4 day of September , we have bring our self into the height of 41 degree and 20 minute , somewhat to the northward of the island of the azore : and thus bult up and down with contrary wind , the 29 of the same month , we reach the coast of England , and so make a end of the voyage .