, and lay before they such infallible reason , that the council give credit unto his word , send he to sea with five ship and 400 man all very well appoint . with these five ship set sail from saint Lucar , he come to the coast of Brasill , where at that time two place be inhabit by Portugal , and so sail on along that coast he pass by the river of plate , which river be discover a little before by Solis . and notwithstanding many storm , and great mutiny among his company , he come at length unto 48 degree , to the southward of the river of plate : where he find a har - bour , which he name Puerto de Sant Julian , and port . Julian . winter there : and there also he hang 5 man , and put on shore a priest , because they will have make the company to stand against their captain , and so to have return back again . but in the end have pacify his man , he put to sea , and within 5 day after he find the discovery the strait , which by he be so much desire : but ^ f ^ r ^ r ‘ s before he enter the say strait there befall such a i it mutiny in one of his ship , that the same ship return back again . and so himself with the other four ship enter the strait , one of they say four with all the man therein be cast away at the very entrance : which loss notwithstanding he proceed on with the other three ship , and pass many trouble and danger in this long discovery , cease not to prosecute his intend voyage . this discovery be at the first think very profitable unto the Spaniard , but of late 255 it have prove very hurtful unto they by mean of certain coaster which have sail the self same course . the southerly these strait stand in 52 degree and a half of st ^ htfof1 southerly latitude . also here be to be note , that it Magellan . be cold to the southward of the line then to the northward : in such wise , that in forty degree to the southward the cold be more sharp , then in fifty degree to the north : experience do always show the same : for it be as cold even in the strait of Magellan , as it be in sixty degree of northerly latitude . howbeit the cold be not the cause why navigator frequent not the same , but the westerly and southerly wind , which blow most furious on that coast , and that oftentimes out of the very mouth of the straight , and so continue for the most part of the year . also there run sometime such a strong current , that if the wind and it go all one way , the cable can hold , neither can the ship withstand the force thereof . for which cause , and also for that there be no harbour , till you be pass 30 league into the say strait , most part of the ship that have go thither have endure many trouble before they can come to the strait , and be come to the mouth thereof they have be hinder by the current and wind , and so have be put back again . and to the end you may understand the truth , i will declare unto you all the ship that have pass through the say strait , since Magellan first find they , unto this present year of 1586 , when i have once end my discourse of Magellan his own voyage . now you be by the way to understand , that the north side of the entrance of these strait be plain land without any wood or tree : Patagpnes . here be likewise some Indians though not many , yet be they very mighty man of body of ten or eleven foot high , and good bowman , but no man - eater , neither have they any victual , but such as they get by hunt and fish ; they cover their body with the skin of beast that they kill , to defend they from the cold : neither be there ever to this day any silver or gold 256 find among they or in their country . Theise Streights the length of ( they say ) extend in length from east to west about the strait of a hundred and twenty league . at the middle of these mighty ridg strait on the north side be many mountain cover of mountain . with snow , which mountain stretch from thence along the frontier of Chili , Peru , and Nuevo reino de Granada , even unto the shore of the north sea at Santa Martha , as i have before signify . it be a wonder to behold the exceed heighth of these mountain , and the way which they continue cover with snow , for even under the equinoctial line they have as much snow upon their top as in 52 degree . also it be worthy the remembrance , that all this country toward the south sea be very fruitful , and the people very discreet and gentle : but all the coast towards Brasill upon the north sea be poor , whereas never yet be find any commodity of account , and the people themselves be very cruel and savage ; for the will of God be , that good and civil man shall inhabit fruitful country . and for the better understanding hereof you must note , that all the land lie between the say ridge of mountain and the south sea be call by the name of Chili , Peru , and Nuevo Chili , Peru , reino de Granada , which be the best and rich country an Nuevo in all the world : and most part of the land from the rQ %^ a say mountain to the north sea be call Brasill , be ' a mountainous country , * where as yet be never find * but of late either gold or silver . from the say mountain in there