late one Francis Drake a Englishman ( of who i have before speak ) see he can do no good on the main land of the west Indies to benefit himself , because of the galley of Cartagena that keep the coast , determine to seek the strait of Magellan , and to pass into the south sea . and so have provide two ship and three pinnace in England , he proceed on his voyage , and come to the island of cape Verde take a Portugal ship lade with wine , the pilot whereof be a Portugal call Nuno da Sylva , he carry along with he , who be a great help and furtherance unto he in his voyage . and this which i shall here say , i have in write of the Portugal pilot himself . from the island of cape Verde the say Francis Drake sail unto port Sant Julian , where he winter : and there also he put to death a gentleman of his company , because he will have return home . this port i take to be accurse , for that Magellan likewise put some to death there for the like offence . this Francis Drake put out of the say port , enter the strait , and within twelve day get into the south sea . and two day after there arise such a storm of westerly wind ( which be usual in those part ) that he lose his pinnace , and his vice - admiral master John winter be drive back again into the strait , who pass many danger return home into England . but Francis Drake himself run with this storm into seven and fifty degree of southerly latitude , where he find a island with a good harbour , and fresh water , and stay at the same island two month to repair his ship : and then , the weather be fair , he proceed on his voyage , and come to the coast of Chili to a island call la Mocha ; where he go on shore , and talk with the Indians : but when he will have return unto his boat they shoot their arrow at he , and kill two of his man , and he himself be wound in the face . 260 go from thence he pass by the town of Con - town of cepcion not know the place , and so to Valparizo which be the port of Sant Iago , where he find a ship lade afanzo - with a kind of victual and wine , and have in she beside threescore thousand pezo of gold , every pezo be worth eight shilling sterling : and take this ship with he he go from thence to another port call coquimbo : the port of where see many cattle on the land , he send present some of his man with caliver to kill of the say cattle : mi „ , but be espy of the Spaniard that dwell in the town , they send twelve horseman to see what they be that kill their cattle , for they know they not : and come near unto they , the Englishman flee to their boat , but the horseman overtake one of they who have a halberd in his hand , who the Spaniard think to have take : but he with his halberd kill one of their horse be himself run through with a lance , and so the Spaniard carry he dead with they into the town . the next day the news come to Sant Iago , that they be Englishman , and how they have take the ship out of the harbour of Valparizo : whereupon they of Sant Iago send a post by land to give warning unto they of Peru . howbeit by reason that the country between this place and Peru be not inhabit for the space of two hundred league , and many huge and cold mountain cover with snow lie in the way , the post be so long in performance of this journey , that captain Drake be upon the coast of Peru a month before the say post come thither : neither can they send any news by sea , because they be destitute of ship . captain Drake depart from coquimbo sail to another port not inhabit , where he set up a pinnace . And go from thence , the next place where he touch be a port upon the coast of Peru call los Pescadores : lospescadore . and there he land , and in one of the fishermen house find of a Spaniard three thousand pezo of silver in little bar . Arica in 18 from hence he go to another port call Arica , which deg . 261 be the next town to Chili that the Spaniard have in all Peru , contain a hundred house : and this be the port where they discharge their merchandise that pass from Lima to Potossi , and to all other city within the land , and likewise at this place they be wont to embark all the silver which they carry for Panama . at this port of Arica he find a ship that have in her thirteen thousand pezo of silver , which have take out , he burn the say ship , and after think to have land , but see both horseman and footman on shore he will not , but proceed on his voyage . since captain Drake be at this port they carry their silver by land to Lima , and lade no more treasure here , but only discharge the merchant good that come from Spain hither . also they have build a fort at this place for the better safety of the inhabitant , and have plant it with ten piece of ordinance , and every summer there lie in garrison a hundred soldier beside the townsman . * from hence Chuli . he sail to another port call Chuli : in which port be a ship that have three hundred thousand pezo of silver in bar : but they have send horseman from Arica to give advertizement of drake be on the coast , which news come but two hour to the town before his arrival at the say port : whereupon