great river of Magdalen . they can go with grande there bark but two hundred league up this river ; for magaa - although it be large and very deep , yet there run it so swift a current , that the bark be constrain to discharge their good at a place in the river call Branco Branco de de Malambo , into small canoas which row close by the Salambo . shore side . in this river be great abundance of crocodile , so huge and terrible to behold , that such as never see they before be very fearful at the first sight of they , for if a man chance to put his hand or foot into the water , they will straightway catch at they . in some place this river be very unhealthful and full of noisome worm ; but the first place thereupon which the Spaniard do inhabit call mompox be exceed healthful . the mompox . country adjoin upon this river they call the new kingdom of Granada , because the captain call Cesada which first conquer the same , and inhabit there , be bear at Granada in Spain : for it be the use of the spanish captain , when they have conquer any province of the Indies , to call it after the name of the place where they themselves be bear . this new kingdom of Granada be very fruitful , and bring forth much corn and other victual , and have many gold - mine , and great quantity of emerald , whereof they send so many into Spain , that now they be become little worth : but before these country be find , they be in great estimation . here be also dwell many of the indian people so meek and gende of nature , that they be 235 call fly . this land be very plain and wholesome , and the inhabitant be give to peace . from this kingdom they travel to another country Popayan . call la governacion de Popayan ; it be rich of gold , and withal very fruitful , but full of mountain than the new kingdom of Granada , and have few Indians dwell in it , but those that be there be full of courage and very valiant , which cause the Spaniard to make great war before they can overcome they . in this province there be 13 town of Spaniards , and in the new kingdom of Granada there be nine town of Spaniards . from this country of Popayan they travel along till they come to the first inhabitant of Peru dwell in Quito . a town which join upon the south sea call Quito . this town i will leave any further to speak off till i come particular to entreat of Peru . only i have speak of the two foresay province , to the intent you a passage may know , that there be a passage by land from car - ove land from tagena to perUj which be about five hundred league Peru ^ ™ t0 through : so that beside the two hundred league which they go up the river , the other three hundred league be a country well inhabit and without danger to travel in , insomuch that oftentimes post be send too and fro . but because it be so long a journey , merchant use not to travel that way , but when they be enforce so to do . if any foreign nation shall become lord of the south sea , the king of Spain may have his treasure convey unto this town of Cartagena from Peru , and so into Spain . for in time pass there be a rebellion in Peru make by the Spaniard against their king , he send his power to suppress they through these province . this i write only for that i know some Englishman have think , that in take the south sea , or Panama or number de dios from the king of Spain , his treasure of Peru can not be convey unto he , and that the king can not succour Peru , if it want help . howbeit i do here most certain assure you , that there be many way to Peru . 236 but now i will return to my former discourse . upon the seacoast of Tierra firma eastward from Cartagena stand a little town call Santa Martha , between which town and Cartagena the mighty river of Magdalen before name fall into the sea with such a strong current , that by reason thereof it be know 20 league from the shore . Santa Martha be a very poor town , because it have often be rob by the Frenchman , and have no trade but with a few Indians that dwell thereabouts . here begin that wonderful long ridge of high mountain cover with snow , which stretch through many country , run along the kingdom of Peru and Chili , and continue to the very strait of Magellan . Theise mountain be see with snow upon their top above thirty league into the sea . at the foot of these wild mountain there be a valley call Tagrona , which be the rich place that be know thereabouts : but because the country adjoin be so mountainous , and the inhabitant so many and of so good a courage , shoot poison arrow which be present death to such as be wound with the same ; therefore it lie as yet unconquered , notwithstanding it have cost many spanish captain their life . pass along the coast of Tierra firma to the east of Santa Martha , where be a other small town of above a hundred house call Rio de Hacha . this town be somewhat rich by reason of the pearl which they get there . also they have a trade with the indian for some small quantity of gold . from hence they go along the coast to Cabo de la Vela , which because it be of the same property with Rio de Hacha before mention , i omit to speak of it . upon this coast there be a lake or gulf which open into the sea , at the mouth whereof they gather great store of pearl . beyond this place there