all the say ship save two , in one of the which two be Lewis the Melo himself : also the most part of the man that be in the ship cast away be save and get to the shore , and so go by land to the hand of Margarita ; from whence they be disperse throughout all the Indies . thus these two fleet of ship be so unfortunate cast away , never dare any captain afterward attempt by sea to conquer the say river . howbeit from the kingdom of Nueva Granada before mention there have 242 go two or three captain by land to discover it , for a rumour go over all the country of the great riches contain in this river ; whereupon the Spaniard name it el Dorado , that be to say , the golden river . it be el Dorado . thought that God will not have this river to be know , for that one captain by land have most of his people slay by those of the country , and other for want of victual return . so that none of all these come to any plain discovery , till a few year past a captain of the country of Navarre call Pedro de Orzua , who Pedn de go from Peru almost the same way that Gonsalo Orzua - Pizarro have before discover , and be accompany with about some seven hundred Spaniard , it be a great marvel how he can get so many , among who be many gentleman and old soldier of Peru , who cause diverse mutiny and insurrection , as hereafter i will more at large declare , which mutinous soldier be the cause of their captain death . howbeit with all these man captain Pedro de Orzua come unto the head of the say river : but you must understand , that this river be nourish not only with the water and freshet that come from the mountain of Peru , but also by all the river between the equinoctial and sixteen degree of southerly latitude , which fall thereinto and cause it to be so great . now at the head of this river the say captain Pedro de Orzua make fifteen pinnace with many canoas , wherein he carry above two thousand Indians to help he , with many horse and other provision , as mean to inhabit there : for it be not possible for he to carry all his provision by land , because the mountain be very great , there be also between they many small river which fall into this great river above twenty league out of the land . so this captain have all his thing in good order go down the river wjth his whole company , and at length come from among the mountain to a plain country where the Indians dwell ; and there he hold a council , determine in the same place to build a town and to fortify 243 Lopez de jdgira . his dangerous conspiracy . Pedro de Orzua murdered . it very strong , to the end he may leave all his stuff there , and such man as be not soldier . and so they begin to build the say town , and wrought upon it all the winter : where because it rain much , and withal be very hot , sickness and want of victual begin to prevail among they , whereupon the soldier fall a murmur among themselves . for come out of Peru , which be one of the fruitful and rich country of the world , they be more incline to have their fill of bread and meat then to apply their body to labour : which be the cause that albeit the country in which they now be , be exceed fruitful , and that they see with their eye most evident appearance of gold , and also that up into the country it seem to be much better ; yet for all this they murmur and will needs return for Peru from whence they come . in the company of these man there be a soldier of Biskay call Lopez de Agira , a very little man of body and lame of one of his leg , but very valiant and of good experience in the war . this man have be one of the principali mutineer in Peru , can not here give over his old wont , but ask his fellow - soldier , what they go to seek for in those wild desert whither they be bring : for ( say he ) if you seek riches , there be enough in Peru , and there be bread , wine , flesh , and fair woman also ; so that it be better to conquer that , and to take it out of the hand of the Spaniard , and that it be no hard enterprise , because all the soldier and poor man of Peru will turn unto they , and that that be a better course , than to go and conquer the savage people in those mountain : so that once have the government of Peru , the king of Spain shall be enforce to agree with they : if not ( say he ) we shall not lack they that will succour we , to have the riches of Peru . by these persuasion he bring many soldier to be of his mind , and conspire also with a young gentleman of Seville call don Fernando de Gusman ( who be in love with a young woman which the captain Pedro de Orzua have , and therefore do the 244 do Ferdinando de Gusman proclaim kin Lopez VAZ soon agree unto the wicked intent of Agira ) to murder the captain . who on a night be asleep in his bed , the say conspirator and their faction enter into his bedchamber , and there stab he with their dagger ; which be do , they slay also all the captain that be his friend , and therewithal ! make a great outcry , say , God save the king , God save the king : whereupon all the camp be in a uproar . then Lopez de Agira make unto the soldier a long oration , and get they all to consent