thing which their country do yield . the man go naked , save their head and privity , every man have something or other hang at their ear . their woman be cover from the middle down to the foot , wear a great number of bracelet upon their arm , for some have 8 . upon each arm , be make some of bone , some of horn , and some of brass , the light whereof by our estimation weigh two ounce apiece . with this people linen - cloth be good merchandise , and of good request , whereof they make roll for their head , and girdle to wear about they . their island be both rich and fruitful : rich in gold , silver , copper , and sulphur , wherein they seem skilful ! and expert , not only to try the same , but in work it also artificial into any form and fashion that please they . their fruit be diverse and plentiful , as nutmeg , ginger , long pepper , lemon , cucumber , coco , figu , sagum , with diverse other sort : and among all the rest , we have one fruit , in bigness , form , and husk , like a bay berry , hard of substance , and pleasant of taste , which be sodden , become soft , and be a most good and wholesome victuali , whereof we take reasonable store , as we do also of the other fruit and spice : so that to confess a truth , since the time that we first set out of our own country of England , we happen upon no place ( ternate only except ) wherein we find more comfort and better mean of refresh . at our departure from Barateve , we set our course for Java major , where arrive , we find great coiirtesie , and honourable entertainment . this island be govern by 5 . king , who they call Rajah : as Rajah Donaw , and 130 1580 . Rajah Mang bange , and Rajah Cabuccapollo , which live as have one spirit , and one mind . of these five we have four a shipboard at once , and two or three often . they be wonderful delight in red and green colour clothes , as red and green : their upper part cl °^ 1 of their body be naked , save their head , where - eseeme • upon they wear a turkish roll , as do the maluccians : from the middle downward they wear a pintado of silk , trail upon the ground , in colour as they best like . the maluccians hate that their woman shall be manner see of stranger : but these offer they of high peo ^ e courtesy , yea the king themselves . the people be of goodly stature , and warlike , well provide of sword and target , with dagger , all be of their own work , and most artificial do , both in temper their mettle , as also in the form , whereof we buy reasonable store . they have a house in every village for their common assembly : every day they meet twice , man , woman , and child , bring with they such victual as they think good , some fruit , some rice boil , some hen roast , some sagum , have a table make 3 . foot from the ground , whereon they set their meat , that every person sit at the table may eat , one rejoice in the company of another . they boil their rice in a earthen pot , make in form of a sugar loaf , be full of hole , as our pot which we water our garden withal , and it be open at the great end , wherein they put their rice dry , without any moisture . in the mean time they have ready another great earthen pot , set fast in a furnace , boil full of water , whereinto they put their pot with rice , by such measure , that they swell become soft at the first , and by their swell stop the hole of the pot , admit no more water to enter , but the more they be boil , the hard and more firm substance they become , so that in the end they be a firm and good bread , of the which with oil , butter , 131 a strange fashion of boy ling rice . the cape of buena esperanza not so dangerous as the Portugal have give out . sierra Leona . oyster - tree . sugar , and other spice , they make diverse sort of meat very pleasant of taste , and nourish to nature . the french pock be here very common to all , and they help themselves , sit naked from ten to two in the sun , whereby the venomous humour be draw out . not long before our departure , they tell we , that not far off there be such great ship as we , wish we to beware : upon this our captain will stay no long . from Java Major we sail for the cape of good hope , which be the first land we fall withal : neither do we touch with it , or any other land , until we come to Sierra Leona , upon the coast of Guinea : notwithstanding we run hard aboard the cape , find the report of the Portugal to be most false , who affirm , that it be the most dangerous cape of the world , never without intolerable storm and present danger to traveller , which come near the same . this cape be a most stately thing , and the fair cape we see in the whole circumference of the earth , and we pass by it the 18 . of June . from thence we continue our course to Sierra Leona , on the coast of Guinea , where we arrive the 22 . of July , and find necessary provision , great store of elephant , oyster upon tree of one kind , spawn and increase infinite , the oyster suffer no bud to grow . we depart thence the 24 . day . we arrive in England the three of November 1580 . be the three year of our departure .