five hundred old soldier new come out of Flanders . Theise ship have the hard hap of any that ever go out of Spain since the India be first discover : for that before they can get clear of the coast of Spain , a storm take they , and cast away five of they , and above eight hundred man , and the residue of the fleet put into Cadiz . notwithstanding which hard success , the king send they word that they shall proceed : and so they do with sixteen sail only , for two other of their ship be so shake with the storm , that they can not go forth . in these sixteen sail of ship Pedro Sarmiento be send to be governor in the strait : he carry with he all kind of artificer , to build fort , and other necessary , with great store of ordinance and munition . this fleet because it set late forth , winter on the coast of Brasil in the river of Jenero . Winter be pass , they set sail from hence , and about the height 267 two english ship under the conduct ofM . Fenton andm . Luke ward . of 42 degree they have such a storm , that Diego Flores be fain to beat it up and down about 22 day ; in which storm be sink one of his best ship , and in her three hundred man and twenty woman that go to inhabit the strait , and most part of the munition that shall have be leave in the strait be all cast away . in the end the storm grow so intolerable , that the ship not be able to endure it any long be constrain to put back again unto a island call Santa Catelina : and there he find a bark wherein be certain friar go for the river of plate , which friar tell he of two great english ship and a pinnace that have take they , but take nothing from they , nor do they any harm , but only ask they for the king of Spain ship . now Diego Flores suppose that these english ship will go to the strait , be himself determine to go to the strait also , though it be in the month of February ; and choose ten ship of the fifteen that be leave , he send three of the residue that be old and shake with the storm ( wherein he put all the woman and sick man that be in the fleet ) back again to the river of Jenero ; leave the other two ship , which be not able to brook the sea , at the foresay island ; and so himself with the say ten ship return again for the strait . now the three ship wherein the sick man and the woman be embark , come to the port of Sant Vincent : where find the two foresaid english ship , and urge they to avoid the harbour , the english enter combat with they : and by reason that these three ship be weaken with former tempest , and be man with the refuse of all the spanish fleet , the Englishman easy put they to the worst , and sink one of they , and may also have sink another , if they have be so mind ; but they desire not the destruction of any man : and doubtless it be the great valour that any man can show , that when he may do hurt , he will not . hereupon the Englishman depart from this port unto 268 Espirito Santo , where they have victual for their mer - Espirito Santo . chandize : and so they return home to England without do any harm in the country . the cause why these english captain go not to the strait i know not : some say , that they be put back by foul weather , other suppose that it be for fear of the king ship : but the pinnace that belong to these ship wherein John Drake go as captain , depart from they : the cause why he do so , be unknown : but this pinnace John Drake . enter the river of plate , and within five league of seal - island , not far from the place where the earl of cumberland ship take in fresh water , it be cast away upon a ledge of rock ; but the man be all save in the boat . who be eighteen in number go on shore upon the northside of the island , and pass ten day journey up into the land , they meet with certain savage people , which be no man - eater , but take all the Christians that they can get , and make they their slave : howbeit the Englishman fight with they , and be too few in number , five of they be slay , and the other thirteen take prisoner , who remain with the savage about fifteen month . but the master of the pinnace call Richard fair - weather , be loath any long to induce that misery wherein he be , and have knowledge of a town of Christians on the other side of the river , call on a night John Drake , and another young man which be with they , and take a Canoa be very little , and have but two oar , and pass therewith on the other side of the river , which be full nine league broad ; and be three day before they can get over , they be much pine for lack of meat . but come to land , they hit upon a high way that go towards the Christians : and spy the foot of horse , they follow it , and at last come to a house , near unto the which corn be sow . and there they meet with Indians that be servant to the Spaniard , who give they food , and clothes to cover they withal , for they 269 the governor of Chili pass thither by the river of plate : be all naked . and one of the say Indians go to the town , and carry