not long after meet with a ship lade with linen cloth and fine chinadish of white earth , and great store of china - silk , of china - silk , all which thing we take as we list . andporceuan . the owner himself of this ship be in she , who be a spanish gentleman , from who our general take a falcon of gold , with a great Emeraud in the breast thereof , and the pilot of the ship he take also with he , and so cast the ship off . this Pilot bring we to the haven of Guatulco , the Guatulco . town whereof , as he tell we , have but 17 . Spaniards in it . assoon as we be enter this haven , we land , and go present to the town , and to the town - house , where we find a judge sit in judgement , be associate with three other officer , upon three negro that have conspire the burn of the town : both which judge and prisoner we take , and bring they a shipboard , and cause the chief judge to write his letter to the town , to command all the townsman to avoid , that we may safe water there . which be do , and they depart , we ransack the town , and in one house we find a pot of the quantity of a bushel , full of real of plate , which we bring to our ship . and here one Thomas Moone one of our company , take a spanish gentleman as he be fly out of the town , and search he , he find a chain of gold about he , and other jewel , which he take , and so let he go . at this place our general among other Spaniards , set the Portugal ashore his Portugal pilot , which he take at the Pitot set on island of cape Verde , out of a ship of saint mary port lan ’ of Portugal : and have set they ashore , we depart hence , and sail to the island of can , where our the island of general land , and bring to shore his own ship , camk - and discharge she , mend , and grave she , and furnish our ship with water and wood sufficient . 117 a ship with a govemour fir the island of phirppinas . June . sir Francis Drake sail on the hackside of America to 43 - degree of northerly latitude . and while we be here , we espy a ship , and set sail after she , and take she , and find in her two pilot , and a spanish governor , go for the island of the philippinas : we search the ship , and take some of her merchandize , and so let she go . our general at this place and time , think himself both in respect of his private injury receive from the Spaniard , as also of their contempt and indignity offer to our country and prince in generail , sufficient satisfy , and revenge : and suppose that her majesty at his return will rest content with this service , purpose to continue no long upon the spanish coast , but begin to consider and to consult of the best way for his country . he think it not good to return by the strait , for two speciali cause : the one , lest the Spaniard shall there wait , and attend for he in great number and strength , who hand , he be leave but one ship , can not possible escape . the other cause be the dangerous situation of the mouth of the strait in the south sea , where continual storm reign and bluster , as he find by experience , beside the shoald and sand upon the coast , he think it not a good course to adventure that way : he resolve therefore to avoid these hazard , to go forward to the island of the Malucos , and therehence to sail the course of the Portugal by the cape of buena esperanza . upon this resolution , he begin to think of his best way to the Malucos , and find himself where he now be becalm , he see that of necessity he must be force to take a spanish course , namely to sail somewhat northerly to get a wind . we therefore set sail , and sail 600 . league at the least for a good wind , and thus much we sail from the x6 . of April , till the 3 . of June . the 5 . day of June , be in 43 . degree towards the pole arctike , we find the air so cold , that our man be grievous pinch with the same , complain 118 of the extremity thereof , and the further we go , the I579 * more the cold increase upon we . whereupon we think it best for that time to seek the land , and do so , find it not mountainous , but low plain land , till we come within 38 . degree towards the line . degree . in which height it please God to send we into a fair and good bay , with a good wind to enter the same . in this bay we anchor , and the people of the description country have their house close by the water side , of the people show themselves unto we , and send a present to our andpountrty general . when they come unto we , they great wonder at the thing that we bring , but our general ( accord to his natural and accustom humanity ) courteous entreat they , and liberal bestow on they necessarything to cover their nakedness , whereupon they suppose we to be god , and will not be persuade to the contrary : the present which they send to our general , be feather , and call of network . their house be dig round about with earth , and have from the uttermost brim of the circle , cliff of wood set upon they , join close together at the top like a spire steeple , which by reason of that closeness be very warm . their bed be the ground with rush strew on it , and