fly fish in flyingfish . great abundance , some a foot long , some less . their fynne wherewith they fly be as long as their body . they be great pursue by the dolphin and bonito , who as soon as the fly fish espy , immediate they mount out of the sea in great number , and fly as long as their fynne continue moist : and when they be dry , they fall down into the sea again . and here be to be note , that after we come within 4 degree of the equi - cmtmuall noctial , until we be so much past it , no day do pass , aineat without great store of rain . sm near ihe from hence we direct our course towards the equinoctial . Southsouthwest until the 5 of April ; at which time , we have a very sweet smell from the land . the same day at noon we sound , and find the sea to be 32 fathom deep , the ground be soft oaze : and short after we have but 28 fathom , be 31 degree Landin 31 and 30 min . beyond the equinoctial , toward the south de & rees - 3 ° pole : and we have sight of the land about 3 of the clock in the afternoon the same day . this land be equinoctial . very low near the sea ; and high mountain up within the country . from hence we run towards the southsouthwest , until the 14 of April ; when we find a little island , lie near the main land of cape Sant marie , by which be the entrance into the river of plate , be in 35 degree of southerly latitude . from this island we run 7 or 8 league along the main , where we come to a anchor under a cape , which our general call cape joy . here every ship take in fresh water . than we cape sant marry at the mouth of the river of plate . 153 depart , and run about 15 league towards the westsouthwest , where we find a deep bay . in the bottom of this bay be a long rock , not far from the main : which rock so break the force of the sea , that ship may ride commodious under the same for southerly wind . hither come all our fleet to anchor , the 19 of April , and ride there until the 20 day at night . here we kill some seal . And . from thence we run about 20 league , where we find the water very much trouble and fresh , and we run in so far that " we have but 3 fathom water . here we take in fresh water , and run over to the southward , and fall with the land which lie on the south part of the river of plate , the 27 day . this land lie southsouthwest and Northnortheast , and be shall 3 or 4 league into the sea . here our flyboat lose our company in the night . from hence we run towards the southwest , have much foul weather and contrary wind , until the 12 of may : and then we sound and have 28 fethome , with black sand and small stone , and have sight of the land the same morning about 10 of the clock . this land be 47 degree in latitude . our general name this land , cape hope . we come to anchor there , about 3 league from the shore the same night . the next morning our general , go to the main in a boat : by mean whereof he have be in great danger , if the marigold have not weigh , and run in with the shore , and so take up the boat and man : for there arise such foul weather , with a thick mist and a southeast wind , that they be not able to recover their ship again which ride without : which be force to weigh and run to sea . the prize weigh the 13 at night , and run to the southward : the other stay until the 14 in the morning and then run to sea , not be able to ride . in the mean time while the marigold ride under the shore , our general with certain of his man go 154 on land , where they see two naked man , save that they have a certain skin ne wrap about their shoulder and roll upon their head . to who our general show a white cloth , in sign of friendship , who with certain gesture of their body and hand , show the like to he again , speak likewise and make a noise , which our man can not understand , but they will in no case come near our man . our general go the next day to the same place again : but he have no sight of the foresay man or any other . howbeit he find certain fowl , as ostrich , and other ostrich and sea fowl , which the say man have new kill , and seafoules - laid they on a heap together , as though they have do that for our man of purpose . there be also a certain bag with little stone of diverse colour , which together with the victual our general bring aboard , and then weigh , and come to sea the 15 of the say month : where all the rest of the fleet meet with he , save the prize , and the flyboat . the 16 day we run into a bay to the southward of cape hope , where we ride all that night . the next morning our general weigh , and run without the cape to the northward , and send the Elizabeth towards the south to look for the prize : leave the marigold and the canter to search if in the bay they can find any fit harbour for our ship . the same day be the 14 of may , our general meet with the flyboat ( which lose we the 27 of April ) and bring she into say bay .