happy perform round about the world , by sir Francis Drake , and m . Thomas candish esquire , together with the rest of our english voyage intend for the south sea , the kingdom of Chili , Peru , the back side of Nueva Espanna , the Malucos , the philippinas , the mighty empire of China , though not so happy perform as the two former : whereunto be annex certain rare observation touch the present state of China , and the kingdom of Coray , late invade by quabacondono the last monarch of the 66 . princedom of Japan . the famous voyage of sir Francis drake into the south sea , and therehence about the whole globe of the earth , begin in the year of our lord , 1577 . 15 . day of November , in the year of our i 1577 . m . Francis Drake , with a fleet of s ^ ips and bark , and to the number of 164 . man , gentleman and sailor , depart from plymouth , give out his pretend voyage for Alexandria : but the wind fall contrary , he be force the ioi A . D . ’ 577 - the ci tie of Assumption , or ascension 60 . league from the mouth of Paraguai . 200 . league from Assumption subject to the Spaniard , to the ci tie of xaraes . next morning to put into Falmouth haven in cornwall , where such and so terrible a tempest take we , as few man have see the like , and be in deed so vehement , that all our ship be like to have go to wrack : but it please God to preserve we from that extremity , and to afflict we only for that present with these two particular : the mast of our admiral which be the pelican , be cut over board for the safeguard of the ship , and the marigold be drive ashore , and somewhat bruise : for the repair of which damage we return again to Plymouth , and have recover those harm , and bring the ship again to good state , we set forth the second time from Plymouth , and set sail the 13 . day of December follow . the 25 . day of the same month we fall with the cape Cantin , upon the coast of Barbary , and coast the isle of along , the 27 . day we find a island call mogador , mogador on lie one mile distant from the main , between which arbarie ^ island and the main , we find a very good and safe harbour for our ship to ride in , as also very good entrance , and void of any danger . on this island our general erect a pinnace , whereof he bring out of England with he four already frame . while these thing be in do , there come to the water side some of the inhabitant of the country , show forth their flag of truce , which be see of our general , he send his ship boat to the shore , to know what they will : they be willing to come aboard , our man leave there one man of our company for a pledge , and bring two of they aboard our ship , which by sign show our general , that the next day they will bring some provision , as sheep , capon and hen , and such like : whereupon our general bestow among they some linen cloth and shoe , and a javelin , which they very joyful receive , and depart for that time . the next morning they fail not to come again to the water side , and our general again set out 102 our boat , one of our man leap over rash ashore , and offer friendly to embrace they , they set violent hand on he , offer a dagger to his throat if he have make any resistance , and so lay he on a horse , carry he away : so that a man can be too circumspect and wary of himself among such miscreant . our pinnace be finish , we depart from this place the 30 . and last day of December , and coast along the shore , we do descry , not contrary to our expectation , certain canter which be spanish fisherman , to who we give chase and take three of they , and proceed further we meet with 3 . caravel and take they also . the 17 . day of January we arrive at cape Blanco , Januarie . where we find a ship ride at anchor , within the cape , and but two simple mariner in she , which ship we take and carry she further into the harbour , where we remain 4 . day , and in that space our general muster , and train his man on land in warlike manner , to make they fit for all occasion . in this place we take of the fisherman such necessary as we want , and they can yield we , and leave here one of our little bark call the Benedict , we take with we one of they which they call canter , be of the burden of 40 . ton or thereabouts . all these thing be finish , we depart this harbour the 22 . of Januarie , carry along with we one of the Portugal caravel which be bind to the island of cape Verde for salt , whereof good store be make in one of those island . the master or pilot of that caravel do advertise our general that upon one of those island call Mayo , the isle of there be great store of dry cabritos , which a few maj °- inhabitants there dwell do yearly make ready for such of the king ship as do there touch , be bind for his country of Brasile or elsewhere . we fall with this island the 27 . of January , but the inhabitant will in no case traffic with we , be 103 thereof forbid by the king edict : yet the next day our general send to view the island , and the likelihood that may be there of provision of victual , about threescore and two man under the conduct and government of master winter and master doughty