. the king majesty at last come in guard with 12 . lance cover over of the king . with a rich canopy , with emboss gold . our man accompany with one of their captain call Moro , rise to meet he , he gracious do welcome , and entertain they . he be attire after the manner of the country , but more sumptuous than the rest . from his waste down to the ground , be all cloth of gold , and the same very rich : he leg be bare , but on his foot be a pair of shoe , make of Cordovan skin . in the attire of his head be fine wreathe hoop ring of gold , and about his neck he have a chai ne of perfect gold , the link whereof 127 be great , and one fold double . on his finger he have six very fair jewel , and sit in his chair of estate , at his right hand stand a page with a fan in his hand , breathe and gather the air to the king . the fan be in length two foot , and in breadth one foot , set with 8 . sapphire , rich embroider , and knit to a staff 3 . foot in length , by the which the page do hold , and move it . our gentleman have deliver their message , and receive order accord , be license to depart , be safe conduct back again by one of the king counsel . temate the this island be the chief of all the island of Maluco , and the king hereof be king of 70 . Islands auco - ts shilling . bgsidg the king with his people be moor in religion , observe certain new moon , with fast : during which fast , they neither eat nor drink in the day , but in the night . after that our gentleman be return , and that we have here by the favour of the king receive all necessary thing that the place can yield we : our general consider the great distance , and how far he be yet off from his country , think it not best here to linger the time any long , but weigh his anchor , set a utle island out of the island , and sail to a certain little island ard ^ f ^ ' to southward of celebe , where we grave our celebe . ship , and continue there in that and other business 26 . day . this island be thorough grow with wood of a large and high growth , very straight and without bough , save only in the head or top , who leaf be not much differ from our broom in England . among these tree night by night , through the whole tiery worm , land , do show themselves a infinite swarm of fiery worm fly in the air , who body be no big than our common english fly , make such a show and light , as if every twig or tree have be a burn candle . in this place breed also wonderful store of bat . Bats , as big as large hen : of crayfish also here Cravlshes . want no plenty , and they of exceed bigness , one 128 1580 . whereof be sufficient for 4 . hungry stomach at a dinner , be also very good , and restore meat , whereof we have experience : and they dig themselves hole in the earth like cony . when we have end our business here , we weigh , and set sail to run for the Malucos : but have at that time a bad wind , and be among the island , with much difficulty we recover to the northward of the island of celebe , where by reason of contrary wind not able to continue our course to run westwards , we be enforce to alter the same to the southward again , find that course also to be very hard and dangerous for we , by reason of infinite shoald which lie off , and among the island : whereof we have too much trial to the hazard and danger of our ship and life . for of all other day upon the 9 of Januarie , in the Januarie in year 1579 . we run sudden upon a rock , where ’ 579 - we stick fast from 8 . of the clock at night , till 4 . ' 741 of the clock in the afternoon the next day , be indeed out of all hope to escape the danger : but our their danger general as he have always hitherto show himself 0 reck ’ courageous , and of a good confidence in the mercy and protection of God : so now he continue in the same , and lest he shall seem to perish wilful , both he , and we do our best endeavour to save our self , which it please God so to bless , that in the end we clear our self most happy of the danger . we light our ship upon the rock of 3 . ton of clove . clove , 8 . piece of ordinance , and certain meal and bean : and then the wind ( as it be in a moment the klfe of11 by the speciali grace of God ) change from the star - the board to the larboard of the ship , we hoist our sail , " and the happy gale drive our ship off the rock into the sea again , to the no little comfort of all our heart , for which we give God such praise and thank , as so great a benefit require . p , . the 8 . of February follow , we fall with the fruitful island of Barateve , have in the mean time suffer island . xi 129 1 nutmeg and long pepper grow in Barateve . commendation of the island of Barateve . Java major . many danger by wind and shoald . the people of this island be comely in body and stature , and of a civil behaviour , just in deal , and courteous to stranger , whereof we have the experience sundry way , they be most glad of our presence , and very ready to relieve our want in those