full of fruit : also tree grow by the water side with the stalk hang full of oyster and great periwinkle , and crab among they : we find dry pomegranate with many other fruit unknown to we . in the mean time our admiral and the Edward with the bark , have a gale at west , set sail , and run up and anchor in the road before the accustom water place . the 22 day certain Portugal which have be with 174 we before , come down and bring some other Portugal and negro with they in a ship - boat , wherein they bring we 80 mew of rice , 500 and odd weight of elephant tooth , and a negro boy , which boy they give the general , and the rice and tooth for the Elizabeth , their traffic which we sell they , with all her tackle and sail , the have need of the rice , because our meal which we wu & a ■ bring out of England be decay and nought , whereof we have into the Edward 30 bushel , which be a mew and a half : the Francis have 5 bushel , and the Gallion have the rest . and we have 200 weight of elephant tooth , and the Gallion 300 and a half , and six pound . during this time we send our skiff with the admiral pinnace up the river to meet with a Gundall , which the Portugal have send for fresh victual for we : who not find she , return at night : all this day i with m . Walker remain aboard with the admiral , and after their dinner and supper we end our business , and return aboard , have have many good speech with the Portugal . the 26 day be Sunday , captain Hawkins , m . Maddox , m . hall , m . Bannister , captain Drake , m . Evans , m . Hood , and other come aboard and hear the sermon , and dine with i : after dinner we go on shore to the low point where we follow the foot of a elephant , but see he not , and so spend the time to and fro till supper time , and then come aboard , and sup together , which do , each man depart to his abode . this night i be very sick , ( and so be all they sickness by that be on shore with i , ) with eat of a fruit eat seem in the country , which we find on tree , like nut : whereof some do eat four , some five , some six , and ’ more , but we vomit and scour upon it without reason . the 27 day in the afternoon the old greek Francisco come aboard to i , with request that he may have the Francis boat to go up for his own 175 boat which be not come down , with who i talk of this country and countrypeople , until five of the clock at night that the flood be come , and then i go aboard to the admiral , and get his consent , and send themselves in she : viz . Ferdinando the Portugal ! master , and his negro : in the mean time i send four of my man to watch in the Elizabeth all night . the 28 day in the morning at four a clock i send my skiff with the admiral pinnace down to the west point to fish , who come aboard again at one in the afternoon , and bring as much fish as all our company can eat . during the time that our boat be a fish , come down the river a canoa and the Portugal former boat , 7 ^ Portugal with hen , orange , plantan , which they present the present . general and i with : and also the rest of the rice due to we for the payment of the Elizabeth . for the parti - tion whereof i go aboard the admiral , where i dine . m . Evans after dinner m . Evans begin to barter away certain of one of our then ship commodity with the negro , without acquaint - merchant . jng the generaq or any other until he have do , whereof grow more word than profit , as by the book of merchandise appear . which do i come aboard , and have two of the Portugal to supper with i . about two of the clock in the morning we have a ternado , and much rain . they search the 29 about 4 a clock in the morning , i in my the country . skiff , and captain Parker in his pinnace , go down to the west point , and there we land with 11 man in all well furnish , and search the wood , plain and plash , after a elephant , find the haunt , foot , and soil of many new do , yet we see none of they . we see hog , goat or fawn , and diverse sort of fowl very wild : and have travail about 2 league , about noon we return to the point , where we land , and meet our boat which have be at sea , and take plenty of good fish : there we refresh our self with such victual as we have , and come 176 1582 . aboard our several ship , where i find the Portugal and negro , who have dine , and after sup aboard with i . the 2 of September we set sail at six of the clock in the morning , and go out west between 7 and 10 fathom , with a pretty gale at east till 8 , than it wax calm , we be shoot out of the harbour a league and a half . it continue calm this day till one in the afternoon , and then it blow up at Westsouthwest a good gale , so we stand off northnorthwest , and northwest till 5 in the afternoon , than we anchor in 12 fathom , be 6 league off the point west by north . the 3 day about eight a clock in