of custom , that the king may 264 see it . all this treasure that captain Drake take be merchant and other man good , save one hundred and eighty thousand pezo of the king . he have also out of this ship good store of victual with other necessary , which be to be carry for Panama and be five day take out of such thing as he need . this do , he sail from hence to the coast of Nueva Espanna without go to Panama . Surely this be a great plague of God just inflict upon we for our sin : for the take of these ship be a especial cause of all the dangerous war that be likely to ensue between Spain and England . now the ship that be send by the viceroy of Peru from Lima after Francis drake , arrive at cape Sant Francisco twenty day after he have take the foresay ship , and have intelligence by a ship come from Panama , which they meet at the say cape , that Francis Drake have take the ship with silver , and be not go for Panama . whereupon the captain of the three ship think that captain Drake have be go for the strait of Magellan , direct his course that way to seek he . captain Drake carry from the coast of Peru eight hundred sixty six thousand pezo of silver , which be as much as eight hundred sixty six quintal , at 100 pound weight the quintal , every quintal be worth one thousand and two hundred ducat of Spain ; all which sum amount to a million and thirty nine thousand and two hundred ducat . beside this silver he carry away a hundred thousand pezo of gold , that be ten quintal , each quintal be value at a thousand five hundred Spanish ducat , which last sum amount to a hundred and fifty thousand ducat : over and beside the treasure in the say ship which be uncustomd ( the value whereof i can learn ) consist of pearl , precious stone , real of plate , and other thing of great worth . with all this purchase he sail towards Nueva Espanna ; and at a island lie before that coast 265 Pedro Sarmiento send from Lima to the streit of Magellan . 58 degree of southerly latitude discover . many island discover to the south of the strait . call the island of canon he discharge all thing out of his ship and grave she , and remain there ten day . from thence he go along the coast of Nueva Espanna , where he take certain ship lade with spice , silk , and velvet , but no gold nor silver , for there be none to be have on this coast . and here at Guatulco he set on shore his portugal - pilot , which he take at one of the island of cape Verde . but what course he keep from this coast till he come into England i know not of certainty , and therefore i will not meddle therewithal ! . the foresay three ship which be send in pursuit of captain drake , return back again to Lima without do of aught . all which notwithstanding , the viceroy of Peru determine to send two ship to the strait of Magellan , either to meet with captain drake there , or else to see if they can fortify the say strait against such ship as may afterward attempt to pass through the same . and albeit this be think a most dangerous voyage , and impossible to be perform , by reason of the shold on that side of the strait , yet send he forth the two say ship . the admiral be a ship of a hundred ton , and the other of eighty ton , and have one hundred and twenty man in they both , sail from Lima under the conduct of Pedro Sarmiento , who be then account the best navigator in all Peru . Theise ship after their departure touch on the coast to take in victual , be nine month before they come to the latitude of the strait , and there be they encountered with a cruel storm : but Pedro Sarmiento be a man of good courage , bear in with the land in this storm , and in a night he be put into the streit , not know how nor which way ; and the other ship run far into the sea , sail to 58 degree of southerly latitude . the storm be pass , this other ship find many island near unto the main land , and so return with fair weather all along the shore , neither can they find any other way to enter the strait , but only that 266 which Magellan discover : notwithstanding that other affirm the contrary , say that the strait be full of island to the southward : but they may be deceive , for if there be any other strait , it be beyond 58 degree , and have never be see of any man : for this ship be far to the southward of all that ever i hear of : for Francis Drake be drive by tempest no far than 57 degree can not know so much as this other ; which ship from hence return back to Lima . but Pedro Sarmiento enter the strait , where his man fall - ing into a mutiny will have return to Lima ; where - upon hang one of they he proceed on his voyage for Spain . where be arrive , he tell the king that e ^ ro sarmi - there be two narrow place in the strait where he ent ^ ter ^ d - might build a fort , and that there be a very good s ^ ine to for - countrey abound with great store of riches and other tifie the necessary , and very well inhabit with Indians . upon strait of who word , and for that there be more ship make Magellan . ready in England to pass the say strait , the king send Diego flores de Valdez with 23 ship and 3500 man , and a new governor to Chili with