the forenoon , than they return general come aboard to i , complain that his main t0 ^ rra ^ ona cross - tree be break , and therefore determine to a ^ aine - goe into Sierra leona again when the wind blow : at 12 at noon we set sail , and go in eastsoutheast , and southeast , and southsoutheast , be carry to the northward with the flood . and at 7 at night we anchor in eight fathom three league off the entrance , westnorthwest . the 12 day come down the river a boat with three traffic with other Portugal , with who the general bargain , to let 3 ° j her . Porlu they have 3 barrel of salt for 5 barrel of rice , and after s £ ewis that rate to exchange for 40 barrel , which he acquaint Henriques a i with : afterward i dine among the Portugal with dweller here he : after dinner i go on shore to the oven , and above 20 to the carpenter . after i have be on shore and see the work there , i return aboard , and there sup with Fernando i the general , m . Maddox , captain Hawkins , and captain . Portugal : after supper each man return to his ^ t ' dro Vaz place . ™ ’ the 13 in the afternoon , the Portugal come again aboard i , and break their fast with i : after i send by they up the river in my skiff 12 barrel of salt , and give they a bottle of wine for one of the savage queen . xi 177 m they enter up the 15 after dinner , the master , m . Walker , and i , to search the accompany with 12 other travel over a great deal country . ground to find some cattle , but find none : and come home through the oyster bay , i find of my company and of the admiral together roast of oyster : and go from they , Thomas Russell one of my com - pan ie see a strange fish name Utelif , which have fight with a crocodile , and be hurt come near the shore , where he wade in , and by the tail draw he a land , a swordfish and there slay he , and send the general the hinder hill . half of he : the head part i keep , in who nose be a bone of two foot long like a sword with three and twenty prick of a side , sharp and strange : the body we do eat , and it be like a shark . the 30 and last day of September the Francis cook come aboard about seven a clock in the forenoon from fish with my net , and bring among other a strange fish fish , a sea - calf ( as we call it ) with hair and lympit , take ' and barnacle upon he , be seven foot long , four foot nine inch about : which to see i send for the general , and such as please to come see it out of the admiral , who come and bring with he m . Maddox , captain Hawkins , captain Parker , and most part of his company , who have view the beast , which be ugly be alive , it be flay , open , and dress , prove a excellent , fair , and good meat , broil , roast , sod and bake , and suffice all our company for that day . the first day of October in the morning , we take in to make up our full compliment of rice twenty barrel for the twelve barrel of salt , deliver the Portugal Lewis Henriques before . the 2 day about six a clock in the morning , we set sail have little wind : the captain with the master , and other of their company of the Portugal come aboard i , complain that the carsey by they receive for the four negro of the general , be not sufficient for their payment , whereupon i give they 178 1582 . scarlet cap , and other thing to their content , who find themselves well please , depart away in the Gundall , and we have little wind , get down thwart of the fish bay , and there come to anchor about nine a clock the same forenoon . the three day about two a clock in the morning we set sail , and go hence Southwest by west till two in the afternoon then be little wind : at five we anchor six league eastsoutheast of the southermost part of the land in fifteen fathom , and there we ride till eight a clock at night , and set sail with a stiff gale at Northeast , which sometime blow , and sometime be little wind , and so continue all night . the first day of November in the forenoon , we take in our main sail to mend it : in the mean time , the admiral come up by we , and desire i with my master , and m . Blackcoller to come aboard to he about certain conference , he send his boat for we , where by he be propound , whether it be best for we to stand on with the coast of Brasil as we do , or else to stand about starboard tack to the eastwards : whereupon diverse of their charts and reckon be show : by some it appear , we be a hundred and fifteen league , by some a hundred and fifty league , by some a hundred and forty league , and some a great deal further short of Brasil , next hand north - east of we : but all agree to be within twenty minute of the line , some to the north , some to the south of the line . after many debatement , it be agree by most consent to stand on for the coast of Brasil , except the wind change , and there to do , as weather shall compel we . in this consultation , we have speech of course , and place of meeting , if by misfortune we shall