, so name in regard of the ayere . freshness of the air , and the healthfiilnesse of his man , during their abode there : this place be eighty league within the river , and here he land first : at this place the river be above seven league broad , and very low land on both side without tree . this river be very often subject to great and sudden storm , so that with a storm this don Pedro lose eight of his ship , and in the rest he return for Spain , say to his man , that he will go 252 seek victual , and so leave the great part of they behind . in his way homeward he die , and the poor man which he leave behind he , for the most part of they die for hunger also , because in that place there be very few Indians , and therefore but small store of victual , only they live by hunt of deer , and by fish . of all the man that don Pedro leave behind he there be but two hundred remain alive , who in the ship boat go high up the river , leave in the place call Buenos ayere their mere and horse : but it be a wonder the wonderful to see , that of thirty mere and seven horse which the Spaniard leave there , the increase in forty year be so jmares - great , that the country be 20 league up full of horse ; whereby a man may conjecture the goodness of the pasture , and the fruitfulness of the soil . the Spaniard that go up this river pass three hundred league , and find the country full of Indians : who have great plenty of victual , among who the Spaniard dwell as their friend , and the Indians bestow their daughter in marriage upon they , and so they dwell altogether in one town , which the Spaniard it call la ascension , and it la ascension stand on the north side of the river . the foresay Spaniard be twenty year in this place , before any pi ^ er news of their inhabit upon this river be bring into Spain : but wax old , and fear that when they be dead , their son which they have beget in this country be very many , shall live without the knowledge of any other Christians : they determine among themselves to build a ship , and to send news into Spain with letter unto the king of all thing that have pass among they , upon that river . Theise news be bring to the king , he send three ship , with a bishop and certain priest , and friar , and more man and woman to inhabit , with all kind of cattle , when this succour be come , they inhabit in two place more on the north side of the river , and travel three hundred league beyond the ascension ; but find neither gold nor silver , they return back again unto the ascension . the people be so 253 multiply in this city , that now it be one of the great in all the India , and contain above two thousand house . the country adjoin be exceed fruitful , abound with all kind of victual , and with sugar and cotton . from this city of ascension 150 league towards the mouth of the river stand another town which Santa Fe . they call Santa fe , on the south side of the say river , from which town there lie a open high way lead into the land of Peru , so that when i come to entreat of Peru i will speak of this way , and declare who first find it . also five year past they have inhabit anew the town of Buenos air on the south side of the river , to the end they may have trade from the coast of Brasill , but their fortune be such , that the very first time they go to Brasill , and will have return again two english to the river of plate , they be take by two ship of ^^ fenton ^ England that be go for the strait of Magellan . be general the coast along from this river to the strait of 1582 . Magellan have not be perfect discover , either by sea or land , save only certain port which they have find , sail to the strait . wherefore pass they over , i will here entreat of the say strait , and declare who be the first finder of they , as likewise what be the cause why they be seek for . the Portugal therefore have first find and conquer the east Indies , and discover the coast of China , with the hand of the Malucos , ( all which place abound with gold , precious stone , silk , and other rich commodity ) and bring home the foresay riches in their ship into Portugal : there grow by this mean great envy between the Portugal and their neighbour the Spaniard ; insomuch that the council of Spain say unto the emperor Charles the five be then their king , that the Portugal will be lord of all the riches of the world . upon which word begin a controversy between the emperor and the king of Portugal : but they be great friend before , and also kinsman , agree immediate to part the whole world between they , in such wise as i for 254 my part can never understand the certainty thereof . the world be thus divide , a portugal - gentleman call Fernando magellane bear in a place of Portugal call Fernando Punta de la barte , be of a good house , and very well masellanes - seene in cosmography , and a excellent pilot , as also be offend with don Emanuel his sovereign , depart out of Portugal into Spain , and affirm to the council of Spain , that the isle of the Malucos be in that part of the world which be allot to the king of Spain , and that he will find a short way thither then the Portugal take