plate unto Tucuman , i will return unto Atacama the Atacama . southermost town upon the coast of Peru , where i leave . from this town of Atacama till you come to Arica , all the coast be inhabit by Indians subject unto the Spaniard . but since captain Drake be here they have build tower by the sea side , whereon , see any sail that they do mistrust , they presently ' make smoke , and so from tower to tower they warn all the country . have before speak of Arica all that i can , i will now proceed to the next port call Camena be a Camena . town of Spaniards and contain about two hundred house . here they make store of wine , and have abundance of fig and reisin . the next town call Acari Acari . contain about three hundred house , and here be make the best and great store of wine in all Peru . from hence pass along the coast you come to el Calao el Calao . the port of Lima consist of about two hundred house : and here be a strong fort build since captain Drake be upon the coast . the city of Lima stand Lima . two league within the land , and contain two thousand house , be very rich , and of more trade than all the city of Peru beside : and this city be the seat of the viceroy , the archbishop , and the inquisition . 285 Paita . Guaiaquil . Tumbez . salsaperilla . ship build at Guaiaquil . Puerto Viejo a place where emrald abound . la Buenaventura . la governacion de Popaian . negro flee from their master . Panama . next unto this stand a small town of the Spaniard by the sea side call Santa : and next unto Santa be another small town of Christians call Cannete . from hence they sail unto a rich city call Truxillo , be one of the principali town of Peru , and contain about five hundred house . then follow Paita which have to the number of two hundred house . leave this town they pass to Guaiaquil which stand forty league up into a great bay or river , at the entrance of which river stand Tumbez a town of the Indians . all this coast along from Atacama to Tumbez it never rain , as i have before say : so that all the house in their town be not tile , but cover with bourd to keep off the heat of the sun , for they fear no rain at all . Guaiaquil be the first place where it rain , and here they gather Salsaperilla ; here be also great store of timber , and at this place they build many ship . hence they sail along the coast to a small and poor town call Puerto Viejo , which in time pass have be rich with emrald : but now since these stone in regard of their plenty be grow nothing worth , this town likewise be wax very poor . below this village stand another call la buena Ventura : but whosoever go thither must needs meet with evil fortune , the place it self be so waterish and unwholesome . here abide not above 20 man , who serve only to transport good unto a city stand fifty league within the main , in a province call la governacion de Popaian . from buena ventura and Popaian till you come to Panama there be no other town , by reason of the high mountain , the manifold river , and the unholesomenesse of the country . in this place do inhabit the negro that run from their master , and upon these mountain be Oxnam the english captain and his man take , as be before mention . beyond these mountain stand the city of Panama , be a rich place , by reason that all the treasure which come from Peru 286 be bring thither , and it consist of about four hundred house . the coast run along between this city and Nueva Espanna be call Costa rica . Costa rica . next unto Costa rica , which be a mountainous and the province desolate place , lie the coast of Nicaragua , be inhabit by the Spaniard , and have many good port belong to it , and be frequent with trade of merchandise ; but have no knowledge of the situation thereof , nor of the town therein contain , i surcease to speak any more of it . a certain viceroy of Nueva Espanna call don Luis de Velasco cause certain ship to be build for the discovery of the Malucos and of the coast of China : which ship in sail thitherward find certain the discovery island 80 league distant from the main land , which pmip - the Spaniards , accord to the name of their king , call * mass ' the philippinas : and have conquer one of these island call manilla , inhabit with a barbarous kind the isle of of people , they build a fort and a town thereupon , manilla . from whence they have trade with the people of China . unto these island they have four great ship that usual trade , two of they continual go , and two come : so that such spice and silk as the Portugal bring home out of the east Indies , the very same do the Spaniard bring from these island and from China , for Mexico the chief city of Nueva Espanna . the principali port - town of the coast of Nueva Espanna be Guatulco , and Acapulco . all the viceroy and governor that the king of Spain send for Peru and Nueva Espanna have a custom , for the obtain of his favour , to seek and discover new country . but the great and most notable discovery that have be from those part now of late , be that of the isle of Salomon , which be the discovery find in manner follow . the licenciate Castro be governor of Peru send forth a fleet of ship to ’ discover certain island in the south sea upon the coast of Peru , appoint as general of the same fleet