a discourse of the west Indies and South sea write by Lopez Vaz a Portugal , bear in the city of Elvas , continue unto the year 1587 . wherein among diverse rare thing not hitherto deliver by any other writer , certain voyage of our Englishman be true report : which be intercept with the author thereof at the river of plate , by captain Withrington and captain Christopher Lister , in the fleet set forth by the right honourable the earl of Cumberland for the south sea in the year 1586 . Rancis Drake a Englishman be on the sea , and have knowledge of the small strength of the town of number de dios , come into the harbour on a night with four pinnace , and land a hundred and fifty man : and leave one half of his man with a trumpet in a fort which be there , he with the rest enter the town without do any harm till he come at the market place : and there his company discharge their caliver , and sound their trumpet ( which make a great noise in the town ) be answer by their rellowe in the fort , who discharge and sound in 227 this voyage vias make in the year 1572 . like manner . this attempt put the townsman in such extreme fear , that leave their house , they flee into the mountain , and there bethink themselves what the matter shall be in the town , remain as man amaze at so sudden a alarm . but the Spaniard be man for the most part of good discretion join fourteen or fifteen of they together with their piece , to see who be in the town : and get to a corner of the marketplace they discover the Englishman , and perceive that they be but a few , discharge their piece at they ; and their fortune be such , that they slay the trumpeter , and shoot the captain ( who name be Francis drake ) into the leg : who feel himself hurt retire towards the fort , where he have leave the rest of his man : but they in the fort sound their trumpet , and be not answer again , and hear the caliver discharge in the town , think that their fellow in the town have be slay , and thereupon flee to their pinnace . now Francis Drake ( who his man carry because of his hurt ) when he come to the fort where he leave his man and see they flee , he and the rest of his company be in so great fear , that leave their furniture behind they , and put off their hose , they swim and wade all to their pinnace , and depart forth of the harbour , so that if the Spaniard have follow they , they may have slay they all . thus captain Drake do no more harm at number de dios , neither be there in this skirmish any more than one Spaniarde slay , and of the Englishman only their trumpeter , who they leave behind with his trumpet in his hand . from hence the coast lie all along till you come to Cartagena . between number de dios and Cartagena be a great sound or gulf , where the first Spaniard that ever dwell upon the firm land build and inhabit the town of Dariene : howbeit they abide not long there , because of the unholesomenesse of the place . but captain Drake be discontent with the repulse 228 that the man of number de dios give he , go with his pinnace into the say bay or sound of Dariene , where have conference with certain negro which be run away from their master of Panama and number de dios , he be inform that at the very same time many mule be come from Panama to number de dios lade with gold and silver . upon this news Francis Drake take with he a hundred shot , and the say negro , stay in the way till the treasure come by , accompany and guard only by those that drive the mule , who mistrust nothing at all . when captain Drake meet with they , he take away their gold : but the silver he leave behind , because he can not carry it over the mountain . and two day after this he go to the house of cross call by the Spaniard Venta de cruze , Venta de where all the merchant leave their good , where he slay cruzes - sixe or seven of the merchant , but find neither gold nor silver , but great store of merchandise : and so he fire the say house , with all the good , which be judge to be worth above two hundred thousand ducat . thus not find gold in this house to satisfy his mind , he burn the merchant good , and forthwith recover his pinnace : where fortune so favour his proceed , that he have not be aboard half a hour , but there come to the sea side above three hundred soldier , which be send of purpose to take he : but God suffer he to escape their hand , to be a far plague unto the Spaniard . also another Englishman name John Oxenham hear - JohnOxenham ing what spoil captain Drake have do upon that coast , anno make a voyage thither to enterprise the like . his ship be of burden about a hundred and twenty ton , and he be accompany with seventie person : he have conference also with the foresay negro , but be advertise that the treasure be conduct by soldier , he determine with himself to do that which never any man before dare undertake to do . for be most resolute of his purpose , and not look nor forecast what danger may ensue of this bold enterprise , he land his 229 man in the same place where captain Drake be , and hail his ship to shore , cut down bough of tree , and cover his ship with they , and hide up his great ordinance in the ground . thus leave not one man in his ship , he take two small