country , mean to return by land to Panama , but in the way they all perish , for they be never hear of until this day . so that Francisco Pizarro be leave upon the say island only with thirteen man : who although he have his ship there in which he may have return , yet will he rather die than go back ; and his 13 man also be of his opinion , notwithstanding that they have no other victual , but such as they have from the main land in the night season . thus he continue nine month , before any succour be bring he from Panama : but in the end his ship return with 40 man only and victual : whereupon he prosecute his voyage till he come to the first plain country of Peru call Tumbez , where he find a fort make by the king of Peru against the Indians of the mountain . wherefore Pizarro and his man be very glad in that they have find a people of so good understanding and discretion , be rich also in gold and silver and well apparel . at this port of Tumbez he take 30000 pezo of gold in truck of merchandise : and have too few man to proceed any further he carry two Indians with he to learn the language and return back for Panama . upon this discovery Francisco Pizarro think it expedient to travel into Spain to crave of the king the conquest of this land . whither be come , the king grant his request . and with the money which he carry over with he he hire a great number of man with a fleet of ship , and bring also along with he four of his brethren very valiant and hardy man . And be come to Panama he straightway go on his voyage 280 for Peru , be accompany with his partner Diego de Almagro . they sail first to the island call Isla deal Gallo ; where Francisco pizarroand his brethren go on land , and leave Diego de Almagro in the ship . and the whole number which afterward land on the main land be 60 horseman and 120 footman , with two great fieldpiece . but before we proceed any far , we think it not tir river of amiss to describe unto you the situation of Peru , and the natural disposition of the inhabitant : this country be call Peru by the Spaniard , of a river so name by the Indians , where they first come to the sight of gold . from which river stand under the line , till you come to Copiapo the first town on the coast of Chili , stretch the land of Peru , for the space of eight hundred league : upon six hundred whereof from Atacama to Tumbez do never drop of rain fall , since the flood of Noah : and yet it be the fruitful land for all kind of victual and other necessary for the sustentation of man life that be to be find in all the world beside . the reason why it the cause why rain not in this land be because it be a plain coun - ^ mth not trey and very narrow and low , situate between the ' equinoctial and the tropic of Capricorn , there run on the west frontier not above twenty league from the sea call mar deal Sur eastward thereof , a mighty ridge of high mountain cover with snow , the height of which mountain so draw the moisture of the cloud unto it self , that no rain fall upon the valley of Peru . from these mountain issue great store of river into the south sea , with the water whereof draw by certain sluice and channel they moisten their vineyard and cornfield , and by this mean the land be so exceed fruitful . between these mountain and the mountain of Chili that stretch unto the streit of Magellan , lie a plain of 60 league over , be so cold that it yield no wheat , but good store of other victual . this country of Peru be full of people well apparel and of civil behaviour . it have many mine 281 gold , silver , of gold and moor of silver , as also great store of copper , aft - peur ^ nd and tinne - mine , with abundance of salt peter , and of brimstone . brimstone to make gunpowder . there be likewise cattle the sheep of of all sort , among which there be a beast in shape some - Peru call what resemble a camel , but no big than a steer of a Llamas . year old ; they serve to carry burden , their flesh be good to eat , and their wool apt for many purpose . this beast be account the most profitable of all other for the use of man : howbeit the Spaniard since their first come have replenish this country with horse , cow , sheep , and goat , and likewise with plenty of wheat . so that in few word this land have abundance of riches and victual , and be the healthfull place in the world . there be in time past king of this land which be mighty monarch , who dominion stretch 1200 . league , and their law be very civil , save that they be worshipper of the sun . at what time the Spaniard first enter this land there be two brethren of Atabalipa and the blood royal which strive who shall have the king -^ rethren ^ com d ° me > the one call Guascar , and the other Atabalipa . petitoursfor ' now Guascar have possession of all the mountain and the empire of the land within they : and Atabalipa be lord of all the pen . sea coast , and of the valley situate between the say mountain and the sea . the Indians see the Spaniard at the first arrive upon their shore call they vera coach , which in their language signify , the foam of the sea . also Atabalipa the indian prince send unto they to know what they do in his land , and what they seek for