into the land , the governor of Nueva Granada come against he with a power of man : but Lopez de Agira hope that other soldier will have join themselves unto he , whereby his strength may have be the more , be quite frustrate of his expectation : for even his own man leave he , and take part with the king captain . now see himself thus leave destitute of his soldier , and void of all help , he commit a more unnatural bloody act then ever Nero the tyrant do , for he murder his own 247 great riches hide within the river of Marannon . the coast of Brasill , why it be so call , and by who it be at the first discover . daughter be but sixteen year of age , which he have bring with he out of Peru : the cause why he kill she be , that she may not become a concubine to villain , nor be call the daughter of a traitor : and these word he use unto she , so soon as he have give she her death wound : but before he can finish this cruel act , the soldier come upon he , and cut he in piece , also his daughter die of her wound in that place . thus have you hear the miserable end of this bloody caitiff : in regard of who treacherous and mischievous deal the king will never since suffer this river to be thorough discover ; so that the riches and treasure of the say river remain unknown even until this present day . now leave to discourse any long of this river of Marannon , all the coast between the say river and the river of plate , be call the coast of Brasill , take that name from a kind of wood in the same country , call brasill - wood , whereof there be great store in those part . this coast of Brasill be first discover by Pedro Alvarez Cabral , in the second voyage which the king of Portugal cause to be make to the east Indies : and the foresay Pedro Alvarez take possession of this land for the king of Portugal : whereupon the king don Emanuel hear news thereof send present ship to discover the whole country , and find it to be part of America otherwise call the west Indies : for which cause there grow some controversy between he and the king of Spain : but be kinsman and great friend one to another , they agree in the end , that the king of Portugal shall hold all the country that he have discover , the which be ( as i have say ) from the river of Marannon to the river of plate ; albeit the Spaniard affirm , that it stretch no further than the hand of Santa Catelina ; whereupon there have rise many controversy between the Portugal and Spaniard , which have cost many man their life . 248 there come into the say river of plate in the year 1587 two english ship and a pinnace of the right honourable the earl of Cumberland , which be bind for the strait of Magellan , and ankor ten league within the say river before a little hand lie hard by another call seal - hand . on which hand the captain of one of the ship call Christopher Lister , and his whole company land , find the king of Portugal arm grave on a rock by the sea side ; which be think to have be there engrave by one Martin Alonso de Souza , who be send by the king don Emanuel to discover this coast . therefore i think the Portugal have reason for that which they allege concern the extension of the say coast of Brasil . wherefore the king of Portugal ! give this land to diverse of his gentleman to inhabit . most of the natural inhabitant of this country be very rude , and go stark naked both man and woman , and be maneater ; for which cause they make war one against another to get man to eat ; they be stout and good bowman . the first place inhabit on this coast beyond the river of Maran non be call Fernambuck so name by the Indians , but in Portugal ! it be call Villa de Olinda . before you come to this place there be a port call Parajua , unto which port not many year past the Frenchman hear of the trouble which be then in Portugal resort , and build there a fort ; whereunto certain french ship make yearly voyage to lade brasill - wood . but they of Fernambuck , with the help of the Spaniard , go and burn five french ship within the port , and take the fort it self , and the Frenchman that be there flee part into the mountain , and part of they be slay ; so that since that time the Spaniard have inhabit there till this present . now to return to Fernambuck inhabit by a Portugal captain call Duarte Coelio , it be the great town in all that coast , and have above three thousand house in it , with seventie ingenios for sugar , and great store Fernambuck . a fort build by the Frenchman at Parajua . parajua now inhabit by Spaniards . Fernambuck contain 3000 house . 249 of brasill - wood and abundance of cotton , yet be they in great want of victual : for all their victual come either from Portugal or from some place upon the coast of Brasill . the harbour of this town be a bar harbour , and fit only for small bark : this place belong as yet unto the son of Duarte Coelio . cape S . au - beyond this town lie the cape of Sant Augustin , , and next thereunto be the river of Sant Francisco , which Francisco . 1S a great nver . between this river and naya it be all a wilderness inhabit with cruel savage , for whosoever they take they kill and eat he . the bayhaatowne town of Bayha belong to the king , and therefore ofvcoohmue . governor of all the coast keep