lie about the house , have the fire in the midst . the man go naked , the woman take bulrush , and kemb they after the manner of hemp , and thereof make their loose garment , which be knit about their middle , hang down about their hip , have also about their shoulder a skin of deer , with the hair upon it . Theise woman be very obedient and serviceable to their husband . after they be depart from we , they come and visit we the second time , and bring with they feather and bag of tobacco for present : and when they come to the top of the hill ( at the bottom whereof we have pitch our tent ) they stay they - 119 self : where one appoint for speaker weary himself with make a long oration , which do , they leave their bow upon the hill , and come down with their present . in the mean time the woman remain on the hill , torment themselves lamentable , tear their flesh from their cheek , whereby we perceive that they be about a sacrifice . in the mean time our general with his company go to prayer , and to read of the scripture , at which exercise they be attentive , and seem great to be affect with it : but when they be come unto we , they restore again unto we those thing which before we bestow upon they . the news of our be there be spread through the country , the people that inhabit round about come down , and among they the king himself , a man of a goodly stature , and comely personage , with many other tall and warlike man : before who come be send two ambassador to our general , to signify that their king be come , in do of which message , their speech be continue about half a hour . This end , they by sign request our general to send some thing by their hand to their king , as a token that his come may be in peace : wherein our general have satisfy they , they return with glad tiding to their king , who march to we with a princely majesty , the people cry continual after their manner , and as they draw near unto we , so do they strive to behave themselves in their action with comeliness . in the forefront be a man of a goodly personage , who bear the sceptre or mace before the king , whereupon hang two crown , a less and a big , with three chain of a marvellous length : the crown be make of knit work wrought artificial with feather of diverse colour : the chain be make of a bony substance , and few be the person among they that be admit to wear they : and of that number also the person be 120 stint , as some ten , some 12 . etc next unto he which bear the sceptre , be the king himself , with his guard about his person , clad with conie skin , and other skin : after they follow the naked common sort of people , every one have his face paint , some with white , some with black , and other colour , and have in their hand one thing or another for a present , not so much as their child , but they also bring their present . in the mean time our general gather his man together , and march within his fence place , make against their approach a very warlike show . they be troop together in their order , and a generail salutation be make , there be present a general silence . than he that bear the sceptre before the king , be inform by another , who they assign to that office , with a manly and lofty voice proclaim that which the other speak to he in secret , continue half a hour : which end , and a general amen as it be give , the king with the whole number of man and woman ( the child except ) come down without any weapon , who descend to the foot of the hill , set themselves in order . in come towards our bulwark and tent , the scepter - bearer begin a song , observe his measure in a dance , and that with a stately countenance , who the king with his guard , and every degree of person follow , do in like manner sing and dance , save only the woman , which dance and keep silence . the general permit they to enter within our bulwark , where they continue their song and dance a reasonable time . when they have satisfy themselves , they make sign to our general to sit down , to who the king , and diverse other make several oration , or rather supplication , that he will take their province and kingdom into his hand , and become their king , make sign that they will resign unto he their right and title of the whole land , and become his subject . in which , to persuade we the better , the king and the rest , with one 121 the king consent , and with great reverence , joyful sing a reside hu song , do set the crown upon his head , enrich his kingdom * to neck with all their chain , and offer unto he many sir Francis other thing , honour he by the name of Hioh , drake . add thereunto as it seem , a sign of triumph : which thing our general think not meet to reject , because he know not what honour and profit it may be to our country . wherefore in the name , and to the use of her majesty he take the sceptre , crown , and dignity of the say country into his hand , wish that the riches and treasure thereof may so convenient be transport to the enrich of her kingdom at home , as it abound in you same . the common sort of people leave the king and his guard with our general , scatter themselves together with their sacrifice among our people , take a diligent view of every person : and - such as please their fancy ,