20 of the say month we seize cape victory , the entrance by the which cape be the way into the south sea , call the strait of Magellan , the first discoverer thereof . we find the mouth of the strait to be 52 degree southward of equinoctial . in this strait , we find the sea to have no such current as some do imagine , ( follow the course of the primum mobile from east ordinary to west ) but to ebb and flow as ordinary as upon other inthenrei ^ ht coast > rise 5 fathom upright . the flood rise out ’ of the east ocean , and stretch it self so far into the strait , that it meet the flood of the south sea near about the midst of the strait , where it bend like a elbow , tend to the westnorthwest into the south sea , whereas the east part from the mouth of the strait to this elbow lie south - west and by west , or south - west to 53 degree and j . 30 league within the strait there be 3 island . to the great our general give the name of Elizabeth : to the 2 Bartholomew , because we find it on saint bartholomews abundance of day : the 3 he name saint George island . here we ' go ^ s bland stay one day and victual our self with a kind of in the strait f ° ule which be plentiful in that isle , and who flesh be of Magellan , not far unlike a fat goose here in England : they have no wing , but short pinion which serve their turn in swim . their colour be somewhat black mix with white spot under their belly , and about their neck . they walk so upright , that a far off a man will take they to be little child . if a man approach any thing near they , they run into hole in the ground ( which be not very deep ) whereof the island be full . so that to take they we have staff with hook fast to 158 the end , wherewith some of our man pull they out and other being ready with cudgel do knock they on the head , for they bite so cruel with their crooked bill , that none of we be able to handle they alive . the land on both part be very high : but especial towards the south sea , monstrous high hill and craggy rock do exalt themselves , who top be all hoary with snow , in the month of August , September , and October . notwithstanding the low part of the hill be replenish and beautify with impenetrable thick wood of strange and unknown tree , flourish all the year long . here we make provision of fuel and fresh water , and pass by cape Deseado into the south sea the 6 of September . And run along towards the northwest about 70 league , the wind turn direct against we , with great extremity of foul weather , as rain , hail , snow , and thick fog which continue so more than 3 week , that we can bear no sail , at which time we be drive 57 degr . to the south pole . the 15 of September the moon be there eclipse , and begin to be darken present after the set of the sun , about 6 of the clock at night , be then equinoctial vernal in that country . the say eclipse happen the 16 day in the morning before one of the clock in England , which be about six hour difference , agree to one quarter of the world , from the meridian of England towards the west . the last of September be a very foul night , and the sea sore grow , we lose the marigold , the general ship and the Elizabeth run to the eastward to get the shore , whereof we have sight , the 7 of October , fall into a very dangerous bay full of rock : and there we lose company of m . Drake the same night . the next day very hardly escape the danger of the rock , we put into the strait again , where we anchor in a open bay for the space of 2 day , and make great fierce on the shore , to the end that if m . Drake shall come into the A . D . 1578 . high hill on both side of the strait . cape Deseado where they entered into the south sea . they be drive to degree southward . they loose m . drake company . strait , he may find we . after we go into a is9 they return out of the strait the 11 of November , have enter into the south sea the 6 of September . sant tineent in Brasil in 24 degree . sound , where we stay for the space of 3 week and name it the port of health , for the most part of our man be very sick with long watch , wet , cold , and evil diet , do hear ( God be thank ) wonderful recover their health in short space . here we have very great muscle ( some be 20 inch long ) very pleasant meat , and many of they full of seed - pearl . we come out of this harbour the first of November , give over our voyage by m . winter compulsion ( full sore against the mariner mind ) who allege , he stand in despair , as well to have wind to serve his turn for Peru , as also of m . drake safety . so we come back again through the strait to saint George island , where we take of the fowl before name , and after depart . and thus we pass by cape victory out of the strait the 11 of November , direct our course to the north - east , till the last of this month . what time we arrive at a island which lie at the mouth of the river of plate . upon this island there be such a infinite