( which be the young ) they enclose they about offer their sacrifice unto they with lamentable weep , scratch , and tear the flesh from their face with their nail , whereof issue abundance of blood . but we use sign to they of dislike this , and stay their hand from force , and direct they upward to the live God , the like they who only they ought to worship . they show unto do in Hoche - we their wound , and crave help of they at our hand , whereupon we give they lotion , plaster , and ointments , agree to the state of their grief , beseech God to cure their disease . Every three day they bring their sacrifice unto we , until they understand our meaning , that we have no pleasure in they : yet they can not be long absent from we , but daily frequent our company to the hour of our departure , which departure seem so grievous unto they , that their joy be turn into sorrow . they entreat we , that be absent we will remember they , and by stealth provide a sacrifice , which we mislike . our necessary business be end , our general with his company travail up into the country to their 122 village , where we find herd of deer by 1000 in great herd a company , be most large , and fat of body . of deer . we find the whole country to be a warren of a abundance of strange kind of cony , their body in bigness as be stran & continue ™ 5 - the Barbary cony , their head as the head of we , the foot of a want , and the tail of a rat be of great length : under her chin be on either side a bag , into the which she gather her meat , when she have fill her belly abroad . the people eat their body , and make great account of their skin , for their king coat be make of they . our general call this country Nova Albion , and Nova Albion . that for two cause : the one in respect of the white bank and cliff , which lie towards the sea : and the other , because it may have some affinity with our country in name , which sometime be so call . there be no part of earth here to be take up , gold and wherein there be not some probable show of gold or r ° earth of Nova S11V5 - , , „ Albion . at our departure hence our general set up a monument of our be there , as also of her majesty right and title to the same , namely a plate , nail upon a fair great post , whereupon be engrave her majesty name , the day and year of our arrival there , with the free give up of the province and people into her majesty hand , together with her highness picture and arm , in a piece of six penny of current english money under the plate , whereunder be also write the name of our general . it seem that the Spaniard hitherto have never be their deparin this part of the country , neither do ever discover ture - the land by many degree , to the southward of this place .. October . after we have set sail from hence , we continue certain without sight of land till the 13 . day of October island in % , follow , which day in the morning we fall with certain island 8 . degree to the northward of the line , qanoas > i ^ e from which island come a great number of canoas , those of Java . 123 have in some of they 4 . in some 6 . and in some also 14 . man , bring with they coco , and other fruit . their canoas be hollow within , and cut with great art and cunning , be very smooth within and without , and bear a glass as if it be a horn dainty burnish , have a prow , and a stern of one sort , yield inward circlewise , be of a great height , and full of certain white shell for a bravery , and on each side of they lie out two piece of timber about a yard and a half long , more or less , accord to the smallness , or bigness of the boat . this people have the nether part of their ear cut into a round circle , hang down very low upon their cheek , whereon they hang thing of a reasonable weight . the nail of their hand be a inch long , their tooth be as black as pitch , and they renew they often , by eat of a herb with a kind of powder , which they always carry about they in a cane for the same purpose . island . leave this island the night after we fall with it , the 18 . of October , we light upon diverse other , some whereof make a great show of inhabitant . we continue our course by the island of Tagulada , Zelon , and Zewarra , be friend to the Portugal , the first whereof have grow in it great store of cinnamom . November . the 14 . of November we fall with the island of Maluco , which day at night ( have direct our course to run with Tydore ) in coast along the island of mutyr , belong to the king of ternate , his deputy or vice - king see we at sea , come with his Canoa to we without all fear , and come aboard , and after some conference with our general , will he in any wise to the isle of run in with ternate , and not with Tydore , assure ternate . hjm tjiat the king will be glad of his come , and will be ready to do what he will require , for which purpose he himself will that night be with the king , and tell he the news , with who if he once deal , he 124 shall find that as he be a king , so his word shall stand : add further , that if he