country , out of which ten they choose the valiant man for the general in the war . the king of Peru in time past can never conquer this part of Chili , nor yet any other king of the Indians . the weapon use by these people of Arauco be long pike , halberd , bow and arrow : they also make they jack of seal - skin , and head - piece : in time past the head of their halberd and pike be of brass , but now they have get store of iron . they pitch their battle in manner like the Christians : for put their pikeman in rank , they place bowman among they , and marshal their troop with discretion and great valour . now the Spaniard come unto this province send word unto they by other Indians , say that they be the child of God , and come to teach they the word of God , and that therefore they ought to yield themselves unto they : if not , they will shoot fire among they and burn they . Theise people not fear the great word of the Spaniard , but desire to see that which they have hear report , meet they in the field , and fight a most cruel battle : but by reason of the Spaniard great ordinance and caliver , they be in the end put to flight . now these Indians think very that the Spaniard be the child of God , because of their great ordinance which make such a noise , and breathe out such flame of fire , yield themselves unto they . So the Spaniard have divide this province make the Indians to serve their turn for get of gold out of the mine , which they enjoy in such abundance , that he which have least have 20000 pezo , but captain Baldivia himself have 300000 pezo 275 Villa neuva de la Serena , la Concepcion , Sant lag ) , la imperial , Baldivia , la villa rica , the first six town that wereinhdbit in Chili . a stratagem of the Indians of Chili against the Spaniard . the death of Baldivia . by the year . the fame of these riches in the end be spread as far as Spain ; from whence soon after resort many Spaniards to the land of Chili , who captain Baldivia cause to inhabit six town : to wit , villa nueva de la Serena call in the indian tongue coquimbo ; the second sant Iago which the Indians call Mapocha ; the three la Concepcion call by the indian penco ; the four la Imperial ; the five Baldivia ; and the sixth la villa Rica . also he build a fort in the middle of all the land , wherein he put ordinance and soldier ; howbeit all this their good success continue not long : for the indian in short time perceive that the Spaniard be but mortali man as well as they , determine to rebel against they : wherefore the first thing that they do , they carry grass into the say fort for the Spaniard horse , and wood also for they to burn , among which grass the Indians convey bow and arrow with great club . this do , fifty of the indian enter the fort , betake themselves to their bow , arrow , and club , and stand in the gate of the say fort : from whence make a sign unto other of their nation for help , they win the fort , and slay all the Spaniard . the news of this overthrow come to the town of Concepcion where captain Baldivia be , he present set forth with two hundred horseman to seek the Indians , take no more man with he , because he be in haste . and in a plain he meet the indian , who come of purpose also to seek he , and compass he about , slay most part of his company , the rest escape by the swiftness of their horse : but Baldivia have his horse slay under he be take alive . who the Indians wish to be of a good courage , and to fear nothing ; for the cause ( say they ) why we have take you , be to give you gold enough . and have make a great banquet for he , the last service of all be a cup full of melt gold , which the Indians force he to drink , say , now glut thy self with gold , and so they kill he . This Baldivia be a most valiant man , who have be a 276 old soldier in the war of Italy , and at the sack of Rome . upon this discomfiture the Spaniard choose for their captain one Pedro de Villa grande : who assemble Pedro de all the Spaniard in Chili , and take with he ten s " ande - peece of ordinance , march against those Indians ; but with so bid success , that he lose not only the field and many of his man , but also those ten piece of ordinance which he bring . the Indians have thus get the victory , go straightway against the town of Concepcion , from whence the Spaniard flee for fear , and leave the town desolate . and in this manner be the Spaniard chase by the Indians out of the country of Arauco . but news hereof be bring to the mark of Cannete viceroy of Peru , he send his sdnne don d ° n Garda de Garcia de Mendoza against those Indians , with a great power of horseman , and footman , and store of artillery . the nobleman have subdue Chili again , and slay in diverse battle above 40000 Indians , and bring they the second time under the Spaniard subjection , new erect the say fort that stand in the midst of the land , inhabit the town of Concepcion again , and build other town for the Spaniard : and so leave the land in peace , he return for Peru . but year he be clean depart out of the land the indian rebel again , but can not do so much