along the shore , until we come into 48 . degree . it be a steep 48 degree . beach all along . the 17 . day of December in the afternoon we enter into a harbour , where our admiral go in first : wherefore our general name the say harbour port port desire . desire : in which harbour be a hand or two , where there be wonderful great store of seal , and another hand of bird which be grey gull . Theise seal be of a seal strange wonderful great bigness , huge , and monstrous of ™ d0 ? 6 antl shape , and for the forepart of their body can be come - * ' pare to any thing better than to a lion : their head , and neck , and forepart of their body be full of rough hair : their foot be in manner of a fin , and in form like 295 unto a man hand : they breed and cast every month , give their young milk , yet continual get they their rmg seal live in the sea , and live altogether upon fish : their young be very good be marvelous good meat , and be boil or roast , ‘ be hardly to be know from lamb or mutton . the old one be of such bigness and force , that it be as much as 4 . man be able to do to kill one of they with great cowl - stave : and he must be beat down with strike on the head of he : for his body be of that bigness that four man can never kill he , but only on the head . for be shot through the body withan harquebus or a musket , yet he will go his way into the sea , and never fowl breed - care for it at the present . also the fowl that be in there , be very good meat , and great store of they : canted * encage they have burrow in the ground like cony , for they we call these can fly . they have nothing but down upon their fowl pen - pinion : they also fish and feed in the sea for their live , and breed on shore . this harbour be a very good place to trim ship in , and to bring they on ground , and grave they in : for they grave there eb and flow much water : therefore we and trim gravecl and trim all our ship there . t etr s tp . the of p ) ecem ^ er be Christmas even , a man and a boy of the rear - admiral go some forty score from our ship into a very fair green valley at the foot of the mountain , where be a little pit or well which our man have dig and make some 2 . or 3 . day before to get fresh water : for there be none in all the harbour ; and this be but brackish : therefore this man and boy come thither to wash their linen : and be in wash at the say well , there be great store of Indians which be come down , and find the say man and boy in wash . Theise Indians be divide on each side i man and a of the rock , shoot at they with their arrow and hurt ne ence ^ they both , but they flee present , be about fifty or negigence . threescore , though our general follow they but with 16 . or 20 . man . the man name which be hurt be John Garge , the boy name be lutch : the man be shoot 296 clean through the knee , the boy into the shoulder : either of they have very sore wound . their arrow be make of little cane , and their head be of a flint stone , set into the cane very artificial : they seidome or never see any Christians : they be as wild as ever be a buck or any other wild beast : for we follow they , and they run from we as it have be the wild thing in the world . we take the measure of one of their foot , kind ° f and it be 18 . inch long . their use be when any of synthem dye , to bring he or they to the cliff by the seaside , and upon the top of they they bury they , and in their grave be bury with they their bow and arrow , and all their jewel which they have in their life time , which be fine shell which they find by the sea side , which they cut and square after a artificiali manner : and all be lay under their head . the grave be make all with great stone of great length and bigness , be set all along full of the dead man dart which he use when he be live . and they colour both their dart and their grave with a red colour which they use in colour of themselves . the 28 of December we depart out of the port of their depardesire , and go to a hand which lie 3 . league to the southward of it ; where we trim our save ’ penguin with salt for victual all that and the next day , and depart along the coast Southwest and by south . the 30 . day we fall with a rock which lie about 5 . league from the land , much like unto Ediestone , which lie off the sound of Plymouth , and we sound , and have 8 . fathom rocky ground , within a mile thereof : the rock bear west Southwest . we go coast along south Southwest , and find great store of seal all along the coast . this rock stand in 48 . degree to the southward of the line . the 2 . day of Januarie we fall with a very fair white January cape , which stand in 51 . degree , and have 7 . fathom r587 - water a league off the land . 297 they enter the strait the 6 . rf Januarie . a Spaniard take in the strait of Magellan . the bark John Thomas one of