; where , as it seem , they have keep watch either at the water side , or at the house , or else at both , and be new go out of the house , have so short warn , that they leave the meat both boil and rest at the fire and be flee with their treasure with they , or else bury it where it can not be find , be also in the night . our company take hen and such thing as we think good , and come away . the 29 day of May our general go in the ship - a little island boat into a little island there by , whereas the say cacique np ™ a unt0 which be the lord of Puna , have cause all the hang - ’ ing of his chamber , which be of cordovan leather all guild over , and paint very fair and rich , with all his household stuff , and all the ship tackle which be ride in the road at our come in , with great store of nail , spike of iron , and very many other thing to be convey : all which we find , and bring away what our general think requisite for the ship business . 3 * 5 the I | will of Puna be almost as big as the lie of wight . Cotton tree . a excellent orchard . this hand be very pleasant for all thing requisite , and fruitful : but there be no mine of gold nor silver in it . there be at the least 200 house in the town about the caciques palace , and as many in one or two town more upon the hand , which be almost as big as the he of wight in England . there be plant on the one side of the caciques house a fair garden , with all herb grow in it , and at the low end a well of fresh water , and round about it be trees ' set , whereon bombasin cotton grow after this manner : the top of the tree grow full of cod , out of which the cotton grow , and in the cotton be a seed of the bigness of a pease , and in every codde there be seven or eight of these seed : and if the cotton be not gather when it be ripe , than these seed fall from it , and spring again . there be also in this garden figtree which bear continual , also pompion , melon , cucumber , radish , rosemary and thyme , with many other herb and fruit . at the other end of the house there be also another orchard , where grow orange sweet and sour , limmons , pomegranate and lymes , with diverse other fruit . there be very good pasture ground in this hand ; and withal many horse , ox , bullock , sheep very fat and fair , great store of goat which be very tame , and be use continual to be milk . they have moreover abundance of pigeon , turkey , and duck of a marvellous bigness . there be also a very large and great church hard by the caciques house , whither he cause all the Indians in the hand to come and hear mass : for he himself be make a Christian when he be marry to the spanish woman before speak of , and upon his conversion he cause the rest of his subject to be christen . in this church be a high altar with a crucifix , and five bell hang in the nether end thereof . we burn the church and bring the bell away . 316 by this time we have hale on ground our admiral , and have make she clean , burn her keel , pitch and tar she , and have hale she on float again . and in the mean while continual keep watch and ward in the great house both night and day . the second day of June in the morning , by and by after break of day , every one of the watch be go abroad to seek to fetch in victual , some one way , some another , some for hen , some for sheep , some for goat , upon the sudden there come down upon we a hundred spanish soldier with musket and a ensign , which be land on the other side of the hand that night , and all the Indians of the hand with they , every one with weapon and their baggage after they : which be by mean of a negro , who name be Emmanuel , which flee from we at our first land there . thus be take at advantage we have the worst : for our company be not pass sixteen or twenty ; whereof they have slay one or two before they be come to the house : yet we skirmish with they a hour and a half : ’ at the last be sore overcharge with multitude , we be drive down from the hill to the water side , and there keep they play a while , until in the end Zacharie Saxie , who with his halberd have keep the way of the hill , and slay a couple of they , as he breathe himself be somewhat tire , have a honourable death and a short : for a shot strike he to the heart : who feel himself mortal wound cry to God for mercy , and fall down present dead . but soon after the enemy be drive somewhat to retire from the bank side to the green : and in the end our boat come and carry as many of our man away as can go in she , which be in hazard of sink while they hasten into it : and one of our man who name be Robert Maddock be shoot through the head with his own piece , be a snaphance , as he be haste into the boat . but four of we be left behind which the boat can not carry : to wit , my self 317 A . D . 1587 . the second grave of their shift . the first skirmish with the Spaniard . z . acharie saxie slay honorable . Robert Maddock slay with his own