away at our first come ; and at length come aboard our pinnace upon captain Havers word of safe return . we carry he to the river of Copalita where our ship ride : and when he come to our general , he cause he to be set on shore in safety the same night , because he come upon the captain word . the 28 day we set sail from Copalita , because the sea be so great there , that we can not fill water , and run the same night into the road of Aguatulco . the 29 our general land and go on shore with thirty man two mile into the wood , where we take a mestizo , who name be Michael the Truxillo , who be customer of that town , and we find with he two chamber full of his stufie : we bring he 320 and his stuff aboard . and whereas i say he be a Mestizo , it be to be understand that a mestizo be one which have a Spaniard to his father and a indian to his mother . the second day of August , we have water , and examine the say Mestizo , and set he on shore again and depart from the port of Aguatulco the same night , which stand as i say before in 15 degree and 40 minute to the northward of the line . here we overslip the haven of Acapulco , from whence the ship be set forth for the philippinas . the four and twenty day of August , our general with 30 of we go with the pinnace unto a haven call Puerto de Natividad , where we have intelligence by Michael Sancius that there shall be a pinnace , but before we can get thither the say pinnace be go to fish for pearl 12 league far , as we be inform by certain Indians which we find there . we take a mullato in this place , in his bed , which be send with letter of advice concern we along the coast , of Nueva Galicia , who horse we kill , take his letter , leave he behind , set fire on the house , and burn two new ship of 200 ton the piece , which be in build there on the stock , and come aboard of our ship again . the six and twenty day of August , we come into the bay of saint Iago , where we water at a fresh river , along which river many plantan be grow : here be great abundance of fresh fish . here also certain of our ourdeparture from Aguatulco . Puerto de Natividad in 19 degree . thethirdposte of advice take . Puerto de Natividad burn . two new ship burn . the river of Sant Iago . company drag for pearl and catch some quantity . pearl take . the second of September we depart from Sant Iago at four of the clock in the evening . this bay of Sant Iago stand in nineteen degree and eighteen minute to the northward of the line . the 3 of September we arrive in a little bay a league to the westward off port de Natividad call Malacca , and a3 ° f which be a very good place to ride in : and the same day Malacca . about twelve of the clock our general land with xi 321 the isle of Sant Andrew . i guanos good meat . Massatlan in 2 3 degree , and a half . thirty man or there about , and go up to a town of Indians which be two league from the road , which town be call Acatlan : there be in it about 20 or 30 house and a church , which we deface and come aboard again the same night . all the people be flee out of the town at the sight of we . the four of September , we depart from the road of Malacca , and sail along the coast . the 8 we come to the road of Chaccalla , in which bay there be two little house by the water side . this bay be 18 league from the cape de los Corrientes . the 9 in the morning our general send up captain Havers with forty man of we before day , and Michael Sancius be our guide , we go unto a place about two league up into the country in a most villainous desert path through the wood and wilderness : and in the end we come to a place where we take three householder with their wife and child and some Indians , one carpenter which be a Spaniard , and a Portugal , we bind they all and make they to come to the sea side with we . our general make their wife to fetch we plantan , lemon , and orange , pineapple and other fruit whereof they have abundance , and so let their husband depart , except Sembrano the spanish carpenter , and Diego the Portugal ; and the ten day we depart the road . the twelve day we arrive at a little island call the isle of Sant Andrew , on which there be great store of foul and wood : where we dry and salt as many of the fowl as we think good : we also kill there abundance of seal , and iguanos which be a kind of serpent , with four foot , and a long sharp tail , strange to they which have not see they ; but they be very good meat . we rid here until the seventeenth day , at which time we depart . the 24 day we arrive in the road of Massatlan , which stand in 23 degree just under the Tropic 322 of Cancer : it be a very great river within , but it be bar at the mouth : and upon the north side of the bar without , be good fresh water : but there be very evil fill of it ; because at a low water it be shall half a mile off the shore . there be great store of fresh fish in that bay : and good fruit up into the country , whereof we have some , though not without danger . the seven and twenty day of September , we depart from the road of