a fowl piece . they differ very much from our partridge which be in England both in bigness and also in colour . for they be within a little as big as a hen , and be of a ash colour , and live in covy twelve , sixteen , and twenty together : you can go ten or twelve score but you shall see or spring one or two covy at the least . there be likewise no less store of fesant in the island , great store of which be also marvelous big and fat , surpass those fesants - which be in our country in bigness and in number of a company . they differ not very much in colour from the partridge before speak of . we find moreover in this place great store of guinie turkle in cock , which we call turkey , of colour black and white , ereatluant ^ t - with red head : they be much about the same bigness which we be off in England : their egg be white , and as big as a Turkey egg . there be in this island thousand of goat , which the exceed Spaniards call cabritos , which be very wild : you shall number of see one or two hundred of they together , and sometime s ° ati ' you may behold they go in a flock almost a mile long . some of they , ( whether it be the nature of the breed of they , or of the country i wot not ) be as big as 345 a ass , with a main like a horse and a beard hang down to the very ground : they will climb up the cliff which be so steep that a man will think it a thing unpossible for any live thing to go there . we take and kill many of they for all their swiftness : for there be thousand of they upon the mountain . here be in like manner great store of swine which be very wild and very fat , and of a marvelous bigness : they keep altogether upon the mountain , and will very seidome abide any man to come near they , except it be by mere chance when they be find asleep , or otherwise , accord to their kind , be take lay in the mire . we find in the house at our come 3 . slave which be negro , and one which be bear in the island of Java , which tell we that the east indian fleet , which be in number 5 . sail , the least whereof be in burden 8 . or 900 . ton , all lade with spice and calicut cloth , with store of treasure and very rich stone and pearl , be go from the say island of saint Helena but 20 . day before we come thither . this island have be find of long time by the por - tugals , and have be altogether plant by they , for their refresh as they come from the east Indies . and when they come they have all thing plentiful for their relief , by reason that they suffer none to inhabit there that may spend up the fruit of the island , except some very few sick person in their company , which they stand in doubt will not live until they come home , who they leave there to refresh themselves , and take away the year follow the other fleet if they live so long . they touch here rather in their come home from the east Indies , then at their go thither , because they be thorough furnish with corn when they set out of Portugal , but be but mean victual at their come from the Indies , where there grow little corn . the 20 . day of June have take in wood and water and refresh our self with such thing as we find there , 346 1588 . and make clean our ship , we set sail about 8 . of the clock in the night towards England . at our set sail we have the wind at southeast , and we hale away northwest and by west . the wind be common off the shore at this island of saint Helena . on Wednesday be the third day of July we go July 1588 . away northwest the wind be still at southeast ; at which time we be in 1 . degree and 48 minute to the southward of the equinoctial line . the twelve day of the say month of July it be very little wind , and towards night it be calm and blow no wind at all , and so continue until it be Monday , be the 15 . day of July . on Wednesday the 17 . day of the abovesaid month we have the wind scant at west northwest . we find the wind continual to blow at east , and Northeast , and eastnortheast after we be in 3 . or 4 . degree to the northward ; and it alter not until we come between 30 . and 40 . degree to the northward of the equinoctial line . on Wednesday the 21 . day of August the wind come up at Southwest a fair gale : by which day at noon we be in 38 . degree of northerly latitude . on Friday in the morning be the 23 . day of August , at four of the clock we hale east , and east and by south for the northermost island of the azore . on Saturday the 24 . day of the say month by 5 . of the clock in the morning we fall in sight of the two island of Flores and Corvo stand in 39 degree and Corvo and flo - and sail away Northeast . reptwoyland the three of September we meet with a flemish hulk e zores ' which come from Lisbon , and declare unto we the overthrow of the spanish fleet , to the singular rejoice and comfort of we all . the 9 of September , after a terrible tempest which carry away most part of our sail , by the merciful favour of the almighty we recover our long wish port of Plymouth in England , from whence we set forth at the begin of our voyage .