their town be marvelous artificial descrip - builded with mud wall , and build round , with their yard pale in and keep very clean as well in their ’ street as in their house . Theise negro use good obedience to their king , as one of our man say , which be with they in pawn for the negro which come first . there be in their town by estimation about one hundred house . the first of September there go many of our man on shore at the water place , and do wash shirt very quiet all the day : and the second day they go again , and the negro be in ambush round about the place : and the carpenter of the admiral go into the wood to do some speciali business , espy they by good fortune . but the negro rush out upon our man so sudden , that in retire to our boat , many of they be hurt : among who one William Pickman a soldier be shoot into the thigh , who pluck the arrow out , break it , and leave the head behind ; and he tell the chirurgeon that he pluck out all the arrow , because he will not have they lance his thigh : whereupon the poison wrought so that night , that he be marvelous swell , and all his belly and privy part be as black as ink , and the next morning he die , the piece of the arrow with the poison be pluck out of his thigh . the three day of the say month , diverse of our fleet go up 4 mile within the harbour with our boat , and catch great store of fish , and go on shore and take Limmons from the tree , and come aboard again , see two Bufles . the 6 . day we depart from Sierra leona , and go out of the harbour , and stay one tide 3 . league from the September . many of our man hurt by Negros . William Pickman die of a poison arrow . this poison be the juice of a herb . 2 buffet . their departure from Sierra leona . 293 A . D . 1586 . point of the mouth of the harbour in 6 . fathom , and it flow south Southwest . on Wednesday be the 7 . of the same month the isle of Madrabumba inhabit by ' Negros . we depart from one of the isle of cape Verde , alias the isle of Madrabumba , which be 10 . league distant from the point of Sierra leona : and about five of the clock the same night we anchor 2 . mile off the hand in 6 . fathom water , and land the same night , and find plantan only upon the island . the 8 . day one of our boat go out and sound round about the hand , 8c they pass through a sound at the west end of the hand , where they find 5 . fathom round about the hand , until they come unto the very gut of the sound , and then for a cast or two they have but two fathom , and present after , 6 . fathom , and so deep and deep . and at the east end of the hand a town . there be a town , where negro do use at sometime , as we perceive by their provision . there be no fresh water on all the south side , as we can perceive , but on the north side three or four very fresh water . good place of fresh water : and all the whole hand be a wood , save certain little place where their house stand , which be environ round about with plantan - tree , whereof the fruit be excellent meat . this place be subject marvelous much to thunder , rain , and lightning in this month . i think the reason be , because the sun ne be so near the line equinoctial . on Saturday the ten we depart from the say hand about 3 . of the clock in the afternoon , the wind be at the southwest . October . cape Frio in Brasil . the last of October run west Southwest about 24 . league from cape Frio in Brasile , we fall with a great mountain which have a high round knop on the top of it stand from it like a town , with two little hand from it . November . S . Sebastian hand . the first of November we go in between the hand of saint Sebastian and the main land , and have our thing on shore , and set up a forge , and have our 294 cask on shore : our cooper make hoop , and so we remain there until the 23 . day of the same month : in which time we fit our thing , build our pinnace , and fill our fresh water . and while our pinnace be in building , there come a Canoa from the river of Jenero , the river of meaning to go to saint Vincent , wherein be six naked jenero - slave of the country people , which do row the Canoa , and one Portugal . and the Portugal know Christopher hare master of the admiral , for that master hare have be at saint Vincent in the minion of London in the year 1581 . And think to have John whithal the Englishman which dwell at saint Vincent come unto we , which be twenty league from this harbour with some other , thereby to have have some fresh victual , we suffer the Portugal to go with a letter unto he , who promise to return or send some answer within ten day , for that we tell he we be merchant , and will traffic with they : but we never receive answer from he any more ; and see that he come not accord to appointment , our business be dispatch we weigh anchor , and set sail from saint Sebastian on the 23 . of November . the 16 . day of December we fall with the coast of America in 47 . degree the land bear west from we ® ecemter - about 6 . league off : from which place we run