do , we return to our ship the like way that we think their town shall be : so we travail all the day long , not see any man , but we meet with many wild dog : yet there be two hundred horseman abroad that same day by mean of the Spaniard which they have take the day before from we , who have tell they that our force , be but small , and that we be wonderful weak ; who though they do espy we that day , yet dare they not give the onset upon we . for we march along in array , and observe good order , whereby we seem a great number more than we be , until we come unto our ship that night again . the next day be the first of April 1587 , our man go on shore to fill water at a pit which be a quarter of a mile from the water side : and be early hard at their business be in no readiness . in which mean while there come pour down from the hill almost 200 horseman , and before our people can return to the rock from the water place , twelve of they be cut off , part kill , and part take prisoner , the rest be rescue by our soldier xi 305 u A . D . I587 . our man march 7 or 8 mile into their enemy land . which come from the rock to meet with they , who be but fifteen of we that have any weapon on shore , yet we make the enemy retire in the end with loss of Spaniards some four and twenty of their man , after we have > latne ’ skirmish with they a hour . the name of our man that be slay be these . kill out of the huge gallant . Thomas Lucas of London , soldier . it Richard Wheeler of London . Robert pitcher of Norffolke , soldier . out of the John Langston of Glocestershire . [ admiral . William Kingman of Dorsetshire , soldier . William hill of Cornwall . 1 William byet of Weymouth . 1 kill out of 2 Laurence Gamesby , of Newcastle . j the vice adm . 1 Henry blackenal of Weymouth . 2 William Stevens of Plymmouth , gunner . 3 William pit of shereborne in Dorsetshire . 4 Humphrey Derrick of London . after the loss of these man , we rid in the road , and water in despite of they with good watch and ward , until the five of the say month . the five day we depart out of this bay of Quintero : a little hand and off from the bay there lie a little hand about a full of pen - league distant , whereon there be great store of penguin and other fowl ; whereof we take to serve our turn , and sail away north and north and by west : for so lie the coast along in this place . Mom ' the fifteen we come thwart of a place which be call de ^ es ’ anda Morro moreno , which stand in 23 degree % , and be a i ^ e . 1 a excellent good harbour : and there be a island which make it a harbour : and a ship may go in at either end of the island : here we go with our general on shore to the number of 30 man : and at our go on shore upon our land , the Indians of the place come down from the rock to meet with we , with fresh water and wood on their back . they be in marvellous awe 306 of the Spaniard , and very simple people , and live marvellous savage : for they bring we to their biding about two mile from the harbour , where we see their woman and lodging , which be nothing but the skin of some beast lay upon the ground : and over they in stead of house , be nothing but five or six stick lay across , which stand upon two fork with stick on the ground and a few bough lay on it . their diet be raw fish , which stink most vile . and when any of they die , they bury their bow and arrow ‘ with they , with their canoa and all that they have : for we open one of their grave , and see the order of they . their canoas or boat be marvellous artificial make of two skin mostarti - like unto bladder , and be blow full at one end with butt . quill : they have two of these bladder blow full , which be sow together and make fast with a sinew of some wild beast ; which when they be in the water swell , so that they be as tight as may be . they go to sea in these boat , and catch very much fish with they , and pay much of it for tribute unto the Spaniard : but tribute pay they use it marvellous beastly . in fish . the 23 in the morning we take a small bark which bark . come out of Arica ride , which we keep and call the George : the man rorsooke it , and go away with their 7 ^ George . boat . our admiral pinnace follow the boat , and the huge gallant boat take the bark : our admiral pinnace can not recover the boat before it get on shore , but go along into the road of Arica , and lay aboard a aricastand great ship of a hundred ton ride in the road in right afore the town , but all the man and good be take . go out of it , only the bare ship be leave alone . they make three or four very fair shot at the pinnace as she be come in , but miss she very narrow with a minion shoot which they have in the fort . whereupon we come into the road with the admiral and the huge gallant : but the content which be viceadmiral be behind out of sight : by mean whereof , and for want of her boat to land man withal we land not : otherwise 307 if we have be together ,