dare not for lack of ground tackle : to bear sail we doubt , the tempest be so furious , and our sail so bad . the pinnace come room with we , and tell we that she have receive many grievous sea , and that her rope do every hour fail she , so as they can not tell what shift to make : we be unable in any sort to help they , stand under our corpse in view of the lee - shore , still expect our ruinous end . 404 the four of October the storm grow beyond all reason furious , the pinnace be in the wind of we , strike sudden ahull , so that we think she have receive some grievous sea , or spring a leak , or that her sail fail she , because she come not with we : but we dare not hull in that unmerciful storm , but sometime try under our main coarse , sometime with a haddock of our sail , for our ship be very leeward , and most laboursome in the sea . this night we lose the pinnace , and never see she again . the five , our foresail be split , and all to turn : than our master take the mizzen , and bring it to the foremast , to make our ship work , and with our spritsail we mend our foresail , the storm continue without all reason in fury , with hail , snow , rain , and wind such and so mighty , as that in nature it can not possible be moor , the sea such and so lofty , with continual breach , that many time we be doubtful whether our ship do sink or swim . the ten of October be by the account of our captain and master very near the shore , the weather dark , the storm furious , and most of our man have give over to travel , we yield our self to death , without further hope of succour . our captain sit in the gallery very pensive , i come and bring he some rosa solis to comfort he ; for he be so cold , that he be scarce able to move a joint . after he have drink , and be comfort in heart , he begin for the ease of his conscience to make a large repetition of his forepass time , and with many grievous sigh he conclude in these word : oh most glorious God , with who power the mighty thing among man be matter of no moment , i most humble beseech thou , that the intolerable burden of my sin may through the blood of Jesus Christ be take from i : and end our day with speed , or show we some merciful sign of thy love and our preservation . have thus end , he desire i not to make know to any of the company 405 A . D . 1592 - the black pinnace lose in the south sea . his intolerable grief and anguish of mind , because they shall not thereby be dismay . and so sudden , before i go from he the sun shine clear ; so that he and the master both observe the true elevation of the pole , whereby they know by what course to recover the strait . wherewithal ! our captain and master be so revive , and give such comfortable speech to the company , that every man rejoice , as though we have receive a present deliverance . the next day be the 11 of October , we see Cabo Deseado be the cape on the south shore ( the north shore be nothing but a company of dangerous rock , isle , and shold . ) this cape be within two league to leeward off we , our master great doubt , that we can not double the same : whereupon the captain tell he : you see there be no remedy , either we must double it , or before noon we must die : therefore loose your sail , and let we put it to God mercy . the master be a man of good spirit resolute make quick dispatch and set sail . our sail have not be half a hour aboard , but the footrope of our foresail break , so that nothing hold but the eyelet hole . the sea continual break over the ship poop , and fly into the sail with such violence , that we still expect the tear of our sail , or oversetting of the ship , and withal to our utter discomfort , we perceive that we fall still more and more to leeward , so that we can not double the cape : we be not we come within half a mile of the cape , and so near the shore , that the counter - suff of the sea will rebound against the ship side , so that we be much dismay with the horror of our present end . be thus at the very pinch of death , the wind and sea rage beyond measure , our master vear some of the main sheate ; and whether it be by that occasion , or by some current , or by the wonderful power of God , as we very think it be , the ship quicken her way , and shoot past that rock , where we think she will have shore . then between 406 last voyage of Thomas candish a . d . the cape and the point there be a little bay ; so that we be somewhat far from the shore : and when we be come so far as the cape , we yield to death : yet our good God the father of all mercy deliver we , and we double the cape about the length of our ship , or very little moor . be shoot past the cape , we present take in our sail , which only God have preserve unto we : and when we be shoot in between the high land , the wind blow trade , without any inch of sail , we spoon before the sea , three man be not able to guide the helm , and in six hour we be put five