anchor in on the coast of new Spain . item , you may anchor in the port of Aguatulco in six fathom water : and a southsouthwest wind be fathom 6 . the worst . item , you may anchor in the port of saint Iago in 6 fathom 6 . fathom water : and a westsouthwest wind be the worst . item , you may anchor in the port of Natividad in 8 fathom 8 . fathom water : and a southeast wind be the worst . item , you may anchor on the bay of Xalisco in 9 fathom 9 fathom water : and a westsouthwest wind be the worst . item , you may anchor on the northwest part of the island of saint Andrew in 17 fathom water . fathom 17 . item , you may anchor under the island of Chiametlan in 4 fathom water : and a southeast wind be the worst . fathom 4 . item , you may anchor in the port of saint Lucas on the cape of California in 12 fathom water : and a fathom 12 . southeast wind be the worst . a note of what depth we anchor in , among the island of the philippinas . item , you may anchor on the southwest part of the island of Capul in 6 fathom water : and a west - fathom 6 . southwest wind be the worst . item , you may anchor all along the south part of the island of Panna in shall water , in the depth of io or 12 fathom . fathom 10 . item , you may anchor in the bay of Lago grande in seven fathom water , which bay be on the south side of the island of Panna . item , you may anchor at the east end of Java major in 16 fathom water , and a eastsoutheast wind be the fathom 16 . worst . item , you may anchor on the north part of the island of Santa Helena in 12 fathom water . fathom 12 . 373 * to you south side of the equinoctial . a note of our find of the wind for the most part of our voyage 1586 . n primis , from the 21 day of July unto the 19 day of August we find the wind at Northnortheast , be in the latitude of 7 degree . item , from the 19 day of August unto the 28 day of September , we find the wind for the most part be between the west and the southwest , be in * 24 degree . item , from the 28 day of September unto the 30 day of October , we find the wind between the north - east and the eastnortheast . item , from the 23 of November , from the island of saint Sebastian , unto the 30 day of November , we find the wind between the southeast and the southsoutheast , be in 36 degree . item , from the 30 day of November unto the 6 day of December , we find the wind to be between the west and the southwest . item , from the 6 day of December unto the first day of January , we find the wind for the most part between the north and the north - east , be then in the latitude of 52 degree . item , from the first day of January unto the 23 day of February , we find the wind to be between the northwest and the westsouthwest , we be all that time in the strait of Magellan . item , from the 23 day of February unto the first day of march , we find the wind to be between the south and the southeast , be then in the south sea in the latitude of 48 degree . item , from the first day of march unto the 7 day of march , we find the wind to be at the north and the northnortheast in the latitude of 43 degree . item , from the 7 day of march unto the 14 day of 374 march , we find the wind to be between the south and the southwest , in the latitude of 37 degree . item , from the 14 day of march unto the 28 day 1587 . of may , we find the wind to be between the south and the southwest , in the latitude of 3 degree to the south of the line . a note of the vary of our wind to the north of the equinoctial line on the coast of new Spain - item , from the 28 day of may unto the 5 day of July , we find the wind for the most part to be between the southsoutheast , and the southsouthwest , be in the latitude of 10 degree to the northward of the line on the coast of new Spain . item , from the 5 day of July unto the 14 day of October , we find the wind for the most part to be at the eastnortheast in the latitude of 23 degree northward , and almost under the tropic of cancer . a note of the wind which we find between the coast of new Spain and island of the philippinas on the coast of Asia . in the year of our lord 1587 we depart from the cape of Santa Clara on the coast of California the 19 day of November , and we find the wind to be between the east and the eastnortheast , until the 29 day of January ; depart then from the island of the philippinas , be in the latitude of 9 degree . item , from the 29 day of January unto the 19 day of march , we find the wind for the most part between the northnortheast and than northwest , be then among the land of Maluco , in the latitude of 9 degree . item , from the 19 day of march unto the 20 day of May , we find the wind for the most part between the south and the eastsoutheast , be then 375 between the land of Maluco , and the cape of buena esperanza , in the latitude of 34 degree to the south of the line . item , from the 20 day of may unto the 11 day of July , we find the wind for the most part between the south and the southeast , be then between the cape of buena esperanza , and 15 degree unto the southward of the line . item , from the 11 day of July unto the 18 day of August , we find the wind for the most part between the north - east and Eastnortheast , be then between the latitude of 15 degree to the southward of the line , and 38 degree unto the northward of the line .