port that be call port desire , where we arrive the 17 day of December ; in which port we grave our ship : and we stay there until ° four the 28 day of December , where we anchor in 5 fathom . item , the eight and twenty day of December we - a ^ our depart from the port of desire towards the strait of ship . Magellan , where we arrive the three day of January : and we remain in the strait until the four and twenty day of February ; where we water in many place on the south side , have the wind all that while between the Westsouth west and than northwest . item , we depart out of the strait the 24 day of February towards the island of Mocha , which island we have sight of the 14 day of march . item , the 14 day of march at night we anchor in the bay of marrocco ; where we ride in 9 fathom water . item , the 15 day of march we anchor in the island of saint marie , on the north part of the island in f01 * ™ 367 of our abode two in fifAe day , where we water . of our abode eight fathom water , black sand , where we stay four day . item , the 19 day of march we depart from the island of saint marie , and the same day we anchor in the bay of conception , where we stay until the next day : and there we ride in ten fathom water , shingle stone . item , the 20 day of march we depart from the bay of conception , and the thirty day of march we of our abode arrive in the bay of Quintero , where we water : 6 day , where anj there the first day of April we have twelve of our we wa re . man s ] a ; nej being on land for water : and we stay there six day : and we anchor in 7 fathom water , white sand . of our abode item , we depart from the bay of Quintero the 5 day three day . qf April , and we arrive at the bay of Arica the 24 day of April , and we anchor in 7 fathom water . of our abode item , the 27 day of April we depart from the bay of two day . Arica , and the three day of may we arrive in the bay of Pisca , and we anchor in 4 fathom water in oaze . of our abode item , the 5 day of may we depart from the bay of six day . Pisca ) and the 12 day we anchor in the bay of cherrepe , where we anchor in 7 fathom water , in white sand . of our abode item , the 18 day of may we depart from the bay of one day . cherrepe , and the 20 day of may we arrive in the bay of Payta , where we anchor in 6 fathom water . item , the 20 day of may we depart from the bay of Paita , and the 26 day of may we anchor at the island of Puna , and we anchor in 5 fathom . of our abode item , from the island of Puna we depart the four watered * ^ une Unt ° °^ ce main , where we ' water , and we anchor in 10 fathom water , brown sand . of our abode item , the 12 day of June we depart from the place % day , where where we water , be bind for the coast of new we water , gpaine , and the 29 day of July we arrive in the port of Aguatulco , where we water , and anchor in 6 fathom water . 368 item , the 3 day of August we depart from the port of Aguatulco , and the 26 day of August we arrive at the port of saint Iago , where we water , and stay of our abode there until the second day of September , and anchor in 7 wbere o radom . item , the 2 of September we depart from the port of saint Iago , and the 3 day of September we put into a port one league unto the westwards of Natividad , where of our abode we anchor in 8 fathom water . one day . item , the 4 day of September we depart from the ° / ° ur “ bode port of Natividad , and the 7 day of September we put three into the bay of Xalisco , where we anchor in 9 fathom water , and the 10 day of September we depart from the bay of Xalisco , and the 12 day of September our anchor at the island of saint Andrew , where we anchor in 17 fathom water . item , the 17 day of September we depart from of our abode the island of saint Andrew , and the 24 day of September we put into the bay of Chiametlan , where we anchor in 8 fathom water , and the 26 of September we depart from the bay of Chiametlan , and the 28 day we anchor of our abode under the island of Chiametlan in 4 fathom . z day es , where item , the 9 day of October we depart from the island of Chiametlan , and cross over the mouth of twelve day , mar vermejo , the 14 day of October we have sight of they where we cape of California . water . item , the 15 day of October we lie off the cape of S . Lucas , and the 4 day of November we take the great and rich ship call Santa Anna , come from the philippinas : and the 5 day of November we put into the of our abode port of saint Lucas , where we put all the people on shore , and burn the Santa Anna : and we anchor in 12 fathom water . water . item , the 19 day of November we depart from the port of saint Lucas , and the 3 day of January we have sight of one of the island of the ladrone , which island be call the island of * Iwana , stand in the latitude * Guana . of 13 degree and 50 minute . xi 369 2 a item , the 3 day of January we depart from the island of Iwana , and the 14 day of Januarie we have sight of the cape of Spirito santo , and the same day we put of our abode into the strait of the philippinas ; and the 15 day mne ayes . of january we anchor under the island of Capul