we endure most furious weather , so that one of our two cable break , whereby we be hopeless of life . yet it please God to calm the storm , and we unrive our sheate , tack , hallier , and other rope , and more our ship to the tree close by the rock . we labour to recover our anchor again , but can not by any mean , it lie so deep in the water , and as we think clean cover with oaze . now have we but one anchor which have but one whole flouke , a cable splice in two place , and a piece of a old cable . in the midst of these our trouble it please God that the wind come fair the first of October ; whereupon with all expedition we loose our moring , and weigh our anchor , and so tow off into the chanel ; for we have mend our boat in port desire , and have five oar of the pinnace . when we have weigh our anchor , we find our cable break , only one strand hold : than we praise God ; for we see apparently his mercy in preserve we . be in the chanel , we rive our rope , and again rig our ship , no man hand be idle , but all labour even for the last gasp of life . here our company be divide ; some desire to go again for port desire , and there to be set on shore , where they may travel for their life , and some stand with the captain and master to proceed . whereupon 402 the captain say to the master : master , you see the wonderful extremity of our estate , and the great doubt among our company of the truth of your report , as touch relief to be have in the south sea : some say in secret , as i be inform , that we undertake these desperate attempt through blind affection that we bear to the general . for my own part i plain make know unto you , that the love which i bear to the general cause i first to enter into this action , whereby i have not only heap upon my head this bitter calamity now present , but also have in some sort procure the dislike of my best friend in England , as it be not unknown to some in this company . but now be thus entangle by the providence of God for my former offence ( no doubt ) i desire , that it may please his divine majesty to show we such merciful favour , that we may rather proceed , than otherwise : or if it be his will , that our mortali be shall now take a end , i rather desire that it may be in proceed then in return . and because i see in reason , that the limit of our time be now draw to a end , i do in christian charity entreat you all , first to forgive i in whatsoever i have be grievous unto you ; second that you will rather pray for our general , then use hard speech of he ; and let we be full persuade , that not for his cause and negligence , but for our own offence against the divine majesty we be present punish ; last , let we forgive one another and be reconcile as child in love and charity , and not think upon the vanity of this life : so shall we in leave this life live with our glorious redeemer , or abide in this life , find favour with God . and now ( good master ) forasmuch as you have be in this voyage once before with your master the general , satisfy the company of such truth , as be to you best know ; and you the rest of the general man , which likewise have be with he in his first voyage if you hear any thing contrary to the truth , spare not to reprove it , i pray you . and so i beseech the lord to 403 this Santos stand upon the coast of Peru in 9 deg . of southerly latitude . they enter the south sea the three time . bestow his mercy upon we . then the master begin in these speech : captain , your request be very reasonable , and i refer to your judgement my honest care , and great pain take in the general service , my love towards he , and in what sort i have discharge my duty , from the first day to this hour . i be command by the general to follow your direction , which hitherto i have perform . you all know , that when i be extremely sick , the general be lose in my mate watch , as you have well examine : since which time , in what anguish and grief of mind i have live , God only know , and you be in some part a witness . and now if you think good to return , i will not gainsay it : but this i assure you , if life may be preserve by any mean , it be in proceed . for at the isle of Santa Maria i do assure you of wheat , pork , and root enough . also i will bring you to a isle , where pelican be in great abundance , and at Santos we shall have meal in great plenty , beside all our possibility of intercept some ship upon the coast of Chili and Peru . but if we return there be nothing but death to be hope for : therefore do as you like , i be ready , but my desire be to proceed . Theise his speech be confirm by other that be in the former voyage , there be a general consent of proceed ; and so the second of October we put into the south sea , and be free of all land . this night the wind begin to blow very much at westnorthwest , and still increase in fury , so that we be in great doubt what course to take : to put into the strait we