the last voyage of the worshipful m . Thomas candish esquire , intend for the south sea , the philippinas , and the coast of China , with 3 . tall ship , and two bark : write by m . John Jane , a man of good observation , employed in the same , and many other voyage . he 26 . of August 1591 , we depart from Plymouth with 3 . tall ship , and two bark , the Galeon wherein m . Candish go himself be admiral , the roebuck vice admiral whereof m . Cocke be captain , the desire rear - admiral whereof be captain m . John Davis ( with who and for who sake i go this voyage ) the black pinnace , and a bark of m . Adrian Gilbert , whereof m . Randolfe Cotton * be captain . the 29 . of November we fall with the bay of Salvador upon the coast of Brasil 12 . league on this side Cabo Frio , where we be becalm until the second of December : at which time we take a small bark bind for the river of plate with sugar , haberdash ware , and negro . the master of this bark bring we unto a isle call Placencia thirty league west from Cabo Frio , where we arrive the five of December , and rifle six or 3 ^ 9 A . D . 1591 . the Spaniard take in at port famine . Baya de Salvador . abarketaken . Cabo frio . Isla de Placencia . seven house inhabit by Portugal . the 11 . we depart from this place , and the fourteenth we arrive Isla de S . se - at the isle of saint Sebastian : from whence m . cock and bastian . captain Davis present depart with the desire and the black pinnace , for the take of the town of Santos . the 15 . at evening our ancker at the bar of Santos , from whence we depart with our boat to the town ; and the next morning about nine of the clock we come to Santos , where be discover , we be enforce to land with 24 . gentleman , our long boat be far a stern , by which expedition we take all the people or the town at mass both man and woman , who we keep all that day in the church as prisoner . the cause why master Candish desire to take this town be to the town of supply his great want : for be in Santos , and have santos take . jn quje ^ possession , we stand in assurance to supply all our need in great abundance . but such be the negligence of our governor master cock , that the indian be suffer to carry out of the town whatsoever they will in open view , and no man do control they : and the next day after we have win the town , our prisoner be all set at liberty , only four poor old man be keep as pawn to supply our want . thus in three day the town that be able to furnish such another fleet with all kind of necessary , be leave unto we naked bare , without people and provision . eight or ten day after master candish himself come thither , where he remain until the 22 . of January , seek by intreaty to have that , whereof we be once possess . but in conclusion we depart out of the town through extreme want of victuali , not be able any long to live there , and be glad to receive a few canister or basket of Cassavi meal ; so that in every condition we go worse furnish from the town , then when we come unto it . the 22 . of the town of January we depart from Santos , and burn Sant Vincent to the ground - than 24 . we set sail , shape our course it for the strait of Magellan . 390 last voyage of Thomas candish a . d . 1592 . the seven of February we have a very great storm , and the eight our fleet be separate by the fury of the tempest . than our captain call unto he the master of our ship , who he find to be a very honest and sufficient man , and confer with he he conclude to go for port desire , which be in the southerly latitude of 48 . degree ; hope that the general will come thither , because that in his first voyage he have find great relief there . for our captain can never get any direction what course to take in any such extremity , though many time he have entreat for it , as often i have hear he with grief report . in sail to this port by good chance we meet with the roebuck , wherein master Cocke have endure great extremity , and have lose his boat , and therefore desire our captain to keep he company , for he be in very desperate case . our captain hoist out his boat , and go aboard he to know his estate , and return tell we the hardness thereof , and desire the master and all the company to be careful in all their watch not to loose the roebuck , and so we both arrive at port desire the six they arrive at of march . port desire . the 16 . of march the black pinnace come unto we , but master gilbert bark come not , but return home Adrian to England , have their captain aboard the roebuck gilbert bark without any provision more than the apparel that he England wear , who come from thence aboard our ship to remain with our captain , by reason of the great friendship between they . the 18 . the Galeon come into the road , and master Candish come into the harbour in a boat which he have make at sea ; for his long boat and lighthorseman be lose at sea , as also a pinnace which he have a pinnace build at Santos : and be aboard the desire he tell our build at Santos . captain of all his extremity , and speak most hardly of his company , and of diverse gentleman that be with he , purpose no more to go aboard his own ship , but to stay in the desire . we all sorrow to hear such hard speech of our good friend ; but have speak with the 391 gentleman of the Galeon we find they faithful , honest , and resolute in proceed , although it please our general otherwise to conceive of they .. the 20 . of march we depart from port desire , master Candish be in the desire with we . the eight they fall with of April 1592 , we fall with the strait of Magellan , endure many furious storm between port desire and an . the strait . the 14 . we pass through the first strait . the 16 . we pass the second strait be ten league distant from the first . the 18 . we double cape froward , which cape lie in 53 . degree and J . the 21 . we be enforce by the fury of the weather to put into a small coove with our ship , 4 . league from the say cape , upon the south shore , where we remain until the 15 . of May . in the which time we endure extreme storm , with perpetual snow , where many of our man die with curse famine , and miserable cold , not have wherewith to cover their body , nor to fill their belly , but live by muscle , water , and weed of the sea , with a small relief of the ship store in meal sometime . and all the sick man in the Galeon be most uncharitable put a shore into the wood in the snow , rain , and cold , when man of good health can scarce endure it , where they end their life in the high degree of misery , master candish all this while be aboard the desire . in these great extremity of snow and cold , doubt what the end will be , he ask our captain opinion , because he be a man that have good experience of they northwest part , in his 3 . several discovery that way , employ by the merchant of London . our captain tell he , that this snow be a matter of no long continuance , and give he sufficient reason for it , and that thereby he can not much be prejudice or hinder in his proceed . notwithstanding he call together all the company , and tell they , that he purpose not to stay in the strait , but to depart upon some other voyage , or else to return again for Brasil . but his resolution be to go for the cape of 392 last voyage of Thomas candish a . d . .. wonderful - buena esperanza . the company answer , that if it please he , they do desire to stay God favour for a wind , and to endure all hardness whatsoever , rather than to give