sir Francis drake consort . king fillip city leave desolate in the strait of Magellan , which our general call port famine . the three day of the foresay month we fall with another great white cape , which stand in 52 . degree and 4 5 . minute : from which cape there run a low beach about a league to the southward , and this beach reach to the open of the dangerous straight of Magellan , which be in diverse place 5 . or 6 . league wide , and in two several place more narrow . under this cape we anchor and lose a anchor , for it be a great storm of foul weather , and last three day very dangerous . the 6 . day we put in for the strait . the 7 . day between the mouth of the strait and the narrow place thereof , we take a Spaniard who name be Hernando , who be there with 23 Spaniard more , which be all that remain of four hundred , which be leave there three year before in these strait of Magellan , all the rest be dead with famine . and the same day we pass through the narrow of the strait , where the aforesaid Spaniard show we the hull of a small bark , which we judge to be a bark call the John Thomas . it be from the mouth of the strait unto the narrow of the strait 14 . league , and the course lie west and by north . the mouth of the strait stand in 52 . degree . from the narrow of the strait unto Pengwin hand be 10 . league , and lie west Southwest somewhat to the southward , where we anchor the 8 . day , and kill and salt great store of penguin for victual . the nine day we depart from Pengwin island , and run south Southwest to king fillip city which the Spaniard have build : which town or ci tie have four fort , and every fort have in it one cast piece , which piece be bury in the ground , the carriage be stand in their place unbury : we dig for they and have they all . they have contrive their city very well , and seat it in the best place of the strait for wood and water : they have build up their church by themselves : they have law very severe among them - 298 self , for they have erect a gibbet , whereon they have do execution upon some of their company . it seem unto we that their whole live for a great space be altogether upon muscle and lympit : for there be not any thing else to be have , except some deer which come out of the mountain down to the fresh river to drink . Theise Spaniards which be there , be only come to fortify the strait , to the end that no other nation shall have passage through into the south sea save only their own : but as it appear , it be not god will so to have it . for during the God enemy to time that they be there , which be two year at they the paniards - least , they can never - have any thing to grow or in any wise prosper . and on the other side the Indians oftentimes prey upon they , until their victual grow so short , ( their store be spend which they have bring with they out of Spain , and have no mean to renew the same ) that they die like dog in their house , and in their clothes , wherein we find they still at our come , until that in the end the town be wonderful taint with the smell and the savour of the dead people , the rest which remain alive be drive to bury such thing as they have there in their town either for provision or for furniture , and so to forsake the town , and to go along the seaside , and seek their victual to preserve they from starve , take nothing with they , but every man his harquebus and his furniture that be able to carry it ( for some be not able to carry they for weakness ) and so live for the space of a year and more with root , leaf , and sometime a foul which they may kill with their piece . to conclude , they be determine to have travail towards the river of plate , only be leave alive 23 . person , whereof two be woman , which be the remainder of 4 . hundred . in this place we water and wooded well and quiet . our general name this town port famine : it stand in 53 . degree by obser - port famine vation to the southward . tn degree . 299 the 14 . day we depart from this place , and run south southwest , and from thence southwest unto cape cape froward froward 5 . league west Southwest , which cape be the wonderful ^ 8 ™ ' southermost part of all the strait , and stand in the latitude of 54 . degree . from which cape we run west and by north 5 . league , and put into a bay or muscle Cove . Cove on the south side , which we call muscle - cove , because there be great store of they : we rid therein 6 . day , the wind be still westerly . the 21 . day of Januarie we depart from muscle - cove , and go northwest and by west 10 . league to a very fair sandy bay on the north side , which our Elizabeth general call Elizabeth bay , and as we rid there ba > that night , one of our man dye which go in the huge gallant , who name be grey , a carpenter by his occupation , and be bury there in that bay . the 22 . we depart from Elizabeth bay in the afternoon , and go about 2 . league from that place , where there be a fresh water river , where our general go up with the ship - boat about three mile , which river have very good and pleasant ground about it , and it