lord advise we , that sithence quabacondono be come so near , all our company that live in the college , in the house of probation , and in the seminary , shall depart to some other place . and the Christians from Miac6 write daily unto we , that we shall pull down our house and church at Omura , arima , and Cansaco , and that the father of Europe shall return unto nangasaque in the secular habit of Portugal , but that the japonian friar shall retire themselves unto several house of Christians , that so they may all remain safe and out of danger . but this remedy , as it be too grievous and subject to many difficulty , so do it afford we but small comfort . in brief the father visitor talk of this matter with 428 eucunocamindono , the lord Protasius , and omurandono , before their expedition towards the kingdom of Coray , find they , as before , in the same fortitude of mind , be constant in their first opinion : neither will they give any other counsel or direction , then that the father shall keep themselves secret , and shall only forsake their house at Arima , and Omura , wherein the Toni or great lord will have some of their kinsman remain . it be also think convenient , that the number of the seminary shall be diminish , and that of 90 there shall only remain 50 in our school , namely such as study the latin tongue . with the father visitor there come unto nangasaque certain father and friar , which be say to be of Fungo and Firando . for the say father under the name of a legate may retain they with he more open . about this time quabacondono , that he may with some pastime recreate his noble which accompany he ; and also may declare , with how great confidence and security of mind he take upon he this expedition for China ; and likewise to obscure the most renown fame of a certain hunt and hawk perform of old by that mighty prince Joritono , who be emperor over all Japan ; he determine to ordain ( as it be ) another royal court of diverse kind of fowl . whereupon being accompany with many great lord and other , he depart to the kingdom of Oiaren , where his game have so good success , that he catch above 30000 . fowl of all sort ; among which be many falcon . howbeit , for quabacondono his great recreation , and for the more solemnity of the game , there be also add many dead fowl , which the japonians with certain poulder or mean to composition know how to preserve sweet in their feather a long time . this game be end , Quaba - - m t ^ ir condono return with great pomp unto Miac6 ; before feather a long who go great multitude which carry those thou - time . sand of fowl upon guild cane . next after these follow many horseman sumptuous attire , carry 429 a great number of falcon and other bird . after they be lead many horse by the reins , most rich trap . next of all be bring coscis or littier very stately adorn : after which be carry quabacondono himself in a litty of another fashion , like unto those which in India be call palanchin , which be make in China , with most curious and singular workmanship , and be present unto he by the father visitor , and seem exceed to content he , for that in all action of solemnity he use the same . last of all follow a great troop of prince and noble brave mount on horseback , and gorgeous attire , thereby the more to delight quabacondono , who in triumphant sort be welcome by the way , with the shout and applause of infinite swarm of people , enter the city of Miac6 . now when the time of sail towards China approach , quabacondono determine first to proclaim his nephew inangondono his successor , and governor of all Japan , to the end he may supply his own room in the time of this war . and therefore he command the dairi to transfer unto his say nephew the dignity belong to himself , call he by the name of Taicusama , that be to say , great lord . which dignity be in such sort translate , that albeit he assign unto his nephew large revenue , together with that princely title , yet himself remain the very same that he be before . the day of the say translation be appoint , he summon all the prince of Japan to appear , and to swear obedience unto this his nephew : who with great pomp go unto the dairi to receive that dignity at his hand , have surrendered unto he the castle of Miac6 , and the palace of quabacondono to dwell in . thus at the begin of the three moon , he set forward on his journey to Nangoia , have before give order , that Augustine shall pass over into the kingdom of Coray , and that his other captain shall remain in Ceuxima . wherefore , the twenty day of the three moon he come unto Nangoia , where the company 43 ° of the other lord be number , be find to be 200000 . person , beside those that be conduct by the four foresay governor . in the mean season Augustine with his force , and with a fleet of eight hundred fleet of ship , arrive at Coray . in who army the lord Pro - 8 ° 0 - tasius excel all other ; for though he have but the lead of 2000 soldier , yet for the goodness of his armour , and the beauty of his ship , he be admire of all man . at their very first entrance they win 2 . castle of the kingdom of Coray by main force , wherein the corayans repose great confidence ; for they be environ with mighty high wall , and defend with great multitude of soldier , and with a kind of gun gun of 2 . span and long , which in stead of bullet wtth discharge with a terrible noise wooden arrow head arrow with fork point of iron : but the say gun be able to hurt but a small distance off , and the japonians be furnish with brazen ordinance unknown unto the corayans , they present drive they from their wall , and with ladder make for the same purpose of great cane , they forthwith scale the same , and plant their ensign thereon ; the corayans indeed for a short time make resistance , but after a while betake themselves to dishonourable flight , 5000 man of their part be slay , and of augustines but 100 and 400 . wound . Augustine perceive that the corayans can not endure any long assault , determine to take upon himself , and his army the whole burden and honour of this war , and not stay for the governor his associate ,