the commendation both of he , and of other captain his associate , as if but the ten part of his fair promise come to effect , they shall be far great than they be , and Augustine ( next unto himself ) shall be the principali person in all Japan . and now he be become so famous in the court , and throughout the whole kingdom of Japan , that at all their meeting and assembly there be no talk but only of the valour and fortitude of Augustine , who in twenty day space have subdue so mighty a kingdom to the crown of Japan . and all the noble account he a 434 most happy man , be astonish at the immortali renown which he have attain unto by this exploit : yea , and quabacondono send forthwith unto he , as unto the conqueror and vanquisher of the corayans , in token of great honour , a two - edged sword and a horse , which among the japonians be a pledge of the most peerless honour that can possible be do to a man : and this very gift do Nabunanga in time past send unto quabacondono , when he have in any battle win any kingdom from morindono . and by this great event the power of the christian god , and his providence towards his child be know not only to the christian , but even to the very ethnic themselves , for that in the heat of such extreme persecution it have please his divine majestic to lay the honour of all this war upon christian lord . wherefore we doubt not , but they will prove more mighty and famous then ever they be . hence it come to pass that the Portugal ship come from China , have winter in Japan : by which occasion the presence of the father visitor have be a great comfort not only to we , but to all the other Christians , who in regard of the departure of so many man with quabacondono and his captain to the war , think they shall have be leave utter forsake and destitute , have not the father visitor , in who they repose all their confidence , remain here . but the singular providence and love of God towards we appear in this , that he will have the say ship , contrary to their usual custom , to winter in Japan . for when quabacondono have obtain that victory , be determine to return unto Ximo , they be all shroud under the protection of the foresay father ; who hear that he be enter into Nangoia , cause Frier John Rodorigues and the governor of the Portugal ship to salute and welcome he . for the Christians of Miaco , which succeed in their room that go for Coray , advise he in their letter so to do . and it be very acceptable to quabacondono to see the 435 Portugal captain general attend upon by so many Portugal sumptuous attire , and come with so many ship in the company of friar John Rodoriguez : and he ask the friar how the father visitor do ? and whether the present to the viceroy like he ? as also , that he take it in very good part that the father have winter in Japan , and that the friar shall stay with he . afterwards write a answer to the father , he declare therein the great favour which he bear to the captain of the ship . who , have familiar entertain he for the space of 2 . hour , he dismiss with evident token of good will . after the captain return , friar Rodoriguez stay behind above a month , attempt very often to speak with quabacondono , of who he be always most kind use . afterwards by reason of sickness he return to nangasaque ; whereupon quabacondono demand why he be not cure at the same place where himself remain ? jacuino answer , that be a stranger , he be to be cure with such diet and medicine , as be not there to be have : with which answer he be satisfy . hence it be , that by often conference which be make by reason of the ambassage , quabacondono wax every day more courteous and affable . and yet for all this , new occasion of trouble and affliction be not cut off : for certain it be , that quabacondono have give out , that if he have good success with his war against China , he will make great alteration of estate , in assign the kingdom of Coray and China to the christian prince , and place in their room ethnic lord throughout Japan : which thing may redound to the ruin and destruction of all christianity here , neither shall the christian find in Japan any place of refuge . and albeit Augustine have certain inform the father visitor ’ of the say alteration of estate , and jacuine have write unto Augustine , that quabacondono have full determine to alter the state or government of Ximo , and so consequent the state of Augustine , and of the christian prince of Arima and 436 Omura ; yea , and that the say two prince have notice thereof : yet almighty God with the eye of his infinite mercy have vouchsafe to regard the prayer of his faithful servant ( who for this cause be most perplex and sorrowful ) and to provide this remedy follow . the corayans have intelligence , that their king and the force which he carry with he be in safety , go the great part of they , with as much victual as they can get , and hide themselves in the mountain and wood , remain there with such hate and indignation against the japonians , that with promise of safe conduct they can by no mean be draw out of their start hole . wherefore albeit the japonians have all the castle and place of defence in their own possession , yet because they want people to till the ground , and to do they other necessary service , they can choose but forgo all that which they have win . Moreover , the common high way be so pester with thief and murderer , that unless the japonians march in whole troop all together , they be sudden oppress with swarm of Corayans issue forth of the wood . many of the corayans also have retire themselves unto the neighbour - island , from whence with number of great hand near ship , to the mighty loss of the japonians , they assail unt0 coray - their small and weak one , and have already sink many of they . wherefore all the japonian lord why he remain in Coray have write unto quabacondono , that his army must for a certain time in no wise remove from the place where it be , for avoid of such imminent danger as in proceed further it may incur . upon these advertisement quabacondono be ready to take his journey to Coray , to divide the whole kingdom , be hinder from his purpose , and send most friendly letter