our general with the company will resolute have land to take the town , whatsoever have come of it . the cause why the content stay behind be , that she have find about 14 league to the southward of Arica , in a place where the Spaniard gnat store of have land , a whole ship lade of botija of wine of wine find . Castillia , whereof the say content take into she as many as she can convenient carry , and come after we into the road of Arica the same day . by this time we perceive that the town have gather all their power together , and also convey all their treasure away , and bury it before we be come near the town : for they have hear of Us . now because it be very populous with the aid of one or two place up in the land , our general see there be no land without loss of many man : wherefore he give over that enterprise . while we rid in the road they shoot at we , and our ship shoot at they again for every shot two . Moreover , our pinnace go in hard almost to the shore , and fetch out another bark another bark which ride there in despite of all their fort oad t > ie though they shoot still at the pinnace , which they can ‘ never hit . after these thing our general send a boat on shore with a flag of truce to know if they will redeem their great ship or no ; but they will not : for they have receive speciali commandement from the viceroy from Lima , not to buy any ship , nor to ransom any man upon pain of death . our general do this in hope to have redeem some of our man , which be take prisoner on shore by the horseman at Quintero , otherwise he will have make they no offer of parley . the four the 25 ride still in the say road , we spy a sail bark take . come from the southward , and our general send out his pinnace to meet she , with all our boat ; but the town make such sign from the hill with fire a watchhouse , and token out of the watchhouse , that before our pinnace can get to they , they run the bark on shore two mile to the southward of the town ; but they 308 have small leisure to carry any thing with they ; but all the man ; scape , among who there be certain friar : for we see they in their friar weed as they run on shore : many horseman come from the town to rescue they , and to carry they away , otherwise we have land and take or kill they . so we go aboard the bark as she lie sink , and fetch out the pillage : but there be nothing in it of any value , and come aboard our ship again the same night : and the next morning we set the great ship on fire in the road , and sink one of the bark , and carry the other along with we , and so depart from thence , and go away northwest . the 27 day we take a small bark , which come from the first saint Iago near unto Quintero , where we lose our man b ^ en °^ ad ^ se first . in this bark be one George a greek , a reason - ‘ able pilot for all the coast of Chili . they be send to the city of Lima with letter of adviso of we , and of the loss of our man . there be also in the say bark one Fleming and three Spaniards : and they be all swear and receive the sacrament before they come to sea by three or four friar , that if we shall chance to meet they , they shall throw those letter over board : which ( as we be give they chase with our pinnace ) before we can fetch they up , they have accord through wen away . yet our general wrought so with they , that they do confess it : but he be fain to cause they to be torment with their thumb in a wrinch , and to continue they at several time with extreme pain . also he make the old Fleming believe that he will hang he ; and the rope be about his neck he be pull up a little from the hatch , and yet he will not confess , choose rather a good mind if to die , than he will be perjure . in the end it be confess by one of the Spaniard , whereupon we burn s ' the bark , and carry the man with we . the three of May we come into a bay where be three little town , which be call Paracca , Chincha , and 309 the Hugh gallant lose company of the fleet , and meet not until the seventeenth . 400 bag of meal find . Pisca , where some of we land and take certain house , wherein be bread , wine , fig and hen : but the sea go so high , that we can not land at the best of the town without sink of our boat , and great hazard of we all . this place stand in thirteen degree and f to the southward of the line . the five of May we depart from this harbour , leave the content our viceadmiral within at a island of seal , by which mean at that time we lose she company . the nine we give chase to a sail , namely , our admiral , the huge gallant , and the George which we have take before come out of the road of Arica ; the content which be our viceadmiral be still lose : but we can not fetch it . the George make after it , but lose it that night . the ten day the huge gallant ( in which bark i Francis pretty be ) lose company of our admiral . the eleven we which be in the huge gallant put into a bay which stand in 12 degree f , in which bay we find