on the head of the nail be as it be a crown : which be drive through their privity when 332 they be young , and the place grow up again , without any great pain to the child : and they take this nail out and in , as occasion serve : and for the truth thereof we our self have take one of these nail from a son of one of the king which be of the age of 10 year , who do wear the same in his privy member . this custom be grant at the request of the woman of the country , who find their man to be give to the foul sin of sodomy , desire some remedy against that mischief , and obtain this before name of the magistrate . Moreover all the male be circumcise , have the foreskin of their flesh cut away . Theise people whole worship the devil , and often time have conference with he , which appear unto they in most ugly and monstrous shape . on the 23 day of January , our general m . Thomas Candish cause all the principal of this island , and of a hundred island more , which he have make to pay tribute unto he ( which tribute be in hog , hen , potato and coco , ) to appear before he , and make himself and his company know unto they , that they be english man , and enemy to the Spaniard : and thereupon spread his ensign and sound up the drum , which they much marvel at : to conclude , they promise both themselves and all the island thereabouts to aid he , whensoever he shall come again to overcome the Spaniard . also our general give they , in token that we be enemy to the Spaniard , money back again for all their tribute which they have pay : which they take marvelous friendly , and row about our ship to show we pleasure marvelous swift : at the last our generail cause a saker to be shoot offj whereat they wonder , and with great contentment take their leaf of we . circumcision . the inhabitant of Capul with all the island adjoin , promise to aid the english against the Spaniard . the next day be the twenty four of Januarie , Our ^ P ^ tnre we set sail about six of the clock in the morning , j ^ d of and run along the coast of the island of manilla , shape Capul . 333 mark of shallow water . a Balsa be a great canoa . a Spaniard of manilla take . our course northwest between the isle of manilla , and the isle of masbat . the 28 day in the morning about 7 of the clock , ride at a anchor betwixt 2 island , we spy a frigate under her two corpse , come out between 2 other island , which as we imagine come from manilla , sail close aboard the shore along the main island of Panama : we chase this frigate along the shore , and get very fast upon it , until in the end we come so near that it stand in to the shore close by a wind , until she be becalm and be drive to strike her sail , and bank up with her oar : whereupon we come unto a anchor with our ship , a league and a half from the place where the frigate row in ; and man our boat with half a dozen shot and as many man with sword , which do row the boat : thus we make after the frigate which have hoist sail and run into a river , which we can not find . but as we row along the shore , our boat come into very shallow water , where many wear and stick be set up in diverse place in the sea , from whence 2 or 3 canoas come forth , whereof one make somewhat near unto we , with 3 or 4 Indians in it : we call unto they , but they will not come near unto we , but row from we : who we dare not follow too far from fear of bring our self to much to the leewarde of our ship . here , as we look about we , we espy another Balsa or canoa of a great bigness which they which be in she , do set along as we do usual set a barge with long staff or pole , which be build up with great cane , and below hard by the water make to row with oar ; wherein be about 5 or 6 Indians and one Spaniard : now as we be come almost at the Balsa , we run a ground with our boat ; but one or two of our man leap overboard and free it again present , and keep thwart her head , we lay she aboard and take in to we than Spaniard , but the indian leap into the sea and dive and rise far off again from we . present upon the take of this 334 candish ’ s circumnavigation canoa , there show upon the sand a band of soldier march with a ensign have a red cross like the flag of England , which be about 50 or 60 Spaniard , which be late come from manilla to that town which be call Ragaun in a bark to fetch a new ship of the king , which be build in a river within the bay , and stay there but for certain iron that do serve for the rudder of the say ship , which they look for every day . this band of man shoot at we from the shore with their musket , but hit none of we , and we shoot at they again : they also man a frigate and send it out after our boat to have take we , but we with sail and oar go from they : and when they perceive that they can not fetch we , but that they must come within danger of the ordinance of our ship , they stand in with the shore again and land their man , and present send their frigate about the point , but whether we know not . so we come aboard with