to march up into the heart of the kingdom , and to the principali city ; unto which determination all the lord that be with he give their consent . this be ( no doubt ) a bold , yea , and in some sort , a rash enterprise of Augustine : but yet it argue a wise and valiant mind in he . but this long delay be so grievous to the captain which in Ceuxima expect the success of the war , that before they hear any news at all concern the surprise of the two castle , they bring Augustine in suspicion among 431 their friend , that he ambitious affect the honour of the whole war . which thing be know unto quabacondono , he be so trouble in mind even before he come to Nangoia , that sudden he command the other captain to set sail from Ceuxima . but when quabacondono be come to Nangoia , and hear news of the two castle take , and that Augustine pursue they the significa - victory proceed on towards the Miaco , that be to say , time of Miaco . cltie of Coray , and be determine to invade the same also ( all which Augustine himself write , and request he to send the other captain and commander to assail the kingdom on all side , and to furnish the castle which he have take and shall take , with garrison of soldier , because as yet he have not man enough to hold those fortress which he have win ) he be surprise with such unspeakable joy , as he affirm open , that in all Japan he have no subject comparable to Augustine : and that neither Nabunanga , nor himself ever know any man endue with so valiant and courageous a mind . i ( say he ) know against who and with what force i wage war , subdue by little and little all Japan unto i : but Augustine in so short a time and with so small force , have bold set his foot in a foreign region , and with most glorious victory have subdue the mighty kingdom of Coray . wherefore ( quoth he ) i will reward he with many kingdom , and will make he next unto my self the great prince in all Japan . he add far , that now his own son seem to be rise from the death : and that whosoever dare either disgrace or extenuate the deed of Augustine , he will grievous punish he , not respect whether he do it upon reason or malice . by this speech the name and report of Augustine grow so honourable among all man , that those which most envy his estate , dare not speak one ill word of he , but high commend he before q ^ bacondono . breadth of this kingdom or Coray extend in length about Coray . roo . and in breadth 60 . league . and albeit the inhabi - 432 tants in nation , language , and strength of body ( which make the people of China to dread they ) be different from the chinians , yet because they pay tribute to the king of China , and exercise traffic with his subject , they do after a sort imitate the law , apparel , custom , and government of the chinians . they border on one side upon the Tartar , and other nation , with who sometime they have peace , and sometime war : but with the chinians they have continual peace . they be speciali good bowman ; but at other weapon , because they have but few , and those bad , they be nothing so skilful . wherefore they be not comparable to the japonians , who by reason of their war be continual exercise in arm , and be by nature more courageous and valiant , be furnish with iron - piece , with lance , and with excellent sword . only in ship they be inferior to the corayans and chinians , by reason of the hugeness of their ship which they use upon the sea . wherefore , if they be to join battle by sea , there be no doubt but that both the foresay nation will be too the people of hard for they . but now because they know nothing of an the come of the japonian army , or for that they str ^ er in doubt that their sea - force be the strong , or else ship , then because God be determine to punish they , he suffer they of Japan . they to be destitute of all the defence of their ship , so that the japonians without any resistance land upon their dominion . now the fame of augustines victory cause the army notable to increase , and the mariner , and many other which carry burden ( as they be train up in war from their childhood ) bear arm , while the corayan captive supply their base office : so great a terror possess all the people of Coray where Augustine come , that all the castle and fortress which he pass by be forsake by their garrison , and all man flee for refuge to the principali city . and while other commander and Christians send from Ceuxima and Nangoia shape their course for Coray , Augustine have pitch his camp near xi 433 2 e the king of Coray flee out of his frin - cipall city . unto the foresay principali city : of the which be come within 3 . day journey , he be encounter by 20000 man ; who at the very first assault , have slay 3000 . of they , he put to flight . but approach very near unto the city , and have pass a river , he maintain a valiant conflict at a certain narrow passage against 80000 . Corayans , 8000 . whereof be slay , and a great number drown in the river . here while Augustine appoint all his troop to remain for two day , to the end they may somewhat refresh their weary limb , the king of Coray see himself besiege by his enemy , and that many other japonian lord with strong army invade his kingdom on all side , determine to have his city strengthen with garrison , and to retire himself into the inland of China . which by reason of the abundance of horse that he have , he be able right com - modiously to perform . whereupon the second or three day after , Augustine without any resistance enter the head - city , be present with great store of victual and gift by they that remain therein . thus Augustine , with other captain his associate , become lord of the principali city , and win all the honour of the victory unto himself : for albeit by this time the other captain be come from Ceuxima , and many from Nangoia , yet they find all thing perform to their hand . quabacondono be advertise of this second victory , yield as much honour unto Augustine as he can possible devise , speak so high to