Massatlan and run to a island be ! aneia which be a league to the northward the say Massatlan , n ° rth - where we trim our ship and new build our Massatlan . pinnace : and there be a little island a quarter of a league from it , on which be seal : where a spanish prisoner , who name be Domingo , be send to wash shirt with one of our man to keep he , make a escape , and swim to the main , which be a english mile distant : at which place we have see 30 or 40 Spaniard and Indians , which be horseman , and keep watch there , which come from a town call Chiametla , which be 11 league up into the country , as Michael Sancius tell we . we find upon the island where we trim our pinnace , fresh water by the assistance of God in that our great need by dig two or three foot deep in the sand , where no water nor sign of water be before to be perceive . otherwise we have go back 20 or 30 league to water : which may have be occasion that we may have miss our prey we have long wait for . but God raise one Flores a Spaniard , which be also a prisoner with we , to make a motion to dig in the sand . now our general have have experience one before of the like , command to put his motion in practice , and in dig three foot deep we found very good and fresh water . so we water our ship , and may have fill a thousand ton more , if we have will . we stay in this island until the 9 day of October , at which time we depart at night for the cape of saint Lucar , which be on the west side of the point of California . 323 the escape of one Domingo , a Spaniard . fresh water at 2 or 3foote deep in the sand . the cape of S . the 14 of October we fall with the cape of saint Lucar , ucar on the which cape be very like the needle at the isle of wight ; fimia , and within the say cape be a great bay call by the Aguada Spaniards Aguada Segura : into which bay fall a fair se & ira . fresh river , about which many Indians use to keep : we water in the river and lay off and on from the say cape of saint Lucar until the four of November , and have the wind hang still westerly . the 4 of November the desire and the content , wherein be the number of Englishman only live , beat up and down upon the headland California inn of California , which stand in 23 degree and f to northward , between seven and 8 of the clock in ’ the morning one of the company of our admiral which be the trumpeter of the ship go up into the top espy a sail bear in from the sea with the cape , whereupon he cry out with no small joy to himself and the whole company , a sail , a sail , with which cheerful word the master of the ship and diverse other of the company go also up into the main top , who perceive the speech to be very true give information unto our general of these happy news , who be no less glad than the cause require : whereupon he give in charge present unto the whole company to put all thing in readiness , which be perform we give they chase some 3 or 4 hour , stand with the fight our best advantage and work for the wind . in the reat " Anna afternoon we get up unto they , give they the broad ^ andus . nm s ^ e our great ordinance and a volee of small shot , and present lay the ship aboard , whereof the king of Spain be owner , which be admiral of the south sea , call the saint Anna , and think to be 700 ton in burden . now as we be ready on their ship side to enter she , be not pass 50 or 60 man at the uttermost in our ship , we perceive that the captain of the say ship have make fight fore and after , and lay their sail close on their poop , their mid ship , with their fore castle , and have not one man to be see , stand 324 close under their fight , with lance , javelin , rapier , and target , and a innumerable sort of great stone , which they throw overboard upon our head and into our ship so fast and be so many of they , that they put we off the ship again , with the loss of 2 of our man which be slay , and with the hurt of 4 or 5 . but for all this we new trim our sail , and fit the second every man his furniture , and give they a fresh encounter encounter - with our great ordinance and also with our small shot , rake they through and through , to the kill and maim of many of their man . their captain still like a valiant man with his company stand very stout unto his close fight , not yield as yet : our general the three encourage his man a fresh with the whole noise of ennunter - trumpet give they the three encounter with our great ordinance and all our small shot to the great discomfort of our enemy rake they through in diverse place , kill and spoil many of their man . they be thus discomfort and spoil , and their ship be in hazard of sink by reason of the great shot which be make , whereof some be under water , within 5 or 6 hour fight set out a flag of truce and the great . parl for mercy , desire our general to save their life and to take their good , and that they will present yield . our general of his goodness promise they mercy , and will they to strike their sail , and to hoist out their boat and to