a petition make by certain of the company of the delight of Bristol unto the master of the say ship Robert Burnet , one of the consort of m . Chidley , be in the strait of Magellan the 12 . of February 1589 . e have think good to show unto you ( be our master ) our whole mind and grief in write : that whereas our captain Matthew hawlse , and Walter street do begin to take into the captain cabin this 12 . of Febr . both bread and butter , ( such as be put in for the provision of the ship and company ) only to feed themselves , and a few other , which be of their mess : mean thereby rather to starve we , than to keep we strong and in health : and likewise upon the same , he have take into his cabin certain furniture , as sword , caliver , and musquet : we therefore not well know their intent herein , except by certain word cast out unware , we may conjecture , , that your death , which God forbid , by they have be determine : do all most humble desire you be our master , and have charge of the ship , and we , this present voyage commit unto you , to consider : first , that by god visitation we have lose 16 . man , and that so much the rather because they be not allot such necessary provision , as be in the ship to be have . also to consider the great loss of 15 . of our man with our , boat at penguin - yland within the strait of Magellan : and of 7 . good and serviceable man beside near port famine : and of three anchor , and our carpenter . over and beside all these calamity to consider how you have ( without all reason and conscience ) be overthwart , disgrace , and outcountenance by your mate street , and Matthew hawlse : also what danger you now be subject unto , your death have be so often xi 385 2 b conspire , and what danger we shall be in , if it be ( which God forbid ) effect . Furthermore , to weigh with your self the great want of many necessary in our ship : namely that we have but 6 . sailor , ( beside your self and your mate street , who we dare not trust , ) also that we have but one anchor , likewise the lack of our boat and a carpenter , of rope , of pitch , [ three . 84 . 1 . ] treynailes , bolt , and plank , and the want of a skilful chirurgeon . and whereas a view be take of our provision there be find but five month victual of bread , meal , greet , and pease , and also but three month victual of beef , penguin and pork , three hogshead of wine , ten gallon of aquavitae ( whereof the sick man can not get any to relieve they , ) four hogshead of syder and 18 . flitche of bacon , etc the company have but three flitche . also the say captain hawlse and street have take and seize upon 17 . pot of butter , with certain cheese , and a hogshead of bread at a time , and have be thereof possess to their own private use : and have not only immoderate spend the company provision in butter , cheese , aquavitae , etc but have also consume those sweet meat , which be lay up in the ship only for the relief of sick person ( themselves be healthy and sound , and withhold the say meat from other in their sickness ) and even at this time also ( by reason of the small store of our provision , we be enforce to come to a short allowance ) they they say captain hawlse and your mate street , do find themselves aggrieve at the very same allowance , wherewith other man be well content . and although ( beside our ordinary allowance , and more than all the rest of the company ) they only have their breakfast permit unto they , yet they complain that the company go about to famish they , whereas indeed they do what lie in they to famish the company by feed themselves fat , which do not labour at all . Theise thing be well weigh , you ought likewise to consider the 386 long time that we have lie here in these strait of Magellan , have be at , and seven or eight time , ten league beyond cape froward , we have have but a small gale of wind with we : neither can we come to a anchor , the water be so deep : and ( you know ) the place be so dangerous , that we be once embay , and can scarce get out again : and likewise , what fog and mist be here already ? much more here will be , the winter and dark night be at hand , and we have not so much as a boat to seek out any road to ride in , save a small weak boat make of man chest , in which it be not convenient to go on shore in a foreign country , where we must go with force : and have but one anchor leave we , there be but little hope of life in we , as you may sufficient judge , if we shall lose either the say anchor or our boat , and therefore we dare not put the same in danger for fear of loose they . also we have lie here these six week and upward , the wind have continue in the northwest direct against our course , so that we can no way hope to get through the strait into the south sea this year , and if we can , yet our provision be not sufficient , have spend so much thereof , in this our linger abode . nay we have scarce victual enough to carry we home into England , if they be not use spare , and with very good government . therefore we do again most humble desire you to consider and have regard unto the premise , as you tender your own safety and the safety of we which remain alive , that we may ( by God help ) return back into England , rather than die here among wild and savage people : for if we make any long abode in this place , it will be ( without all doubt ) to the utter decay and loss , both of our self , and of the ship : and in return back , it may please God , that we may find our fifteen man , and our boat at penguin - yland ( although this be contrary to the mind of Matthew hawlse , and your mate street ) and have 387 find they , we do not despair in god mercy , but that in our return homeward , he will send we purchase sufficient , if we will join our self together in prayer , and love one another . and thus do ( as we shall bound ) even so we will also hearty pray for the continuance of your good estate , and welfare , and for the length of your day , to the pleasure of almighty God . last , we do most humble beseech you to consider , that ( after the loss of so many man and all the casualty aforesaid , as we be take in of water by port famine , our boatswain , the hooper , and William magoth be on shore ) Matthew hawlse do hallow to have they in all the haste come on - bord : say therewithal ! these word : he that will come in this voyage , must not make any reckon to leave two or three man on shore behind he , whereas we have so late lose all the foresay man , have then but six sailor leave we on - bord . also the say Matthew hawlse do carry a pistol for the space of two day secret under his gown , intend therewithal ! to have murdered Andrew Stoning , and William Combe , as by confession of hawlse his man , William Martin , it be manifest : for the say William Martine report unto two of his friend , viz . Richard Hungate , and Emanuel dornel , that he kneel upon his knee one whole hour before Matthew hawlse in his own cabin , desire he , for god cause , not to kill either of they , especial because the say Stoning and Martin come both out of one town . also the say hawlse , at our second time of water in the place aforesaid , come into the gunner room to speak with you ( your self with the master gunner Thomas brown , and his mate William Frier be then present ) demand of you , if he shall send certain man to port famine be two league from the ship by land . Thomas Browne answer he present , that he shall send none , for fear least the wind may arise , and by that mean we shall loose 388 so many of our man more : to who Matthew hawlse reply that it be not material , for that he have make choice of a company for the very same purpose , who name be Emmanuel dornel , Richard Hungate , Paul carry , John Davis , Gabriel Valerosa , a Portugal , and Peter a Britain , and the Spaniard which we have take in at the same place , at our first time of water . and thus we end , desire God to send we well into our native country . in witness whereof we have subscribe our name . Thomas brown , gunner , John Morrice , etc