a river of fresh water about eight of the clock at night ; and though we be but of small force , and no more but one bark and 18 man in it , yet we go on shore to fill water ; where have fill one boat lade , while our boat be in go aboard , two or three of our company which be on shore , as they be go a little from the water place with their furniture about they , espy where there be four or five hundred bag of meal on a heap cover with a few reed . so that night we fill water and take as much meal as we think good : which fall out well for we that be then lose and stand in need of victual : and by break of day in the morning we come aboard , and there stay and ride until the afternoon . in which mean time the town see we ride there still , bring down much cattle to the sea side to have entice we to come on shore : but we see their intent , and weigh anchor and depart the twelve day . 310 the 13 day at night we put into a bay which « 9 - standeth in 9 degree and where we see horseman : and that night we land , namely , m . Bruer captain , my self Francis pretty , Arthur Warford , John way join way a preacher , John Newman , Andrew wight , William preacher - gargefield , and Henry Hilliard . and we 8 only , have every man his harquebus and his furniture about he , march three quarter of a mile along the sea side , where we find a boat of five or six ton hale up dry on the shore about a cable length from the water : and with extreme labour we launch the bark ; when it be on float , captain Bruer and i go in , while the rest of our company be fetch their thing : but sudden it be ready to sink : and the captain and i stand up to the knee lade out water with our target ; but it sink down fast than we be able to free it , insomuch as in the end we have much ado to save our self from drown . when we be out , we stand in great fear that our own boat wherein we come on shore be sink : for we can not where see it . howbeit the captain command they to keep it off - , for fear of the great surge that go by the shore . yet in the end we spy it , and go aboard by two and two , and be drive to wade up to the armhole 60 pace into the sea before we can get into the boat , by reason of the shoaldnesse : and then depart the fourteen day in the morning . the 16 we take with the huge gallant , be but sixteen man of we in it , a great ship which come from guaianil , which be call the Lewis , and be of the burden of three hundred tun , have four and twenty man in it , wherein be pilot one Gonsalvo de Ribas , who we carry along with we , and a negro call Emmanuel . the ship be lade with nothing but timber and victual : wherefore we leave she seven league from the land very leak and ready to sink in 7 degree to the southward of the line : we sink a ship of 300 ton take after half a hour fight . seven degree of southerly latitude . they meet their fleet again . two rich ship take . one ship worth 20000 pound . the bay of Paita in 5 degree 4 min . a new fort in building . the town of Paita take and burn . her boat and take away her foresail and certain victual . the 17 of may we meet with our admiral again , and all the rest of our fleet . they have take two ship , the one lade with sugar , moloss , maiz , cor - dovan - skinne , montego de Porco , many pack of pintado , many indian coat , and some marmalade , and 1000 hen : and the other ship be lade with wheat - meal , and box of marmalade . one of these ship which have the chief merchandise in it , be worth twenty thousand pound , if it have be in England or in any other place of Christendom where we may have sell it . we fill all our ship with as much as we can bestow of these good : the rest we burn and the ship also ; and set the man and woman that be not kill on shore . the 20 day in the morning we come into the road of Paita , and be at a anchor , our general land with sixty or seventie man , skirmish with they of the town , and drive they all to flight to the top of the hill which be over the town , except a few slave and some other which be of the mean sort , who be command by the governor to stay below in the town , at a place which be in build for a fort , have with they a bloody ensign , be in number about one hundred man . now as we be row between the ship and the shore , our gunner shoot off a great piece out of one of the bark , and the shot fall among they , and drive they to fly from the fort as fast as they may run , who get they up upon a hill , and from thence shoot among we with their small shot . after we be land and have take the town , we run upon they , and chase they so fierce up the hill for the space of a hour that we drive they in the end away perforce , and be get up the hill , we find where they have lay all their stufle which they have bring out of the town , and have hide it there upon the mountain . we also find the 312 quantity of 25