the city of the sultan of turquoise , who likewise be in subjection unto they . next unto these lie the country of Vastacius , who son be call astar , of his grandfather by the mother side , who be not in subjection . all the land from the mouth of Tanais westward as far as Danubius be under their jurisdiction . yea beyond Danubius also , towards Constantinople , Valakia , which be the land of Assanus , and Bulgaria minor as far as Solonia , do all pay tribute unto they . and beside the tribute impose , they have also , of late year , exact of every household a axe , and all such corn as they find lie on heap . we arrive therefore at Soldaia the twelve of the kalend of June . and diverse merchant of Constantinople , which be arrive there before we , report that certain messenger be coming thither from the holy land , who be desirous to travel unto Sartach . notwithstanding i my self have public give out upon palm Sunday within the church of sancta Sophia , that i be not your nor any other man messenger , but that i travail unto those infidel accord to the rule of our order . And be arrive , the say merchant admonish i to take diligent heed what i speak : because they have report i to be a messenger , if i shall say the contrary , that i be no messenger , i can not have free passage grant unto i . then i speak after this manner unto the governor of the city , or rather unto their lieutenant , because the 231 governor themselves be go to pay tribute unto baatu , and be not as yet return . we hear of your lord sartach ( quoth i ) in the holy land , that he be become a christian : and the Christians be exceed glad thereof , and especial the most christian king of France , who be there now in pilgrimage , and fight against the Saracen to redeem the holy place out of their hand : wherefore i be determine to go unto Sartach , and to deliver unto he you letter of my lord the king , wherein he admonish he concern the good and commodity of all Christendom . and they receive we with gladness , and give we enterteinement in the cathedral church . the bishop of which church be with Sartach , who tell i many good thing concern the say sartach , which afterward i find to be nothing so . then put they we to our choice , whither we will have cart and ox , or pack horse to transport our carriage . and the merchant of Constantinople advise i , not to take cart of the citizen of Soldaia , but to buy cover cart of my own , ( such as the russian carry their skin in ) and to put all our carriage , which i will daily take out , into they : because , if i shall use horse , i must be constrain at every bait to take down my carriage , and to lift they up again on sundry horse back : and beside , that i shall ride a more gentle pace by the ox draw the cart . wherefore , content my self with their evil counsel , i be travel unto sartach 2 . month which i can have do in one , if i have go by horse . i bring with i from Constantinople ( be by the merchant advise so to do ) pleasant fruit , muscadel wine , and delicate biscuit bread to present unto the governor of Soldaia , to the end i may obtain free passage : because they look favourable upon no man which come with a empty hand . all which thing i bestow in one of my cart , ( not find the governor of the city at home ) for they tell i , if i can carry they to sartach , that they will be most acceptable unto he . we take our journey therefore about the 232 kalend of June , with four cover cart of our own and with two other which we borrow of they , wherein we carry our bed to rest upon in the night , and they allow we five horse to ride upon . for there be just five person in our company : namely , i my self and my associate friar Bartholomew of Cremona , and goset the bearer of these present , the man of God turgeman - nus , and Nicolas my servant , who i buy at Constantinople with some part of the alm bestow upon i . Moreover , they allow we two man , which drive our cart and give attendance unto our ox and horse . there be high promontory on the sea shore from Kersova unto the mouth of Tanais . also there be forty castle between Kersova and Soldaia , every one of which almost have their proper language : among who there be many Goth , who speak the dutch tongue . beyond the say mountain towards the north , there be a most beautiful wood grow on a plain full of fountain and freshet . and beyond the wood there be a mighty plain champion , continue five day journey unto the very extremity and border of the say province northward , and there it be a narrow isthmus or neck land , have sea on the east and west side thereof , insomuch that there be a ditch make from one sea unto the other . in the same plain ( before the Tartar spring up ) be the comanians wont to inhabit , who compel the foresay city and castle to pay tribute unto they . but when the Tartar come upon they , the multitude of the comanians enter into the foresay province , and flee all of they , even unto the sea shore , be in such extreme famine , that they which be alive , be constrain to eat up those which be dead : and ( as a merchant report unto i who see it with his own eye ) that the live man devour and tear with their tooth , the raw flesh of the dead , as dog