the Franckes ? and i say , the emperor , if he can enjoy his own dominion in quiet . no ( quoth he ) but the king of France . for he have hear of your highness by lord Baldwine of Henault . i find there also one of the knight of the temple , who have be in Cyprus , and have make report of all thing which he see there . then return we unto our lodging . and on the morrow we send he a flagon of muscadel wine ( which have last very well in so long a journey ) and a box full of biscuit , which be most acceptable unto he . and he keep our servant with he for that evening . the next morning he command i to come unto the court , and to bring the king letter and my vestment , and book with i : because his lord be desirous to see they . which we do accord , lade one cart with our book and vestment , and another with biscuit , wine , and fruit . than he cause all our book and vestment to be lay forth . and there stand round about we many Tartar , Christians and Saracens on horseback . at the sight whereof , he demand whether 262 i will bestow all those thing upon his lord or no ? which say make i to tremble , and grieve i full sore . howbeit , dissemble our grief as well as we can , we shape he this answer : sir , our humble request be , that our lord your master will vouchsafe to accept our bread , wine , and fruit , not as a present , because it be too mean , but as a benediction , lest we shall come with a empty hand before he . and he shall see the letter of my sovereign lord the king , and by they he shall understand for what cause we be come unto he , and then both our self , and all that we have , shall stand to his courtesy : for our vestment be holy , and it be unlawful for any but priest to touch they . than he command we to invest our self in the say garment , that we may go before his lord : and we do so . than i my self put on our most precious ornament , take in my arm a very fair cushion , and the bible which your majesty give i , and a most beautiful psalter , which the queen grace bestow upon i , wherein there be goodly picture . my associate take a missal and a cross : and the clerk have put on his surplesse , take a censer in his hand . and so we come unto the presence of his lord : and they lift up the felt hang before his door , that he may behold we . than they cause the clerk and the interpreter thrice to bow the knee : but of we they require no such submission . and they diligent admonish we to take heed , that in go in , and in come out , we touch not the threshold of the house , and request we to sing a benediction for he . than we enter in , sing salve regina . and within the entrance of the door , stand a bench with cosmos , and drink cup thereupon . and all his wife be there assemble . also the moal or rich Tartar thrust in with we press we sore . then Coiat carry unto his lord the censer with incense , which he behold very diligent , hold it in his hand . afterwards he carry the psalter 263 unto he , which he look earnest upon , and his wife also that sit beside he . after that he carry the bible : then sartach ask if the gospel be contain therein ? yea ( say i ) and all the holy scripture beside . he take the cross also in his hand , and demand concern the image , whether it be the image of Christ or no ? i say it be . the nestorian and the armenian do never make the figure of Christ upon their cross . wherefore either they seem not to think well of his passion , or else they be ashamed of it . than he cause they that stand about we , to stand aside , that he may more full behold our ornament . afterwards i deliver unto he your majesty letter , with the translation thereof into the arabic , and syriake language . for i cause they to be translate at Aeon into the character , and dialect of both the say tongue . and there be certain armenian priest , which have skill in the turkish and arabian language . the aforesaid knight also of the order of the temple have knowledge in the syriake , turkish , and arabian tongue . than we depart forth , and put off our vestment , and there come unto we certain scribe together with the foresay coiat , and cause our letter to be interpret . which letter be hear , he cause our bread , wine and fruit to be receive . and he permit we also to carry our vestment and book unto our own lodging . this be do upon the feast of saint Peter ad vincula . how they be give in charge to go unto baatu the father of Sartach . Chap . 18 . the next morning betimes come unto we a certain priest , who be brother unto Coiat , request to have our box of chrism , because sartach ( as he say ) be desirous to see it : and so we give it he . about eventide Coiat send for we , say : my lord your king write good word unto my lord and master sartach . howbeit there be certain matter of difficulty in they concern which he dare not determine aught , without 264 the advise and counsel of his father . and therefore of necessity you must depart unto his father , leave behind you the two cart , which you bring hither yesterday with vestment and book , in my custody : because my lord be