may breed some inconvenience . they write the say letter also in the sarazen tongue , that there may be some find in our dominion which can read and interpret they , if need shall require . how they be license to depart . Chap . 32 . a nd ( as our Tartar tell we ) the emperor be purpose to send his ambassador with we . howbeit , he be desirous ( as we think ) that we our self shall crave that favour at his hand . and when one of our Tartar be a ancient man , exhort we to make the say petition , we think it not good for we , that the emperor shall send his ambassador . wherefore we give he answer , that it be not for we to make any such petition , but if it please the emperor of his own accord to send they , we will diligent ( by God assistance ) see they conduct in safety . howbeit , we think it expedient for we , that they shall not go , and that for diverse cause . first , because we fear , lest they , see the dissension and war which be among we , shall be the more encourage to make war against we . second , we fear , that they will be instead of spy and intelligencer in our dominion . third , we misdoubt that they will be slay by the way . for our nation be arrogant and proud . for when as those servant ( which at the request of the Cardinali , attend upon we , namely the legate of almain ) return unto he in the Tartar attire , they be almost stone in the way , by the dutch , and be compel to put off those garment . and it be the Tartar custom , never to be reconcile unto such as have slay their ambassador , till they have revenge themselves . four , lest they shall be take from we i 177 m the legate be loath to have any ambassador send from the Tartar to the Christians . they be reward with the sore journey of the legate in return . bathy . by main force . five , because there can come no good by their ambassade , for they be to have none other commission , or authority , but only to deliver their emperor letter unto the pope , and to the prince of Christendom , which very same letter we our self have , and we know right well , that much harm may ensue thereof . wherefore , the three day after this , namely , upon the feast of saint Brice , they give we our passport and a letter seal with the emperor own seal , send we unto the emperor mother , who give unto each of we a gown make of foxe - skinne , with the fur on the outside , and a piece of purple . and our Tartar steal a yard out of every one of they . and out of that which be give unto our servant , they steal the better half . which false deal of they , we know well enough , but will make no word thereof . how they return homeward . Chap . 33 . than take our journey to return , we travail all winter long , lie in the desert oftentimes upon the snow , except with our foot we make a piece of ground bear to lie upon . for there be no tree , but the plain champion field . and oftentimes in the morning , we find our self all cover with snow drive over we by the wind . and so travail till the feast of our lord ascension , we arrive at the court of bathy . of who when we have inquire , what answer he will send unto our lord the pope , he say that he have nothing to give we in charge , but only that we shall diligent deliver that which the emperor have write . And , have receive letter for our safe conduct , the thirteenth day after Pentecost , be Saturday , we be proceed as far as Montii , with who our foresay associate and servant remain , which be withhold from we , and we cause they to be deliver unto we . from hence we travail unto corrensa , to who , require gift the second time at our hand , we give none , because we have not wherewithal ! . and he appoint we two 178 comanians , which live among the common people of the Tartar , to be our guide unto the city of Kiow in Russia . howbeit one of our Tartar part not from we , till we be past the utmost guard of the Tartar . but the other guide , namely the comanians , which be give we by corrensa , bring we from the last guard unto the city of Kiow , in the space of six day . and there we arrive fifteen day before the feast of saint John Baptist . Moreover , the citizen of Kiow have intelligence of our approach , come forth all of they to meet we , with great joy . for they rejoice over we , as over man that have be rise from death to life . so like wise they do unto we throughout all Russia , Polonia , and Bohemia . Daniel and his brother Wasilico make we a royal feast , and entertain we with they against our will for the space of eight day . in the mean time , they with their bishop , and other man of account , be in consultation together about those matter which we have propound unto they in our journey towards the Tartar , answer we with common consent , say : that they will hold the pope for their speciali lord and father , and the church of Rome for their lady and mistress , confirm likewise all thing which they have send concern this matter , before our come , by their Abbate . and for the same purpose , they send their ambassador and letter by we also , unto our lord the pope .