, and partly with fire . in the year 1098 . the abbey of saint Maries at Cistertium be found . in the same year also Antiochia be take by the christian , and a comet appear . moreover , the same year there be a battle fight between the inhabitant of man , at Santwat , and they of the north obtain the victory . in which battle be slay earl othor and mac - maras , chieftain of both part . the same year magnus king of Norway , son of Olavus , son of Harald Harfagre , be desirous to view the corpse of saint Olavus king and martyr , give commandment that his monument shall be open . but the bishop and the clergy withstand this his attempt , the king go very bold and by his kingly authority , cause the cophin ' to be open . and when he have see with his eye , and handle with his hand the incorrupt body of the foresay king and martyr , a sudden fear come upon he , and he depart with great haste . the night follow Olavus king and martyr appear unto he in a vision , say : choose ( i say ) unto your self one of these two , either within 30 . day to lose your life with your kingdom , or else to depart from Norway and never to see it again . the king so soon as he be awake out of sleep , call his prince and senator , and expound the foresay vision unto they . and they also be astonish thereat give he this counsel , that with all speed he shall depart out of Norway . than he without any further delay cause a navy of 160 . ship to be provide , and so sail unto the island of Orkney , which he present subdue , and pass along through all the island and conquer they , at length he come unto the isle of man , where he be no soon arrive , but he go unto the isle of S . Patric to see the place of battle , where the inhabitant of man have of late fight , because many of the dead body be as yet unbury . And see that it be a 28 most beautiful island , it please he exceed well , and therefore he make choice to inhabit therein his own self , and build fort there which be at this day call by his own name . he have the people of Galway in such awe , that he constrain they to cut down their own timber , and to bring it unto his shore for the build of his fort . he sail on further unto the isle of Anglesey near unto wale , and find two earl therein ( either of they be call by the name of Hugo ) he slay the one , and the other he put to flight , and so subdue the island . but the Welshman present many gift unto he , and so bid they farewell he return unto man unto Murecard king of Irland he send his shoe , command he that he shall carry they on his shoulder , upon the birthday of our lord through the midst of his palace , in the sight of his ambassador , that thereby it may appear unto they , that he be subject unto king magnus . which when the Irishman hear , they take it grievous and disdain much thereat . but the king be better advise , i have rather ( say he ) not only bear his shoe , but eat his shoe , than that king Magnus shall destroy any one province in Irland . wherefore he fulfil his commandment , and honourable entertain his ambassador . many gift also he send unto king magnus by they , and conclude a league . but the messenger return unto their lord , tell he of the situation of Irland , of the beauty thereof , of the fruitfulness of the soil , and of the holesomnesse of the air . Magnus hear these thing be full resolve to conquer all Irland unto himself . and for the same purpose he command that a fleet shall be make ready . but he take his voyage with sixteen ship , and be desirous to view the land , when he have undiscreet depart from his navy , he be sudden environ by the irish , and be himself slay , together with all that be with he almost . he be inter near unto the church of S . Patric in Armagh . he six year . after his death the prince of the 29 A . D . 1098 . island send for Olavus the son of Godredus Crovan , who live in the court of Henry king of England son unto William the conqueror . in the year 1102 . Olavus son of Godredus Crovan begin his reign and reign fourty year : he be a peaceable man be in league with all the king of Scotland and Irland in his time . he take to wife Africa the daughter of Fergusius of Galway , of who he beget Godredus . of his concubine he beget Regnaldus , Lagmannus , and Haraldus , and many daughter , whereof | | Argile , one marry unto Sumerledus king of two herergaidel , which afterward occasion the overthrow of the whole kingdom of the island . he beget four son by she , namely Dulgallus , Raignaldus , Engus , and Olavus . in the year 1134 . Olavus give unto yvo the abbot of furne a portion of his own ground in man to build a abbey in the place which be call Russin . also he enrich with revenue and endue with privilege all place of religion within his island . in the year 1142 . Godredus the son of Olavus sail unto the king of Norway call hinge , and do he homage unto he he remain with he , and be by he honorable entertain . the same year the 3 . son of Harald brother unto Olavus , who be bring up at the city of Dublin , gather together a great multitude of people , and all the fugitive and vagabond of the kingdom resort unto man , and demand of the say king the one half of all the kingdom of the island . which thing when the