concern who also i inquire very diligent in the court of Sartach 8c baatu . howbeit i can have no intelligence 282 of they , but only that their lord and master Ban be put to death upon the occasion follow : this Ban be not place in good and fertile pasture . and upon a certain day be drunken , he speak on this wise unto his man . be not i of the stock and kindred of Chingis can , as well as baatu ? ( for in very deed he be brother or nephew unto baatu . ) why then do i not pass and repass upon the bank of Etilia , to feed my cattle there , as free as baatu himself do ? which speech of he be report unto baatu . whereupon baatu write unto his servant to bring their lord bind unto he . and they do so . then baatu demand of he whether he have speak any such word ? and he confess that he have . howbeit , ( because it be the Tartar manner to pardon drunken man ) he excuse himself that he be drunken at the same time . Howe dare thou ( quoth baatu ) once name i in thy drunkenness ? and with that he cause his head to be chop off . concern the foresay Dutchman , i can not understand aught , till i be come unto the court of mangu - can . and there i be inform that mangu - can have remove they out of the jurisdiction of baatu , for the space of a month journey from Talas eastward , unto a certain village , call Bolac : where they be set to dig gold , and to make armour . whereupon i can neither go nor come by they . i pass very near the say city in go forth , as namely , within three day journey thereof : but i be ignorant that i do so : neither can i have turn out of my way , albeit i have know so much . from the foresay cottage we go direct eastward , by the mountain aforesaid . and from that time we travail among the people of mangu - can , who in all place sing and dance before our guide , because he be the messenger of baatu . for this courtesy they do afford each to other : namely , the people of mangu - can receive the messenger of baatu in manner aforesaid : and so likewise the people of baatu entertain the messenger of mangu - can . notwithstanding the people 283 the village of Bolac . he enter into the territory of mangu - can . certain Alps wherein the cara catalan inhabit . a mighty river . a lake of fifteen day journey in compass . cailac a great city , and full of merchant . Contomanni . of baatu be more surly and stout , and show not so much courtesy unto the subject of mangu - can , as they do unto they . a few day after , we enter upon those Alps where the cara catayan be wont to inhabit . and there we find a mighty river : insomuch that we be constrain to embark our self , and to sail over it . afterwards we come into a certain valley , where i see a castle destroy , the wall whereof be only of mud : and in that place the ground be till also . and there we find a certain village , name equius , wherein be Saracen , speak the persian language : howbeit they dwell a huge distance from Persia . the day follow , have pass over the foresay Alps which descend from the great mountain southward , we enter into a most beautiful plain , have high mountain on our right hand , and on the left hand of we a certain sea or lake , which contain fifteen day journey in circuit . all the foresay plain be most commodious water with certain freshet distil from the say mountain , all which do fall into the lake . in summer time we return by the north shore of the say lake , and there be great mountain on that side also . upon the forename plain there be wont to be great store of village : but for the most part they be all waste , in regard of the fertile pasture , that the Tartar may feed their cattle there . we find one great city there name Cailac , wherein be a mart , and great store of merchant frequent it . in this city we remain fifteen day , stay for a certain scribe or secretary of baatu , who ought to have accompany our guide for the dispatch of certain affair in the court of Mangu . all this country be wont to be call Organum : and the people thereof have their proper language , and their peculiar kind of writing . but it be altogether inhabit of the people call Contomanni . the nestorian likewise in those part use the very same kind of language and writing . they be call Organa , because they be wont to be most 284 skilful in play upon the organ or cithern , as it be report unto i . here first do i see worshipper of idol , concern who , be it know unto your majesty , that there be many sect of they in the east country . how the nestorian , Saracens , and idolater be join together . Chap . 26 . the first sort of these idolater be call jugure : the people who land border upon the foresay land of jusure Organum , within the say mountain eastward : and in all their city nestorian do inhabit together , and they be disperse likewise towards Persia in the city of the Saracen . the citizen of the foresay city of Cailac have 3 . idole - temple : and i enter into two of they , to behold their foolish superstition . in the first of which i find a man have a cross paint with ink upon his hand , whereupon i suppose he to be a christian : for he answer like a christian unto all question which i demand of he . and i ask he ,