they run so swift , that horse can not overtake they . they run also upon that one foot by hop and leap , and be weary of such walk , they go upon their hand and their foot , turn themselves round , as it be in a circle . And be weary of so do , they run again accord to their wont manner . Isidore cyclopede . call they cyclopede . and as it be tell we in court , by the clergy man of Russia , who remain with the foresay emperor , many ambassador be send from they unto the emperor court , to obtain peace . from thence they proceed forth into Armenia , which they Armenia 13 conquer in battle , and part also of Georgia . and the Georgia other part be under their jurisdiction , pay as yet every conquer . year unto they for tribute , 20000 piece of coin call yperpera . from thence they march into the dominion of the puissant and mighty sultan call Deurum , who also they vanquish in fight . and to be short , they go on far sack and conquer , even unto they the sultan of sultan of Aleppo his dominion , and now they have subdue that land also , determine to invade other country ’ beyond it : neither return they afterward into their own land unto this day . likewise the same army the caliph of march forward against the caliph of Baldach his Baldach . country , which they subdue also , and exact at his hand the daily tribute of 400 . byzantine , beside baldakine and other gift . also every year they send messenger unto the caliph move he to come unto they . who send back great gift together with his tribute beseech they to be favourable unto he . howbeit the tartarian emperor receive all his gift , * 54 and yet still nevertheless send for he , to have he come . how the Tartar behave themselves in war . Chap . 17 . / ^• Hingis I | be divide his Tartars by captain of the military ten , captain of a 100 and captain of a 1000 discipline of and over ten millenary or captain of a 1000 , he tfie artars ‘ place , as it be , one colonel , and yet notwithstanding over one whole army he authorise two or three duke , but yet so that all shall have especial regard unto one of the say duke . and when they join battle against any other nation , unless they do all with one consent give back , every man that fly be put to death . and if one or two , or more of ten proceed manful to the battle , but the residue of those ten draw back and follow not the company , they be in like manner slay . also , if one among ten or more be take , their fellow , if they rescue they not , be punish with death . Moreover they be enjoin to have these weapon follow . two long bow or one their good one at the least , three quiver full of arrow , and one weapon . axe , and rope to draw engine withal . but the rich sort have single edge sword , with sharp point , and somewhat crooked . they have also arm horse with their shoulder and breast defence , they have helmet and brigandine . some of they have jack , and caparison for their horse make of leather artificial double or treble upon their body . the upper part of their helmet be of iron or steel , but that part which com - passeth about the neck and the throat be of leather . howbeit some of they have all their foresay furniture of iron frame in manner follow . they beat out many thin plate a finger broad , and a handful long , and make in every one of they eight little hole , they put thereunto three strong and strait leather thong . so they join the plate one to another , as it be , ascend by degree . than they tie the plate 155 their experience and cunning in warn . their manner of pass over river . unto the say thong , with other small and slender thong , draw through the hole aforesaid , and in the upper part , on each side thereof , they fasten one small double thong unto another , that the plate may firm be knit together . Theise they make , as well for their horse caparison , as for the armour of their man : and they skowre they so bright that a man may behold his face in they . some of they upon the neck of their lance have a hook , wherewithal ! they attempt to pull man out of their saddle . the head of their arrow be exceed sharp cut both way like a two edge sword , and they always carry a file in their quiver to whet their arrowhead . they have target make of wicker , or of small rod . howbeit they do not ( as we suppose ) accustom to carry they , but only about the tent , or in the emperor or duke guard , and that only in the night season . they be most politic in war , have be exercise therein with other nation for the space of these 42 . year . when they come at any river , the chief man of the company have a round and light piece of leather , about the border whereof make many loop , they put a rope into they to draw it together like a purse , and so bring it into the round form of a ball , which leather they fill with their garment and other necessary , truss it up most strong . but upon the midst of the upper part thereof , they lie their saddle and other hard thing , there also do the man themselves sit . this their boat they tie unto a horse tail , cause a man to swim before , and to guide over the horse , or sometime they have two oar to row themselves over .