will gnaw upon carrion . towards the border of the say province there be many great lake : upon the bank whereof be salt pit or fountain , the water of which so soon as it enter into 233 the neck of Taurica Chersonesus . the lake , become hard salt like unto ice . and out of those salt pit baatu and Sartach have great revenue : for they repair thither out of all Russia for salt : and for each cart load they give two web of cotton amount to the value of half a yperpera . there come by sea also many ship for salt , which pay tribute every one of they accord to their burden . the three day after we be depart out of the precinct of Soldaia , we the Tartar , find the Tartar . among who be enter , i think i be come into a new world . who life and manner i will describe unto your highness as well as i can . of the Tartar , and of their house . Chap . 2 . they have in no place any settle city to abide in , neither know they of the celestial city to come . they have divide all Scythia among themselves , which stretch from the river Danubius even unto the rise of the sun . and every of their captain , accord to the great or small number of his people , know the bound of his pasture , and where he ought to feed his cattle winter and summer , spring and autumn . for in the winter they descend unto the warm region southward . and in the summer they ascend unto the cold region northward . in winter when snow lie upon the ground , they feed their cattle upon pasture without water , because than they use snow in stead of water . their house wherein they sleep , they ground upon a round foundation of wicker artificial wrought and compact together : the roof whereof consist ( in like sort ) of wicker , meet above into one little roundel , out of which roundel ascend upward a neck like unto a chimney , which they cover with white self , and oftentimes they lie mortar or white earth upon the say felt , with the powder of bone , that it may shine white . and sometime also they cover it with black self . the say self on the neck of their house , they do garnish over with beautiful variety of picture . before the door likewise they hang a felt curious paint over . for 234 1253 - they spend all their colour felt , in paint vine , tree , bird , and beast thereupon . the say house they make so large , that they contain thirty foot in breadth . for measure once the breadth between the wheele - ruts of one of their cart , i find it to be 2 o foot over : and when the house be upon the cart , it stretch over the wheel on each side five foot at the least . i tell 22 . ox in one team , draw a house upon a cart , eleven in one order accord to the breadth of the cart , and eleven more before they : the axletree of the cart be of a huge bigness like unto the mast of a ship . and a fellow stand in the door of the house , upon the forestall of the cart drive forth the ox . Moreover , they make certain foursquare basket of small slender wicker as big as great chest : and afterward , from one side to another , they frame a hollow lid or cover of such like wicker , and make a door in the fore side thereof . and then they cover the say chest or little house with black felt rub over with tallow or sheep milk to keep the rain from soak through , which they deck likewise with paint or with feather . and in such chest they put their whole household stuff and treasure . also the same chest they do strong bind upon other cart , which be draw with camel , to you end they may wade through river . neither do they at any time take down the say chest from off their cart . when they take down their dwell house , they turn the door always to the south : and next of all they place the cart lade with their chest , here and there , within half a stone cast of you house : insomuch that the house stand between two rank of cart , as it be , between two wall . the matron make for themselves most beautiful cart , which i be not the benefit of able to describe unto your majesty but by picture only : “ f ^ ntertn for i will right willing have paint all thing for you , c ° un ~ have my skill be aught in that art . one rich Moal or Tartar have 200 . or 100 such cart with chest . duke baatu have sixteen wife , every one of which have one great house , beside other little house , which they place 235 behind the great one , be as it be chamber for their maiden to dwell in . and unto every of the say house do belong 200 . cart . when they take their house from off the cart , the principal wife place her court on the west frontier , and so all the rest in their order : so that the last wife dwell upon the east frontier : and one of the say lady court be distant from another about a stone cast . whereupon the court of one rich Moal or Tartar will appear like unto a great village , very few man abide in the same . one woman will guide 20 . or 30 . cart at once , for their country be very plain , and they bind the cart with camel or ox , one behind another . and there sit a wench in the foremost cart drive the ox , and all the residue follow on a like pace . when they chance to come at any bad passage , they let they loose , and