the long and wonderful voyage of Frier John de Plano Carpini , send ambassador by pope Innocentius the four . An . do . 1246 to the great can of Tartary ; wherein he pass through Bohemia , Polonia , Russia , and so to the city of Kiow upon Boristhenes , and from thence ride continual post for the space of six month through Comania , over the mighty and famous river of Tanais , Volga , and laic , and through the country of the people call Kangittae , bisermini , karakitay , Naimani , and so to the native country of the mongal or Tartar , situate in the extreme northeaster ne part of all Asia : and thence back again the same way to Russia , and Polonia , and so to roam ; spend in the whole voyage among the say Tartar one whole year and above four month : take out of the 32 . book of Vincentius Beluacensis his speculum historial . libri xxxii . Ascelinus . tartarorum species . Tonsura . Habitus . 1 97 oh temperantia . Castitas . sorde , Temulentia , 101 25 - 102 103 Chingis salutatur imperator . Cathaynorum light ree and religio . 104 105 Burithabeth regio . 107 Interitus . nepotes . duces . 109 Barchin civitas . 51 videmecho - vium , lib . 1 . ca . 3 . 110 + impugnare : nec postea reversion sunt in terram svam usque tartarorum militaris disciplina . 1 113 h tartaros Ferri temperamentum . Lituani . 117 legationis mandata . [ i - + 7 - 1 118 qualiter recepti sunt apud bathy magnum principem . Cap . 22 . 119 bathy audit legatos . 120 qualiter recedentes a bathy per terram comanorum 121 A . D . I246 . Burin . Oceanus ab aquilone . Syban , frater bathy . Nigri Cathayni . mare parvum . plures insula . terra 125 qualiter in imperium sublimatus fuit . Cap . 27 . 126 127 studium 1 129 1 Chingay internuntius . i3i Novemb . 13 . bathy . 133 [ the voyage the voyage of Johannes de Plano Carpini unto the north - east part of the world , in the year of our lord , 1246 . of the first send of certain friar predicants and minorite unto the Tartar , take out of the 32 . book of Vincentius Beluacensis his speculum historial : begin at the second chapter . Ascellinus . [ i - 54 - 1 bout this time also , pope Innocentius the four send Frier Ascelline be one of the order of the predicants , together with three other friar ( of the same authority whereunto they be call ) consort with he out of diverse coven of their order , with letter apostolical unto the tar tar camp : wherein he exhort they to give over their bloody slaughter of mankind , and to receive the christian faith . and i , in very deed , receive the relation concern the deed of the Tartar only , ( which , accord to the congruence of time , i have above insert into this my work ) from a friar minorite , call Simon de Sanct . Quintin , who late return from the same voyage . and at that very time also , there be a certain other friar minorite , namely friar John de Plano Carpini , send with certain associate unto the Tartar , who likewise ( as himself witness ) abide and converse with they a year and three month at the least . for both he and one friar Benedict a polonian be of the same order , and a partaker of all his misery and tribulation , receive straight commandment from the pope , that both of they shall diligent search out all thing that concern the state of the Tartar . and therefore this friar John have write a little Historic ( which be come to our hand ) of such thing , as with his own eye he see among the Tartar , or which he hear from diverse Christians worthy of credit , remain there in captivity . out of which history i 134 think good by way of conclusion , to insert somewhat for the supply of those thing which be want in the say friar Simon . of the situation and quality of the Tartar land , by Johannes de Plano Carpini . Chap . 3 . there be towards the east a land which be call mongal or Tartary , lie in that part of the world which be think to be most north easterly . on the east part it have the country of Kythay and of the people call Solangi : on the south part the country of the Saracen : on the south east the land of the Huini : and on the west the province of Naimani : but on the north side it be environ with the ocean sea in some part thereof it be full of mountain , and in other place plain and smoothe ground , but every where sandy and barren , neither be the hundred part thereof fruitful . for it can bear fruit unless it be moisten with river water , which be very rare in that country . whereupon they have neither village , nor city among they , except one which be call Cracurim , and be say to be a proper town . we our self see not this town , but be almost within half a day journey thereof , when we remain at Syra orda , which be the great court of their emperor . and albeit the foresay land be otherwise unfruitful , yet be it very commodious for the bring up of cattle . in certain place thereof be some small store of tree grow , but otherwise it be altogether destitute of wood . therefore the emperor , and his noble man and all other warm themselves , and dress their meat with fire make of the dung of ox , and horse . the air also in that country be very intemperate . for in the midst of summer there be great thunder and lightning , by the which many man be slay , and at the same time there fall great abundance of snow . there be also such mighty tempest