mjjst . because the governor or chieftain among they dwell always in the midst of his people : except only that direct towards the south no subject or inferior person place himself , because towards that region the court gate be set open : but unto the right hand , and the left hand they extend themselves as far as they 272 will , accord to the conveniency of place , so that they place not their house direct opposite against the court . at our arrival we be conduct unto a sarazen , who provide not for we any victual at all . the day follow , we be bring unto the court : and baatu have cause a large tent to be erect , because his house or ordinary tent can not contain so many man and woman as be assemble . our guide admonish we not to speak , till baatu have give we commandment so to do , and that then we shall speak our mind brief . then baatu demand whether your majesty have send ambassador unto he or no ? i answer , that your majesty have send messenger to ken - can : and that you will not have send messenger unto he , or letter unto Sartach , have not your highness be persuade that they be become Christians : because you send not unto they for any fear , but only for congratulation , and courtesy sake , in regard that you hear they be convert to Christianity . then lead he we unto his pavilion : and we be charge not to touch the cord of the tent , which they account in stead of the threshold of the house . there we stand in our habit barefooted , and bareheaded , and be a great and strange spectacle in their eye . for indeed friar John de Plano John de Plano Carpini have be there before my come : Carpini . howbeit , because he be the pope messenger , he change his habit that he may not be contemn . than we be bring into the very midst of the tent , neither require they of we to do any reverence by bow our knee , as they use to do of other messenger . we stand therefore before he for the space wherein a man may have rehearse the psalm , miserere mei deus : and there be great silence keep of all man . baatu himself sit upon a seat long and broad like unto a bed , guilt all over , with three stair to ascend thereunto , and one of his lady sit beside he . the man there assemble , sit down scatter , some on the right hand of the say lady , and some on the left . those place i 273 s on the one side which the woman fill not up ( for there be only the wife of baatu ) be supply by the man . also , at the very entrance of the tent , stand a bench furnish with cosmo , and with stately great cup of silver , and gold , be rich set with precious stone . baatu behold we earnest , and we he : and he seem to i to resemble in personage , monsieur John de beau mont , who soul rest in peace . and he have a fresh ruddy colour in his countenance . at length he command we to speak . than our guide give we direction , that we shall bow our knee and speak . whereupon 1 bow one knee as unto a man : than he signify that i shall kneel upon both knee : and 1 do so , be loath to contend about such circumstance . and again he command i to speak . than i think of prayer unto God , because i kneel on both my knee , begin to pray on this wise : sir , we beseech the lord , from who all good thing do proceed , and who have give you these earthly benefit , that it will please he hereafter to make you partaker of his heavenly blessing : because the former without these be but vain and improfitable . and i add further . be it know unto you of a certainty , that you shall not obtain the joy of heaven , unless you become a christian : for God say , whosoever believe and be baptize , shall | be save : but he that believe not , shall | be condemn . at this word he modest smile : but the other moal begin to clap their hand , and to deride we . and my silly interpreter , of who especial i shall have receive comfort in time of need , be himself abash and utter dash out of countenance . then , after silence make , i say unto he , i come unto your son , because we hear that he be become a christian : and i bring unto he letter on the behalf of my sovereign lord the king of France : and your son send i hither unto you . the cause of my come therefore be best know unto your self . than he cause i to rise up . and he inquire your majesty name , and my name , and the name of i 274 associate and interpreter , and cause they all to be put down in writing . he demand likewise ( because he have be inform , that you be depart out of your own country with a army ) against who you wage war ? i answer : against the Saracen , who have defile the house of God at Jerusalem . he ask also , whether your highness have ever before that time send any messenger unto he , or no ? to you sir ? ( say i ) never . then cause he we to sit down , and give we of his milk to drink , which they account to be a great favour , especial when any man be admit to drink Cosmos with he in his own house . and as i sit look down upon the ground , he command i to lift up my countenance , be desirous as yet to take more diligent view of we , or else perhaps for a kind of