desirous to take more diligent view thereof . i present suspect what mischief may ensue by his covetousness , say unto he : sir , we will not only leave those with you , but the two other cart also , which we have in our possession , will we commit unto your custody . you shall not ( quoth he ) leave those behind you , but for the other two cart first name , we will satisfy your request . i say that this can not convenient be do : but needs we must leave all with he . than he ask , whether we mean to tarry in the land ? i answer : if you thorough understand the letter of my lord the king , you know that we be even so determine . than he reply , that we ought to be patient and lowly : and so we depart from he that evening . on the morrow after he send a nestorian priest for the cart , and we cause all the four cart to be deliver . then come the foresay brother of Coiat to meet we , and separate all those thing , which we have bring the day before unto the court , from the rest , namely , the book and vestment , and take they away with he . howbeit Coiat have command , that we shall carry those vestment with we , which we wear in the presence of Sartach , that we may put they on before baatu , if need shall require : but the say priest take they from we by violence , say : thou have bring they unto sartach , and will thou carry they unto baatu ? and when i will have render a reason , he answer : be not too talkative , but go your way . than i see that there be no remedy but patience : for we can have no access unto sartach himself , neither be there any other , that will do we justice . i be afraid also in regard of the interpreter , lest he have speak other thing than i say unto he : for his will be good that we shall have give away all 265 they be come as far as Tolga . the Tartar will be call Moal . that we have . there be yet one comfort remain unto i : for when i once perceive their covetous intent , i convey from among our book the bible , and the sentence , and certain other book which i make speciali account of . howbeit i dare not take away the psalter of my sovereign lady the queen , because it be too well know , by reason of the golden picture therein . and so we return with the two other cart unto our lodging . then come he that be appoint to be our guide unto the court of baatu , will we to take our journey in all posthaste : unto who i say , that i will in no case have the cart to go with i . which thing he declare unto Coiat . then Coiat command , that we shall leave they and our servant with he : and we do as he command . and so travel direct eastward towards baatu , the three day we come to Etilia or Volga : the stream whereof when i behold , i wonder from what region of the north such huge and mighty water shall descend . before we be depart from Sartach , the foresay coiat , with many other scribe of the court say unto we : do not make report that our lord be a christian , but a Moal . because the name of a christian seem unto they to be the name of some nation . so great be their pride , that albeit they believe perhaps some thing concern Christ , yet will they not be call Christians , be desirous that their own name , that be to say , Moal shall be exalt above all other name . neither will this history of they be call by the name of Tartar . for the presbyter John Tartars be another nation , as i be inform by they . in the north - east , be allead - how sartach , and mangu - can , and ken - can ge at large do reverence unto Christians . Chap . 10 . by Gerardus * 1 z mercator in a t the same time when the Frenchman take his general Antioch , a certain man name Con can have map . dominion over the northern region , lie thereabouts . con be a proper name : can be a name of authority or dignity , which signify a divine or soothsayer . all 266 diviners be call can among they . whereupon their prince be call can , because that unto they belong the government of the people by divination . we do read also in the history of Antiochia , that the Turk send for aid against the Frenchman , unto the kingdom of Con can . for out of those part the whole nation of from whence the Turk first come . the say con be of the nation turk of kara - catay . Kara signify black , and catay be the frst spran &- name of a country . so that kara - catay signify the black catay . this name be give to make a difference between the foresay people , and the people of catay , inhabit eastward over against you ocean sea : con - an ocean sea . cern who your majesty shall understand more hereafter . Theise Catayans dwell upon certain Alps , by the which i travail . and in a certain plain country within those Alps , there inhabit a nestorian shepherd , be a mighty governor over the people call Yayman , Nayman . which be Christians , follow the sect of Nestorius . after the death of Con can , the say nestorian exalt himself to the kingdom , and they call he king John , report ten time more of he then be true . for so the nestorian which come out of those part , use to do . for they blaze abroad great rumour , and report upon just nothing . whereupon they give out