and among so many drove it can be , but some cattle must needs die . howbeit in summer , so long as their Cosmos , that be , their mare milk last , they care not for any food . and if they chance to have a ox or a horse dye , they dry the flesh thereof : for cut it into thin slice and hang it up against the sun and the wind , it be dryingofflesh present dry without salt , and also without stench tn the mnd " or corruption . they make better pudding of their horse then of their hog , which they eat be new make : the rest of the flesh they reserve until winter . they make of their ox skin great bladder or bag , which they do wonderful dry in the smoke . of the hinder part of their horse hide they make very fine sandal and pantofle . they give unto 50 . or a 100 man the flesh of one ram to eat . for they mince it in a bowl with salt and water ( other sauce they have none ) and then with the point of a knife , or a little fork which they make for the same purpose ( such as we use to take roast pear or apple out of wine withal ) they reach unto every one of the company a morsel ! or twain , accord to the multitude of guest . the master of the house , before the ram flesh be distribute , first of all himself take thereof , what he please . also , if he give unto any of the company a speciali part , the receiver thereof must eat it alone , and must not impart aught thereof unto any other . not be able to eat it up all , he carry it with he , or deliver it unto his boy , if he be present , to keep it : if not , he put it up into his Saptargat , that be to say , his four square buget , which they use to carry about with they for the save of all such provision , and wherein they lie up their bone , when they have not time to gnaw they thorough , that they may burnish they afterward , 239 1253 - to the end that no whit of their food may come to nought . how they make their drink call Cosmos . Chap . 6 . their drink call Cosmos , which be mare milk , be prepare after this manner . they fasten a long line unto 2 . post stand firm in the ground , and unto the same line they tie the young foy of those mere , which they mean to milk . then come the dam to stand by their foy gentle suffer themselves to be milk . and if any of they be too unruly , then one take her foie , and put it under she , let it suck a while , and present carry it away again , there come another man to milk the say mare . and have get a good quantity of this milk together ( be as sweet as cow milk ) while it be new they power it into a great bladder or bag , and they beat the say bag with a piece of wood make for the purpose , have a club at the low end like a man head , which be hollow within : and so soon as they beat upon it , it begin to boil like new wine , and to be sour and sharp of taste , and they beat it in that manner till butter come thereof . then taste they thereof , and be indifferent sharp they drink it : for it bite a man tongue like the wine of rasp , when it be drink . after a man have take a draught thereof , it leave behind it a taste like the taste of almond milk , and go down very pleasant , intoxicate weak brain : also it cause urine to be avoid in great measure . likewise Caracosmos , that be to say black Cosmos , for great lord to drink , they make on this manner . first they beat the say milk so long till the thick part thereof descend right down to the bottom like the lees of white wine , and that which be thin and pure remain above , be like unto whey or white must . the say lees or dregs be very white , be give to servant , and will cause they to sleep exceed . that which be thin and clear their master drink : and in very deed it be marvelous 240 sweet and wholesome liquor . duke baatu have thirty cottage or grange within a day journey of his abide place : every one of which serve he daily with the Caracosmos of a hundred mare milk , and so all of they together every day with the milk of 3000 . mere , beside white milk which other of his subject bring . for even as the husbandman of Syria bestow the three part of their fruit and carry it unto the court of their lord , even so do they their mare milk every three day . out of their cow milk they first churn butter , boil the which butter unto a perfect decoction , they put it into ram skin , which they reserve for the same purpose . neither do they salt their butter : and yet by reason of the long seethe , it putrefi not : and they keep it in store for winter . the churnmilke which remain of the butter , they let alone till it be as sour as possible it may be , than they boil it and in boil , it be turn all into curd , which curd they dry in the sun , make they as hard as the dross of iron : and this kind of food also they store up in satchel against winter . in the winter season when milk fail they , they put the foresay curd ( which they call gry - ut ) into a bladder , and pour hot water thereinto , they beat it lusty till they have resolve it