the cauldron , or to hew with a hatchet near unto the fire . for they think by that mean to take away the head or force from the fire . another be to lean upon the whip , wherewith they beat their horse : for they ride not with spur . also , to touch arrow with a whip , to take or kill young bird , to strike a horse with you rain of their bridle , and to break one bone against another . also , to power out milk , meat , or any kind of drink upon the ground or to make water within their tabernacle : which whosoever do willing , he be slay , but otherwise he must pay a great sum of money to the enchanter to be purify . who likewise must cause the tabernacle with all thing therein , to pass between two fier . before it be on this wise purify , no man dare once enter into it , nor convey any thing thereout . beside , if any man have a morsel give he , which he be not able to swallow , and for that cause cast it out of his mouth , there be a hole make under his tabernacle , by which he be draw forth and slay without all compassion . likewise , whosoever tread upon the threshold of any of their duke tabernacle , he be put to death . many other thing there be , like unto these , which they take for heinous offence . but to slay man , to invade the dominion of other people , and to rifle their good , to transgress the commandment and prohibition of God , be with they no offence at all . they know nothing concern eternal life , and everlasting damnation , and yet they think , that after death they shall live in another world , that they shall multiply their cattle , that they shall eat and drink and doe other thing which live man perform here upon earth . at a new moon , or a full moon , they begin all enterprise 141 A . D . I246 . ridiculous tradition . the Tartar ■ worship the moon . that they take in hand , and they call the moon the great emperor , and worship it upon their knee . all man that abide in their tabernacle must be purify with their custom fire : which purification be on this wise , they kindle two of purify . flresj anj pitch two javelin into the ground near unto the say fire , bind a cord to the top of the javelin . and about the cord they tie certain jag of buckram , under which cord , and between which fire , man , beast , and tabernacle do pass . there stand two woman also , one on the right side , and another on the left cast water , and repeat certain charm . if any man be slay by lightning , all that dwell in the same tabernacle with he must pass by fire in manner aforesaid . for their tabernacle , bed , and cart , their felt and garment , and whatsoever such thing they have , be touch by no man , yea , and be abandon by all man as thing unclean . and to be short , they think that all thing be to be purge by fire . therefore , when any ambassadors , prince , or other personage whatsoever come unto they , they and their gift must pass between two fire to be purify , lest peradventure they have practise some witchcraft , or have bring some poison or other mischief with they . [ i . 57 - 1 the people of Tartary . the original in the exploit of Chingis . of the beginning of their empire or government . Chap . 8 . the east country , whereof we have entreat , which be call Mongal , be report to have have of old time four sort of people . one of their companion be call Yeka Mongal , that be the great mongal . the second company be call Sumongal , that be , the water - mongals , who call themselves Tartar of a certain river run through their country name Tartar . the three be call Merkat , and the four metrit . all these people have one and the same person , attire of body and language , albeit they be divide by prince and province . in the province of Yeka Mongal , there be a certain man call Chingis . this man 142 become a mighty hunter . for he learn to steal man , and to take they for a prey . he range into other country take as many captive as he can , and join they unto himself . also he allure the man of his own country unto he , who follow he as their captain and ringleader to do mischief . then begin he to make war upon the sumongal or Tartar , and slay their captain , and after many conflict , subdue they unto himself , and bring they all into bondage . afterwards he use their help to fight against the merkat , dwell by the Tartar , who also he vanquish in battle . proceed from thence , he fight against the metrite , and conquer they also . the TheNaimani . Naimani hear that Chingis be thus exalt , great disdain thereat . for they have a mighty and puissant emperor , unto who all the foresay nation pay tribute . who son , when he be dead , succeed he in his empire . howbeit , be young and foolish , they know not how to govern the people , but be the discord of divide , and fall at variance among themselves . now brethren . Chingis be exalt , as be aforesaid , they nevertheless invade the forename country , put the inhabitant to the sword , and carry away their good for a prey . which Chingis have intelligence of , gather all his subject together . the Naimani also , and the people call karakitay assemble and band themselves at a certain straight valley , where , after a battle fight they be vanquish