Nell , namely Dufgaldus , Torquellus , and Molmore , and his friend 3 » Joseph unto man , that they may enter into consultation together . wherefore the 25 . day they assemble themselves at Tingvalla : and malice grow between the son of Nell , and Loglen , they fall to blow and skirmish sore on both part , Molmore , Dufgald , and the foresay Joseph be all slay in the fray . the spring follow , king Harald come into the isle of man , and Loglen flee into wale , be himself , together with godred the son of Olavus his pupil , and 40 . other , drown by shipwreck . in the year 1238 . Gospatricius and gillescrist son of mac - kerthac come from the king of Norway unto man , expelling Harald out of the say island , and take tribute on the behalf of the Norwegian king , because the say Harald refuse to come unto his court . in the year 1240 . Gospatricius decease and be bury in the abbey of Russin . in the year 1239 . Haraldus go unto the king of Norway , who within two year confirm unto he , his heir and successor , under seal , all the island which his predecessor enjoy . in the year 1242 . Haraldus return out of Norway unto man , and be honourable receive by the inhabitant , he live in peace with the king of England and Scotland . in the year 1247 . Haraldus ( like as his father also before he ) be knight by the king of England , and so be reward with many gift , he return home . the same year he be send for by the king of Norway , and he marry his daughter . and in the year 1249 . as he be return home with his wife , with Laurence the elect of man , and with many other noble , near unto the confine of Radland , he be drown in a tempest . in the year 1249 . Reginald the son of Olavus , and brother unto Harald begin to reign the day next before the nonce of May : and upon the 30 . day of the same month he be slay by Yvarus a soldier , and other of his complice , in the south part of a certain meadow , 39 A . D . X249 . near unto the church of the holy Trinity , and he be bury at the church of S . marry at Russin . the same year Alexander king of Scot provide a great navy of ship , that he may conquer the island unto himself : howbeit fall into a ague at the isle of ker - wary , he decease . then Haraldus the son of godr don usurp the name of a king over the island , he banish also all the prince of Harald the son of Olavus , and ordain his fugitive to be prince and noble in their stead . in the year 1250 . Haraldus the son of godr don be summon by letter go unto the king of Norway , who detain he in prison because he have unjust possess the kingdom . the same year magnus the son of Olavus , and John the son of Dugalt arrive at Roghalwaht , which John name himself king , but the mannians take it grievous , that Magnus be not nominate , drive they from their shore , and many of the company perish by shipwreck . in the year 1252 . come Magnus the son of Olavus unto man , and be ordain king . the year follow he take his journey unto the king of Norway , and there he remain one whole year . in the year 1254 . Haco king of Norway ordain Magnus the son of Olavus king of the island , confirm they to he and to his heir , and by name unto Harald his brother . in the year 1256 . Magnus take his journey into England , and be by the king of England create knight . in you year 1257 . the church of S . Maries of Russin be dedicate by Richard bishop of Soder . in the year 1260 . Haco king of Norway come into the part of Scotland , and without achieve aught , turn his course towards the Orcades he there decease at kir - was , and be bury at Bergen . in the year 1265 . Magnus the son of Olavus king of man and of the island die at the castle of Russin , and be bury at the church of S . marry at Russin . in the year 1266 . the kingdom of the island be translate unto Alexander king of Scot . that which follow be write in a new character or letter , and of a diverse kind from the former . in the year 1270 . upon the seven day of October the fleet of Alexander king of Scot arrive at Roghalwath , and the next day before the sun rise there be a battle fight between the mannians and the Scot , in the which conflict there be slay 535 . mannians : whereupon a certain versifier write to this effect : five hundred fourty man be slay : against ill hap , you mannians arm your self , for fear of afterclap . in the year 1313 . Robert king of Scot besiege the castle of Russin , which dingaway Dowil hold against he , howbeit at the last the king take the castle . in the year 1316 . upon the feast of ascension , Richard le Mandevile and his brethren , with diverse great personage of Irland arrive at Ramaldwath , demand to have victual and money minister unto they , because they have be spoil by their enemy , which make continual war upon they . but when the whole company of the mannians answer that they will give nothing , they proceed against they in warlike manner with two band , till they be come under the side of the hill call Warthfel , in the field where John Mandevile remain , and there have fight a battle , the irish overcome the people of man , and spoil the island and the abbey of Russin also : and when they have revel a whole month in the island , lade their ship they return home . 41