far off they can descry any people . at length upon the four day of our journey , have find some inhabitant , we rejoice like seafaring man , which have escape out of a dangerous tempest , and have new recover the haven . then have take fresh horse , and ox , we pass on from lodging to lodging , till at the last , upon the 259 about the begin of August , the Tartar return southward . A . D . I253 ’ the people of Moxel be pagan . the people call Merdui be Saracen . the circuit of the caspian sea . [ i . 105 . i second of the kalend of August , we arrive at the habitation of duke sartach himself . of the dominion of Sartach , and of his subject . Chap . 16 . the region lie beyond Tanais , be a very goodly country , have store of river and wood towards the north part thereof . there be mighty huge wood which two sort of people do inhabit . one of they be call Moxel , be mere pagan , and without law . they have neither town nor city , but only cottage in you wood . their lord and a great part of themselves be put to the sword in high Germany . whereupon they high commend the brave courage of the almain , hope as yet to be deliver out of the bondage of the Tartar , by their mean . if any merchant come unto they , he must provide thing necessary for he , with who he be first of all entertained , all the time of his abode among they . if any lie with another man wife , her husband , unless he be a eiewitnes thereof , regard it not : for they be not jealous over their wife . they have abundance of hog , and great store of honey and wax , and diverse sort of rich and costly skin , and plenty of falcon . next unto they be other people call Merclas , which the Latines call Merdui , and they be Saracen . beyond they be the river of Etilia or Volga , which be the mighty river that ever i see . and it issue from the north part of Bulgaria the great , and so trending along southward , disimboqu into a certain lake contain in circuit the space of 4 . month travel , whereof i will speak hereafter . the two foresay river , namely Tanais and Etilia , otherwise call Volga , towards the northern region through the which we travel , be not distant asunder above ten . day journey , but southward they be divide a great space one from another . for Tanais descend into the sea of Pontus : Etilia make the foresay sea or lake , with the help of many 260 other river which fall thereinto out of Persia . and we have to the south of we huge high mountain , upon the side whereof , towards the say desert , do the people call Cergis , and the Alani or Acas inhabit , who be ker & s or as yet Christians , and wage war against the Tartar . aas - beyond they , next unto the sea or lake of Etilia , there be certain Saracen call Lesgi , who be in subjection unto the Tartar . beyond these be Porta ca ferrea , or the iron gate , now call Derbent , which Alexander build to exclude the barbarous nation out of Persia . concern the situation whereof , your majesty shall understand more about the end of this treatise : for i travail in my return by the very same place . between the two foresay river , in the ’ region through the which we pass do the comanians of old time inhabit , before they be overrun by the Tartar . of the court of Sartach , and of the magnificence thereof . Chap . 17 . a nd we find sartach lie within three day journey of the river Etilia : who court seem unto we to be very great . for he himself have six wife , and his elder son also have three wife : every one of which woman have a great house , and they have each one of they about 200 . cart . our guide go unto a certain nestorian name Coiat , who be a man of great authority calat the in sartachs court . he make we to go very far unto nestorian . the lord gate . for so they call he , who have the office of entertain ambassador . in the evening Coiac command we to come unto he . than our guide begin to inquire what we will present he withal , and be exceed offend , when he see that we have nothing ready to present . we stand before he , and he sit majestical , have music and dance in his presence . than i speak unto he in the word before recite , tell he , for what purpose i be come unto his lord , and request so much 261 favour at his hand , as to bring our letter unto the sight of his lord . i excuse my self also , that i be a monk , not have , nor receive , nor use any gold , or silver , or any other precious thing , save only our book , and the vestment wherein we serve God : and that this be the cause why i bring no present unto he , nor unto his lord . for i that have abandon my own good , can not be a transporter of thing for other man . than he answer very courteous , that be a monk , and so do , i do well : for so i shall observe my vow : neither do himself stand in need of aught that we have , but rather be ready to bestow upon we such thing as we our self stand in need of : and he cause we to sit down , and to drink of his milk . and present after he request we to say our devotion for he : and we do so . he inquire also who be the great prince among