our self , for we be none of his subject . 171 of his age and demeanour , and of his seal . Chap . 28 . this emperor , when he be exalt unto his government , seem to be about the age of forty or forty five year , he be of a mean stature , very wise and politic , and pass serious and grave in all his demeanour . a rare thing it be , for a man to see he laugh or behave himself light , as those Christians report , which abide continual with he . certain Christians of his family earnest and strong affirm unto we , that he himself be about to become a christian . a token and argument whereof be , that he retain diverse clergy man of the Christians . he have likewise at all time a chapel of Christians , near unto his great tent , where the clerk ( like unto other Christians , and accord to the custom of the grecian ) do sing public and open , and ring bell at certain hour , be there never so great a multitude of Tartar , or of other people in presence . and yet none of their duke do the like . it be the manner of the emperor never to talk his own self with a stranger , though he be never so great , but hear and answer by a speaker . and when any of his subject ( how great soever they be ) be in propound any matter of importance unto he , or in hear his answer , they continue kneel upon their knee unto the end of their conference . neither be it lawful for any man to speak of any affair , after they have be determine of by the emperor . the say emperor , have in his affair both public and private , a agent , and secretary of estate , with scribe and all other officials , except advocate . for , without the noise of plead , or sentence give , all thing be do according to the emperor will and pleasure . other tartarian prince do the like in those thing which belong unto they . but , be it know unto all man , that while we remain at the say emperor court , which have be ordain and keep for these many year , the 172 say Cuyne be emperor new elect , together with all his prince , erect a flag of defiance against the church of God , and the roman empire , and against all christian war ™ in - . kingdom and nation of the west , unless peradventure ^ iq ^ tians ( which God forbid ) they will condescend unto those j thing , which he have enjoin unto our lord the pope , l and to all potentate and people of the christian , namely , that they will become obedient unto he . for , except Christendom , there be no land under heaven , which they stand in fear of , and for that cause they prepare themselves to battle against we . this emperor father , namely occoday be poison to death , which be the cause why they have for a short space abstain from war . but their intent and purpose be ( as i have above say ) to subdue the whole world unto themselves , as they be command by Chingis can . hence it be that the emperor in his letter write after this manner : the power of God , and emperor of all man . also , upon his seal , there be this posy engrave : God in heaven , and cuyne can upon earth , the power of God : the seal of the emperor of all man . of the admission of the friar and ambassador unto the emperor . Chap . 29 . in the same place where the emperor be establish cuynehear into his throne , we be summon before he . and the legate . Chingay his chief secretary have write down our name , and the name of they that send we , with the name of the duke of Solangi , and of other , cry out with a loud voice , rehearse the say name before the emperor , and the assembly of his duke . which be do , each one of we bow his left knee four time , and they give we warning not to touch the threshold . and after they have search we most diligent for knife , and can not find any about we , we enter in at the door upon the east side : because no man dare presume to enter at the west door , but the emperor only . in like manner , every tartarian duke enter on the west side into his tent . howbeit the inferior sort do not 173 great regard such ceremony . This therefore be the first time , when we enter into the emperor tent in his presence , after he be create emperor . likewise all other ambassador be there receive by he , but very few be admit into his tent . and there be pregift presen - scent unto he such abundance of gift by the say t unto he . ambassador , that they seem to be infinite , namely in samite , robe of purple , and of Baldakin cloth , silk girdle wrought with gold , and costly skin , with other gift also . likewise there be a certain sun canopy , or small tent ( which be to be carry over the emperor head ) present unto he , be set full of precious stone . and a governor of one province bring unto he a company of camel cover with Baldakins . they have saddle also upon their back , with certain other instrument , within the which be place for man to sit upon . also they bring many horse and mule unto he furnish w ‘ trapper and caparison , some be make of leather , and some of iron . and we be demand whether we will bestow any gift upon he or no ? but we be not of ability so to do , have in a manner spend all our