provision . there be also upon a hill stand a good distance from the tent , 500 cartsful more than 500 cart , which be all full of silver and of of treasure . gold , and silk garment . and they be all divide be - between the emperor and his duke , and every duke bestow upon his own follower what please he . of the place where the emperor and his mother take their leaf one of another , and of Jeroslaus duke of Russia . Chap . 30 . a tent of t ' xepart thence , we come unto another place , where purple . a wonderful brave tent , all of red purple , give by the kythayans , be pitch . we be admit into that also , and always when we enter , there be give unto we ale and wine to drink , and sodden flesh ( when we will ) to eat . there be also a lofty stage build of board , where the emperor throne be place , be 174 very curious wrought out of ivory , wherein also there thnne of be gold and precious stone , and ( as we remember ) lvme - there be certain degree or stair to ascend unto it . and it be round upon the top . there be bench place about the say throne , whereon the lady sit toward the left hand of the emperor upon stool , ( but none sit aloft on the right hand ) and the duke sit upon bench below , the say throne be in the midst . certain other sit behind the duke , and every day there resort great company of lady thither . the three tent whereof we speak before , be very large , but the emperor his wife have other great and fair tent make of white felt . this be the place where the emperor part company with his mother : for she go into one part of the land , and the emperor into another to execute justice . for there be take a certain concubine of this emperor , which have poison his father to death , at the same time when the Tartar army be in Hungary , which , for the same cause return home . Moreover , upon the foresay concubine , and deatjl of many other of her confederate sentence of judgement be Gccoda ^ re ~ pronounce , and they be put to death . at the same 6 ' time Jeroslaus the great duke of Soldal , which be a part or of Russia , decease . for be ( as it be for honour sake ) invite to eat and drink with the emperor mother , and immediate after the banquet , return unto his lodging , he fall sick , and within seven day , die . and after his death , his body be of a strange blue colour , and it be common report , that the say duke be poison , to the end that the Tartar may free and total possess his dukedom . how the friar come at length unto the emperor , give , and receive letter . Chap . 31 . to be short , the Tartar bring we unto their emperor , who when he have hear of they , that we be come unto he , command that we shall 175 cuyne dissem - bleth with the legate . return , unto his mother . for he be determine the next day , ( as it be abovesaid ) to set up a flag of defiance against all you country of the west , which he will have we in no case to know . wherefore return , we stay some few day with his mother , and so return back again unto he . with who we continue for the space of one whole month in such extreme hunger and thirst , that we can scarce hold life and soul together . for the provision allow we for four day , be scant sufficient for one day . neither can we buy we any sustenance , because the market be too far off . howbeit the lord provide for we a russian goldsmith , name Cosmas , who be great in the emperor favour , procure we some sustenance . this man show unto we the throne of the emperor , which he have make , before it be set in the proper place , and his seal , which he also have frame . afterwards the emperor send for we , give we to understand by Chingay his chief secretary , that we shall write down our message and affair , and shall deliver they unto he . which thing we perform accord . after many day he call for we again , demand whither there be any with our lord the pope , which understand the russian , the sarracen , or the tartarian language ? to who we answer , that we have none of those letter or language . howbeit , that there be certain Saracen in the land , but inhabit a great distance from our lord the pope . and we say , that we think it most expedient , that when they have write their mind in the tartarian language , and have interpret the meaning thereof unto we , we shall diligent translate it into our own tongue , and so deliver both the letter and the translation thereof unto our lord the pope . then depart they from we , and go unto the emperor . and after the day of saint Martine , we be call for again . then Kadac principal agent for the whole empire , and Chingay , and Bala , with diverse other scribe , come unto we , and interpret the letter word for word . and have write 176 it in latin , they cause we to interpret unto they each sentence , to wit if we have err in any word . and when both letter be write , they make we to read they over twice more , lest we shall have mistake aught . for they say unto we : take heed that you understand all thing thorough , for if you shall not understand the whole matter aright , it