concern sartach , that he be become a christian , and the like also they report concern mangu can , and ken can : namely because these Tartar make more account of Christians , than they do of other people , and yet in very deed , themselves be not Christians . so likewise there go forth a great report concern the say king John . howbeit , when i travail along by his territory , there be no man that know any thing of he , but only a few nestorian . in his pasture or territory dwell ken can , at who court Frier Andrew be . and i my self pass by it at my return . This John have a brother , be a mighty man also , and a shepherd like himself , call vut , and he inhabit beyond the Alps of cara Catay , be 267 presbyter John . the place of ken can his abode . vut can , or une can . distant from his brother John , the space of three week the village of journey . he be lord over a certain village , call cara ( crh ^ rum carum , have people also for his subject , name crit , or Merkit , who be christian of the sect of Nestorius . but their lord abandon the worship of Christ , follow after idol , retain with he priest of the say idol , who all of they be worshipper of devil and sorcerer . beyond his pasture some ten or Moal in aid fifteen day journey , be the pasture of Moal , who you be a poor and beggarly nation , without governor , and without law , except their soothsay , and their divination , unto the which detestable study , all in the place of those part do apply their mind . near unto the tartan . MoaJ be other poor people call Tartars . the foresay king John die without issue male , and thereupon his brother vut be great enrich , and cause himself to be name can : and his drove and flock range even unto the border of Moal . about the cyngi . same time there be one cyngi , a black smith among the people of Moal . this cyngi steal as many cattle from vut can , as he can possible get : insomuch that the shepherd of Vut complain unto their lord . then provide he a army , and march up into the country of Moal to seek for the say cyngi . but cyngi flee among the Tartar , and hide himself amongst they . and vut have take some spoil both from Moal , and also from the Tartar , return home . then speak cyngi unto the Tartar , and unto the people of Moal , say : sir , because we be destitute of a governor and captain , you see how our neighbour do oppress we . and the Tartar and Moals appoint he to be their chieftain . then have secret gather together a army , he break in sudden upon vut , and overcome he , and vut flee into Cataya . at the same time be the daughter of vut take , which cyngi marry unto one of his son , by who she conceive , and bring forth the great mangu - can . can , which now reign , call mangu - can . than 268 cyngi send you Tartar before he in all place where he come : and thereupon be their name publish and spread abroad : for in all place the people will cry out : lo , the Tartar come , the Tartar come . howbeit , through continual ! war , they be now , all of they in a manner , consume and bring to nought . whereupon the moal endeavour what they can , to extinguish the name of the Tartar , that they may exalt their own name . the country wherein they first inhabit , and where the court of cyngi can as yet remain , be call Mancherule . but because Tartary mancheruk . be the region , about which they have obtain their conquest , they esteem that as their royal and chief city , and there for the most part do they elect their great can . of the russian , hungarian , and alanians : and of the caspian sea Chap . 20 . now , as concern sartach , whether he believe in Christ , or no , i know not . this i be sure of , that he will not be call a christian . yea rather he seem unto i to deride and skofle at Christians . he lie in the way of the christian , as namely of the russian , the valacfiians , the bulgarian of Bulgaria the lesser , the soldaianes , the Kerkis , and the alanians : who all of they pass by he , as they be go to the court of his father baatu , to carry gift : whereupon he be more in league with they . howbeit , if the Saracen come , and bring great gift than they , they be dispatch soon . he have about he certain nestorian priest , who pray upon their bead , and sing their devotion . also , there be another under baatu call Berta , who feed his cattle towards Porta or , Berea . ferrea , or derbent , where lie the passage of all those Saracen , which come out of Persia , and out of turquoise to go unto baatu , and pass by , they give reward unto he . and he profess himself to be a saracen , and will not permit swine flesh to be eat in his dominion . 269 howbeit , at the time of our return , baatu command he to remove himself from that place , and to inhabit upon the east side of Volga : for he be unwilling that the Saracen messenger shall pass by the say Berta , because he see it be not for his profit . for the space of four day while we remain in the court of Sartach , we have not any victual at all allow we , but once only a little Cosmos . and in our journey between he and his father , we