, the father of the say damsel make he a feast : in the mean while she flee unto some of her kinsfolk to hide her self . then say her father unto the bridegroom : lo , my daughter be you , take 246 her wheresoever you can find she . than he and his friend seek for she till they can find she , and have find she he must take she by force and carry she , as it be , violent unto his own house . of their execution of justice and judgement : and of their death and burial . Chap . 10 . concern their law or their execution of justice , your majesty be to be advertise , that when two man fight , no three man dare intrude • himself to part they . yea , the father dare not help his own son . but he that go by the worst must appeal unto the court of his lord . and whosoever else offer he any violence after appeal , be put to death . but he must go present without all delay : and he that have suffer the injury , carry he , as it be captive . they punish no man with sentence of death , unless he be take in the deed do , or confess the same . but be accuse by the multitude , they put he unto extreme torture to make he confess the truth . they punish murder with death , and carnali copulation also with any other beside his own . by his own , i mean his wife or his maid servant , for he may use his slave as he list himself . heinous theft also or felony they punish with death . for a light theft , as namely for steal of a ram , the party ( not be apprehend in the deed do , but otherwise detect ) be cruel beat . and if you executioner lay on a 100 stroke , he must have a 100 staff , namely for such as be beat upon sentence give in the court . also counterfeit messenger , because they feign themselves to be messenger , when as indeed they be none at all , they punish with death . sacrilegious person they use in like manner ( of which kind of malefactor your majesty shall understand more full hereafter ) because they esteem such to be witch . when any man die , they lament and howl most pitiful for he : and the say mourner be free from pay any tribute for one whole year after . also whosoever be present at the house 247 where any one grow to man estate lie dead , he must not enter into the court of mangu - can till one whole year be expire . if it be a child decease he must not enter into the say court till the next month after . near unto the grave of the party decease they always leave one cottage . if any of their noble ( be of the stock of Chingis , who be their first lord and father ) decease , his sepulchre be unknown . and always about those place where they inter their noble , there be one house of man to keep the sepulcher . i can not learn that they use to hide treasure in the grave of their dead . the comanians build a great tomb over their dead , and erect the image of the dead party thereupon , with his face towards the east , hold a drink cup in his hand , before his navel . they erect also upon the monument of rich man , pyramid , that be to say , little sharp house or pinnacle : and in some place i see mighty tower make of brick , in other place Pyramides make of stone , albeit there be no stone to be find thereabouts . i see one new bury , in who behalf they hang up 16 . horse hide , unto each quarter of the world 4 , between certain high post : and they set beside his grave Cosmos for he to drink , and flesh to eat : and yet they say that he be baptize . i behold other kind of sepulcher also towards the east : namely large flower or pavement make of stone , some round and some square , and then 4 . long stone pitch upright , about the say pavement towards the 4 . region of the world . when any man be sick , he lie in his bed , and cause a sign to be set upon his house , to signify that there lie a sick person there , to the end that no man may enter into the say house : whereupon none at all visit any sick party but his servant only . Moreover , when any one be sick in their great court , they appoint watchman to stand round about the say court , who will not suffer any person to enter within the precinct thereof . for they fear least evil spirit or wind shall come together with the party that enter in . they esteem of soothsayer , as of their priest . 248 of our first entrance among the Tartar , and of their ingratitude . Chap . 11 . a nd be come among those barbarous people , i think ( as i say before ) y ‘ i be enter into a new world : for they come flock about we on horse back , after they have make we a long time to await for they sit in the shadow , under their black cart . the first question which they demand be whether we have ever be with they heretofore , or no ? And give they answer that we have not , they begin impudent to beg our victual from we . and we give they some of our biscuit and wine , which we have bring with we from the town of Soldaia . and have drink off - one flagon of our wine they demand another , say , that a man go not into the house with one foot . howbeit we give they no more , excuse our self that we have but a little . than they ask we , whence