king hear , be desirous to pacific they , he answer that he will consult about that matter . and a day and place be appoint , where the consultation shall be keep , in the mean time those miscreant conspire together , about the murder of the king . and when the day appoint be come , both company assemble themselves unto the haven town call Ramsa , and they sit in order , the king with his nobility on the one side , and they with their confederate on the other side . howbeit Regnaldus who have a intention to slay the king , stand aside in the midst of the house talk with one of the prince of the land . And be call to come unto the king he turn himself about as if he will have salute he , and lift up his glitter axe , he chop the king head quite off at a blow . now 1143 • have commit this outrageous villainy , within a short space they divide the island between themselves , and gather a army together sail unto Galway , intend to subdue that also ; howbeit the people of Galway assemble themselves , and with great fury encounter with they . than they immediate turn their back with great confusion flee unto man and as touch all the galwedian which inhabit in the say island , some of they they slay , and the residue they banish . in the year 1143 . Godredus son of Olavus return out of Norway be create king of man ; who in revenge of his father death , put out the eye of two of Harald son and slay the third . in the year 1144 . Godredus begin his reign , and he reign thirty year . in the third year of his reign the citizen of Dublin send for he and create he king of Dublin , against who Murecardus king of Irland make war , and encamp himself at the city call Coridelis , he send his brother Osibel with 3000 . horseman unto Dublin , who be slay by godred and the dubliner , the rest of his company be put to flight . Theise thing be thus finish , Godredus return unto man , and begin to exercise tyrannic , disinherit certain of his noble , of who one call Thorfinus the son of oter , be mighty than the rest , go unto Sumerledus , and name Dubgal the son of Sumerledus , king of the island , and subdue many of the say island on his behalf . whereof when godr have intelligence by one Paulus , provide a navy , he go to meet Sumerledus come against he with 80 . ship : and in the year 1156 . upon the night of the feast of Epiphanie , there be 1156 . of sea - battell fight , and many be slay on both part , the day follow they be pacify , and divide the kingdom of the island among themselves , and it continue two kingdom from that day unto this present time . and this be the cause of the ruin of the monarchic of the island , from which time the son of Sumerled enjoy the one half thereof . in the year 1158 . Sumerled come unto man with 53 . ship , put godred to flight and waste the island : and godred sail unto Norway to seek for aid against Sumerled . in the year 1164 . Sumerled gather a fleet of 160 . ship together ; and arrive at rhinfrin , intend to subdue all Scotland unto himself : howbeit , by God just judgement be overcome by a few , together with his son , and a innumerable multitude of people , he be slay . the very same year there be a battle fight at Ramsa , between Reginald the brother of godred , and the inhabitant of man , but by the stratagem of a certain earl the mannians be put to flight . then begin Reginald to usurp the kingly authority . howbeit his brother godr within four day after , come out of Norway with a great power of arm man , apprehend his brother Reginald , geld he , and put out his eye . the same year decease Malcolme the king of Scot , and his brother William succeed in the kingdom . in the year 1166 . two comet appear in the month of August , before the rise of the sun , one to the south and another to the north . in the year 1171 . Richard earl of Penbroke sail into Irland , and subdue Dublin with a great part of Irland . in the year 1176 . John Curcy conquer Ulster unto himself . and at the same time also Vivianus legate from the sea of Rome come into man , and cause king godred to be lawful wed unto his wife Phingola , daughter of Maclotlen son of Murkartac king of Irland , mother of Olavus , who be then 3 . year old . Silvanus the abbot marry they , unto who the very same day , king godred give a portion of ground in Mirescoge , where he 32 build a monastery : howbeit , in process of time , the say land with the monk , be grant unto the abbey of Russin . in the year 1172 . Reginaldus the son of eacmarcat ( a man descend of the blood royal ) come into man with a great multitude of people , in the absence of the king , at the first conflict he put to flight certain watchman which keep the shore , and slay about 30 . person . whereupon the very same day the mannians arrange themselves put he , and almost all his follower to the sword . in the year 1183 . o - fogolt be viscount of man in the year 1185 . the sun be eclipse upon the feast of saint Philip and Jacob . in the year 1187 . decease godred king of the island , upon the 4 . of the ides of November , and the next summer his body be translate unto the island of Hy . he leave 3 . son behind he , Reginaldus , Olavus , and Yvarus . in his life time he ordain his son Olavus to be his heir apparent , because he only be bear legitimate . but the mannians , when