guide they over one by one : for they go a slow pace , as fast as a lamb or a ox can walk . of their bed , and of their drink pot . Chap . 3 . have take down their house from off their cart , and turn the door southward , they place the bed of the master of the house , at the north part thereof . the woman place be always on the east side , namely on the left hand of the good man of the house sit upon his bed with his face southwards : but the man place be upon you west side , namely at the right hand of their master . Men when they enter into the house , will not in any case hang their quiver on the woman side . over the master head there be always a image , like a puppet , make of self , which they call the master brother : and another over the head of the good wife or mistress , which they call her brother be fasten to the wall : and above between both of they , there be a little lean one , which be , as it be the keeper of the whole house . the good wife or mistress of the house place aloft at her bed foot , on the right hand , the skin of a kid stuff with wool or some other matter , and near unto 236 that a little image or puppet look towards the maiden and woman . next unto the door also on the woman side , there be another image with a cow udder , for the woman that milk the kine . for it be the duty of their woman to milk kine . on the other side of the door next unto the man , there be another image with the udder of a mare , for the man which milk mere . and when they come together to drink and make merry , they sprinkle part of their drink upon the image which be above the master head : afterward upon other image in order : then go a servant out of the house with a cup full of drink sprinkle it thrice towards the south , and bow his knee at every time : and this be do for the honour of the fire . then perform he the like superstitious idolatry towards the east , for the honour of the air : and then to the west for the honour of the water : and last to the north in the behalf of the dead . when the master hold a cup in his hand to drink , before he taste thereof , he pour his part upon the ground . if he drink sit on horse back , he pour out part thereof upon the neck or main of his horse before he himself drink . after the servant aforesaid have so discharge his cup to the four quarter of the world , he return into the house : and two other servant stand ready with two cup , and two bason , to carry drink unto their master and his wife , sit together upon a bed . and if he have more wife than one , she with who he sleep the night before , sit by his side the day follow : and all his other wife must that day resort unto the same house to drink : and there be the court hold for that day : the gift also which be present that day be lay up in the chest of the say wife . and upon a bench stand a vessel of milk or of other drink and drink cup . 237 [ of their they use the like custom in Florida . of their drink , and how they provoke one another to drink . Chap . 4 . in winter time they make excellent drink of rise , of mill , and of honey , be well and high colour like wine . also they have wine bring unto they from far country . in summer time they care not for any drink , but Cosmos . and it stand always within the entrance of his door , and next unto it stand a minstrel with his fiddle . 1 see there no such citern and vial as we common be , but many other musical instrument which be not use among we . and when the master of the house begin to drink , one of his servant cry out with a loud voice ha , and the minstrel play upon his fiddle . and when they make any great solemn feast , they all of they clap their hand and dance to the noise of music , the man before their master and the woman before their mistress . and when the master have drink , then cry out his servant as before , and the minstrel stay his music . then drink they all around both man and woman : and sometime they carouse for the victory very filthy and drunken . also when they will provoke any man , they pull he by the ear to the drink , and so lug and draw he strong to stretch out his throat clap their hand and dance before he . Moreover when some of they will make great feast and rejoice , one of the company take a full cup , and two other stand , one on his right hand and another on his left , and so they three come sing to the man who be to have the cup reach unto he , still sing and dance before he : and when he stretch forth his hand to receive the cup , they leap sudden back , return again as they do before , and so have delude he thrice or four time by draw back the cup until he be merry , and have get a good appetite , than they give he the cup , sing and dance and stamp with their foot , until he have do drink . 238 of their food and victual . Chap . 5 . / concern their food and victual , be it know unto kJ your highness that they do , without all difference or exception , eat all their dead carrion .