man their be allow so little sustenance , that scarce two can barbarous live thereof . likewise , if any injury be otter they , towar ^ s they can without danger make complaint . many gift ambassador . also be demand of they , both by duke and other , which if they do not bestow , they be base esteem , and set at nought . and hereupon , we be of necessity enforce to bestow in gift a great part of those thing which be give we by well dispose people , to defray our charge . to be short , all thing be so in the power and possession of the emperor , that no man dare say , this be i , or , this be my neighbour ; but all , both good , cattle and man be his own . concern this matter also he publish a statute of late . the very same authority and jurisdiction , do the duke in like sort exercise upon their subject . I51 the title of Barchin . [ i . 61 . i Orna . of the election of emperor occoday , and of the expedition of duke bathy . Chap . 15 . after the death of Chingis Cham aforesaid , the duke assemble themselves and choose occoday his son to be their emperor . and he , enter into consultation with his noble , divide his army , and send duke Bathy his nephew against the country of altisoldan , and against the people call bisermini , who be Saracen , but speak the language of Comania . the Tartar invade their country , fight with they and subdue they in battle . but a certain city call Barchin resist they a long time . for the citizen have cast up many ditch and trench about their city , in regard whereof the Tartar can not take it , till they have fill the say ditch . but the citizen of sarguit hearing this , come forth to meet they , yield themselves unto they of their own accord . whereupon their city be not destroy , but they slay many of they and other they carry away captive , and take spoil , they fill the city with other inhabitant , and so march forth against the city of Orna . this town be very populous and exceed rich . for there be many Christians therein , as namely gasarian , russian , and alanians , with other , and Saracens also . the government of the city be in the Saracen hand . it stand upon a mighty river , and be a kind of port town , have a great mart exercise therein . and when the Tartar can not otherwise overcome it , they turn the say river , run through the city , out of his channel , and so drown the city with the inhabitant and their good . which be do , they set forward against Russia , and make foul havoc there , destroy city and castle and murdering the people . they lay siege a long while unto Kiow the chief city of Russia , and at length they take it and slay the citizen . whereupon , travel through that country , we find a innumerable multitude of dead man skull and bone lie upon the earth . for it be a very large and a populous city , but it be now in a manner bring to nothing : for there do scarce remain 200 . house , the inhabitant whereof be keep in extreme bondage . Moreover , out of Russia and Comania , they proceed forward against the hungarian , and the polonians , and there many of they be slay , as be aforesaid : and have the hungarian manful withstand they , the Tartar have be confound and drive back . return from thence , they invade the country of the morduans be pagan , and conquer the they in battle . than they march against the people morduans - called Byleri , or Bulgaria magna , and utter waste the Bulgaria country . from hence they proceed towards the mag ™ - north against the people call Bastarci or Hungaria Hungaria magna , and conquer they also . and so go on make ™ - further north , they come unto the Parossitae , who have Parossita - . little stomach and small mouth , eat not any thing at all , but seethe flesh they stand or sit over the pot , and receive the steam or smoke thereof , be therewith only nourish , and if they eat any thing it be very little . from hence they come to the Samogetae , who live Samogeta : . only upon hunt , and use to dwell in tabernacle only , and to wear garment make of beast skin . from thence they proceed unto a country lie upon the ocean sea , where they find certain monster , who in the north all thing resemble the shape of man , save that their ocean - feete be like the foot of a ox , and they have in deed man head but dog face . they speak , as it be , northern two word like man , but at the three they bark like monster . dog . from hence they retire into Comania , and there some of they remain unto this day . of the expedition of duke Cyrpodan . Chap . 16 . at the same time occoday can scent duke Cyrpodan kergl . with a army against Kergis , who also subdue they in battle . Theise man be pagan , have no beard at all . they have a custom when any of their father die , for grief and in token of lamentation to 153 draw as it be , a leather thong overthwart their face , from one ear to the other . this nation be conquer , duke Cyrpodan march with his force southward against the armenian . And travail through certain desert place , they find monster in the shape of man , which have each of they but one arm and one hand grow out of the midst of their breast , and but one foot . two of they use to shoot in one bow , and