his wife what be best to be do . and on the morrow after he tell we , that he dare in no case receive baptism , because than he shall drink no more Cosmos . for the Christians of that place affirm that no true Christians ought to drink thereof : and that without the say liquor he can not live in that desert . from which opinion , i can not for my life remove he . wherefore be it know of a certainty unto your highness , that they be much estrange from the christian faith by reason of that opinion which have be broach and confirm among they by the russian , of who there be a great multitude in that place . the same day scacatay the captain aforesaid give we one man to conduct we to sartach , and two other to guide we unto the next lodging , which be distant from that 254 place five day journey for ox to travel . they give unto we also a goat for victual , and a great many bladder of cow milk , 8c but a little Cosmos , because it be of so great estimation among they . and so take our journey direct towards the north , i think that we have pass through one of hell gate . the servant which conduct we begin to play the bold thief with we , see we take so little heed unto our self . at length have lose much by their thievery , harm teach we wisdom . and then we come unto the extremity of that province , which be fortify with a ditch from one sea unto another : without the bound whereof their lodging be situate . into the which , so soon as we have enter , all the inhabitant there seem unto we to be infect with leprosy : for certain base fellow be place there to receive tribute of all such as take salt out of the salt salt pit . pit aforesaid . from that place they tell we that we must travel fifteen day journey , before we shall find any other people . with they we drink Cosmos , and give unto they a basket full of fruit and of biscuit . and they give unto we eight ox and one goat , to sustain we in so great a journey , and i know not how many bladder of milk . and so change our ox , ? en we take our journey which we finish in ten j ° urned - dayes , arrive at another lodging : neither sound we any water all that way , but only in certain ditch make in the valley , except two small river . and from the time wherein we depart out of the foresay province of Gasaria , we travail direct eastward , have a sea on the south side of we , and a waste desert on the north , which desert , in some place , reach twenty day journey in breadth , and there be neither tree , mountain , nor stone therein . and it be most excellent pasture . here the comanians , which be call capthac , be wont to feed their cattle . howbeit by the dutch man they be call Valani , and the province it self Valania . but Isidore call all that 2S5 the length of tract of land stretch from the river of Tanais to the Comania . lake of Maeotis , and so along as far as Danubius , the country of Alania . and the same land continue in length from Danubius unto Tanais ( which divide Asia from Europe ) for the space of two month journey , albeit a man shall ride post as fast as the Tartar use to ride : and it be all over inhabit by the comanians , call capthac : yea and beyond Tanais , as far as the river of Edil or Volga : the space between the two which river be a great and long Russia . journey to be travail in ten day . to the north of the same province lie Russia , which be full of wood in all place , and stretch from Polonia and Hungaria , even to the river of Tanais : and it have be waste all over by the Tartar , and as yet be daily waste by they . of our affliction which we sustain : and of the comanians manner of burial . Chap . 15 . Prussia . ' | ' hey prefer the Saracen before the russian , a because they be Christians , and when they be able to give they no more gold nor silver , they drive they and their child like flock of sheep into the wilderness , constrain they to keep their cattle there . beyond Russia lie the country of Prussia , which the dutch knight of the order of saint maries hospitali of Jerusalem have of late whole conquer and subdue . and in very deed they may easy win Russia , if they will put to their help hand . for if the Tartar shall but once know , that the great priest , that be to say , the pope do cause the ensign of the cross to be display against they , they will flee all into their desert and solitary place . we therefore go on towards the east , see nothing but heaven and earth , and sometime the sea on our right hand , call the sea of Tanais , and the sepulchre of the comanians , which appear unto we two league off , in which place they be wont to bury their kindred 256 altogether . so long as we be travel through the desert , it go reasonable well with we . for i can sufficient express in word the irksome and tedious trouble which i sustain , when i come at any of their place of abode . for our guide will have we go in unto every captain with a present , and our expense will not extend so far . for we be every day eight person of we spend our wayfare provision , for the Tartar servant will all of they eat of our victual . we our self be five in number , and the servant our guide be three , two to