a chronicle of the king of man , take out of m . camdens chorography . n the year of our lord 1066 . Edward king of England , of famous memory decease , who Harald son of Godwin succeed in his kingdom ; against which Harald the king of Norwaie call Harald Harfager fight a battle at Stainford bridge , where the english win the field put all the norwegian to flight : out of which flight one Godredus surname Crovan ( the son of Harald the black , who have before time flee out of island ) repair unto godr son of Syrric , who then reign in man , and be right friendly and honourable entertain by he . in the very same year William the conqueror subdue England , and godr the son of Syrric , king of man , decease , after who succeed his son Fingal . Fingal . in the year 1066 . Godredus Crovan gather a fleet of ship , and sail unto man , and give battle unto the people of the country , be vanquish and put to flight . the second time also have gather his army and ship together , he come unto man , fight with the inhabitant , lose the victory , and be chase away . yea , the three time he assemble a great multitude , and come by night unto the port which be call Ramsa , hide 300 . of his man in a wood stand upon the side of the hill call Scacafel . the sun be no soon up , but the mannians arrange themselves and with great fury set upon godred . boat have not pass three iron nail in they . and in the midst of the skirmish , the foresay 300 . man rise out of their ambush , and come upon the back of the mannians , molest they so sore , that they be enforce to fly . but when they see you they be overcome and have no place of refuge to retire unto ( for the tide of the sea have fill the chanel of the river of Ramsa ) and see the enemy so fierce pursue they on the other side , they which remain , with lamentable outcry beseech godred to spare their life . than he be move with compassion , and pity their extreme calamity , because he have be of late sustain and nourish among they , sound a retreat and forbid his soldier to make any long pursuit . the day follow godred put his soldier to their choice , whether they will divide man among themselves and inhabit it , or whether they will take the wealth of the country , and so return unto their own home . howbeit , it please they better to waste the whole island and to enrich themselves with the commodity thereof , and so to return from whence they come . now godr himself with a few islander which have remain with he , take possession of the south part of the island , and unto the remnant of the mannians he grant the north part thereof , upon condition , that none of they shall at any time afterward dare once to challenge any parcel of the say ground by title of inheritance . whereupon it comes to pass , that unto this day the whole island be the king own fee - simple , and that all the revenue thereof pertain unto he . also Godredus subdue Dublin unto himself and a great part of lainestir . and he so tame the Scot , that none of they dare build a ship or a boat , with above three iron nail in it . he reign 16 . year and die in the island call isle . he leave behind he three son , Lagman , Harald , and Olavus . Lagman be the old challenge the kingdom and reign seven year . howbeit Harald his brother rebel against he a long time , but be at length take by Lagman , he be geld and have his eye put out . after - 26 ward Lagman repent he that he have put out the eye of his brother , do of his own accord relinquish his kingdom , and take upon he the badge of the cross , he go on pilgrimage to Jerusalem , in which journey also he die . in the year 1075 . all the principali man of the island have intelligence of the death of Lagman , send messenger unto Murecardus O - Brien king of Irland , request he that he will send some well - disposed person of his own kindred and blood royal , until Olavus son of godr be come to full age . the king most willing [ i . 11 . i condescend unto their request , and send unto they one Dopnald the son of Tade , charge and command he that with all meekness and modesty , he shall govern that kingdom , which of right belong not unto he . howbeit he , after he have once attain unto the kingdom , neglect the commandment of his lord , usurp the government with great tyrannic , commit many heinous crime , and so he reign very disorderly for the space of three year . than all the prince of the island make a generail conspiracy , band themselves against he , and expel he out of their dominion . and he fly into Irland return no more unto they . in the year 1077 . one Ingemundus be send from the king of Norway , to take possession of the kingdom of the island . And be come unto the island of Leodus , Lewis . he send messenger unto all the prince of the island to come unto he , command they to assemble themselves , and to appoint he to be their king . in the mean season he and his companion spend their time in rob and riot , ravish woman and virgin , and addict themselves to filthy pleasure and to the lust of the flesh . and when these thing be report unto the prince of the island , who have assemble themselves to choose he king , be mighty incense thereat , they make haste towards he , and come upon he in the night , they burn the house wherein he be , and slay both he and the rest of his company , partly with sword