, that Rumney and Sandwich answer the like service . but now whether this ( like ) ought to be understand of the like altogether , both in respect of the number and service , or of they ( like ) in respect of service , accord to the proportion of their ability only , i may not hereby take upon i to determine . for on the one side , if Rumney , Sandwich , and the residue , shall likewise find twenty vessel a piece , then ( as you shall anon see ) the five port be subject to a great charge at that time , than king Edward the first lay upon they : and on the other side , if they be only chargeable after their proportion , then know i not how far to burden they , see the record of domesday it self , bind they to no certainty . and therefore leave this as i find it , i must elsewhere make inquisition for more lightsome proof . and first i will have recourse to king Edward the first his chartre in which i read , that at each time that the king pass over the sea , the port ought to rig up fifty and seven ship , ( whereof every one to have twenty arm soldier ) and to maintain they at their own cost , by the space of fifteen day together . and thus it stand with the port for their generail > 278 - charge , in the sixth year of his reign , for then be this chartre seal . but as touch the particular burden of each one , i have see two diverse testimony , of which the first be a note in French ( bear the countenance of a record ) and be entitle , to have be renew in the two and twenty year of the reign of the same king , by Stephan Penchester , than constable of Dover castle , in which the particular charge be set down in this manner . the port of Hastings ought to find three ship . the lowy of Pevensey , one . Bulverhithe and Petit Jahn , one . Bekesborne in Kent , seven . grenche at Gillingham in Kent , two man and armour , with the ship of Hastings . the town of rye , five . to it be Tenterdene annex , in the time of king Henry the sixth . the town of Winchelsey , ten . the port of Rumney , four . lydde , seven . the port of Hythe , five . the port of Dover , nineteen . the town of Folkestone , seven . the town of Feversham , seven . the port of Sandwich , with Stonor , Fordwich , dale , etc five . these ship they ought to find upon forty day summons , arm and array at their own charge , and in each of they twenty man , beside the master of the mariner : all which they shall likewise maintain five day together at their own cost , give to the master six penny by the day , to the constable six penny , and to each other mariner three penny . and after those five day end , the king shall defray the charge . the other be a latin Custumall of the town of Hyde , the which although it pretend not so great antiquity as the first , yet seem it to i to import as much or more likelihood and credit : it stand thus . these be the five port of our sovereign lord the king have liberty , which other port have not : haste , Romenal , Heth , Dover , Sandwich , the chief town . the service due by the same . haste shall find 21 . ship , in every ship 21 . man , and a Garcion , or boy , which be call a Gromet . to it pertain ( as the member of one town ) the seashore in Seford , Pevenshey , Hodeney , Winchelsey , rye , ihame , Bekesbourne , Grenge , northie , bulwerh . romenal 5 . ship , in every ship 21 . man , and a Garcion : to it pertain , as member thereof , promhell , lead , Eastwestone , Dengemareys , old Rumney . Hethe 5 . ship , as Romenal before . to it pertain the westhethe . Dover 21 . ship , as haste before . to it pertain , Folkstane , Feversham , and saint Margaret , not concern the land , but for the good and cattle . Sandwich 5 . ship , as Romenal , and Hethe . to it pertain Fordwich , Reculver , Serre , and deal , not for the soil , but for the good . sum of ship 57 sum of the man 1187 . and 57 garcion . this service , the baron of the five port do acknowledge to owe to the king , upon summons yearly ( if it happen ) by the space of 15 . day together , at their own cost and charge , account that for the first day of the 15 . in which they shall spread their sail to go towards those part that the king intend : and to serve so long after 15 . day , as the king will , at his own pay and wage . thus much out of these ancient note , whereby your 48 self may easy discern the difference : but whether the one or the other , or ( by reason of some latter dispensation ) neither of these , have place at this day , i must refer it to they that be privy , and of counsel with the port : and so leave this also undecided , hold on the way , wherein i be enter . this duty of attendance therefore ( be devise for the honourable transportation , and safe conduct of the king own person or his army over the narrow sea ) the port have not only most diligent ever since that time perform , but furthermore also valiant behave themselves against the enemy from time to time , in sundry exploit by water , as occasion have be proffer , or the necessity of the realm require . and among other feat not unworthy perpetuali re - the good ser - membrance , after such time as Lewes ( the old son of vice of the five the french king ) have enter the realm to aid Stephan ‘ Langton the archbishop , and the nobility , in the life of king John , and have send into France for new supply of soldier after his death , Hubert of Borough ( than 1217 . captain of Dover ) follow the opinion of Themistocles in the exposition of the oracle of the wooden wall , by the aid of the port town , arm forty tall ship , and meet with eighty sail of french man upon the high sea , give they a most courageous encounter , in which he take some , sink other , and discomfit the rest . king Henry the three also , after that he come to ripe age , have great benefit by the service of the cinque port : and king Edward the first in his chartre , make their continual faithful service ( and especial their good endeavour , then late show against the Welshman ) the 1278 . principali cause , and motive of that his liberali grant . furthermore , about the midst of the reign of the same king , a hundred sail of the navy of the port fight at the sea with a fleet of 200 . French man , all which 1293 . ( notwithstanding the great odds of the number ) they take , and slay , and sink so many of the mariner , that i 49 n France be thereby ( for a long season after ) in manner destitute , both of seaman , and ship . 1406 . final , and to conclude this part , in the day of king Henry the four , the navy of the five port , under the conduct of one Henry Paye , surprise one hundred and twenty french ship , all lade with salt , iron , oil , and no worse merchandise . the privl - than privilege of these port , be first grant by ledge s ^ of the £ dward the confessor , and William the conqueror , ’ and then confirm and increase by William Rufus , Henry the second , Richard the first , Henry the three , and king Edward the first , be very great , consider either the honour and ease , or the freedom and exemption , that the inhabitant have by reason of the same .