we come , and whither we be bind ? i answer they with the word above mention : that we have hear concern duke sartach , that he be become a christian , and that unto he our determination be to travel , have your majesty letter to deliver unto he . they be very inquisitive to know whether i come of my own accord , or whether i be send ? i answer that no man compel i to come , neither have i come , unies in my self have be willing : and that therefore i be come accord to my own will , and to the will of my superior . i take diligent heed never to say that i be your majesty ambassador . than they ask what i have in my cart ; whether it be gold or silver , or rich garment to carry unto Sartach ? i answer that Sartach shall see what we have bring , when we be once come unto he , and that they have nothing to do to ask such question , but rather ought to conduct i unto their captain , and that he , if he think good , shall cause i to be direct unto Sartach : if not , that i will return . for there be in the same province one of baatu he kinsman call scacati , unto who my lord 249 the emperor of Constantinople have write letter of request , to suffer i to pass through his territory . with this answer of we they be satisfy , give we horse and ox , and two man to conduct we . howbeit before they will allow we the foresay necessary for our journey , they make we to await a long while , beg our bread for their young brat , wonder at all thing which they see about our servant , as their knife , glove , purse , and point , and desire to have they . i excuse my self that we have a long way to travel , and that we must in no wise so soon deprive our self of thing necessary , to finish so long a journey . than they say that i be a very varlet . true it be , that they take nothing by force from i : howbeit they will beg that which they see very importunately and shameless . and if a man bestow aught upon they , it be but cost lose , for they be thankless wretch . they esteem themselves lord and think y * nothing shall be deny they by any man . if a man give they nought , and afterward stand in need of their service , they will do right nought for he . they give we of their cow milk to drink after you butter be chern out of it , be very sour , which they call Apram . and so we depart from they . and in very deed it seem to i y ‘ we be escape out of the hand of devil . on the morrow we be come unto the captain . from the time wherein we depart from Soldaia , till we arrive at the court of Sartach , which be the space of two month , we never lie in house or tent , but always under the starry canopy , and in the open air , or under our cart . neither yet see we any village , nor any mention of building where a village have be , but the grave of the comanians in great abundance . the same evening our guide which have conduct we , give we some Cosmos . after i have drink thereof i sweat most extreme for the novelty and strangeness , because i never drink of it before . notwithstanding i think it be very savoury , as indeed it be . of the court of Scacatai : and how the Christians drink no Cosmos . Chap . 12 . on the morrow after we meet with the cart of Scacatai lade with house , and i think that a mighty city come to meet i . i wonder also at the great multitude of huge drove of ox , and horse , and at the flock of sheep . i can see but a few man that guide all these matter : whereupon i inquire how many man he have under he , and they tell i that he have not above 500 in all , the one half of which number we be come past , as they lie in another lodging . then the servant which be our guide tell i , that i must present somewhat unto scacatay : and so he cause we to stay , go himself before to give notice of our come . by this time it be past three of the clock , and they unlade their house near unto a certain water : and there come unto we his interpreter , who be advertise by we that we be never there before , demand some of our victual , and we yield unto his request . also he require of we some garment for a reward , because he be to interpret our say unto his master . howbeit we excuse our self as well as we can . than he ask we , what we will present unto his lord ? and we take a flagon of wine , and fill a maund with biscuit , and a platter with apple and other fruit . but he be not content therewith , because we bring he not some rich garment . notwithstanding we enter so into his presence with fear and bashfulness . he sit upon his bed hold a citron in his hand , and his wife sit by he : who ( as i very think ) have cut and pare her nose between the eye , that she may seem to be more flat and saddle - nosed : for she have leave her self no nose at all in that place , have anoint the very same place with a black ointment , and her eye brow also : which sight seem most ugly in our eye . than i rehearse unto he the same word , which i have speak in other place before . for it stand we in hand to