why therefore have you not the cross with the image of Jesus Christ thereupon ? and he answer : we have no such custom . whereupon i conjecture that they be indeed christian : but , that for lack of instruction they omit the foresay ceremony . for i see there behind a certain chest ( which be unto they in steed of a altar , whereupon they set candle and oblation ) a image have wing like unto the image of saint Michael , and other image also , hold their finger , as if they will bless some body . that evening i can not find any thing else . for the Saracen do only invite man thither , but they will not have they speak of their religion . and therefore , when i inquire of the Saracen concern such ceremony , they be offend thereat . on the morrow after be the kalend , and the Saracen feast of Passeover . And change my inn or lodging the same day , i take up my abode near unto another idole - temple . for 285 the citizen of the say city of Cailac do courteous invite , and love entertain all messenger , every man of they accord to his ability and portion . And enter into the foresay idole - temple , i find the priest of the say idol there . for always at the kalend they set open their temple , and the priest adorn themselves , and offer up the people oblation of bread and fruit . First therefore i will describe Frier William be at caracarum . unto you those rite and ceremony , which be common unto all their idole - temple : and then the superstition of the foresay jugure , which be , as it be , a sect distinguish from the rest . they do all of they worship towards the north , clap their hand together , and prostrate themselves on their knee upon you earth , hold also their forehead in their hand . whereupon the nestorian of those part will in no case join their hand together in time of prayer : but they pray , display their hand before their breast . they extend their temple in length east and west : and upon the north side they build a chamber , in manner of a vestry for themselves to go forth into . or sometime it be otherwise . if it be a four square temple , in the midst of the temple towards the north side thereof , they take in one chamber in that place where the choir shall stand . and within the say chamber they place a chest long and broad like unto a table : and behind the say chest towards the south stand their principali idol : which i see at Caracarum , and it be as big as the idol of saint Christopher . also a certain nestorian priest , which have be in catay , say that in that country there be a idol of so huge a bigness , that it may be see two day journey before a man come at it . and so they place other idol round about the foresay principal idol , be all of they fine gild over with pure gold : and upon the say chest , which be in manner of a table , they set candle and oblation . the door of their temple be always open towards the south , contrary to the custom of the Saracen . they have also great 286 belles like unto we . and that be the cause ( as i think ) why the Christians of the east will in no case use great bell . notwithstanding they be common among the russian , and grecian of Gasaria . of their temple and idol : and how they behave themselves in worship their false god . Chap . 27 . a li their priest have their head and beard shave quite over : and they be clad in saffron colour garment : and be once shave , they lead a unmarried life from that time forward : and they live a hundred or two hundred of they together in one cloister or covent . upon those day when they enter into their temple , they place two long form therein : and so sit upon the say form like sing man in a quire , namely the one half of they direct over against the other , they have certain book in their hand , which sometime they lie book . down by they upon the form : and their head be bare so long as they remain in the temple . and there they read soft unto themselves , not utter any voice at all . whereupon come in among they , at the time of their superstitious devotion , and find they all site mute in manner aforesaid , i attempt diverse way to provoke they unto speech , and yet can not by any mean possible . they have with they also whithersoever they go , a certain string with a hundred or two hundred nutshell thereupon , much like to our beadroll which we carry about with we . and they do always utter these word : ou mam hactani , God thou know : as one of they expound it unto i . and so often do they expect a reward at God hand , as they pronounce these word in remembrance of God . round about their temple they do always make a fair court , like unto a churchyard , which they environ with a good wall : and upon the south part thereof they build a great portal , wherein they sit and confer together . and upon the top of the say portali they pitch a long pole right up , 287 exalt it , if they can , above all the whole town beside . and by the same pole all man may know , that there stand the temple of their idol , these rite and ceremony aforesaid be common unto all idolater in those part . go upon a time towards the foresay idol - temple , i find certain priest sit in the outward portal . and those which i see , seem unto i , by their shave beard , as if they have be French man