deliver unto they . this march . 1 161 l the manner of salute the tartarian prince . [ i . 65 . i duke bathy in his power . duke be governor of all they , which lie in guard against the nation of the west , lest some enemy may on the sudden and at unaware break in upon they . and he be say to have 60000 . man under he . how they be receive at the court of corrensa . Chap . 21 . be come therefore unto his court , he cause our tent to be place far from he , and send his agent to demand of we with what we will incline unto he , that be to say , what gift we will offer , in do our obeisance unto he . unto who we answer , that our lord the pope have not send any gift at all , because he be not certain that we shall ever be able to come at they : for we pass through most dangerous place . notwithstanding , to our ability , we will honour he with some part of those thing , which have be , by the goodness of God , and the favour of the pope , bestow upon we for our sustenance . have receive our gift , they conduct we unto the orda or tent of the duke , and we be instruct to bow thrice with our left knee before the door of the tent , and in any case to beware , lest we set our foot upon the threshold of the say door . and that after we be enter , we shall rehearse before the duke and all his noble , the same word , which we have before say , kneel upon our knee . then present we the letter of our lord the pope : but our interpreter who we have hire and bring with we from Kiow be not sufficient able to interpret they , neither be there any other esteem to be meet for the same purpose . here certain post horse and three Tartar be appoint for we to conduct we from hence with all speed unto duke bathy . this bathy be the mighty prince among they except the emperor , and they be bind to obey he before all other prince . we begin our journey towards his court the first Tuesday in Lent , and ride as fast as our horse can trot ( for we have fresh horse almost thrice or four time a day ) we post from morning till night , yea very often in 162 the night season also , and yet can we not come at he before Maundie Thursday . all this journey we go through the land of Comania , which be all plain ground , and have four mighty river run through it : the first be call i neper , on the side whereof towards Russia , duke corrensa and Montii march up and down , which Montii on the other side upon the plain be great than he . the second be call i don , upon the bank whereof t Tanais . march a certain prince have in marriage the sister of Baty , his name be Tirbon . the three be call i Volga , which be a exceed great river , upon the bank whereof duke Bathy march . the four be call i laec , upon which two millenary do march , on each side of the river one . all these , in the winter time , descend down to the sea , and in summer ascend back by the bank of the say river up to the mountain . the sea last name be the two great sea , out of which the arm of saint George proceed , which run by Constantinople . Theise river do abound with plenty of fish , but especial Volga , and they exon - \ bha . | | Pontus Euxinus . he be deceive , erate themselves into the grecian sea , which be call mare neper y don major . over neper we go many day upon the ice . run into mare along the shore also of the grecian sea we go very dan - gerous upon the ice in sundry place , and that for many int0 day together . for about the shore the water be freeze three league into the sea . but before we come unto caspian sea . bathy , two of our Tartar ride afore , to give he intelligence of all the say which we have utter in the presence of corrensa . how we be receive at the court of the great prince bathy . Chap . 22 . moreover , when we come unto bathy in the land of Comania , we be seat a good league distant from his tabernacle . and when we shall be conduct unto his court , it be tell we that we must pass between two fire . but we will by no mean be induce thereunto . howbeit , they say unto we : you may pass through without all danger : for we will have you to do it for 163 a ceremony of pass between two fier . none other cause , but only that if you intend any mischief against our lord , or bring any poison with you , fire may take away all evil . unto who we answer , that to the end we may clear ourselves from all suspicion of any such matter , we be content to pass through . when therefore we be come unto the orda , be demand eye gay . by his agent eldegay with what present or gift we will do our obeisance ? we give the sameanswere which we do at the court of corrensa . the gift be give and receive , the cause of our journey also be hear , they bring we into the tabernacle of the prince , first bow our self at the door , and be admonish , as before , bathy hear not to tread upon the threshold . And be enter , we the legate . speak unto he kneel upon our knee , and deliver he our letter , and request he to have interpreter