to translate they . who accord on good Friday be send unto we , and we together with they , diligent translate our say letter into the russian , tartarian , and sarazen language . this interpretation be present unto bathy , which he read , and attentive note . at length we be conduct home again unto our own lodging , howbeit no victual be give unto we , except it be once a little millet in a dich , the first night of our he behave come . this bathy carry himself very stately and himself hke magnificent , have porter and all officer after the a , n ' manner of the emperor , and sit in a lofty seat or throne together with one of his wife . the rest , namely , as well his brethren and son , as other great personage sit underneath he in the midst upon a bench , and other sit down upon the ground , behind he , but the man on the right hand and the woman on the left . he have very fair and large tent of linen cloth also , which be once the king of Hungaria . neither dare any man come into his tent ( beside they of his own family ) unless he be call , be he never so mighty and great , except perhaps it be know that it be his pleasure . we also , for the same cause , sit on the left hand ; for so do all ambassador in go : but in return from the emperor , we be 164 always place on the right hand . in the midst stand his table , near unto the door of the tent , upon the which there be drink fill in golden and silver vessel . neither do bathy at any time drink , nor any other of the tartarian prince , especial be in a public place , but they have sing and minstrilsie before they . and always , when he ride , there be a canopy or small tent carry over his head upon the point of a javelin . and so do all the great prince of the Tartar , and their wife also . the say bathy be courteous enough unto his own man , and yet be he have in great awe by they : he be most cruel in fight : he be exceed prudent and politic in war , because he have now continue a long time in martial affair . ‘ their custom of drink at the sound of music . how depart from bathy , they pass through the land of Comania , and of the kangitta . Chap . 23 . moreover , upon easter even we be call unto the tent , and there come forth to meet we the foresay agent of bathy , say on his master behalf , that we shall go into their land , unto the emperor Cuyne , detain certain of our company with this pretence , that they will send they back unto the pope , to who we give letter of all our affair to deliver unto he . but be come as far as duke Montii aforesaid , there they be keep until our return . upon Easter day , have say our prayer , and take a slender breakfast , in the company of two Tartar , which be assign unto we by corensa we depart with many tear , not know whether we go to death or to life . and we be so they travel post from easter day to the 22 . of July eastward of Volga . feeble in body , that we be scarce able to ride . for all that lend through , our meat be Millet only with a little water and salt . and so likewise upon other fast day . neither have we aught to drink , but snow melt in a skillet . And pass through Comania we ride most earnest , have change of horse five time or often in a day , except when we go through desert , for i65 the land of the Kangitta . Jeroslaus duke of Russia . than we be allow better and strong horse , which can undergo the whole labour . and thus far have we travail from the begin of Lent until eight day after easter . the land of Comania on the north side immediate after Russia , have the people call Morduyni Byleri , that be , Bulgaria magna , the Bastarci , that be , Hungaria magna , next unto the Bastarci , the Parositae and the Samogetae . next unto the Samogetae be those people which be say to have dog face , inhabit upon the desert shore of the ocean . on the south side it have the Alani , the circassi , the Gazari , Greece and Constantinople ; also the land of Iberia , the cathe , the brutache who be say to be Jew shave their head all over , the land also of Scythia , of Georgia , of Armenia , of turquoise . on the west side it have Hungaria , and Russia . also Comania be a most large and long country . the inhabitant whereof call Comani the Tartar slay , some notwithstanding flee from they , and the rest be subdue under their bondage . but most of they that flee be return again . afterwards we enter the land of the kangittae , which in many place have great scarcety of water , wherein there be but few inhabitant by reason of the foresay defect of water . for this cause diverse of the servant of Jeroslaus duke of Russia , as they be travel towards he into the land of Tartary , die for thirst , in that desert . as before in Comania , so likewise in this country , we find many skull and bone of dead man lie upon the earth like a dunghill . through this country we be travel from the eight day after easter until ascension day . the inhabitant thereof be pagan , and neither they nor the comanians use to till the ground , but live only upon cattle , neither build they any house but dwell in tent . Theise man also have the