the navigation of king Edgar , take out of Florentius Wigorniensis , Hoveden , and m . Dee his discourse of the british monarchic , page . 54 , 55 , etc have often time ( say he ) and many way look into the state of earthly kingdom , general the whole world over ( as far as it may be yet know to christian man common ) be a study of no great difficulty , but rather a purpose somewhat answerable to a perfect Cosmo - grapher , to find himself Cosmopolites , a citizen and member of the whole and only one mystical city universali , and so consequent to meditate of the cosmopolitical government thereof , under the king almighty , pass on very swift towards the most dreadful and most comfortable term prefix . and i find ( say he ) that if this british monarchic will heretofore have follow the advantage which they have have onward , they may very well , year this , have surpass by justice , and godly sort , any particular monarchic else , that ever be on earth since man creation : and that to all such purpose as to God be most acceptable , and to all perfect common wealth , most honourable , profitable , and comfortable . but yet ( say he ) there be a little lock of lady occasion flicker in the air , by our hand to catch hold on , whereby we may yet once more ( before all be utter pass , and for ever ) discreet and valiant recover and enjoy , if not all our ancient and due appurtenance to this 16 imperiali british monarchic , yet at the least some such notable portion thereof , as ( all circumstance due and just appertain to peace and amity with foreign prince be offer and use ) this may become the most peaceable , most rich , most puissant , and most flourish monarchic of all else ( this day ) in Christendom . peaceable , i say , even with the most part of the self same respect that good king Edgar have ( be but a saxon ) and by sundry such mean , as he chief in this empire do put in proof and ure triumphant , whereupon his surname be Pacificus , most apt and just . this peaceable king Edgar have in his mind about six hundred year past , the representation of a great part of the self same idea , which from above only , and by no man devise have stream down into my imagination , be as it become a subject careful for the godly prosperi tie of this british empire under our most peaceable queen Elizabeth . for , jEdgarus pacificus , Regni svi prospiciens utilitati , flores pariter and quieti , quatuor millia octingentas sibi ’ robustas historiarum . congregavit nave e quibus mille ducentas , in plaga angliae orientali , mille ducentas in occidentali , mille ducentas in pelago con stituit , ut ad defensionem regni svi , contra extera nationes , bellorum discrimina sustinerent . o wisdom imperiali , most diligent to be imitate , videlicet , prospicere , to foresee . o charitable kingly parent , that be touch with ardent zeal , for procure the public profit of his kingdom , yea and also the peaceable enjoy thereof . o , of a incredible mass of treasure , a kingly portion , yet , in his coffer remain : if then he have , ( or late before ) any war , see no notable tax , or contribution public be historical mention to have be for the charge levy : if in peace he himself flourish so wealthy : oh marvellous political ! , and princely prudency , in time of peace to foresee , and prevent , ( and that most puissant , and invincible ) all possible malice , fraud , force , and mischief foreign . o most discreet liberali tie to such 1 17 b australi , mille ducentas in septentrionali excellent use , pour out his treasure so abundant . o faithful english people ( than , ) and worthy subject , of such a imperiali and godly governor . o your true , and willing heart , and bless ready hand ( than , ) so to impart such abundance of victual for those huge navy maintenance : so ( i say ) as neither dearth of famine , seem ( fond ) to be fear of you , for any intolerable want likely to ensue thereby , nor price of victual complain of to be unreasonable enhance by you , find for their great sale so good , and rare opportunity . this peaceable king Edgar , be one of the perfect Imperiali monarch of this british empire , and therefore thus his fame remain ( for ever ) record . anglici orbis Basileus , flos , and Decus TEdgarus , non minus memorabilis Anglis , quam Cyrus Persis , Romulus Romanis , Alexander macedonibus , Arsaces parthis , Carolus Francis , anno vitae 37 . Regni svi cum fratre , and post 21 . idibus Julii obiit , and apud Glascon sepelitur . o Glastonbury , Glastonbury , the treasury of the carcase of so famous , and so many person ( quae olim mater sanctorum dicta es , and ab aliis , tumulus sanctorum , quam ab ipsis discipulis domini , aedificatam fuisse venerabilis habet antiquorum authoritas ) how lamentable be thy case now ! how have hypocrisy and pride wrought thy desolation encage though i omit here the name of very many other , both excellent holy man , and mighty prince , who carcase be commit to thy custody , yet that apostolic Joseph , that triumphant british Arthur , and now this peaceable and provident saxon king Edgar , do force i with a certain sorrowful reverence , here to celebrate thy memory . this peaceable king Edgar ( as by ancient record may appear ) his summer progress , and yearly chief pastime be , the sail round about this whole isle of Albion , guard with his grand navy of 4000 sail at the least , part into 4 . equal part of petty navy , 18 each one be of 1000 ship , for so it be ancient record . idem quoque jEdgarus , 4000 nave congregavit , ex Ranulphus quibus omni anno , post festum Paschale , 1000 cest , ens , s - nave ad quamlibet angliae partem statuit , sic , aestate insulam circumnavigavit : hyeme vero , judicia in Provincia exercuit : and haec omnia ad svi exercitium , and ad hostium fecit terrorem . can , and will that peaceable and wise king Edgar , before need , as be in peace and quiet with all nation about he , and notwithstanding mistrust his possible enemy , make his pastime so royal , political , and triumphant , with so many thousand ship , and at the least with ten time so many man as ship , and that yearly ? and shall we be not assure of such neighbour friendship , as may become to we as cruel and tyrannical enemy as never king Edgar need to dread the like , and they as many and mighty prince , as never king Edgar cope with the like , shall we ( say he ) not judge it some part of wisdom , to imitate careful in some little proportion ( though not with so many thousand ) the prosperous pastime of peaceable king Edgar , that saxonicall Alexander ? yea , prosperous pastime these may be just count , by which he also make evident to the whole world , that as he wise know the ancient bound and limit of this british empire , so that he can and will royal , just , and trium - [ i . 8 . i phant enjoy the same , spite of the devil , and maugre the force of any foreign potentate . and all that , so high and faithful to the glory of God final intend and bring to pass , as the wise and godly prelate and counsellor of those day ( so count of and record ) can best advise and direct he , or perchance , but sincere commend and duetifiil encourage he in , he be of himself so bend , as purpose first invincible to fortify the chief and uttermost wall of his islandish monarchic , against all foreign encumbrance possible . and in that fortification further and assure to trust best his own oversight and judgement , in yearly view the same in every quarter thereof , and that as it be for his pastime Imperiali , also in summer time , to the