way . and i answer he : it be not just deal for you so to do : for we go not thither upon any business of our own , 277 but by reason that we be send by your lord . wherefore sithence we be commit unto your charge , you ought in no wise to forsake we . than he say : all shall well . afterwards he cause we to show he all our garment : and whatsoever he deem to be less needful for we , he will we to leave it behind in the custody of our host . on the morrow they bring unto each of we a fur gown , make all of ram skin , with the wool still upon they , and breech of the same , and boot also or buskin accord to their fashion , and shoe make of feel , and hood also make of skin after their manner . the 16 . of the second day after holy rood , we begin to set forward September . on our journey , have three guide to direct we : and we 46 . day . ride continual eastward , till the feast of all saint . throughout all that region , and beyond also do the or , Kangjtt & . people of changle inhabit , who be by parentage descend from the roman . upon the north side of we , we have Bulgaria the great , and on the south , the foresay caspian sea . or , laic . of the river of lagac : and of diverse region or nation . Chap . 23 . laic twelve t t aving travel twelve day journey from Etilia , we day journey ten sound a mighty river call lagac : which river jtom oga . issue out of the north , from the land of pascatir , descend into the foresay sea . the language of pascatir . pascatir , and of the hungarian be all one , and they be all of they shepherd , not have any city . and their country border upon Bulgaria the great , on the west frontier thereof . from the north - east part of the say country , there be no city at all . for Bulgaria the great be the far country that way , that have any city therein . out of the forename region of pascatir , descendedfrom proceed the Hun of old time , who afterward be the bascirde . cade Hungarians . next unto it be Bulgaria the great . Isidore report concern the people of this nation , that with swift horse they traverse the impregnable wall and bound of Alexander , ( which , together with the rock 278 of Caucasus , serve to restrain those barbarous and bloodthirsty people from invade the region of the south ) insomuch that they have tribute pay unto they , as far as TEgypt . likewise they waste all country even unto France . whereupon they be more mighty than the Tartar as yet be . and unto they the blacians , the ValaMans . bulgarian , and the Vandal join themselves . for out of Bulgaria the great , come those bulgarian . Moreover , they which inhabit beyond Danubius , near unto Constantinople , and not far from pascatir , be call Ilac , which ( save the pronunciation ) be all one with Blac , ( for the Tartar can pronounce the letter b ) from who also descend the people which inhabit the land of Assani . for they be both of they call Ilac ( both these , and the other ) in you language of the russian , the polonians , and the bohemians . the sclavonian speak all one language with the Vandal , all which band themselves with the Hun : and now for the most part , they unite themselves unto the Tartar : who God have raise up from the utmost part of the earth , accord to that which the lord say : i will provoke they to 32 - v - envy ( namely such as keep not his law ) by a people , which be no people , and by a foolish nation will i anger ' ' ' they . this prophecy be fulfil , accord to the literal sense thereof , upon all nation which observe not the law of God . all this which i have write concern the land of pascatir , be tell i by certain friar predicants , which travail thither before ever the Tartar come abroad . and from that time they be subdue unto their neighbour the bulgarian be Saracens , whereupon many of they prove Saracens also . other matter concern this people , may be know out of chronicle . for it be manifest , that those province beyond Constantinople , which be now call Bulgaria , Valachia , and Sclavonia , be of old time province belong to the greek . also Hungaria be heretofore call Pannonia . and we be ride over the land of cangle , from the feast of holy rood , until the feast of all saint : travail - country . 279 ing almost every day ( accord to my estimation ) as far , as from Paris to Orleans , and sometime far , as we be provide of post horse : for some day we have change of horse twice or thrice in a day . sometime we travail two or three day together , not find any people , and then we be constrain not to ride so fast . of 20 . or 30 . horse we have always the worst , because we be stranger . for every one take their choice of the best horse before we . they provide i always of a strong horse , because i be very corpulent and heavy : but whether he amble a gentle pace or no , i dare not make any question . neither yet dare i complain , although he trot full sore . but every man must be content with his lot as it fall . whereupon we be exceed trouble : for oftentimes our horse be tire before we can come at any people . and then we be constrain to beat and whip on our horse , and to lay our garment upon other empty horse : yea