the state of the ship of the cinque port from Edward the confessor and William the conqueror , and so down to Edward the first , faithful gather by the learned gentleman 42 m . willaim Lambert in his perambulation of Kent , out of the most ancient record of England . find in the book of the general ! survey the antiquity of the realm , which William the con - ° fthe porls - querour cause to be make in the four io7 °- yeere of his reign , and to be call domesday , because ( as Matthew Parise say ) it spare no man but judge all man indifferent , as the lord in that great day will do , that Dover , Sandwich , and Rumney , be in the time of king Edward the confessor , discharge almost of all manner of imposition and burden ( which other town do bear ) in consideration of such service to be do by they upon the sea , as in their special title shall hereafter appear . whereupon , although i may ground reasonable conjecture , that the immunity of the haven town ( which we now call by a certain number , the cinque port ) may take their beginning from the same Edward : yet for as much as i read in the chartre of king Edward the first after the conquest ( which be report in our book of entry ) at reci tall of the grant of sundry king to the five port , the same reach no high than to William the conqueror , i will leave my conjecture , and lean to his chartre : content my self to yield to the conqueror , the thanks of other man benefit , see those which be benefit , be wise content ( as the case then stand ) to like better of his confirmation ( or second gift ) then of king Edward first grant , and endowment . and to the end that i may proceed in some manner of array , i will first show , which town be at the beginning take for the five port , and what other be now repute in the same number : second , what service they ought , and do in time pass : and last , what privileges they have therefore , and by what person they have be govern . citizen be call baron in old time . contention between Yarmouth , and the five port . 1250 . antiquity of Yarmouth fish . if encage shall judge by the common , and rude verse , Dover , Sandwicus , ry , rum , frigmare ventus , i must say , that Dover , Sandwich , rye , Rumney , and Winchelsey , ( for that be , frigmare ventus ) be the five port : again , if i shall be rule by the roll which recite the port that send baron to the parliament , i must then add to these , Hastings and Hyde , for they also have their baron as well as the other : and so shall i not only , not show which be the first five , but also ( by addition of two other ) increase both the number , and doubtfulness . leave the verse therefore , for ignorance of the author and suspicion of his authority , and forsake the roll ( as not assure of the antiquity ) i will flee to Henry Bracton , a man both ancient , learned , and credible , which live under king Henry the third , and write ( above three hundred year since ) learned of the law of this realm . he ( i say ) in the three book of his work , and treatise of the crown , take in hand to show the article inquirable before the justice in Eire , ( or itinerent , as we call they , because they use to ride from place to place throughout the realm , for administration of justice ) set forth a special form of writ , to be direct several to the baliff of Hastings , Hithe , Rumney , Dover , and Sandwich , command they , that they shall cause twenty and four of their baron ( for so their burgess , or townsman , and the citizen of London likewise , be wont to be term ) to appear before the king justice at Shipwey in Kent ( as they accustom to do ) there to inquire of such point , as shall be give in charge . which do , he add moreover , that forso - much as there be oftentimes contention between they of the five port , and the inhabitant of Yarmouth in Norfolk and Donwich in suffblke , there shall be several ! writ direct to they also , returnable before the same justice at the same day and place , recite , that where the king have by his former writ summon the plea of the five port to be hold at Shipwey , if any of the same town have cause to complain of any ( be within the liberty of the say port ) he shall be at Shipwey to propound against he , and there to receive accord to law and justice . thus much i recite out of Bracton , partly to show that Shipwey be before king Edward the first time , the place of assembly for the pleasant of the five port : partly to notify the difference , and controversy that long time since be between these port , and those other town : but purposely , and chief , to prove , that Hastings , and Hithe , Dover , Rumney , and Sandwich , be in bractons time account the five principali haven or port , which be endow with privilege , and have the same ratify by the great chartre of England . neither yet will i deny , but that soon after , winchelsea and rye may be add to the number . for i find in a old record , that king Henry the three take into his own hand ( for the better defence of the realm ) the town of Winchelsey , and rye , which belong before to the monastery of Fescampe in Normandy , and give therefore in exchange , the manor of Chiltham in Gloucestershire , and diverse other land in Lincolnshire . this he do , partly to conceal from the prior alien the intelligence of the secret affair of his realm , and partly because of a great disobedience and excess , that be commit by the inhabitant of Wincelsey , against prince Edward his elder son . and therefore , although i can easy be lead to think , that he submit they for their correction to the order , and governance of the five port , yet i stand doubtful whether he make they partner of their privilege , or no , for that have be a preferment , and no punishment unto they : but i suspect rather , that his son king Edward the first , ( by who encouragement and aid , old Winchelsey be afterward abandon , and the new town bud ) be the first that apparel they with that preeminence . by this therefore let it appear , that Hastings , Dover , Hithe , Rumney , and Sandwich , be the first port of + 5 1268 . Winchelsey first build . ™ 77 - privilege : which ( because they be 5 . in number ) both at the first give , and yet continue , to all the residue , the name of cinque port , although not only Winchelsey and rye , be ( since that time ) incorporate with they as principal , but diverse other place also ( for the ease of their charge ) be creep in , as part , limb , and member of the same . now therefore , somewhat shall say , as touch the service that these port of duty owe , and in deed have do , to the prince : whereof the one ( i mean with what number of vessel , in what manner of furniture , and for how long season , they ought to wait on the king at the sea , upon their own charge ) shall partly appear by that which we shall present say , and partly by that which shall follow in Sandwich , and Rumney : the other shall be make manifest by example , draw out of good history : and they both shall be testify by the word of king Edward the first in his own chartre . the book of domesday before remember , charge Dover with twenty vessel at the sea , whereof each to be furnish with one and twenty man for fifteen day together : and say further