drive our cart , and one to conduct we unto Sartach . the flesh which they give we be not sufficient for we : neither can we find any thing to be buy for our money . and as we sit extreme heat under our cart in the code shadow , by reason of the tn sommer - extreame and vehement heat which be there at that time , they do so importunate and shameless intrude themselves into our company , that they will even tread upon we , to see whatsoever thing we have . Having list at any time to ease themselves , the filthy lozel have not the manner to withdraw themselves far from we , than a bean can be cast . yea , like vile sloven they will lay their tail in our presence , while they be yet talk with we : many other thing they commit , which be most tedious and loathsome unto we . but above all thing it grieve i to the very heart , that when i will utter aught unto they , which may tend to their edification , my foolish interpreter will say : you shall not make i become a preacher now : i tell you , i can nor i will not rehearse any such word . and true it be which he say , for i perceive afterward , when i begin to have a little smattering in the language , that when i speak one thing , he will say quite another , whatsoever come next unto his witless tongue end . then see the danger i may incur in speak by such a interpreter , i resolve much rather to hold my peace , and thus we travel with great toil from lodging to lodging , till at the length , i 257 r the breadth of Tanais . he be much deceive . a few day before the feast of saint marie Magdalene , we arrive at the bank of the mighty river Tanais which divide Asia from Europa , even as the river Nilus off . / Egypt disjoin Asia from Africa . at the same place where we arrive , baatu and Sartach do cause a certain cottage to be build , upon the eastern bank of the river , for a company of russian to dwell in to the end they may transport ambassador and merchant in ferry - boat over that part of the river . first they ferry we over , and then our cart , put one wheel into one lyter , and the other wheel into another lyter , have bind both the lyter together , and so they row they over . in this place our guide play the fool most extreme . for he imagine that the say russian , dwell in the cottage , shall have provide we horse , send home the beast which we bring with we , in another cart , y ‘ they may return unto their own master . and when we demand to have some beast of they , they answer , that they have a privilege from baatu , whereby they be bind to none other service , but only to ferry over goer and comer : and that they receive great tribute of merchant in regard thereof . we stay therefore by the say river side three day . the first day they give unto we a great fresh turbut : the second day they bestow rye bread , and a little flesh upon we , which the purveyor of the village have take up at every house for we : and the three day dry fish , which they have there in great abundance . the say river be even as broad in that place , as the river of sein be at Paris . and before we come there , we pass over many goodly water , and full of fish : howbeit the barbarous and rude Tartar know not how to take they : neither do they make any reckon of any fish , except it be so great , that they may pray upon the flesh thereof , as upon the flesh of a ram . this river be the limit of the east part of Russia , and it spring out of the fen of Maeotis , which fen stretch unto the north ocean . and it run south - 258 ward into a certain great sea 700 . mile about , before it fall into the sea call Pontus Euxinus . and all the river , which we pass over , run with full stream into those quarter . the foresay river have great store of wood also grow upon the west side thereof . beyond this place the Tartar ascend no far unto the north : for at that season of the year , about the first of August , they begin to return back unto the south . and therefore there be another cottage somewhat low , where passenger be ferry over in winter time . and in this place we be drive to great extremity , by reason that we can get neither horse , nor ox for any money . at length , after i have declare unto they , that my come be to labour for the common good of all Christians , they send we ox and man ; howbeit we our self be fain to travel on foot . at this time they be reap their rye . Wheat prosper not well in that soil . they have the seed of Millium in great abundance . the russian woman attire their head like unto our woman . they imbroder their safeguard or gown on the outside , from their foot unto their knee with particoloured or grey stuff . the russian man wear cap like unto the dutch man . also they wear upon their head certain sharp , and high - crowned hat make of feel , much like unto a sugar loaf . then travel we 3 . dale together , not find any people . and when our self and our ox be exceed weary and faint , not know how far off we shall find any Tartar , on the sudden , there come two horse run towards we , which we take with great joy , and our guide and interpreter mount upon their back , to see , how