. their woman be chaste , neither be there so much as a word utter concern their dishonesty . some of they will notwithstanding speak filthy and immodest word . but towards other people , the say Tartars be most insolent , and they scorn and set nought by all other noble and ignoble person whatsoever . for we see in the emperor court the great duke of Russia , the king son of Georgia , and many great sultans receive no due honour and estimation among they . so that even the very Tartar assign to give attendance unto they , be they never so base , will always go before they , and take the upper hand of they , yea , and sometime will constrain they to sit behind their back . Moreover they be angry and of a disdainful nature unto other people , and beyond all measure deceitful , and treacherous towards they . they speak fair in the beginning , but in conclusion , they sting like scorpion . for crafty they be , and full of falsehood , circumvent all man who they be able , by their sleight . whatsoever mischief they intend to practise against a man , they 138 keep it wonderful secret , so that he may by no mean provide for himself , nor find a remedy against their conspiracy . they be unmannerly also and unclean in take their meat and their drink , and in other action . drunkenness be honourable among they , and when any of they have take more drink than his stomach can well bear , he cast it up and fall to drink again . they be most intolerable exacter , most covetous possessor , and most niggardly giver . the slaughter of other people be account a matter of nothing with they . of their law and custom . Chap . 6 . moreover , they have this law or custom , that punishment whatsoever man or woman be manifest take ° f adultery . in adultery , they be punish with death . a virgin likewise that have commit fornication , they slay together with her mate . whosoever be take in of theft . robbery or theft , be put to death without all pi tie . also , of secret if any man disclose their secret , especial in time of disclose . war , he receive a hundred blow on the back with a bastinado , lay on by a tall fellow . in like sort when any inferior offend in aught , they find no favour at their superior hand , but be punish with grievous stripe . they be join in matrimony to all in general , yea , law of even to their near kinsfolk except their mother , matrimome - daughter and sister by the mother side . for they use to marry their sister by the father side only , and also the wife of their father after his decease . the young brother also , or some other of his kindred , be bind to marry the wife of his elder brother decease . for , at the time of our abode in the country , a certain duke of Andreas duke Russia name Andreas , be accuse before duke Baty for ° f ^ ussia - conveying the Tartar horse out of the land , and for sell they to other : and although it can not be prove , yet be he put to death . his young brother and the wife of the party decease hear this , come and make their supplication unto the forename duke , that 139 the dukedom of Russia may not be take from they . but he command the youth to marry his decease brother wife , and the woman also to take he unto her husband , accord to the custom of the Tartar . she answer , that she have rather die , than so heinous transgress the law . howbeit , he deliver she unto he , although they both refuse as much as they can . wherefore carry they to bed , they constrain the youth , lament and weep , to lie down and commit incest with his brother wife . to be short , after the death of their husband , the Tartar wife use very seidome to marry the second time , unless perhaps some man take his brother wife or his stepmother in marriage . they make no difference between the son of their wife and of their concubine , but the father give what he please unto each one : for of late the king of Georgia have two son , one lawful beget call Melich ; but the other David , bear in adultery , at his death leave part of his land unto his base son . hereupon Melich ( unto who the kingdom fall by right of his mother , because it be govern before time by woman ) go unto the emperor of the Tartar , David also have take his journey unto he . now both of they come to the court and proffer large gift , the son of the harlot make suit , that he may have justice , accord to the custom of the Tartar . well , sentence pass against Melich , that David be his elder brother , shall have superiority over he , and shall quiet and peaceable possess the portion of land grant unto he by his father . whensoever a tartar have many wife , each one of they have her family and dwell place by her self . and sometime the tartar eat , drink and lie with one , and sometime with another . one be account chief among the rest , with who he be often conversant , then with the other . and notwithstanding ( as it have be say ) they be many , yet do they seidome fall out among themselves . 140 of their superstitious tradition . Chap . 7 . but by reason of certain tradition , which either they or their predecessor have devise , they account some thing indifferent to be fault . one be to thrust a knife into the fire , or any way to touch the fire with a knife , or with their knife to take flesh out of