travel in great fear . for certain russian , hungarian , and alanians be servant unto the Tartar ( of who they have great multitude among they ) assemble themselves twenty or thirty in a company , and so secret in the night convey themselves from home , they take bow and arrow with they , and whomsoever they find in the night season , they put he to death , hide themselves in the day time . and have tire their horse , they go in the night unto a company of other horse feed in some pasture , and change they for new , take with they also one or two horse beside , to eat they when they stand in need . Oure guide therefore be sore afraid , lest we shall have meet with such companion . in this journey we have die for famine , have we not carry some of our biscuit with we . at length we come unto the mighty river of Etilia , or Volga . for it be four time great , than the river of sein , and of a wonderful depth : and issue forth of Bulgaria the great , it run into a certain lake or sea , which of late they call the hircan sea , accord to the name of a certain city in Persia , stand upon the shore thereof . howbeit Isidore call it the caspian sea . for it have the caspian mountain and the land of Persia situate on the south side thereof : and the mountain of musihet , that be to say , of the people call Assassini towards the east , which mountain be conjoined unto the caspian mountain : but on the north side thereof lie the same desert , wherein the Tartar do now inhabit . howbeit heretofore there dwell certain 270 i253 - people call Changlae . and on that side it receive changle . the stream of Etilia ; which river increase in summer time , like unto the river Nilus in . / Egypt . upon the west part thereof , it have the mountain of Alani , and Lesgi , and porta ferrea , or derbent , and the mountain of Georgia . this sea therefore be compass in on three side with the mountain , but on the north side with plain ground . Frier Andrew , in his journey travel Frier round about two side thereof , namely the south and the Andrew east side : and i my self about other two , that be to say , the north side in go from baatu to mangu - can , and in return likewise : and the west side in come home from baatu into Syria . a man may travel round about it in four month . and it be not true which Isidore report , namely that this sea be a bay or gulf come forth of the ocean : for it do , in no part thereof , join with the ocean , but be environ on all side with land . of the court of baatu : and how we be entertain by he . Chap . 21 . all the region extend from the west shore of the foresay sea , where Alexander iron gate , otherwise call the city of Derbent , be situate , and from the mountain of Alania , all along by the fen of Maeotis , whereinto the river of Tanais fall , and so forth , to the north ocean , be wont to be call the north Albania . of which country Isidore report , that there be dog of such a huge stature , and so fierce , that they be able in fight to match bull , and to master lion . which be true , as i understand by diverse , who tell i , that there towards the north ocean they make their dog to draw in cart like ox , by reason of their bigness and strength . Moreover , upon that part of Etilia where we arrive , there be a new cottage build , wherein they have place Tartar and russian both together , to ferry over , and transport messenger go and come to and from the court of baatu . for 271 baatu remain upon the far side towards the east . neither ascend he in summer time more northward than the foresay place where we arrive , but be even then descend to the south . from Januarie until August both he and all other Tartar ascend by the bank of river towards cold and northerly region , and in August they begin to return back again . he descend we pass down the stream therefore in a bark , from dim > ne than the foresay . cottage unto his court . from the same to ’ barke place unto village of Bulgaria the great , stand towards the north , it be five day journey . i wonder what devil carry the religion of Mahomet thither . for , from Derbent , which be upon the extreme border of Persia , it be above 30 . day journey to pass overthwart the desert , and so to ascend by the bank of astracan . Etilia , into the foresay country of Bulgaria . all which way there be no city , but only certain cottage near unto that place where Etilia fall into the sea . those bulgarian be most wicked Saracen , more earnest profess the damnable religion of Mahomet , than the descrip - any other nation whatsoever . Moreover , when i first cion of baatu behold the court of baatu , i be astonish at the sight sscomt . thereof : for his house or tent seem as though they have be some huge and mighty city , stretch out a great way in length , the people range up and down about it for the space of some three or four league . and even as the people of Israel know every man , on which side of the tabernacle to pitch his tent : even so every one of they know right well , towards what side of the court he ought to place his house when he take it from off the cart . whereupon the court call in their language Horda , which signify , the et t e i st .