and sometime two of we to ride upon one horse . of the hunger , and thirst , and other misery , which we sustain in our journey . Chap . 24 . of hunger and thirst , cold and weariness , there be no end . for they give we no victual , but only in the evening . in the morning they use to give we a little drink , or some sodden millet to sup off . in the evening they bestow flesh upon we , as namely , a shoulder and breast of ram mutton , and every man a measure quantity of broth to drink . when we have sufficient of the flesh - broth , we be marvellous well refresh . and it seem to i most pleasant , and most nourish drink . Every Saturday i remain fast until night , without eat or drink of aught . and when night come , i be constrain , to my great grief and sorrow , to eat flesh . sometime we be fain to eat flesh half sodden , or almost raw , and all for want of fuel to seethe it withal : especial when we lie in the field , or be 280 1253 - benighted before we come at our journey end : because we can not then convenient gather together the dung of horse or ox : for other fuel we find but seidome , except perhaps a few thorn in some place . likewise certain upon the bank of some river , there be wood grow nver " here and there . howbeit they be very rare . in the beginning our guide high disdain we , and it be tedious unto he to conduct such base fellow . after - ward , when he begin to know we somewhat better , he direct we on our way by the court of rich moal , and we be request to pray for they . wherefore , have 1 carry a good interpreter with i , i shall have have opportunity to have do much good . the foresay Chingis , who be the first adhere can or emperor of the Tartar , have four son , of who proceed by natural descent many child , every one of which do at this day enjoy great possession : and they be daily multiply and disperse over that huge and waste desert , which be , in dimension , like unto the ocean sea Oure guide therefore direct we , as we be go on our journey , unto many of their habitation . and they marveil exceed , that we will receive neither gold , nor silver , nor precious and costly garment at their hand . they inquire also , concern the great pope , whether he be of so last a age as they have hear ? for there have go a report among they , that he be 500 year old . they inquire likewise of our country , whether there be abundance of sheep , ox , and horse or no ? concern the ocean sea , they can not conceive of it , because it be without limit or bank . upon the even of you feast of all saint , we forsake the way lead towards the east , ( because the people be now descend very much south ) and we go on our journey by certain Alps , or mountain direct southward , for the space of eight jay 8 . day together . in the foresay desert i see many j ° urney ass ( which they call Colan ) be rather like unto mule : wjrd ' ■ f these do our guide and his companion chase very eager : f00te 0 i howbeit , they do but lose their labour : for the beast 281 1253 - high mountain . manure ground . Kenchat a village of the Saracen . be two swift for they . upon the 7 . day there appear to the south of we huge high mountain , and we enter into a place which be well water , and fresh as a garden , and find land till and manure . the eight day after the feast of all saint , we arrive at a certain town of the Saracen , name Kenchat , the governor whereof meet our guide at the town end with ale and cup . for it be their manner at all town and village , subject unto they , to meet the messenger of baatu and mangu - can with meat and drink . at the same time of the year , they go upon the ice in that country . and before the the 7 . day of feast of saint Michael , we have frost in the desert . i November . inquire the name of that province : but be now in a strange territory , they can not tell i the name thereof , but only the name of a very small city in a gnat river , the same province . and there descend a great river down from the mountain , which water the whole region , accord as the inhabitant will give it passage , by make diverse channel and sluice : neither do this river exonerate it self into any sea , but be swallow up by a hideous gulf into the bowel of the earth : many lake , and it cause many fen or lake . also i see many vine . vine , and drink of the wine thereof . the mountain of Caucasus be extend unto the eastern sea the city of Talas , or Chincitalas . Frier Andrew . how Ban be put to death : and concern the habitation of the dutch man . Chap . 25 . the day follow , we come unto another cottage near unto the mountain . and i inquire what mountain they be , which i understand to be the mountain of Caucasus , which be stretch forth , and continue on both part to the sea , from the west unto the east : and on the west part they be conjoin unto the foresay caspian sea , whereinto the river of Volga discharge his stream . i inquire also of the city of Talas , wherein be certain Dutchman servant unto one Buri , of who friar Andrew make mention .