by the mongal . And be thus vanquish , they be , the great part of they , slay ; and other , which can not escape , be carry into captivi tie . in the land of the foresay karakytayans , occoday cham , the son of Chingis Cham , after he be occoday create emperor , build a certain city , which he call cham - chanyl . near unto which city , on the south side , there be a huge desert , wherein wild man be certain report to inhabit , which can speak at all , and be destitute of joint in their leg , so that if they fall , they can rise alone by themselves . howbeit , they be of 143 discretion to make felt of camel hair , wherewith they clothe themselves , and which they hold against the wind . and if at any time , the Tartar pursue they , chance to wound they with their arrow , they put herb into their wound , and fly strong before they . of the mutual victory between they , and the people of Kythay . Chap . 9 hey than and t ) ut the mongal return home into their own Paulus jj country , prepare themselves to battle against the vthemus Cal1 * kythayans : which their emperor hear , set forward * cathayans . against they with his army , and they fight a cruel battle , wherein the mongal be overcome , and all their noble in the army , except seven , be slay . and for this cause , when they , purpose to invade any region , be threaten by the inhabitant thereof to be slay , they do , to this day , answer : in old time also our whole number beside be slay , we remain but seven of we alive , and yet notwithstanding we be now grow unto a great multitude , think not therefore to daunt we with such brag . but Chingis and the residue that remain alive , flee home into their country : and have breathe new victory , he a little , he prepare himself to war , and go forth against the people call Huyri : these man be Chris - letter . tian of the sect of Nestorius . and these also the mongal overcome , and receive letter or learning from they : for before that time they have not the art of writing , and now they call it the hand or letter of the mongal . immediate after , he march against the country of saruyur , and of the karanite , and against the land of hudirat ; all which he vanquish . then return he home into his own country , and breathe himself . afterwards , assemble his warlike troop , they march with one accord against the kythayans , and wage war with they a long time , they conquer a great part of their land , and shut up their emperor into his great city : which city they have so long time besiege , that they begin to want necessary provision for their 144 army . and when they have no victual to feed upon , Chingis Cham command his soldier , that they shall eat every ten man of the company . but they of the city fight manful against they , with engine , dart , and arrow , and when stone want they throw silver , and especial melt silver : for the same city abound with great riches . also , when the mongal have fight a long time and can not prevail by war , they make a great trench underneath the ground from the army unto the midst of the city , and there issue forth they fight against the citizen , and the remnant also without the wall fight in like manner . at last , break open the gate of the city , they enter , and put the emperor , with many other to the sword , they take possession thereof and convey away the gold , silver , and all the riches therein . and have appoint certain deputy over the country , they return home into their own land . this be the first time , when the emperor of the kythayans be vanquish , Chingis cham obtained the empire . but some part of the country , because it lie within the sea , they can by no mean conquer unto this day . the man of kytay be pagan , have a speciali kind of write by themselves , and ( as it be report ) the scripture of the old and new testament . they have also record in history the life of their forefather : and they have eremite , and certain house make after the rftanner of our church , which in those day they great resort unto . they say that they have diverse saint also , and they worship one God . they adore and reverence Christ Jesus our lord , and believe the article of eternal life , but be not baptize . they do also honourable esteem and reverence our scripture . they love christian , and bestow much alm , and be a very courteous and gentle people . they have no beard , and they agree partly with the mongal in the disposition of their countenance . in all occupation which man practise , there be not better artificer in the whole world . i 145 king silver cast at the enemy in stead of stone . part of Cathay in the sea . the letter , bl the religion of the cathayans . their excellent workmanship . their country be exceed rich , in corn , wine , gold , silk , and other commodity . thossut can son of chinas . the stratagem of the king of India . of their war against India major and minor . Chap . 10 . a nd when the mongal with their emperor Chingis Cham have a while rest themselves after the foresaid victory , they divide their army . for the emperor send one of his son name thossut ( who also they call can , that be to say , emperor ) with a army against the people of Comania , who he vanquish