the first horse therefore be drive into the water , all the other horse of the company follow he , and so they pass through the river . but the poor sort of common soldier have every man his leather bag or satchel well sow together , wherein he pack up all his trinket , and strong truss it up hang it at his horse tail , and so pass over , in manner aforesaid . t56 how they may be resist . Chap . 18 . ideeme not any one kingdom or province able to resist they : because they use to take up soldier out of every country of their dominion . and if so be the neighbour province which they invade , will not aid they , utter waste it , with the inhabitant thereof , who they take from thence with they , they proceed on to fight against another country . And place their captive in the forefront of the battle , if they fight not courageous , they put they to the sword . wherefore , if Christians will withstand they , it be expedient , that the province and governor of country shall agree in one , and so by common counsel , shall give they resistance . their soldier also must be furnish with strong hand - bowe and crossbow , which they great dread , and with sufficient arrow , with mace also of good iron , or a axe with a long handle or staff . when they make their arrow head , they must ( accord to you Tartar custom ) dip they redhot into water mingle with salt , that they may be strong to pierce the enemy armour . they that will may have sword also and lance with hook at the end , to pull they from their saddle , out of which they be easy remove . they must have helmet likewise and other armour to defend themselves and their horse from counsel how to wage war against the Tartar . a notable temper of iron or steel . the Tartar weapon and arrow , and they that be unarm , must ( accord to you Tartar custom ) march behind their fellow , and discharge at the enemy with long bow and crossbow . and ( as it be above say of the Tartar ) they must orderly dispose their band and troop , and ordain law for their soldier . whosoever run to the prey or spoil , before the victory be achieve , must undergo a most severe punishment . for such a fellow be put to death among the Tartar without all pity or mercy . the place of battle must be choose , if it be possible , in a plain field , where they may see round about , neither must * 57 all be in one company , but in many and several band , not very far distant one from another . they which give the first encounter must send one band before , and must have another in a readiness to relieve and second the former in time convenient . they must have spy also on every side to give they notice when the rest of the enemy band approach . for therefore ought they always to send forth band against band and troop against troop , because the tartar ever practise to get his enemy in the midst and so to environ he . let our band take this caveat also , if the enemy retire , not to make any long pursuit after he , lest peradventure ( accord to his custom ) he may draw they into some secret ambush : for the tartar fight more by policy then by main force . and again , lest our horse be tire : for we be not so well store with horse as they . those horse which the Tartar use one day , they ride not upon three or four day after . Moreover , if the Tartar draw homeward , our man must not therefore depart and casseir there band , or separate themselves asunder : because they do this upon policy , namely to have our army divide , that they may more secure invade and waste the country . and in very deed , our captain ought both day and night to keep their army in a readiness : and not to lie out of their armour , but at all assay , to be provide for battle . for the Tartar like devil be always watch and devise how to practise mischief . Furthermore , if in battle any of the Tartar be cast off their horse back , they must present be lay hold on and take , for be on foot they shoot strong , wound and kill both horse and man . * Johannes de of the journey of friar * John unto the first plano Carpini guard of the Tartar < chap we therefore by the commandment of the sea apostolic set forth towards the nation of the east , choose first to travel unto the Tartar , because 158 we fear that there may be great danger imminent the journey of upon the church of God next unto they , by their frfr invasion . proceed on therefore , we come to the Legate ° ™ king of Bohemia , who be of our familiar acquaintance , advise we to take our journey through Polonia and Russia . for we have kinsfolk in Polonia , by who assistance , we may enter into Russia . have give we his letter , he cause our charge also to be defray , in all his chief house and city , till we come unto his nephew Boleslaus duke of Slesia , who Boleslaus duke also be familiar and well know unto we . the like favour he show we also , till we come unto Conradus duke of * Lautiscia , unto who then ( by God especial * Mazovla . favour towards we ) lord Wasilico duke of Russia be come , from who mouth we hear more at large concern the deed of the Tartar : for he have send ambassador thither , who be return back unto he . wherefore , it be give we to understand , that we must bestow gift upon they , we