long in all part then a nun hood , be open before and gird unto they under the right side . for herein do the Tartar differ from the Turk : because the Turk fasten their garment to their body on the left side : but the Tartar always on the right side . they have also a ornament for their head which they call Botta , be make of the bark of a tree , or of some such other light matter as they can find , which by reason of the thickness and roundness thereof can be hold but in both hand together : and it have a square sharp spire rise from the top thereof , be more than a cubit in length , and fashion like unto a pinnacle . the say Botta they cover all over with a piece of rich silk : and it be hollow within : and upon the midst of the say spire or square top , they put a bunch of quill or of slender cane a cubit long and more : and the say bunch , on the top thereof , they beautify with peacock feather , and round about all the length thereof , with the feather of a malards tail , and with precious stone also . great lady wear this kind of ornament upon their head bind it strong with a certain hat or coif , which have a hole in the crown , fit for the spire to come through it : and under the foresay ornament they cover the hair of their head , which they gather up round together from the hinder part thereof to the crown , and so lap they up in a knot or bundle within the say Botta , which afterward they bound strong under 244 their throat . hereupon when a great company of such gentlewoman ride together , and be behold a far off , they seem to be soldier with helmet on their head carry their lance upright : for the say Botta appear like a helmet with a lance over it . all their woman sit on horseback bestride their horse like man : and they bound their hood or gown about their waste with a sky colour silk scarf , and with another scarf they gird it above their breast : and they bound also a piece of white silk like a muffler or mask under their eye , reach down unto their breast . Theise gentlewoman be exceed fat , and the lesser their nose be , the fair be they esteem : they daub over their sweet face with grease too shameful : and they never lie in bed for their travel of childbirth . of the duty enjoin unto the tartarian woman , and of their labour , and also of their marriage . Chap . 9 the duty of woman be , to drive cart : to lay their house upon cart and to take they down again : to milk kine : to make butter and gry - ut : to dress skin and to sow they , which they usual sow with thread make of sinew , for they divide sinew into slender thread , and then twine they into one long thread . they make sandal and sock and other garment . howbeit they never wash any apparel : for they say that God be then angry , and that dreadful thunder will ensue , if wash garment be hang forth to dry : yea , they beat such as wash , and take their garment from they . they be wonderful afraid of thunder : for in the time of thunder they thrust all stranger out of their house , and then wrap themselves in black feel , they lie hide therein , till the thunder be overpast . they never wash their dish » or bowl : yea , when their flesh be sodden , they wash the platter wherein it must be put , with scald hot broth out of the pot , and then power the say broth into the pot again . they make feel also , and cover their house therewith . the 245 duty of the man be to make bow and arrow , stirrup , bridle , and saddle : to build house and cart , to keep horse : to milk mere : to churn Cosmos and mare milk , and to make bag wherein to put it : they keep camel also and lay burden upon they . as for sheep and goat they tend and milk they , aswell the man as the woman . with sheep milk thicked and salt they dress and tan their hide . when they will wash their hand or their head , they fill their mouth full of water , and spout it into their hand by little and little , they sprinkle their hair and wash their head therewith . as touch marriage , your highness be to understand , that no man can have a wife among they till he have buy she : whereupon sometime their maid be very stale before they be marry , for their parent always keep they till they can sei they . they keep the first and second degree of consanguinity inviolable , as we do : but they have no regard of the degree of affinity : for they will marry together , or by succession , two sister . their widow marry not at all , for this reason : because they believe , that all who have serve they in this life , shall do they service in the life to come also . whereupon they be persuade , that every widow after death shall return unto her own husband . and herehence arise a abominable and filthy custom among they , namely that the son marry sometime all his father wife except his own mother : for the court or house of the father or mother fall by inheritance always to the young son . whereupon he be to provide for all his father wife , because they be part of his inheritance aswell as his father possession . and then if he will he use they for his own wife : for he think it no injury or disparagement unto himself , although they return unto his father after death . therefore when any man have bargain with another for a maid