Tartar root out , and do possess and inhabit their country , howbeit , those that remain be reduce into their bondage . 166 how they come unto the first court of the new emperor . Chap . 24 . moreover , out of the land of the kangitta , we enter thelandofthe into the country of you bisermini , who speak the bisermini . language of Comania , but observe the law of the Saracen . in this country we find innumerable city with castle ruin , and many town leave desolate . the lord of this country be call sultan alti , who with all his progeny , alti Soldanus . be destroy by the Tartar . this country have most huge mountain . on the south side it have Jerusalem huge moun - and Baldach , and all the whole country of the Saracen . tamesIn the next territory adjoin doe inhabit two carnail brother duke of the Tartar , namely , Burin and Cadan , Burin and the son of Thyaday , who be the son of Chingis cadan - can . on the north side thereof it have the land of the black kythayans , and the ocean . in the same country Syban the brother of bathy remain . through this country we be travel from the feast of ascension , until eight day before the feast of saint John Baptist . and then we enter into the land of the black kythayans , in which the emperor build a house , where we be call in to drink . also the emperor deputy in that place cause the chief man of the city and his two son to the north ocean . syban brother unto bathy . the black kythayans . dance before we . depart from hence , we find a certain small sea , upon the shore whereof stand a little a small sea . mountain . in which mountain be report to be a hole , from whence , in winter time such vehement tempest of wind do issue , that traveller can scarce , and with great danger pass by the same way . in summer time , the noise in deed of the wind be hear there , but it pro - ceedeth gentle out of the hole . along the shore of the foresay sea we travail for the space of many day , which many day . although it be not very great , yet have it many island , and we pass by leave it on our left hand . in this land dwell ordu , who we say to be ancient orducap . 13 . unto all the tartarian duke . and it be the orda or court of his father which he inhabit , and one of his 167 the first court of the emperor . the land of it Naymani . the 22 . of July . wife bear rule there . for it be a custom among the Tartar , that the court of prince or of noble man be not dissolve , but always some woman be appoint to keep and govern they , upon who certain gift be bestow , in like sort as they be give unto their lord . and so at length we arrive at the first court of the emperor , wherein one of his wife dwell . how they come unto Cuyne himself , who be forthwith to be choose emperor . Chap . 25 - but because we have not as yet see the emperor , they will not invite we nor admit we into his orda , but cause good attendance and entertainment , after the Tartar fashion , to be give unto we in our own tent , and they cause we to stay there , and to refresh our self with they one day . depart thence upon the even of saint Peter and saint Paul , we enter into the land of the Naymani , who be pagan . but upon the very feast day of the say apostle , there fall a mighty snow in that place , and we have extreme cold weather . this land be full of mountain , and cold beyond measure , and there be little plain ground to be see . Theise two nation last mention use not to till their ground , but , like unto the Tartar , dwell in tent , which the say Tartars have destroy . through this country we be travail many day . then enter we into the land of the mongal , who we call Tartars . through the Tartar land we continue our travail ( as we suppose ) for the space of some three week , ride always hasty and with speed , and upon the day of Marie Magdalene we arrive at the court of Cuyne the emperor elect . but therefore do we make great haste all this way , because our tartarian guide be straight command to bring we unto the court Imperiali with all speed , which court have be these many year , ordain for the election of the emperor . wherefore rise early , we travail until night without eat of any thing , and oftentimes we 168 come so late unto our lodging , that we have no time to eat the same night , but that which we shall have eat over night , be give we in the morning . and often change our horse , we spare no horseflesh , but ride swift and without intermission , as fast as our horse can trot . how Cuyne entertain the minorite friar . Chap . 26 . but when we be come unto the court of Cuyne , he cause ( after the Tartar manner ) a tent and all expense necessary to be provide for we . and his people entreat we with more regard and courtesy , than they do any other ambassador . howbeit we be not call before his presence , because he be not as yet elect , nor admit unto his empire . notwithstanding , the interpretation of the pope letter , and the message which we deliver , be send unto he by the foresay bathy . and have stay there five or six day , he send we unto his mother , under who there be maintained a very