use one and the same speech in all place . for 251 a caveat right we be well forewarn of this circumstance by some worthy the which have be among the Tartar , that we shall never vary in our tale . than i beseech he , that he will vouchsafe to accept that small gift at our hand , excuse my self that i be a monk , and that it be against our profession to possess gold , or silver , or precious garment , and therefore that i have not any such thing to give he , howbeit he shall receive some part of our victual in stead of a blessing . hereupon he cause our present to be receive , and immediate distribute the same among his man , who be meet together for the same purpose , to drink and make merry . i deliver also unto he the emperor of Constantinople his letter ( this be eight day after the feast of ascension ) who send they forthwith to Soldaia to have they interpret there : for they be write in greek , and he have none about he that be skilful in the greek tongue . he ask we also whether we will drink any Cosmos , that be to say mare milk ? ( for those that be Christians among they , as namely the russian , grecian , and alanians , who keep their own law very strict , will in no case drink thereof , yea , they account themselves no christian after they have once drink of it , and their priest reconcile they unto the church as if they have renounce the christian faith . ) i give he answer , that we have as yet sufficient of our own to drink , and that when our drink fail we , we must be constrain to drink such as shall be give unto we . he inquire also what be contain in our letter , which your majesty send unto Sartach ? i answer : that they be seal up , and that there be nothing contain in they , but good and friendly word . and he ask what word we will deliver unto Sartach ? i answer : the word of christian faith . he ask again what these word be ? for he be very desirous to hear they . [ i . i O2 . i then encage expound unto he as well as i can , by my interpreter , ( who have no wit nor any utterance of speech ) the apostle creed . which after he have hear , hold his peace , he shake his head . than he assign unto we 252 two man , who shall give attendance upon our self , upon our horse , and upon our Oxen . and he cause we to ride in his company , till the messenger who he have send for the interpretation of the emperor letter , be return . and so we travel in his company till the morrow after Pentecost . how the alanians come unto we on Pentecost or Whitsun even . Chap . 13 . upon the even of Pentecost , there come unto we certain alanians , who be there call * acias , be Christians after the manner of the grecian , use greek book and grecian priest : howbeit they be not schismatics as the grecian be , but without acception of person , they honour all Christians . and they bring unto we sodden flesh , request we to eat of their meat , and to pray for one of their company be dead . than i say , because it be the even of so great and so solemn a feast day , that we will not eat any flesh for that time . and i expound unto they the solemnity of the say feast , whereat they great rejoice : for they be ignorant of all thing appertain to Christian religion , except only the name of Christ . they and many other Christians , both russian , and Hungarians demand of we , whether they may be save or no , because they be constrain to drink Cosmos , and to eat the dead carcase of such thing , as be slay by the Saracen , and other infidel ? which even the greek and russian priest themselves also esteem as thing strangle or offer unto idol : because they be ignorant of the time of fast , neither can they have observe they albeit they have know they . then instruct i they aswell as i can and strengthen they in the faith . as for the flesh which they have bring we reserve it until the feast day . for there be nothing to be sell among the Tartar for gold and silver , but only for cloth and garment , of the which kind of merchandise we have none at all . when our servant offer they any coin call Yperpera , they 253 cloth be the chief merchandise in Tartaric . rub it with their finger , and put it unto their nose , to try by the smell whether it be copper or no . neither do they allow we any food but cow milk only which be very sour and filthy . there be one thing most necessary great want unto we . for the water be so foul and muddy by reason of their horse , that it be not meet to be drink . and but for certain biscuit , which be by the goodness of God remain unto we , we have undoubted perish . of a Saracen which say that he will be baptize : and of certain man which seem to be leper . Chap . 14 . upon the day of Pentecost there come unto we a certain Saracen , unto who , as he talk with we , we expound the christian faith . who ( hear of God benefit exhibit unto mankind by the incarnation of our saviour Christ , and the resurrection of the dead , and the judgement to come , and that in baptism be a wash away of sin ) say , that he will be baptize . but when we prepare our self to the baptize of he , he sudden mount on horseback , say that he will go home and consult with