how they be welcome at their return . Basilius and Daniel prince . Ecclus . 39 ver . 4 . 181 182 183 186 190 oficium fceminarum est ducere bigas , ponere domus super eas and deponere , mungere vaccas , facere butirum 192 i 193 n 194 196 197 198 200 201 202 203 204 205 207 208 Oceanus . presbyter Johannes . frater Andreas in curia Kencham . tartarorum sedes . cyngi . mangu - can . 210 211 frater Andreas . 212 213 astracan . 214 lagag flumen 12 . dietis of Volga . 219 221 Casale . frater Andreas . Casale . Aurifodina . longissime a perside . Contomanni . 222 223 jugurespopuli , idolatrce . cailac . 224 i 225 p kalendae ipsi extrahunt predict patria Presbiteri Johannis . boves pilosis caudis : his simile sunt in Quivera America septentrionalis provincia . tangut homines magni sed fusci . - . .... Hispanis , and 227 228 the journal of friar William de rubruquis a french man of the order of the minorite friar , unto the east part of the world . An . Dom . 1253 - o his most sovereign , and most christian lord Lewis , by god grace the renown king of France , friar William de rubruk , the mean of the minorite order , wish health and continual triumph in Christ . it be write in the book of Ecclesi - Ecclus . 39 asticus concern the wise man : he shall travel for - +• into foreign country , and good and evil shall he try in all thing . the very same action ( my lord and king ) have i achieve : howbeit i wish that i have do it like a wise man , and not like a fool . for many there be , that perform the same action which a wise man do , not wise but more undiscreet : of which number i fear my self to be one . notwithstanding howsoever i have do it , because you command i , when i depart from your highness , to write all thing unto you , which i shall see among the Tartar , and you wish i also that i shall not fear to write long letter , i have do as your majesty enjoin i : yet with fear and reverence , because i want word and eloquence sufficient to write unto so great a majesty . be it know therefore unto your sacred majesty , that in the year of our lord 1253 . about the nonce of May , we enter into the sea of Pontus , which the bulgarian call the great sea . it contain in length ( as i learn of certain merchant ) 1008 mile , and be in a manner , divide into two part . about the midst thereof be two province , one towards the north , and another towards the south . the south province be call Synopolis , and it be the castle and port of the sultan of turquoise : but the north province be call of the Latines , Gasaria : of the Greeks , which 229 inhabit upon the sea shore thereof , it be call Cassaria , that be to say Caesaria . and there be certain head land stretch forth into the sea towards Synopolis . also , there be 300 . mile of distance between Synopolis and Cassaria . insomuch that the distance from those point or place to Constantinople , in length and breadth be about 700 . mile : and 700 . mile also from thence to the east , namely to the country of hiberia which be a province of Gasaria . Georgia . at the province of Gasaria or Cassaria we arrive , which province be , in a manner , three square , have a city on the west part thereof call Kersova , wherein saint Clement suffer martyrdom . And sail before the say city , we see a island , in which a church be say to be build by the hand of angel . but about the midst of the say province towards the south , as it be , upon a sharp angle or point , stand a city call sell ala . Soldaia direct over against Synopolis . and there do all the turquoise merchant , which traffic into the north country , in their journey outward , arrive , and as they return homeward also from Russia , and the say northern region , into turquoise . the foresay merchant transport thither ermine and grey fur , with other rich and costly skin . other carry clothes make of cotton or bombast , and silk , and diverse kind of spice . but upon the east part of the say province stand a city the ritie of call Matriga , where the river Tanais discharge his Matriga . stream into the sea of Pontus , the mouth whereof be twelve mile in breadth . for this river , before it enter into the sea of Pontus , make a little sea , which have in breadth and length seven hundred mile , and it be in no place thereof above six pace deep , whereupon great vessel can sail over it . howbeit the merchant of \\ Matriga . Constantinople , arrive at the foresayd ci tie of two Materta , send their bark unto the river of Tanais to buy dry fish , sturgeon , thoss , barbil , and a infinite number of other fish . the foresay province of Cassaria be compass in with the sea on three side thereof : namely on the west side , where Kersova the city of saint 230 clement be situate : on the south side the city of Soldaia whereat we arrive : on the east side Maricandis , and there stand the city of Matriga upon the mouth of the river Tanais . beyond the say mouth stand zikia , zikia . which be not in subjection unto the Tartar : also the people call Suevi and Hiberi towards the east , who likewise be not under the Tartar dominion . Moreover towards the south , stand the city of Trapesunda , which have a governor proper to it self , name Guydo , be of the lineage of the emperor of Constantinople , and be subject unto the Tartar . next unto that be Synopolis