from the foresay island , they environ the say island on all side . now godred and his company rise early in the morning , and see themselves beset with their enemy on all side , they be utter astonish . howbeit arm themselves they begin stout to make resistance , but altogether in vain . for about 9 of the clock in the morning , Olavus and the foresay viscount Pol , with all their soldier , enter the island , and have slay all who they find without the precinct of the church , they apprehend godred , gelding he , and put out his eye . unto which action Olavus give not his consent , neither can he withstand it , by reason of the forename viscount the son of book . this be do in the year of Christ 1223 . the next summer follow Olavus have receive pledge from all the chief man of the island , with a fleet of 32 . ship sail unto man , and arrive at Rognolfwaht . at the same time Reginald and Olavus divide the kingdom of the island between themselves , man be grant unto Reginald , and beside his portion the name of a king also . Olavus have receive certain victual of the people of man , return , together with his company , unto his own portion of island . the year follow Reginald take unto he Alanus lord of Galway , together with his subject of man , sail unto the island , that he may take away that portion of ground from his brother Olavus , which he have grant unto he , and subdue it unto himself . How - 1228 . , beit , by reason that the people of man have no list to fight against Olavus or the islander , because they bear good will towards they , Reginald and Alanus lord of Galway be defeat of their purpose , return home unto their own . within a short space after Reginald , under pretense of go unto the court of his lord the king of England , receive a 100 mark of the people of man , and take his journey unto Alanus lord of Galway . which the people of man hear take great indignation thereat , insomuch that they send for Olavus , and appoint he to be their king . in the year 1226 . Olavus recover his inheritance , that be to say the kingdom of man and of the island , which Reginald his brother have govern for the space of 38 . year , and he reign two year in safety . in the year 1228 . Olavus with all his noble of man , and the strong part of his people , sail unto the island . a short space after Alanus lord of Galway , Thomas earl of Athol , and king Reginald come unto man with a mighty army , and waste all the south part of man , spoil the church , and slay all the man who they can take , insomuch , that the south part of the say island be bring almost into desolation . and then Alanus return with his army into his own land , leave behind he bailiff and substitute in man , which shall gather up and render unto he the tribute of the country . howbeit king Olavus come sudden upon they , chase they away and recover his kingdom . and the mannians which of late be disperse and scatter abroad , begin to unite themselves , and to inhabit without fear . the same year , in the time of winter , upon the sudden , and in the very dead of the night come king Reginald out of Galway with five ship , and burn all the ship of his brother Olavus , and of the noble of man , at the isle of S . Patric , and conclude a peace with his brother , remain at the port of Ragnolwath 40 . day : in the mean while he allure unto himself all the islander upon the south part of man , who swear , that they will adventure their life , until he have get the one half of his kingdom : contrariwise Olavus join unto himself they of the north part , and upon the 14 . of February in the place call Tingvalla , a field be fight between the two brother , wherein Olavus get the victory , and Reginald the king be by certain soldier slay without the knowledge of his brother . also certain pirate come to the south part of man , waste and spoil it . the monk of Russin convey the body of king Reginald , unto the abbey of saint mary of furnace , and there he be inter in the place , which his own self have choose for the purpose . after these thing Olavus travel unto the king of Norway , but before he be arrive there , Haco king of Norway appoint acertaine noble man name Husbac the son of Owmund , to be king of the island of the Hebrides and call his name Haco . then come the say Haco with Olavus and godred don the son of Reginald , and a multitude of norwegian , unto the island : and while they be give a assault unto a castle in the island of both , Haco be hit with a stone die , and be bury in Iona . in the year 1230 . come Olavus , with Godredus don , and certain norwegian unto man , and they part the kingdom among themselves , Olavus still retain man godr as he be go unto the island , be slay in the isle of Lewis , and Olavus enjoy the kingdom of the island also . in the year 1237 . upon the 12 . of the kalend of June , Olavus son of godr king of man decease in the isle of saint Patric , and be inter in the abbey of Russin . he reign 11 . year , two while his brother be alive , and nine after his death . Haraldus his son be of the age of 14 . year , succeed , and he reign 12 . year . the first year of his reign take his journey unto the island , he appoint one Loglen his kinsman to be his deputy in man the autumn follow Haraldus send the three son of