between the foresay tangut . mountain eastward , inhabit the nation of tangut , who be a most valiant people , and take Chingis in battle . but after the conclusion of a league he be set at liberty by they , and afterward subdue they . Theise strange ox , people of tangut have ox of great strength , with tail like unto horse , and with long shag hair upon their back and belly . they have leg great than other ox have , and they be exceed fierce . Theise ox 290 draw the great house of the moal : and their horn be slender , long , straight , and most sharp point : insomuch that their owner be fain to cut off the end of they . a counterfeit we will not suffer her self to be couple unto one of they , unless they whistle or sing unto she . they have also the quality of a buff : for if they see a man clothe in red , they run upon he immediate to kill he . next unto they be the people of tebet , man which be wont to eat the carcase of their decease parent : that for pity sake , they may make no other sepulchre for they , than their own bowel . howbeit of late they have leave off this custom , because that thereby they become abominable and odious unto all other nation . notwithstanding unto this day they make fine cup of the skull of their parent , to the end that when they drink out of they , they may amid all their jollity and delight call their dead parent to remembrance . this be tell i by one that see it . the say people of tebet have great plenty of gold in their land . whosoever therefore want gold , dig till he have find some quantity , and then take so much thereof as will serve his turn , he lay up the residue within the earth : because , if he shall put it into his chest or storehouse , he be of opinion that God will withhold from he all other gold within the earth . i see some of those people , be very deform creature . in tangut i see lusty tall man , but brown and swart in colour . the jugure be of a middle stature like unto our french man . among the jugure be the originali and root of the turkish , and comanian language . next unto tebet be the people of Langa and Solanga , who messenger i see in the Tartar court . and they have bring more than ten great cart with they , every one of which be draw with six ox . they be little brown man like unto Spaniards . also they have jacket , like unto the upper vestment of a deacon , save that the sleeve be somewhat straight . and they have mitre upon their head like bishop . but the fore part of their 291 the people of tebet . abundance of glide . the stature of the people of tangut , and of the jugure . the people ofSolanga resemble Spaniards . miter be not so hollow within as the hinder part : neither be it sharp point or corner at the top : but there hang down certain square flappe compact of a kind of straw which be make rough and rugged with extreme heat , and be so trim , that it glitter in the sun beam , like unto a glass , or a helmet well burnish . and about their temple they have long band of the foresay matter fasten unto their mitre , which hover in the wind , as if two long home grow out of their head . and when the wind toss they up and down too much , they tie they over the midst of their miter from one temple to another : and so they lie circle wise overthwart their head . Moreover their principal messenger Atabkofele - come unto the Tartar court have a table of elephant phant tooth , about he of a cubit in length , and a handful in breadth , be very smoothe . and whensoever he speak unto the emperor himself , or unto any other great personage , he always behold that table , as if he have find therein those thing which he speak : neither do he cast his eye to the right hand , nor to the left , nor upon his face , with who he talk . yea , go too and fro before his lord , he look no where but only upon ne people be table . beyond they ( as i understand of a certainty ) call Muc . there be other people call Muc , have village , but no one particular man of they appropriate any cattle unto himself . notwithstanding there be many flock and drove of cattle in their country , and no man appoint to keep they . but when any one of they stand in need of any beast , he ascend up unto a hill , and there make a shout , and all the cattle which be within hear of the noise , come flock about he , and suffer themselves to be handle and take , as if they be tame . and when any messenger or stranger come into their country , they shut he up into a house , minister there thing necessary unto he , until his business be dispatch . for if any stranger shall travel through that country , the cattle will flee away at the very send of he , and so will become wild . beyond Muc be great 292 Cathaya , the inhabitant whereof ( as i suppose ) be of great old time , call Seres . for from they be bring most cat ^ a - excellent stuff of silk . and this people be call seres of a certain town in the same country . i be credible inform , that in the say country , there be one town have wall of silver , and bulwark or tower of gold . there be many province in that land , the great part whereof be not as yet subdue unto the Tartar . and amongst * somewhat be want .