Olavus be scarce ten year old , send unto the island for Reginald and create he king . in the year 1187 . begin Reginald the son of godred to reign over the island : and murchardus a man of great power throughout all the kingdom of the island be put to death . in the year 1192 . there be a battle fight between Reginald and Engus the two son of Sumerled : but Engus obtain the victory . the same year be the abbey of Russin remove unto Dufglas , howbeit within four year after the monk return unto Russin . in the year 1203 . Michael bishop of the island decease at Fontanas , and Nicholas succeed in his room . in the year 1204 . Hugo de Lacy invade Ulster with a army and encounter with John de Curcy , take he prisoner and subdue Ulster unto himself . afterwards he permit the say John to go at liberty , who come unto king Reginald be honourable entertain by he , i 33 c king John pass into Irland with 500 sail . because he be his son in law , for John de Curcy have take to wife Africa the daughter of Godredus , which found the abbey of saint mary de jugo domini , and be there bury . in the year 1205 . John de Curcy and Reginald king of the island invade Ulster with a hundred ship at the port which be call stranfeord do negligent besiege the castle of Rath : but Walter de Lacy come upon they with his army , put they to flight , and from that time Curcy never recover his land . in the year 1210 . Engus the son of sumerl and his 3 . son be slay . at the same time John king of England conduct a fleet of 500 ship into Irland , and subdue it unto himself : and send a certain earl name Fulco , unto the isle of man , his soldier almost utter waste it in the space of 15 . day , and have take pledge they return home into their own country . king Reginald and his noble be at this time absent from man in the year 1217 . decease Nicolas bishop of the island , and be bury in Ulster , in the house of benchor , who Reginald succeed . i think it not amiss to report somewhat more concern the two foresay brethren Reginaldus and Olavus . REginald give unto his brother Olavus , the island call lodhus or Lewes , which be say to be large than the rest of the island , but almost destitute of inhabitant , because it be so full of mountain and quarrei , be almost no where fit for tillage . howbeit the inhabitant thereof do live for the most part upon hunt and fish . Olavus therefore go to take possession of this island , and dwell therein lead a poor life : and when he see that it will by no mean suffice for the sustentation of himself and his follower , he go bold unto his brother Reginald , who as then remain in the island , and speak on this wise unto he . my brother ( say he ) and my lord and king , you know that the 1223 - kingdom of the island pertain unto i by right of inheritance , howbeit because the lord have choose you to bear the sceptre , i do not envy that honour unto you , neither do it any whit grieve i that you be exalt unto this royal dignity . now therefore i beseech you to provide i some portion of land in the island , whereby i may honest live . for the island of Lewis which you give i be not sufficient for my maintenance . which his brother Reginald hear say that he will consult about the premise . and on the morrow , when Olavus be send for to parley , Reginald command he to be attach , and to be carry unto William king of Scotland , and with he to remain prisoner : and Olavus remain in prison almost for the space of 7 . year . but at the 7 . year end William king of Scot decease , and Alexander his son reign in his stead . the foresay William , before his death , command that all prisoner shall be set at liberty . Olavus therefore be at liberty come unto man , and immediate with a great company of noble take his journey unto saint James : and his brother Reginald cause the say Olavus to take unto wife , the daughter of a certain noble man of Kentyre , cousine germane unto his own wife , and by name be call Lavon , and he grant unto he the possession of Lewis . after a few day Reginald the bishop of the island have gather a synod , separate Olavus and godr his son , and Lavon his wife , namely because she be cousin germane unto his former wife . afterwards Olavus marry Scristina daughter unto Ferkarus earl of Rosse . hereupon the wife of Reginald queen of the island be incense , send letter unto the island of sky in king Reginald his name to her son godred will he to take Olavus . which commandment godred put in practice , and enter the isle of Lewis for you same purpose , Olavus flee in a little skiff unto his father in law the earl of Rosse , and in the mean time godred waste the isle of Lewis . at the very same time Pol the son of book 35 the isle of man advanced to a kingdom . viscount of sky , be a man of power in all the island , because he will not consent unto godred , flee , and dwell together with Olavus in the dominion of the earl of Rosse , and make a league with Olavus , they go both in a ship unto sky . to be short , send certain spy , they be inform that godred remain secure with a small company in a certain isle call you isle of saint Columba . And unite unto themselves their friend and acquaintance , and other that will go voluntary with they , in the dead of the night , have launch 5 . ship from the next seashore , which be distant about the space of 2 . furlong