that country be , they answer , that the people inhabit under the ground in mountain . then Chingis Cham keep still the woman , send her husband unto they , give they charge to come at his command . And go unto they , he declare all thing that Chingis Cham have command they . but they answer , that they will upon such a day visit he , to satisfy his desire . and in the mean season , by blind and hide passage under the earth , assemble themselves , they come against the Tartar in warlike manner , and sudden issue forth , they slay a great number of they . this people be not able to endure the terrible noise , which in that place the sun make at his uprise : for at the time of the sun rise , they be enforce to lay one ear upon the ground , and to stop the other close , lest they shall hear that dreadful sound . neither can they so escape , for by this mean many of they be destroy . Chingis cham therefore and his company , see that they prevail not , but continual lose some of their number , flee and depart out of that land . but the man and his wife aforesaid they carry along with they , who all their life time continue in the Tartar country . be demand why the man of their country do inhabit under the ground , they say , that at a certain time of the year , when the sun rise , there be such a huge noise , that the people can endure it . Moreover , they use to play upon cymbal , drum , and other musical instrument , to the end they may not hear that sound . a fabulous narration of the sun rise . of the statute of Chingis Cham , of his death , of his son , and of his duke . Chap . 13 . but as Chingis Cham return out of that country , his people want victual , and suffer extreme famine . then by chance they find you fresh entrail of a beast : which they take , and cast away the dung thereof , cause it to be sodden , bring it before Chingis cham , and do the tawe eat thereof . and hereupon Chingis cham enact ; that Chingis . 149 neither the blood , nor the entrail , nor any other part of a beast which may be eat , shall be cast away , save only the dung . wherefore he return thence into his own land , and there he ordain law and statute , which the Tartar do most strict and inviolable observe , the death of of the which we have before speak . he be afterward Chingis . slay by a thunderclap . he have four son : the first ts son . call occoday , the second thossut can , the three thiaday : the name of the four be unknown . from these four descend all the duke of the mongal . the his grand - first son of occoday be cuyne , who be now emperor : child . h ; s brother be cocten and chyrinen . the son of thossut can be bathy , ordu , Siba , and Bora . Bathy , next unto the emperor , be rich and mighty than all the rest . but ordu be the seignior of all the duke . the son of Thiaday be Hurin and Cadan . the son of Chingis Cham his other son , who name be unknown , be mengu , Bithat , and certain other . the mother of Mengu be name Seroctan , and of all other most honour among the Tartar , except the emperor mother , and mighty than any subject except bathy . the tar - Theise be the name of the duke : ordu , who be in tarian duke . Poland and in Hungary : Bathy also and Hurin and Cadan , and Siban , and ovygat , all which be in Hungary . in like manner Cyrpodan , who be as yet beyond the sea , make war against certain sultan of the Saracen , and other inhabitant of far country . other remain in the land , as namely Mengu , chyrinen , Hubilai , Sinocur , cara , gay , Sybedey , Bora , Berea , corrensa . there be many other of their duke , who name be unknown unto we . of the authority of the emperor , and of his duke . Chap . 14 . the absolute r “ and lordly A that Oreo ver , the emperor of the Tartar have a ‘ Tartarian ^ dominion over all his subject . for no emperor over man be abide in any place , unless he have assign he his subject . to be there . also he himself appoint to his duke 150 where they shall inhabit . likewise the duke assign place unto every millenary , or conductor of a thousand soldier , the millenary unto each captain of a too . the captain unto every corporali of ten . whatsoever be give they in charge , whensoever , or wheresoever , be it to fight or to lose their life , or howsoever it be , they obey without any gainsay . for if he demand any man daughter , or sister be a virgin , they present deliver she unto he without all contradiction : yea , often time he make a collection of virgin throughout all the Tartar dominion , and those who he mean to keep , he retain unto himself , other he bestow upon his man . also , whatsoever messenger he send , or whithersoever , his subject must without delay find they horse and other necessary . in like sort , from what country soever tribute payer , or ambassador come unto he , they must have horse , carriage , and expense allow they . notwithstanding ambassador come from other place do suffer great misery , and be in much want both of victual , and of apparel : especial when they come to any of the duke , and there they be constrained to make some linger abode . than ten