into the say water , which be thereby make exceed sour , and that they drink in stead of milk . they be very scrupulous , and take diligent heed that they drink not fair water by it self . of the beast which they eat , of their garment , and of their manner of hunt . Chap . 7 . great lord have cottage or grange towards the south , from whence their tenant bring they millet and meal against winter . the poor sort provide themselves of such necessary , for you exchange of ram , and of other beast skin . the Tartar slave fill their belly with thick water , and be therewithal ! content . they will neither eat mouse with long tail , i 241 q another strange custom , which i leave to be scan by falconer themselves . nor any kind of mouse with short tail . they have also certain little beast call by they sogur , which lie in a cave twenty or thirty of they together , all the whole winter sleep there for the space of six month : and these they take in great abundance . there be also a kind of cony have long tail like unto cat : and on the outside of their tail grow black and white hair . they have many other small beast good to eat , which they know and discern right well . i see no deer there , and but a few hare , but a great number of roe . i see wild ass in great abundance , which be like unto mule . also i see another kind of beast call artak , have in all resemblance the body of a ram , and crooked home , which be of such bigness , that i can scarce lift up a pair of they with one hand : and of these home they make great drink cup . they have falcon , girfalcon , and other hawk in great plenty : all which they carry upon their right hand : 8c they put always about their falcon neck a string of leather , which hang down to you midst of their gorge , by the which string , when they cast they off the fist at their game , with their left hand they bow down the head and breast of the say hawk , lest they shall be toss up and down , and beat with the wind , or lest they shall soar too high . wherefore they get a great part of their victual , by hunt 8c hawk . concern their garment and attire be it know unto your majesty , that out of Cataya 8c other region of the east , out of Persia also and other country of the south , there be bring unto they stuff of silk , cloth of gold , 8c cotton cloth , which they wear in time of summer . but out of Russia , Moxel , Bulgaria the great , 8c pascatir , that be Hungaria the great , and out of Kersis ( all which be northern region 8c full of wood ) 8c also out of many other country of the north , which be subject unto they , the inhabitant bring they rich and costly skin of diverse sort ( which i never see in our 242 1253 - country ) wherewithal they be clad in winter . and always against winter they make themselves two gown , one with the fur inward to their skin , and another with the fur outward , to defend they from wind and snow , which for the most part be make of wolf skin , or fox skin , or else of papion . and when they sit within the house , they have a fine gown to wear . the poor sort make their upper gown of dog or of goat skin . when they go to hunt for wild beast , there meet a great company of they together , and environing the place round about , where they be sure to find some game , by little and little they approach on all side , till they have get the wild beast into the midst , as it be into a circle , and then they discharge their arrow at they . also they make themselves breech of skin . the rich Tartar sometime fur their gown with pelluce or silk shag , which be exceed soft , light , and warm . the poor sort do line their clothes with cotton cloth which be make of the fine wool they can pick out , and of the courser part of the say wool , they make feel to cover their house and their chest , and for their bed also . of the same wool , be mix with one three part of horse hair , they make all their cordage . they make also of the say feel cover for their stool , and cap to defend great expense their head from the weather : for all which purpose efwmu - they spend a great quantity of their wool . and thus much concern the attire of the man . of the fashion which the Tartar use in cut their hair , and of the attire of their woman . Chap . 8 . the man shave a plot four square upon the crown of their head , and from the two foremost corner they shave , as it be , two seam down to their temple : they shave also their temple and the hinder part of their head even unto the nape of the neck : likewise they shave the forepart of their scalp down 243 to their forehead , and upon their forehead they leave a lock of hair reach down unto their eye brow : upon the two hindermost corner of their head , they have two lock also , which they twine and braid into knot and so bound and knit they under each ear one . Moreover their woman garment differ not from their man , save that they be somewhat long . but on the morrow after one of their woman be marry , she shave her scalp from the midst of her head down to her forehead , and wear a wide garment like unto the hood of a nun , yea large and