cause certain skin of beaver and other beast to be buy with part of that money , which be give upon alm to succour we by the way . which thing duke Conradus and the * duchess grlmslaua . of Cracow , and a bishop , and certain soldier be advertise of , give we likewise moor of the same skin . and to be short , duke Wasilico be earnest request by the duke of Cracow , and by the bishop and baron , on our behalf , conduct we with he , unto his own land , and there for certain day , entertain we at his own charge , to the end that we may refresh our self a while . and when , be request by we , he have cause his bishop to resort unto he , we read before they the pope letter , admonish they to return unto the unity of the church . to the same purpose also , we our self admonish they , and to our ability , induce as well the duke as the bishop and other thereunto . howbeit because duke Daniel the Daniel brother of Wasilico aforesaid ( have as then take his brother unto journey unto Baty ) be absent , they can not at that time , ast tc ° ' make a final answer . after these thing duke wasilico 159 send we forward with one of his servant as far as Kiow the chief city of Russia . howbeit we go always in the danger of our life by reason of the lituanians , who do lithuanians . often invade you border of Russia , even in those very place by which we be to pass . but in regard of the foresay servant , we be out of the russian danger , the great part of who be either slay , or carry into captivity by the Tartar . Moreover , at Danilon we be feeble even unto the death . ( notwithstanding we cause our self to be carry in a waggon through the snow and extreme cold . ) And be come unto Kiow , we consult with the millenary , 8c other noble man there concern our journey . they tell we , that if we carry those horse , which we then have , unto the Tartar , great store of snow lie upon the ground , they will all dye : be because they know not how to dig up the grass under the fodder of the snow , as the tartarian horse do , neither can there the tartarian bee ought found for they to eat , the Tartar have neither horse . hay nor straw , nor any other fodder . we determine therefore to leave they behind at Kiow with two servant appoint to keep they . and we be constrain to bestow gift upon the millenary , that we may obtain his favour to allow we post horse and a guide . wherefore beginning our journey the second day after the feast of the purification , we arrive at the town of Canow , which be immediate under the dominion of the Tartar . the governor whereof allow we horse and a guide unto Mich ^ as the another town , wherein we find one Michaeas to be ma iduus . governor , a man full of all malice and despite . who notwithstanding , have receive gift at our hand , accord to his manner conduct we to the first guard of the Tartar . how he and his company be at the first receive of the Tartar . Chap . 20 . wherefore , the first Saturday next after ash Wednesday , have about the sun go down , take up our place of rest , the arm Tartars come rush upon 160 we in uncivil and horrible manner , be very inquisitive of we what manner of person , or of what condition we be : and when we have answer they that we be the pope legate , receive some victual at our hand , they immediately depart . Moreover in the morning rise and proceed on our journey , the chief of they which be in the guard meet with we , demand why , or for what intent and purpose we come thither ? and what business we have with they ? unto who we answer , we be the legate of our lord the pope , who be the father and lord of the Christians . he have send we as well unto your then content . emperor , as to your prince , and all other Tartar for ° fthe this purpose , because it be his pleasure , that all Christians shall be in league with the Tartar , and shall have peace with they . it be his desire also that they shall become great or in favour with God in heaven , therefore he admo - nisheth they aswell by we , as by his own letter , to become Christians , and to embrace the faith of our lord Jesus Christ , because they can not otherwise be save . Moreover , he give they to understand , that he much mar - veileth at their monstrous slaughter and massacre of mankind , and especial of Christians , but most of all of Hungarians , mountaineir , 8c polonians , be all his subject , have not injury they in aught , nor attempt to do they injury . and because the lord God be grievous offend thereat , he advise they from henceforth to beware of such deal , and to repent they of that which they have do . he request also , that they will write a answer unto he , what they purpose to do hereafter , and what their intention be . all which thing be hear and understand , the Tartar say that they will appoint we post horse and a guide unto corrensa . And immedi - corrensa . ate demand gift at our hand , they obtain they . then receive the same horse , from which they dismount , together with a guide we take our journey unto corrensa . but they ride a swift pace , send a * messenger before unto the say duke corrensa , to signify the message , which we have