end that afterward in all security , he may in winter time ( vacare ) be at convenient leisure on land , chief to set forth God due honour , and second to understand , and diligent to listen to the cause and complaint of his commons . for as Matthaeus Westmonasteriensis of he to his Imperiali commendation have leave we a remembrance . habebat autem praeterea consuetudinem , per omnes Regni provincias transire , ut intelligeret quomodo legum jura , and suorum statuta decretorum , i principibus observarentur , and ne paupere a potentibus praejudicium passi , opprimerentur , diligenter investigare solebat : in uno fortitudini , in altero justitiae studens , and Reipub . regnique utilitati consulens in utroque . hinc hostibus circumquaque timor , and amor omnium erga eum excreverat subditorum . thus we see how in opportunity , this peaceable Edgar procure to this empire such prosperous security , that his true and faithful subject , all manner of way ( that be at home and also at sea , both outward and inward ) may peaceable , safe and secure employ their wit and travel for the marvelous enrich of this kingdom , and pleasure very many other , carry forth the natural commodity of this land , abound here above our necessary use ( and due store reserve ) and likewise again furnish the same with all necessary and not superfluous foreign commodity , fetch from far or foreign country . this be in deed ( as before be record ) a kingly providence , Reipub . regmque utilitati consulens , etc beside with great utility and profit public foresee , and by his mean enjoy , he himself use most glad the advantage of that security , in minister of justice , or cause the same to be execute all his kingdom over , not squemish , frown or skorneful shun the ragged and totter sleeve of any suppliant , hold up to he a simple soil bill of complaint or petition , and that homely contrive , or afraid at , and timorous haste from the sickly pale face or feeble lim suitor , extreme constrain so to speak for himself , nor parcial smother he own conscience , to favour or maintain the foul fault and trespass unlawful of any his subject , how mighty or necessary soever , they ( else ) be , but diligent make search , least paupere a potentibus praejudicium passi , opprimerentur . thus do public security from foreign foe abroad , and true love of his own subject , guard he at home , and the heavenly spirit direct all his good purpose , cause justice and equity in all quarter of this Albion to flourish . for which his peaceable and prosperous benefit at the eternal king his hand obtain , he become not insolent or decline to tyrannical regiment ( as some prince in other country have make their life comicotragical ) but with all his foresay invincible seaforce , abundant wealth , triumphant peace , with security and justice over all his monarchic prevail , his heart be continual , and most zealous bend to set forth the glory , laud and honour of the almighty creator , the heavenly and everlasting king , by such principali and princely mean , as ( then ) be deem to God most acceptable , as many monument yet to our day remain , do of he undoubted testify : as this , for one . altitonantis dei largiflua dementia , qui est rex regum , ex charta ego jEdgarus anglorum Basileus omniumque f ^^ nis regum , insularum , oceanique britanniam circum - qat ^ raiis jacentis , cunctarumque nationum quae infra earn wigarnia . includuntur , imperator , and dominus , gratias ago ipsi deo omnipotenti , regi meo , qui meum Imperium sic ampliavit , and exaltavit super regnum patrum meorum : qui licet Monarchiam totius angliae adepti sunt i tempore athelstani ( qui primus regnum anglorum , and omnes nationes , fundatio Ecclesiae Cathedralls Eliensis . quae britanniam incolunt , sibi armis subegit ) nullus tamen eorum ultra ejus fine imperium suum dilatare aggressus est . mihi autem concessit propitia divinitas , cum anglorum Imperio , omnia regna insularum oceani , cum suis ferocissimis regibus , usque noruegiam , maximamque partem hyberniae , cum sva nobilissima civitate Dublinia , anglorum regno subjugare : quos etiam omnes , meis imperiis colla subdere ( dei favente gratia ) coegi . quapropter and ego christi gloriam , and laudem exaltare , and ejus servitium amplificare devotus disposui , and per meos fideles fautores , Dunstanum viz . Archiepiscopum , Athelwoldum , and Oswaldum episcopos ( quos mihi patres spirituales , and consiliatore elegi ) magna ex parte , secundum quod disposui , effeci , etc and again this in another monument . omnipotentis dei , etc Ipsius nutu and gratia suffultus , ego / Edgarus Basileus dilectae insulae albionis , subditis nobis sceptris scotorum , Cumbrorum , ac Brytonum , and omnium circumcirca regionum , quieta pace perfruens , studiosus solicit de laudibus creatoris omnium occupor addendis : ne nunc inertia , nostrisque diebus ( plus aequo ) servitus ejus tepescere videatur , etc 18 . mei terreni Imperii anno , etc anno incarnationis Dominicae , 973 . ego TEdgarus totius albionis Basileus hoc privilegium ( tanta roboratum authoritate ) crucis Thaumate confirmavi . so that by all these rehearse record , it be most evident that the peaceable king Edgar , be one of those monarch , in who hand ( if life have suffice ) the incredible value and privilege grant by God and nature unto this british monarchic , may have be peaceable purchase in such sort , as the very blessing and favour of the divine Trinity have lay mean for our industry to attain to , and enjoy the same by . and though sundry other valiant prince and king of this land i can recite , which in time pass have either by intent go about , or by wise and valiant exploit , have meet well prosper towards this islandish appropriate supremacy attain , yet never any other reasonable mean be use , or by humane wit , or industry can be contrive , to all purpose sufficient , but only by our sea force prevail , and so by our invincible enjoy all within the sea limit of our british royalty contain . to which incredible political mystery attain , no easy , ready , or perfect plat and introduction , be ( as yet ) come to my imagination , then be the present and continual service of threescore good and tall warlike ship , with twenty smaller ред bark , and those 80 . ship ( great and small ) with 6660 . apt man furnish , and all singular well appoint for service both on sea and land , faithful and diligent to be do in such circumspect and discreet order , as partly i have in other place declare , and further ( upon good occasion offer ) may declare . this grand navy of peaceable king Edgar , of so many thousand ship , and they furnish with a hundred thousand man at the least , with all the final intent of those sea force , so invincible , continual maintain , the order of the execution of their service , the godly and imperial success thereof , be in a manner kingly lesson and prophetical encouragement to we leave , even now to be as provident for public security as he be , to be as skilful of our sea right and royal limit , and wise to find our self as able to recover and enjoy the same as he be , who can not choose , but with the pass and yearly sail about this british Albion , with all the lesser isle next adjacent round about it , he can not choose i say , but by such full and peaceable possession , find himself ( according to right , and his heart desire ) the true and sovereign monarch of all the british ocean , environ any way his empire of Albion and Ireland , with the lesser island next adjacent : with memorial whereof , as witone very precious jewel imperial , he adorn the title and crown of his regality , as with the testimony annex of the state and noble of his empire , to commit to perpetuali memory , the stile of his chief worldly dignity , in this very tenor of word before also remember . ego TEdgarus anglorum Basileus , omniumque regum , insularum , oceanique britanniam circumjacentis , cunctardmque nationum , quae infra eam includuntur , imperator , and dominus . note the queen majesty royalty over the british ocean sea , round about the british empire .