. they wear certain ornament upon their head make of paper . the priest of the foresay jugure do use such attire whithersoever they go . they be always in their saffron colour jacket , which be very straight be lace or butten from the bosom right down , after the french fashion . and they have a cloak upon their left shoulder descend before and behind under their right arm , like unto a deacon carry the houssel - boxe in time paper . of Lent . their letter or kind of write the Tartar do so do the receive . they begin to write at the top of their paper people of China drawjng their line right down : and so they read and “ draw ' mgfheir multiply their line from the left hand to the right . they line perpendi - do use certain paper and character in their magical cular down - practise . whereupon their temple be full of such short ward , not scrou ] es hang round about they . also mangu - can righthand send letter unto your majesty write in the to the lefie . language of the moal or Tartars , and in the foresay hand or letter of the jugure . they burn their dead accord to the ancient custom , and lie up the ash in the top of a pyramid . now , after i have sit a while by the foresay priest , and enter into their temple and see many of their image both great and small , i demand of they what they believe concern God ? and they answer : we believe that there be only one God . and i demand far : whether do you believe that he be a spirit , or some bodily substance ? they say : we believe that he be a spirit . then say i : do you believe that God ever take man nature upon he ? they answer : no and again i say : since you believe that he be a spirit , to what end do you make so 288 many bodily image to represent he ? since also you believe not that he be make man : why do you resemble he rather unto the image of a man then of any other creature ? than they answer say : we frame not those image whereby to represent God . but when any rich man among we , or his son , or his wife , or any of his friend decease , he cause the image of the dead party to be make , and to be place here : and we in remembrance of he doe reverence thereunto . than i reply : you do these thing only for the friendship and flattery of man . Noe ( say they ) but for their memory . than they demand of i , as it be in scoff wise : where be God ? to who i answer : where be your soul ? they say , in our body . then say i , be it not in every part of your body , rule and guide the whole body , and yet notwithstanding be not see or perceive ? Even so God be every where and rule all thing , and yet be he invisible , be understanding and wisdom it self . then be desirous to have have some more conference with they , by reason , that my interpreter be weary , and not able to express my meaning , i be constrain to keep silence . the moal or Tartars be in this regard of their sect : namely they believe that there be but one God : howbeit they make image of felt , in remembrance of their decease friend , cover they with five most rich and costly garment , and put they into one or two cart , which cart no man dare once touch : and they be in the custody of their soothsayer , who be their priest , concern who i will give your highness more at large to understand hereafter . Theise soothsayer or diviner do always attend upon the court of Mangu and of other great personage . as for the poor or mean sort , they have they not , but such only as be of the stock and kindred of Chingis . and when they be to remove or to take any journey , the say diviner go before they , even as the cloudy pillar go before the child of Israel . and they appoint ground where the tent must i 289 t be pitch , and first of all they take down their own house : and after they the whole court do the like . also upon their festival day or kalend they take forth the foresay image , and place they in order round , or circle wise within the house . then come the moal or Tartars , and enter into the same house , bow themselves before the say image and worship they . Moreover , it be not lawful for any stranger to enter into that house . for upon a certain time i my self will have go in , but i be chide full well for my labour . of diverse and sundry nation : and of certain people which be wont to eat their own parent . Chap . 28 . but the foresay jugure ( who live among the christian , and the Saracen ) by their sundry disputation , as i suppose , have be bring unto this , to believe , that there be but one only God . and they dwell in certain city , which afterward be bring in subjection unto Chingis can : whereupon he give his daughter in marriage unto their king . also the city of Caracarum it self be in a manner within their territory : the country and the whole country of king or presbyter John , and of ofpresbiter bis brother vut lie near unto their dominion : save , that they inhabit in certain pasture northward , and the say jugure between the mountain towards the south . whereupon it come to pass , that the moal receive letter from they . and they be the Tartar principali scribe : and all the nestorian almost can skill of their letter . next unto they ,