superstitious observation . for they esteem it a sign of ill luck , or a prognostication of evil unto they , when any man sit in their presence , hold down his head , as if he be sad : especial when he lean his cheek or chin upon his hand . than we depart forth , and immediate after come our guide unto we , and conduct we unto our lodging , say unto i : your master the king request that you may remain in this land , which request baatu can satisfy without the knowledge and consent of mangu - can . wherefore you , and your interpreter must of necessity go unto mangu - can . howbeit your associate , and the other man shall return unto the court of Sartach , stay there for you , till you come back . then begin the man of God my interpreter to lament , esteem himself but a dead man . my associate also protest , that they shall soon chap off his head , then withdraw he out of my company . Moreover i my self say , that without my associate i can not go : and that we stand in need of two servant at the least , to attend upon we , because , if one shall chance to fall sick , we can not be without another . then return unto the court , he tell these say unto baatu . And baatu command saying : let 275 the two priest and the interpreter go together , but let the clerk return unto Sartach . And come again unto we , he tell we even so . and when i will have speak for the clerk to have have he with we , he say : no more word : for baatu have resolve , that so it shall be , and therefore i dare not go unto the court any more . goset the clerk have remain of the alm money bestow upon he , 26 . Yperperas , and no more ; 10 . whereof he keep for himself and for the lad , and 16 . he give unto the man of God for we . and thus be we part asunder with tear : he return unto the court of Sartach , and our self remain still in the same place . of our journey towards the court of Mangu can . Chap . 22 . upon Assumption even our clerk arrive at the court of Sartach . and on the morrow after , the nestorian priest be adorn with our vestment in the presence of the say sartach . than we our self be conduct unto another host , who be appoint to provide we housefoome , victual , and horse . but because we have not aught to bestow upon he , he do they travel all thing untoward for we . than we ride on for -^ thubanh ^ of ^ ward whh baatu , descend along by the bank of Etilia , Etilia . i for the space of five week together : sometime my associate be so extreme hungry , that he will tell i in a manner weep , that it fare with he as though he have never eat any thing in all his life before . there be a fair or market follow the court of baatu at all time : but it be so far distant from we that we can not have recourse thereunto . for we be constrain to walk on foot for want of horse . at length Hungarians , certain Hungarians ( who have sometime be after a sort clergy man ) find we out : and one of they can as yet sing many song without book , and be account of other hungarian as a priest , and be send for unto the funeral of his decease country man . there be 276 another of they also pretty well instruct in his grammar : for he can understand the meaning of any thing that we speak , but can not answer we . Theise hungarian be a great comfort unto we , bring we Cosmos to drink , yea , and sometime flesh for to eat also : who , when they request to have some book of we , and i have not any to give they ( for indeed we have none but only a bible , and a breviary ) it grieve i exceed . and i say unto they : bring i some ink and paper , and i will write for you so long as we shall remain here : and they do so . and i copy out for they horas beatae virginis , and officium defunctorum . Moreover , upon a certain day , there be a comanian a comanian . that accompany we , salute we in latin , and say : salvete domini . wonder thereat and salute he again , i demand of he , who have teach he that kind of salutation ? he say that he be baptize in Hungaria by our friar , and that of they he learn it . he say moreover , that baatu have inquire many thing of he concern we , and that he tell he the estate of our order . afterward i see baatu ride with kiss company , and all his subject that be householder or master of family ride with he , and ( in my estimation ) they be not five hundred person in all . at length about the end of holy rood , there come a certain rich Moal unto we ( who father be a millenary , which be a great office among they ) saying : i be the man that must conduct you unto mangu - can , and we have thither a journey of four month long to travel , and a journey of there be such extreme cold in those part , that stone and +• month tree do even rive asunder in regard thereof . therefore rome i will wish you thorough to advise your self , whether you be able to endure it or no . unto who i answer : i hope by god help that we shall able to brook that which other man can endure . than he say : if you can endure it , i will forsake you by the