with much war , and afterward return into his own country . but he send his other son with a army against the Indians , who also subdue India minor . Theise Indians be the black Saracen , which be also call / ethiopian . but here the army march forward to fight against Christians dwell in India major . which the king of that country hear ( who be common call presbyter John ) gather his soldier together , and come forth against they . And make man image of copper , he set each of they upon a saddle on horseback , and put fire within they , and place a man with a pair of bellows on the horse back behind every image . and so with many horse and image in such sort furnish , they march on to fight against the mongal or Tartar . And come near unto the place of the battle , they first of all send those horse in order one after another . but the man that sit behind lay i wot not what upon the fire within the image , and blow strong with their bellows . whereupon it come to pass , that the man and the horse be burn with wild fire , and the air be darken with smoke . then the indian cast dart upon the Tartar , of who many be wound and slay . and so they expel they out of their dominion with great confusion , neither do we hear , that ever they return thither again . 146 how be repel by monstrous man shape like dog , they overcome the people of burithabeth . Chap . 11 . but return through the desert , they come into a certain country , wherein ( as it be report unto we in the emperor court , by certain clergy man of Russia , and other , who be long time among they , and that by strange strong and steadfast affirmation ) they find certain report of cer - monster resemble woman : who be ask by many wman a „ d interpreter , where the man of that land be , they dog . answer , that whatsoever woman be bear there , be endue with the shape of mankind , but the male be like unto dog . And delay the time , in that country they meet with the say dog on the other side of the river . and in the midst of sharp winter , they cast themselves into the water : afterwards they wallow in the dust upon the main land , and so the dust be mingle with water , be freeze to their back , and have often time so do , the ice be strong freeze upon they , with great fury they come to fight against the Tartar . and when the Tartar throw their dart , or shoot their arrow among they , they rebound back again , as if they have light upon stone . and the rest of their weapon can by no mean hurt they . howbeit , the dog make a assault upon the Tartar , and wound some of they with their tooth , and slay other , at length they drive they out of their country . and thereupon they have a proverb of the same matter , as yet rife among they , which they speak in jest sort one to another ; my father or my brother be slay of dog . the woman which they take , they bring into their own country , who remain there till their die day . and in travel homewards , the say army of the mongal come unto theregion of the land of Burithabeth ( the inhabitant whereof be burtthabeth - pagans ) and conquer the people in battle . Theise people have a strange or rather a miserable kind of custom . for when any man father decease , he the manner assemble all his kindred , and they eat he . Theise of the people . man have no beard at all , for we see they carry a certain iron instrument in their hand , wherewith , if any hair grow upon their chin , they present pluck they out . they be also very deform . from thence the Tartar army return to their own home . another expedition of chinas . how they have the repulse at the caspian mountains , and be drive back by man dwell in cave . Chap . 12 . moreover Chingis cham , at the same time when he send other army against the east , he himself march with a power into the land of Kergis , which notwithstanding , he conquer not in that expedition , and as it be report unto we , he go on forward even to the caspian mountain . but the mountain on that part where they encamp themselves , be of adamant , and therefore they draw unto they their arrow , and weapon of iron . and certain man contain within those caspian mountain , hear , as it be think , the noise of the army , make a breach through , so that when the Tartar return unto the same place ten year after , they find the mountain break . And attempt to go unto they , they can not : for there stand a cloud before they , beyond which they be not able to pass , be deprive of their sight so soon as they approach thereunto . but they on the contrary side think that the Tartar dare not come nigh they , give the assault , and when they come at the cloud , they can not proceed for the cause aforesaid . also the Tartar , before they come unto the say mountain , pass for the space of a month and more , through a vast wilderness , and depart thence towards the east , they be above a month travel through another huge desert . at length , they come unto a land wherein they see beat way , but can not find any people . howbeit , at the last , diligent seek , they find a man and his wife , who they present before 148 Chingis cham : and demand of they where the people of