solemn and royal court . And be come thither , we see a huge tent of fine white cloth pitch , which be , to our judgement , of so great quanti tie , that more than two thousand man may stand within it , and round about it there be a wall of plank set up , paint with diverse image . we therefore with our Tartar assign to attend upon we , take our journey thither , and there be all the duke assemble , each one of they ride up and down with his train over the hill and dale . the first day they be all clad in white , but the second in scarlet robe . then come Cuyne unto the say tent . Moreover , the three day they be all in blue robe , and the four in most rich robe of Baldakin cloth . in the wall of board , about the tent aforesaid , be two great gate , by one of the which gate , the emperor only be to enter , and at that gate there be no guard of man appoint to stand , although it stand continual open , because none dare go in or come out the same way : all that be admit , enter by another gate , 169 the courtesy of Cuyne towards ambassador . the tent royal . a general assembly . at which there stand watchman , with bow , sword , and arrow . and whosoever approach unto the tent beyond the bound and limit assign , be catch , be beat , but if he flee , he be shoot at with arrow or iron . there be many that to our judgement , have upon their bridle , trapper , saddle , and such like furniture , to the value of 20 . mark in pure gold . the foresay duke ( as we think ) commune together within the tent , and consult about the election of their emperor . but all the residue of the people be place far away without the wall of board , and in this manner they stay almost till noon . the banquet of then begin they to drink mare milk , and so continue the noble . drink till even tide , and that in so great quantity , as it be wonderful . and they call we in unto they , and give we of their ale , because we can not drink their mare milk . and this they do unto we in token of great honour . but they compel we to drink so much , that in regard of our customary diet , we can by no mean endure it . whereupon , give they to under - stand , that it be hurtful unto we , they cease to compel jenslausduke we any more . without the door stand duke Jeroslaus ofSusdal . of Susdal , in Russia , and a great many duke of the kythayans , and of the Solangi . the two son also of the king of Georgia , the ligier of the caliph of Baldach , who be a sultan , and ( as we think ) above ten sultan ambassador of the Saracen beside . And , as it be tell we by the of sundry na - agent , there be more than 4000 ambassador , partly tims ' of such as pay tribute , and such as present gift , and other sultan , and duke , which come to yield themselves , and such as the Tartar have send for , and such as be governor of land . all these be place without the list , and have drink give unto they . but almost continual they all of they give we and duke Jeroslaus the upper hand , when we be abroad in their company . 170 how he be exalt to his empire . Chap . 27 . a nd to our remembrance , we remain there , about the space of four week . the election be to our thebegynning think there celebrate , but it be not publish and ° f cuyne his proclaim there . and it be great suspect so to be , because always when Cuyne come forth out of the tent , he have a noise of music , and be bow unto , or honour with fair wand , have purple wool upon the top of they , and that , so long as he remain abroad : which service be perform to none of the other duke . the foresay tent or court be call by they Syra orda . sir a orda . depart thence , we all with one accord ride 3 . or 4 . league unto another place , where , in a goodly plain , by a river side , between certain mountain , there be another tent erect , which be call the golden orda . for ‘ the golden there be cuyne to be place in the throne imperial , Crda . upon the day of the assumption of our lady . but , for t5 - the abundance of hail which fall at the same time , as be above say , the matter be defer . there be also a tent erect upon pillar , which be cover with plate of gold , and be join unto other timber with golden nail . it be cover above with Baldakin cloth , but do . there be other cloth spread over that , next unto the air . we abide there unto the feast of saint Bartholomew , what time there be assemble a huge multitude stand with their face towards the south . and a certain number of they be a stone cast distant from the residue , make continual prayer , and kneel upon their knee , proceed far and far towards the south . howbeit we , not know whether they use enchantment , or whether they bow their knee to God or to some other , will not kneel upon the ground with they . and have do so a long time , they return to the tent , and place cuyne in his throne imperiali , and his duke bow their knee before he . afterward the whole multitude kneel down in like manner , except