the voyage of Nicholas de Lynna a franciscan friar , and a excellent mathematician of Oxford , to all the region situate under the north pole , in the year 1360 . and in the reign of Edward the 3 . king of England . the word of Gerardus Mercator , in the foot of his general map , upon the description of the uorth part . the same in english . touch the description of the north part , i have take the same out of the voyage of James cnoyen of Hartzevan Buske , which allege certain conquest of Arthur king of Britain : and the most part , and chief thing among the rest , he learn of a certain priest in the king of Norway court , in the year 1364 . this priest be descend from they which king Arthur have send to inhabit these island , and he report that in the year 1360 , a certain english friar , a franciscan , and a mathematician of Oxford , come into those island , who leave they , and pass further by his magical ! art , describe all those place that he see , and take the height of they with his astrolabe , accord to the form that i ( Gerard Mercator ) have set down in my map , and as i have take it out of the aforesaid James Cnoyen . he say that those four indraught be draw into a inward gulf or whirlpool , with so great a force , that the ship which once enter therein , can by no mean be drive back again , and that there be never in those part so much wind blow , as may be sufficient to drive a corn mill . Giraldus Cambrensis ( who flourish in the year 1210 , 302 under king John ) in his book of the miracle of Ireland , have certain word altogether alike with these , videlicet : not far from these island ( namely the Hebrides , island etc ) towards the north there be a certain wonder whirlpool of the sea , whereinto all the wave of the sea from far have their course and recourse , as it be without stop : which , there convey themselves into the secret receptacle of nature , be swallow up , as it be , into a bottomless pit , and if it chance that any ship do pass this way , it be pull , and draw with such a violence of the wave , that eftsoon without remedy , the force of the whirlpool devour the same . the philosopher describe four indraught of this ocean sea , in the four opposite quarter of the world , from whence many do conjecture that as well the flow of the sea , as the blast of the wind , have their first originali . A . D . 1360 . there be a notable whirlpool on the coast of Norway , call Malestrande , about the latitude of 68