the league between Carolus Magnus and Offa king of Mercia concern safe trade of the english merchant in all the emperor dominion . This Offa die in the year of our lord 795 . partem hic apponam . 310 in the mean season Offa by often legacy solicit Charles le maigne the king of France , to be his friend : albeit he can not easy find king Charles any whit incline to further and promote his crafty attempt . their mind be so alienate before , that , bear haughty stomach on both part , even the mutual traffic of trajfyue their merchant be prohibit . the epistle of Albinus tnhtblted - is a sufficient testimony of this matter : part whereof i will here put down . i know not ( quoth he ) what will become of we . for there be of late , by the instigation of the devil , some discord and variance spring up between king Charles and king Offa : insomuch that sail to and fro be forbid unto the merchant of both their dominion . navigation some say that we be to be send , for the obtain of a firbn < tien - peace , into those part . and again , after a few line . now ( quoth he ) out of Charles his own word , i will make report of the league conclude between he and Offa . Charles by the grace of God king of the Franks and Lombard and senator of the roman , unto the reverend and his most dear brother Offa king of the mercians send greeting . first we do render unto almighty god most humble thanks for the salvation of soul , and the sincerity of the catholique faith , which we , to your great commendation , have find signify in your letter . as touch those pilgrim , who for the love of God and their own soul health , be desirous to resort unto the church of the holy apostle , let they go in peace without all disturbance . but if any be find among they not honour religion , but follow their own gain , they be to pay their ordinary custom at place convenient . it be our pleasure also and commandment , that your merchant shall have lawful patronage and protection in our dominion . who , if in any place they chance to be afflict with any injust oppression , let they 311 a league between carol . Mag . and king Offa . protection of the english merchant . make their supplication unto we , or unto our judge , and we will see justice execute to the full .