the league between Henry the second and Frederick Barbarossa emperor of germanic , wherein be mention of friendly traffic between the merchant of the empire and England , confirm in the year of our lord 1157 . record in the first book and seventeenth chapter of Radevicus Canonicus Frisingensis , be a appendix to Otto Frisingensis . there be present also the same time , the messenger of Henry king of England present diverse rich and precious gift , and that with great learning and eloquence of speech . among the which we see a pavilion , most large in quantity , and most excellent in quality . for if you desire to know the quanti tie thereof , it can not be erect without engine and a kind of instrument , and main force : if the quality , i think there be never any furniture of the same kind , that surpass the same either in stuff or workmanship . the say king direct his letter also , full of sugar speech , the tenor whereof be this that foliow . to he entire belove friend Frederick by the grace of God emperor of the roman most invincible , Henry king of England , duke of Normandy and Aquitaine , earl of Anjou wish health and concord of sincere amity . we do render unto your highness ( most renown and peerless prince ) exceed great thank for that you have so gracious vouchsafe by your messenger to visit we , in your letter to salute 3r7 we , with your gift to prevent we , and ( which we do more high esteem of then all the rest ) to begin a league of peace and friendship between we . we rejoice , and in a manner sensible feel our self to be great embolden , and our courage to increase , while your promise , whereby you put we in good comfort , do make we more cheerful and resolute , in manage the affair of our kingdom . we rejoice ( i say ) and in our secret cogitation do humble obeisance unto your majesty , give you at this time to understand from the sincere 8c unfeigned affection of our heart , that whatsoever we shall know to tend unto your honour , we be , to our power most ready to put in practice . our kingdom , and whatsoever be under our jurisdiction we do offer unto you , and commit the same unto your highness , that all matter may be dispose accord to your direction , and that your pleasure may in all thing be fulfil . let there be therefore between our self and our subject , a indivisible unity of friendship and peace , and safe trade of merchandise : yet so , as that unto you ( who excel in dignity ) authority in command may be ascribe , and diligence in obey shall not want in we . and as the liberality of your reward do often put we in remembrance of your majesty , even so in like manner send unto your highness the most rare thing in our custody , and which we think shall be most acceptable unto you , we do most hearty wish that your self also will not altogether be unmindful of we . have respect therefore not unto the gift , but unto the affection of the giver , and accept of they with that mind , wherewith they be offer unto you . concern the hand of saint James , about which you write unto we , we have send you word by m . Herbert , and by William the clerk . witness Thomas our chancellor at Northanton .