the seller , and that the scale be equal : and that afterward the weigh weigh in the equal balance . and when he have set the balance even , let he straightway remove his hand , so that the balance way remain even : and that throughout all our kingdom and dominion there be one weight and one measure , and that they be mark with the mark of our standard . and that every man may have a weight of one quarter of a hundred , and under , where the same have not be contrary to the liberty of the lord of the place , and contrary to the liberty grant by we and our predecessor , or contrary to the custom of town and fair which have hitherto be observe . 8 - item we will and we grant that some certain faithful and discreet man resident in London be appoint to do justice to the aforesaid merchant , before who they may have their suit decide , and may speedy recover their debt , if the sheriff and mayor shall not from day to day give they speedy justice . and hereof let a commission be make : which we grant unto the aforesaid merchant beside this present charter : to wit of such thing as between merchant and merchant be to be decide accord to the law of merchant . 9 item we ordain and appoint , and we will that this ordinance and statute shall firm be observe for ever for we and our heir , that the aforesaid merchant shall [ i . i37 - j not loose the aforesaid liberty nor any of they , for any liberty whatsoever , which we or our heir hereafter shall grant . and for the obtain of the aforesaid liberty and free custom , and for remission of our arrest of their good , the aforesaid merchant all and every of they for themselves and all other of their party with one accord and one consent have grant unto we , that of every ton of wine , which they shall bring or cause to be bring into our realm and dominion , for which they shall be bind to pay 336 fraught unto the mariner , beside the old custom which be due and be wont to be pay unto we , they will pay unto we and to our heir in the name of a custom two shilling in money , either out of hand , or else within forty day after the say wine shall be bring on land out of the ship . item for every sack of wool , which the say merchant or other in their name shall buy and carry out of the realm , or cause to be bring and carry out , they will pay forty penny above the old custom of half a mark , which be pay heretofore : and for a last of hide to be carry out of our realm and dominion half a mark above that which heretofore be pay by the old custom . and likewise for three hundred fell with the wool on they to be transport out of our realm and dominion forty penny , above that certain rate which before be pay by the old custom : also two shilling upon every scarlate and every cloth die in grain . item eighteen penny for every cloth wherein any kind of grain be mingle . item twelve penny upon every cloth die without grain . item twelve penny upon every quintali of copper . and whereas sundry of the aforesaid merchant be wont to exercise other merchandise , as of haver de pois , and other fine ware , as sarcenet , lawn , cindalle , and silk , and diverse other merchandise , and to sell horse and other beast , corn , and sundry other thing and merchandise , which can easy be reduce unto a certain custom : the say merchant have grant to give unto we , and to our heir of every pound of silver of the estimation and value of these kind of good and merchandise , by what name soever they be call , three penny in the pound in the bring in of these good into our realm and dominion aforesaid , within twenty day after these good and merchandise shall be bring into our realm and dominion , and shall be there unlade and sell . and likewise three penny upon every pound of silver in the carry out of any such i 337 y good and merchandise which be buy in our realm and dominion aforesaid above the custom beforetime pay unto we or any of our progenitor . And touch the value and estimation of these good and merchandise , whereof three penny of every pound of silver , as be aforesaid , be to be pay , credit shall | be give unto they upon the letter which they be able to show from their master or partner . and if they have no letter in this behalf , we will stand to the oath of the foresay merchant if they be present , or in their absence to the oath of their servant . moreover , it shall be lawful for such as be of the company of the aforesaid merchant within our realm and dominion aforesaid , to sell wool to other of their company , and likewise to buy of they without pay of custom . yet so , that the say wool come not to such hand , that we be defraud of the custom due unto we . and furthermore it be to be understand , that after that the aforesaid merchant have once pay in one place within our realm and dominion , the custom above grant unto we in form aforesaid for their merchandise , and have their warrant thereof , whether these merchandise remain within our kingdom or be carry out ( except wine , which in no wise shall | be carry forth of our realm and dominion aforesaid , without our favour and licence as be aforesaid ) we will and we grant for we and our heir , that no execution , attachment , or loan , or any other burden be lay upon the person of the aforesaid merchant , upon their merchandise or good in any case , contrary to the form before mention and grant . the faithful and principali witness of these present be these , Robert archbishop of Canterbury , primate of all England , Walter bishop of coventrey and Lichfield , Henry Lacie of Lincoln , Humphrey de bohume , earl of Herford and Essex , high constable of England , adornare of Valentia , Geoffrey of Gaymal , huge Spenser , Walter Beauchampe seneschal of our house , Robert of Bures , and other . give by our 338 own hand at windesore the first day of February , in the year of our reign xxxi .