Charta anno regni sexto confecta . 350 351 in portu villae Weymouth . in portu villae de magna lernemutha . the same in english . a ordinance of the staple to be hold at one certain place . the king unto his collector of custom , for wool and woollen fel , in his port of London , greeting . whereas we upon the 20 . of may , in the sixth year of our reign , consider the damage and grievance that have diverse happen unto the merchant of our realm , upon occasion that the merchant both of our own , 8c of other country , buy up wool and woollen fel within our kingdom and dominion , have , for the better sale thereof , at their pleasure convey themselves , and transport the say wool 8c fel into sundry place within the province of Brabant , Flanders and artoys : and be desirous also , to our power , to 352 provide a remedy against such damage and inconvenience , have ordain by our counsel , that all merchant , both homeborn and alien , buy up such wool and fel , within our kingdom and dominion aforesaid , and be desirous to transport they into the foresay province , there to be sell , may carry the say wool and fel , or cause they to be carry to some certain staple , within any of the say province , by the mayor and commonalty of the say merchant of our realm , to be appoint and assign , and when they shall think it expedient , to be change and remove , and not unto any other place within the say province whatsoever : and whereas also , among other thing , we have grant unto the merchant of our foresay realm , for we and our heir , that the mayor and council of the say merchant for the time be , may impose upon all merchant , homeborn or alien whatsoever , that shall transgress the foresay ordination , and shall thereof lawful be convict , certain sum of money to be pay for their offence , and that such sum must by our minister and officer , to our use , be levy out of the good and ware of the merchant so offend , wheresoever they shall chance to be find within our kingdom and dominion aforesaid , as in our charter make for the same purpose , it be more plain express , ( which charter we have cause to be publish upon the seacoast , throughout all the country of our realm , and a strong prohibition to be proclaim , that no merchant , neither homeborn , nor stranger , may in any wise transgress the tenor of the foresay charter , under the penalty therein contain ) and whereas afterward it be give we to understand , that diverse merchant both homeborn , and alien , buy up such wool and woollen fell within our say realm and dominion , and convey themselves with the say wool and fell for the sale thereof , unto other place within the foresay province , beside the say staple , which i 353 z 1320 . a Charter make in the sixth year of his reign . be , accord to our grant aforesaid , appoint and ordain by the mayor and commonalty of the say merchant of our realm , in some one of those province , to the contempt of our authority , and contrary to the charter of the ordination , publication , and inhibition aforesaid , we assign certain of our faithful subject , in diverse part of our realm , to make inquisition for such wool and woollen fell , as be convey unto any other place of the say province , then unto the staple , so that by these mean , the penalty due unto we may be levy unto our use : and have intelligence also , that in a manner all merchant both homeborn , and stranger barter such ware in our kingdom , be culpable of the premise , and that many be indict thereupon , and other fear to be indict , do cause their wool and woollen fell to be avouch under the name of person not culpable , and to be send over unto certain stranger be also culpable , and not mind perhaps to return any more into our realm , that they may so escape the foresay forfeiture , and defraud we of the penalty , appertain of right unto we , ( which abuse , if they be suffer so to go unpunished will redound unto our extreme hindrance : ) and be likewise desirous to withstand such deceitful deal , and so far forth as we can , to prevent our own loss , we firm command , and straight charge you , that you do receive of every particular merchant , desirous to convey any wool , or woollen fel out of the foresay port , into any foreign dominion , a corporal oath upon God holy evangelist : that they shall avouch all those wool and woollen fel under his name unto who they do proper belong , and under the name of none other : and then take sufficient security from the owner of those wool and fel , or in his name , in regard whereof you will undertake to warrantise , and make good unto we those penalty and forfeiture which shall unto we appertain , for all wool , and woollen fel convey or send by any of the foresay merchant unto any of the 354 say province of Flanders , Brabant , and artoys , contrary to the charter of the proclamation and inhibition above mention ( if they shall chance to be convince hereof ) that first , our due custom be receive , you do permit the say wool and woollen fel to pass out of the foresay port into foreign country . witness the king at Dover the 18 . day of June . by the king himself and his council . and afterward by a write under the king privy seal there be a like commandment give unto the collector of the custom aforesay in the port underwritten . that be to say : A . D . in the port of the town of Weymouth . Southampton . saint botulph town , now call Boston . kingtone upon Hull . Newcastle . lernemouth magna , or Yermouth . Gypwick or Ipswich .