the great charter grant unto foreign merchant by king Edward the first , in the 31 year of his reign common call Carta mercatoria , anno domini 1303 . 328 329 9 - 331 332 the aforesaid general charter in English . edward by the grace of God king of England , lord of Ireland , duke of Aquitaine , to archbishop , bishop , abbot , prior , earl , baron , justice , viscount , governors , officer , and all bailiff , and his faithful people send greeting . we have speciali care for the good estate of all merchant of the kingdom , land , and country follow : to wit of almain , France , Spain , Portugal , Navarre , Lombardie , Florence , Provence , Catalonia , of our duchy of Aquitaine , Tholosa , catur - lune , Flanders , Brabant , and of all other foreign country and place by what name soever they be call , which come into our kingdom of England , and there remain , that the say merchant may live in quiet and full security under our dominion in time to come . wherefore that their heart desire may be more ready incline to our service and the service of our kingdom , we favourable agree to their petition , for the full asring of their estate , have think good to grant to the say merchant for we and our heir for ever these privilege under write , ordain in form as follow . first , that all merchant of the say kingdom and country may come into our kingdom of England , and any where else into our dominion with their merchandise whatsoever safe and secure under our defence and protection without pay wharfage , pontage , or pannage . and that in city , borough , and market town of the say kingdom and dominion they may traffic only by the great as well with the natural subject and inhabitant of our aforesaid kingdom and dominion , as with foreigner , stranger , or private person . yet so , that 333 a exception for traffic with you know enemy oj the kingdom . 2 . 3 - merchandise which be common call mercery ware , and spice , may be sell by the small , as heretofore have be accustom . and that all the aforesaid merchant may carry or cause to be carry whither they will , aswell within our realm or dominion , as out of the same ; save unto the country of the manifest and know enemy of our kingdom , those merchandise which they shall bring into our foresay realm and dominion , or buy , or otherwise purchase in our say realm and dominion , pay such custom as they ought to do : except only wine , which it shall not be any way lawful for they to carry out of our say realm and dominion without our speciali favour and licence , after they be once bring into our realm and dominion . item that the aforesaid merchant may at their pleasure lodge and remain with their good in the city , borough , and town aforesaid , with the good like of those which be owner of their lodging . item that every bargain make by the say merchant with any manner of person , of what place soever they be , for any kind of merchandise whatsoever , shall firm and stable , so that none of both the merchant shall shrink or give back from that bargain , after that the earnest penny be once give and take between the principali bargainers . and if peradventure any strife arise about the same bargain , the trial and inquiry thereof shall be make accord to the use and custom of the fair and town where it chance that the say bargain be make and contract . item , we promise the aforesaid merchant grant for ever for we and our heir , that from hence forth we will not in any wise make nor cause to be make any stay or arrest , or any delay by reason of arrest of their ware , merchandise or other good , by our self , or by any other or other for any need or accident against the will of the say merchant , without present payment of such a price as the merchant will have sell those merchandise for to other man , or without make of they other 334 satisfaction , so that they shall hold themselves well content : and that no price or valuation shall | be set upon their ware , merchandise , and good by we or by any officer of we . item , we will that all bailiff and officer of fair , city , borough , and market town shall do speedy justice from day to day without delay accord to the law of merchant to the aforesaid merchant when they shall complain before they , touch all and singular cause , which may be determine by the same law . and if default be find in any of the bailiff or officer aforesaid , whereby the say merchant or any of they have sustain , or do sustain any damage through delay , though the merchant recover his loss against the party principali , yet the bailiff or other officer shall be punish to we ward , accord to the quality of the default . and we do grant this punishment in favour of the aforesaid merchant in regard of the hasten of their justice . item , that in all manner of plea , save in case where punishment of death be to be inflict , where a merchant be implead , or sue another , of what condition soever he be which be sue , whether stranger or home bear , in fair , city , or borough , where sufficient number of merchant of the foresay country be , and where the trial ! ought to be make , let the one half of the jury be of the say merchant , and the other half of good and lawful man of the place where the suit shall fall out to be : and if sufficient number of merchant of the say country can be find , those which shall be find fit in that place shall be put upon the jury , and the rest shall be choose of good and fit man of the place where such suit shall chance to be . A . D . 1303 . 5 - where it this law now become ? 6 . item we will , we ordain , and we appoint , that in 7 - every market town and fair of our realm aforesaid and elsewhere within our dominion our weight shall be set in some certain place ; and that before the weigh 335 the balance shall be see empty in the presence of the buyer and of