a brief relation of William esturmy , and John Kington concern their ambassage into Prussia , and the hans - towne . inprimis , that in the month of July , and in the 1403 . year of our lord 1403 , and the five year of the reign of our sovereign lord the king that now be , there come into England the ambassador of the mighty lord fr : Conradus de Jungingen , be then master general of Prussia , with his letter direct unto our foresaid sovereign lord the king , require amends and recompense for certain injury unjust offer by english man unto the subject of the say master generail , write in 20 . article , which amount unto the sum of 19120 . noble and a half etc item , that the three day of the month of October , in the year of our lord abovewritten , and in the five year of the reign of our sovereign lord the king , between the reverend father in God , Henry then bishop of Lincoln lord chancellor , and William lord de Roos high treasurer of England , on the one party and the say ambassador on the other party , it be ( accord to their petition ) among other thing ordain : namely that the liege people of our sovereign lord the king shall free be permit , until the feast of easter then next after ensue to remain in the land of Prussia , and from thence with their good and merchandise to return unto their own home : and also , that the subject of the say master general in the kingdom or England shall have licence and liberty to do the like . provide always , that after the time above limit , neither the english merchant in the land of Prussia , nor the prussian merchant in the realm of England shall use any traffic of merchandise at all , unless in the mean space it be otherwise agree and conclude by the say king and the say master general . item , immediate after our say sovereign lord the king send his letter by John brown merchant of Lin unto the foresay master generail , for to have mutual conversation and intercourse of deal to continue some certain space , between the merchant of England and of Prussia : promise in the same letter , that he will in the mean season send unto the foresay master his ambassador to entreat about the pretend injury aforesaid : which letter the foresay master , for diverse cause , refuse to yield unto , as in his letter send unto our lord the king , bear date the 16 . day of the month of July , in the year of our lord 1404 . moor plain appear . item , that after the receit of the letter of the master aforesaid , which be next above mention , our say king , accord to his promise , send William esturmy knight , m . John Kington clerk , and William Brampton citizen of London , from his court of parliament hold at Coventrie , very slight inform , as his ambassador into Prussia . item , before the arrival of the say ambassador in Prussia , all intercourse of traffic between the english and the Prussians , in the realm of England , and in the land of Prussia be altogether restrain and prohibit : and in the same land it be ordain and put in practice , that in whatsoever port of the land of Prussia any english merchant have arrive with his good , he 28 1406 . be not permit to convey the say good , out of that port , unto any other place of the land of Prussia , either by water , or by land , under the pain of the forfeit of the same : but be enjoin to sell they in the very same port , unto the Prussians only and to none other , to the great prejudice of our english merchant . item , that after the arrival of the say english ambassador in the land of Prussia , it be ordain , that from the eight day of the month of October , in the year of our lord 1405 , all english merchant what - 1405 . soever shall have free liberty to arrive with all kind of their merchandise in whatsoever port of the land of Prussia , and to make sale of they in the say land , as have heretofore from ancient time be accustom . also sundry other commodious privilege unto the realm of England be then ordain and establish : as in the indenture make for this purpose it do moor manifest appear . item , the say english ambassador be arrive in the land of Prussia , demand of the say master general , a reformation and amends , for the damage and injury offer by the Prussians unto the liege people of our sovereign lord and king , write in fifteen article , which loss amount unto the sum of 4535 . noble . item , the say master general , beside the article exhibit unto our sovereign lord the king ( as it be above mention ) deliver unto the say ambassador diverse other article of certain injury offer ( as he say ) unjust by english man , unto his subject , which amount unto the sum of 5100 . noble . item , it be afterward conclude , that upon the first 1406 . of may next than ensue , namely in the year of our lord 1406 . or within the space of one year immediate follow there shall be make a convenient , just , and reasonable satisfaction , for all molestation unjust offer on both part , as well on the behalf of our sovereign lord the king , as of the foresay master general . which satisfaction not be perform , the Prussians with their good and merchandise , within three month after the end of the say year next follow , be without molestation or impediment , enjoin to depart out of the realm of England with their ship and good , and the english man likewise , out of the territory and dominion of the say master general , and both of they , without any further admonition , to abstain and separate themselves , from both the country aforesaid . for the performance of which premise , the ambassador on both part be sufficient instruct , be appoint to meet the first day of May , at the town of dordract in holland . item ,