among other matter they speak on this wise unto they : do you complain of injury and loss offer unto you ? Loe , in your own country of Prussia there be english merchant , and good sufficient , go your way home therefore , and recover your loss , take two for one : and in this manner they be leave , and so depart . afterwards return unto you land of Prussia , they and their friend repair unto the mast , general , joint and wl one consent make their complaint unto he of the loss which have be inflict upon they by your subject . And prostrate themselves at his foot , they all and every of they make their humble suit , y ‘ he will have compassion on they , as upon his poor subject , regard they self , their wife , and child , and pity their distress , and penury , and that he will gracious procure some redress for they . and when he offer his letter unto they , wish they to prosecute their cause before your highness , they answer that they be no way able to defray the expense , and that other , who be in like sort damnify , have labour that way altogether in vain and to no purpose : beseech he again and again , that he will by another kind of mean , namely by arrest of your merchant and their good , procure they restitution of their loss . at length the master general the arrest be move by so many and so great complaint , and by the molestation of his subject , cause ( albeit full a ^ ants sore against his will ) a certain portion of english merchant good to be lay hold on , and to be arrest , in his city of Elburg and Dantzik , and to be bestow in sure place , until such time as he may convenient by his messenger propound and exhibit all and singular the premise unto your highness . and forasmuch as the foresay master general and our order do know no just occasion , whereby they have deserve your majesty indignation , but be firm and most undoubted persuade , to find all courtesy , favour , and friendship at your highness , accord to your wont clemency : the say master general therefore make no doubt , that all the above write damage st molestation , be in such sort , against God and justice , oflr unto his subject by you , be altogether unknown unto your magnificence , and commit against your mind : wherefore present upon the foresay arrest of your merchant good , he dispatch his messenger unto your royal majesty . whereof one decease by the way , namely in the territory of holland : and the other remain sick in those part for a long season : and so that ambassage take none effect . wherefore the say master general be desirous to send we now the second time also unto your highness . we do make our humble suit therefore , in the name and behalf of our master and order aforesaid , unto your kingly supremacy , that , have God and justice before your eye , and also the dutiful and obsequious demeanour of the say master , and order towards you , you will vouchsafe to extend your gracious clemency , for the redress of the premise : whereby the foresay loss may be restore and repay unto our subject . all which notwithstanding , that it will please you of your wisdom and providence to procure so absolute a remedy , by mean whereof , in time to come , such deal and inconvenience may be avoid on both part , and final that your merchant may quiet be possess of their good arrest in Prussia , and our merchant may be admit unto the possession of their commodity attach in England , to convert and apply they unto such use , as to themselves shall seem most convenient . howbeit ( most gracious prince and lord ) we be to solicit your highness , not only about the article to be propound concern the loss aforesaid , but more principal , for certain sinister report and superstitious slander , wherewith certain of your subject , not seek for peace , have false inform your majesty , and your most honourable and discreet council : affirm that at the time of the aforesaid arrest your merchant be barbarous entreat , that they be cast into loathsome prison , drench in mire and water up to you neck , restrain from all conference and company of man , and also that their meat be throw unto they , as a bone to a dog , with many other enormity , which they have most slanderous devise concern the master general aforesaid , and his people , and have publish they in these dominion : upon the occasion of which falsehood certain merchant of our part , and of other region of Alemain ( who , of your special benevolence , be endue with certain privilege and favour in your city of London , and in other place ) be , as malefactor , apprehend and carry to prison , until such time as the truth be more apparent . whereupon , the foresay master general propound his humble suit unto your majesty , that such enemy of truth and concord , your majesty will vouchsafe in such sort to chastise , that they may be a example unto other presume to do the like . moreover , ( high and mighty prince and lord ) it be report unto our master general , that his former legate require of your majesty safe conduct free to come into your highness realm . which when he hear , he be exceed offend thereat , since undoubted they do not this at his commandment or direction . we therefore humble beseech your grace , as touch this oversight , to hold the master general excuse , because there be no need of safe conduct , between so speciali friend . two 17 b furthermore , sundry damage and complaint of the foresay general master , and his subject be brief exhibit , and put down in the bill follow . also , all and singular damnify person , beside other proof , be compel to verify their loss by their formali oath , take upon the holy bible . last , we do make our humble suit and petition unto the providence and discretion of your highness , and of your honourable council , that concern the premise , and all other matter propound , or to be propound unto your majesty , we may obtain a speedy answer , and a effectual end . for it will redound unto our great charge and loss to make any long delay .