of the man of Prussia , and the answer of the english man , to make and ordain a friendly reconciliation or honest recompense between such party : which reconciliation the say party reconcile be bind [ i . 15 2 . i undoubted and without delay to observe . but if there be any english man find , who shall rash contradict or contemn the composition of the foresay ambassador : then the say ambassador be to bring the forename prussian plaintiff before the presence of the king majesty : and also to make supplication on the behalf of such plaintiff , that complete justice and judgement may without delay be administer , accord as those suit be commence . Moreover whatsoever english man , against who any one of Prussia will enter his action , shall absent himself at the term , the say ambassador be to summon and ascite the foresaid english man to appear at the term next ensue , that the plaintiff of Prussia may in no wise seem to depart or to return home , without judgement or the assistance of law . now if the say english man be summon shall be find stubborn or disobedient , the forename ambassador be to make their appeal and supplication in manner aforesaid . and in like sort in all respect shall the english plaintiff be deal withal in Prussia , namely in the city of Dantzik , where the deputy of the say city and of the city of Elburg shall take unto themselves two other head borough , one of Dantzik , and the other of Elburg : which four commissioner be to have in all respect , the very like authority of decide , discuss , and determine all criminali complaint propound criminal , by english man against any prussian or Prussians , by friendly reconciliation , or honest recompense , if it be possible . but if it can friendly be determine , or if any prussian shall not yield obedience unto any such order or composition , but shall find to contradict and to contemn the same : from thenceforth the say four deputy and headborough be to make their appeal and supplication unto the master general of the land aforesaid , that unto the say english plaintiff speedy judgement and complete justice may be administered . but if it shall so fall out that any of the principali offender shall decease , or already be decease in either of the say country , and then it shall be free and lawful for the plaintiff to prosecute his right against the good or heir of the party decease . also , for the execute of the premise the term under write be appoint : namely the first , from the Sunday whereupon quasi modo geniti be to be sing next ensue , until the seven day follow : the second upon the feast of the holy Trinity next to come , and for seven day follow : the three upon the eight day after saint John Baptist next to come , and for seven day follow : the four , last , and peremptory term shall be upon the feast of saint Michael next to come , and upon seven day next follow . and from thenceforth all cause which concern death , or the maim of a member , with all action proceed from they , be to remain altogether void and extinct . and if peradventure any one of the foresay ambassador , shall in the mean season dye , than the other two shall have authority to choose a three unto they . and if after the date of these present any cause great or small do arise or spring forth , it must be decide in England and in Prussia , as it have be a ancient accustom in time past and from ancient time . custom . also , it be far conclude and agree upon , that all 4 . lawful merchant of England whosoever shall have free the privi - licence and authority , with all kind of ship , good , dge and merchandise , to resort unto every port of the land i ^ r ' of Prussia , and also to transport all such good and Prussia . merchandise up far unto any other place in the say land of Prussia , and there with all kind of person free to bargain and make sale , as heretofore it have from ancient time be accustom . which privilege be grant in all thing and by all circumstance unto the Prussians in England . and if after the date of these present , between the say kingdom of England , and land of Prussia any dissension or discord ( which God forefend ) shall arise : then the foresay sovereign prince and king of England , and the say right reverend lord the master generail be mutual by their letter and messenger to give certificate and intimation one unto another , concern the matter and cause of such dissension and discord : with intimation , on the behalf of the foresay sovereign prince and king of England , shall be deliver in the forename castle of Marienburg : but on the behalf of the say right reverend lord the master generail , such intimation shall be give in the city of London aforesaid , unto the mayor of the say city : that than such a denunciation or intimation be make , the merchant of England and the subject of the land of Prussia may , within the space of one year next follow , free and safe return home with all their good and merchandise : if at the least , in the mean while , some composition , and friendly league between the two foresay country be not in some sort conclude . and that all the premise may more firm and faithful be put in due practice and execution on both part , for the strong and inviolable keep of peace and tranquillity : and also for the full confirmation and strengthen of all the say premise , the three foresaid honourable and religious personage be by the say right reverend lord the master general appoint as commissioner to deal in the above write ordination and composition , have cause their seal unto these present to be put : and the say ordination also , and letter in the same tenor word for word , and in all point even as it be insert into these present , they have mutual receive from the abovename three ambassador of the right sovereign king of England under their seal . give at the castle of Marienburg in the year of our lord aforesaid , upon the twenty day of the month of August . and we therefore do accept , approve , ratify , and by the tenor of these present do confirm , the composition , ordination , concord , and treaty aforesaid . in testimony whereof we have cause these our letter to be make patent . witness our self a Westminster the 22 . of October , in the thirteenth year of our reign . by the king and his counsel . Lincoln .