) they be constrain to sue for peace . afterwards Swandepolcus lie at the point of death , admonish his son that they shall not do any injury unto the knight of the order , affirm that himself never prosper so long as he urge war against they . howbeit his son for a certain time observe not their father counsel , until at length one of they name Warteslaus , be create one of the order , and the other call Samborus bestow by legacy his good and possession upon the say order , receive maintenance and exhibition from the say order , during the term of his life . it fortune also under the government of the foresay master boppo , that one sir Martine a Golin be accompany with another knight , go into the country to see how the Prussians be employ . And meet with three Prussians , they slay two , and the third they reserve to guide they the direct way . but this guide betray they into their enemy hand . which when they perceive , they slay the traitor . than five prussian horseman come ride and take [ i . 14 - 6 . } they , deliver they bind to the custody of two . and the other three pursue the horse of the two , which break loose in the time of the fray . and they tarry somewhat long , the other two will have behead the two knight in the mean season . and memorable as one of they be strike with his draw sword , strata & me - at the neck of sir Martine , he say unto they : sir , you do unwise in that you take not off my garment before it be defile with blood . they therefore loose the cord wherewith he be bind , to take off his garment , set his arm more at liberty . which sir Martine well perceive reach his keeper such a box , that his sword fall to the ground . which he with all speed take up , slay both the keeper and unbind his fellow knight . Moreover , see the other three Prussians come furious upon they , with stout courageous heart they make toward the say Prussians , and slay they , and so escape the danger of death . the seven great master be Hanno the sangershusen , who decease in the year one thousand two hundred seventie five . the eight be Hartmannus ab Heldringen who decease in the year 1282 . the nine be Burckardus a Schuvenden be afterward make knight of the order of saint Johns . the ten be Conradus a feuchtuvang : under this man the city of Aeon in Palestina be sack by the sultan , and many people be slay . the templar which be therein return home out of France , where they have great revenue . the knight of saint John , who also have a hospitali at Aeon , change their place , and go into the isle of Cyprus , and from thence depart unto Rhodes , they subdue that island unto themselves . now the dutch knight abound with wealth and possession throughout all Germany , be lord of a good part of Prussia , Livonia , and Curland , who chief house be then at Marpurg , till such time as it be remove unto Marieburg , a town of Prussia . the eleven great master be Godfrey earl of Hohenloe . under this man the knight sustain a great overthrow in Livonia : but have strengthen 4000 their army , they slay near unto rye four thousand of their enemy . the twelve master be Sifridus a feuchtuvang . under this man , the principali house of the order be translate from Martpurg to Marieburg , which in the beginning be establish at Aeon , and from thence be remove unto Venice , and from Venice unto Martpurg . This Sifridus decease in the year 1341 . the thirteenth master be call Charles Beflart of trier . this man build a fort upon the river of Mimmel , and it be name Christmimmel . the fourteenth be Warnerus ab Orsele , who a certain knight of the order slay with his sword . the 15 . be Ludolphus duke of Brunswick , who build the town of Ylgenburg , and decease 1352 . the sixteenth be Theodoricus earl of Aldenborg , and he build the town of Bartenstein . the seventeenth be Ludolphus sir name king . the eighteenth be Henry a Tusimer . the nineteenth Winricus a Knoppenrodt . in this man time the knight take the king of the lithuanians name Kinstut captive , and keep he prisoner in Marieburg half a year , but by the help of a servant , have break out of the castle , he escape away by night . but fear that he be lay wait for in all place , he leave his horse , and go on foot through unknown path . in the day time he hide himself in secret place , and in the night he continue his journey until he come unto Massovia . but all the knight joy be turn into sorrow , after they have lose so great a enemy . the twenty grand master be Conradus Zolner of Rotenstein . the one and twenty Conradus Walenrod . the two and twenty this man send Conradus a Jungingen , who decease in the year one hard ^ tke thousand four hundred and seven . the three and se : tnd . twenty Ulricus a Jungingen . this man die in battle in the year one thousand four hundred and ten : which battle be fight against Vladislaus father of Casimire . both part have levy mighty and huge force : unto the polonians the lithuanians and the Tartar have join themselves , over who one vitol - dus be captain : the dutch knight have take up soldier out of all Germany . and when each army have encamp themselves one within twenty furlong of another , ( hope for victory and impatient of delay ) the great master of the Prussians send a herald to denounce war unto the king , and immediate ( alarm be give ) it be report that there be in both army fourty thousand horseman in a readiness . Vladislaus command the lithuanians and the Tartar to give the first onset , and place the polonians in the rearward of the battle : on the contrary side , the Prussians regard least of all to reserve any strong troop behind , which may rescue such as be weary , and renew the fight , if need shall require , but set forward the flower and chivalry of all his soldier in the very forefront of the battle . the charge be give certain unarm Tartar and lithuanians be slay handsmooth : howbeit the multitude press on , neither dare the fearful polonians turn ’ their back , and so a cruel battle be fight upon the heap of dead carcase . the combat continue a long time , terrible slaughter be commit , and the lithuanians and Tartars be slay like sheep . but when new and fresh enemy continual issue forth , the dutch knight be weary , begin to fight more faint . which Vladislavs no soon perceive , but in all haste he send forward his mighty and well arm band of polonians , who sudden break in renew the skirmish . the dutch be not able to withstand the fury of the fresh troop ( great odds there be between the weary soldy and he that come in a fresh ) insomuch that the knight with their people be constrain to flee . the master of the order see his soldier give way