unto the enemy , gather a company together , and withstand he in the face , howbeit himself be slay for his labour , the flight of his people prove great and more dishonourable , neither do the dutch cease to flee , so long as the polonian continue the chase . there fall on the knight party many thousand of man , and the polonians get not the victory without great spoil and damage . this battle be fight in regard of the bound of region in the year 1410 . all Prussia follow the happy success of the polonian king ( except Marieburg only ) yield themselves unto he be conqueror . howbeit the emperor Sigismond take up the quarrel , peace be ordain between the knight and Polonia , and a league conclude , certain sum of money also be pay unto the polonian , Prussia be restore unto the knight , neither be the say order disturb in the possession of their land until the time of Friderick . the 24 . master be Henry earl of Plaen . this man be depose by the chapter , be 7 . year hold prisoner at Dantzik . the 25 . master be Michael Kuchenmeister , that be , master of the cook of Sternberg . the 26 . be Paulus a Russdorff . the 27 . Conradus ab ellerichshausen . this man , after diverse and sundry conflict between the dutch knight , and the king of Polonia , conclude a perpetuali league with the say king . howbeit the citizen of Dantzig secret go about to obtain their freedom , that the foresay order may have no dominion over they , make suit unto the polonian king to be their protector . this 8 Conradus die in the year 1450 . the 28 . be Lewis ab Ellerichshausen . under this man there arise a dangerous sedition in Prussia between the chief city and the knight of the order . the citizen demand liberty , complain that they be oppress with diverse molestation . whereupon they privy make suit unto Casimir then king of Polonia . the master of the order see what will come to pass begin to expostulate with the king , that he keep not the peace which have be conclude between they to last for ever . also Frederick the emperor commanded the Prussians to return unto the obedience of the knight , who by the dint of their sword have release that province out of the hand of infidel , and have buy it with the shed of much blood . notwithstanding the popular sort persist still in their stubborn determination , proceed at length to open war . the city adhere unto the king usurp diverse castle belong to the master , take certain commander and knight , yea , and some they slay also . fifty and five town conspire together in that rebellion : but think their estate and strength not sure enough against their own governor without foreign aid , they choose king Casimir to be their lord . hereupon the polonian king march into Prussia with a great army , take possession of such city as yield themselves unto he , and proceed forward against Marieburg , besiege the castle and the town . in the mean season the master have hire a army of germane soldier , sudden surprise the king at unaware in his tent , and slay about 300 . polonians , take prisoner 136 . nobleman , spoil their tent , take away their horse , victual , and armour , insomuch that the king himself hardly escape upon one horse . Theise thing come to pass in the year 1455 . the master have thus obtain the victory , send his army into the country , and recover the castle and city which he have lose , to the number of 80 . put many 9 the great master overcome the king of Polonia . the king by treason overthroweth the master . of his enemy also unto the sword . Moreover , he recover Kunigsberg be one of the four principali city , which be by name thorn , Elburg , Kunigsberg , and gdanum , that be to say , Dantzig . and when the war be long protract than the master can well bear , and a whole year wage be unpay unto his captain , those captain which be in the garrison of Marieburg conspire against the master , and for a great sum of money betray the castle of Marieburg unto the king . which practice be know , the master flee to Kunigsberg , and new war be begin , and great spoil and desolation be wrought on both side : until at length , after composition make , the king retain Pomerella , and all the castle and town therein , together with Marieburg and Elburg : and the master enjoy Samaitia , Kunigsberg , etc this composition be conclude in the year 1466 . the 29 . master be Henry Reuss , first being deputy , and afterward master of Prussia . the 30 . be Henry a Richtenberg , who decease in the year 1477 . the 31 . call Martine Truchses die in the year 1489 . the 32 . John a Tieflen die in the year 1500 . the 33 . be duke of Saxony , and mark of misn , decease in the year 1510 . this man begin to call in question , whether the foresay composition conclude between the king of Polonia , and the order , be to be observe or no ? especial sithence it contain certain article against equity and reason . whereupon he appeal unto the bishop of Rome , unto the emperor , unto the prince and elector of Germany , and prevail with they so far forth , that there be a day of hear appoint at Posna in Polonia . and the legate of both part meet hear complaint and excuse , and dispatch no other business . in the mean time prince Frederick decease in the ten year of his government . the 34 . master be Albertus mark of Brandenburg , who the king of Polonia do so grievous molest with war , and oppress all Prussia with such extreme rigour , that the prince of the country be constrain to make a league of four year with he , and to yield unto such condition , as turn to the utter overthrow of the whole order . and among other condition be these which follow . since that the originali of all discord between Polonia and the order do from hence arise , for that hitherto in Prussia , no lawful heir and successor have bear rule and authority , but diverse and sundry have have the government thereof , by who mean the nation have be provoke one against another , much christian blood have be shed , the land and inhabitant grievous spoil , and many widow and orphan make : the pope , emperor , and prince be often solicit for the establish of that perpetual league , which Casimir have heretofore conclude etc since also that the truce which have be agree upon of both party be in short time to be expire , and that it be to be fear , that bloody war will then be renew , and that all thing will prove worse and worse , unless some lawful composition be make , and some good and wholesome devise be put in practice , as well for the benefit of the king and of his posterity , as for the commodity of the whole common weal of Prussia , especial consider that Albertus the Marques refuse not to submit himself to the council of the king , etc A . D . 1525 -