that the say William esturmy and John Kington in their return homeward from Prussia towards England pass through the chief city of the Hans , and treat in such sort with the burgomaster of they , that there be send messenger and agent , in the behalf of the common society of the Hans merchant , unto the town of dordract , to confer with the ambassador of England , about the redress of injury attempt on both part : where diverse agreement be set down between the say ambassador , and messenger , as in the indenture make for the same purpose it do moor manifest appear . item , that the meeting appoint at the town of dordract , upon the first of May , be by the letter of the foresay ambassador , prorogue unto the first of August then next ensue , and afterward by virtue of the king letter unto the first day of march next follow : and there be another day of prorogation also . item , that after the prorogation aforesaid , the ambassador of England , and the messenger and commissioner of Prussia meet together at the town of Hage in holland , the 28 . day of August , in the year of our lord 1407 . and there be a treaty between they concern the sum 25934 . noble and a half , demand on the behalf of the say master general for amends and recompense in consideration of wrong offer unto himself and unto his subject of Prussia , as be aforesaid . also the say master and his Prussians , beside the sum not yet declare in the article , which be very small , be to rest content and satisfy with the sum of 8957 . noble , in lieu of all the damage aforesaid : no time of payment be then assign or limit , but afterward to be reasonable limit and assign , by our say sovereign lord the king . insomuch , that our say sovereign lord the king be to write his full intention 8c determination concern this matter , in his letter to be deliver the 16 . day of march , unto the aiderman of the merchant of the Hans reside at Bruges . otherwise , that from thenceforth all league of friendship shall be dissolve between the realm of England and the land of Prussia . also it be far to be note , that in the appointment of the sum next before write to be disburse out of England , this condition be add in writing , namely , that if by lawful testimony it may sufficient and effectual be prove , concern the chief article abovewritten , or any part of they , that satisfaction be make unto any of those party , to who it be due : or that the good , of and for the which complaint be make on the behalf of Prussia , in the say article , do or do pertain unto other , or that any other just , true , or reasonable cause may lawful be prove 8c allege , why the foresay sum or any of they ought not to be pay : that then in the sum contain in the article abovemention , so much only must be cut off , or stop , as shall find , either to have be pay already , or to appertain unto other , or by any true , just , and reasonable cause allege , not to be due . neither be it to be doubt , but for the great part of the sum due unto the Prussians , that not our lord the king , but other ( which will in time be nominate ) be , by all equity and justice , to be compel to make satisfaction . 31 A . D . ho ? . also , at the day and place above mention it be appoint and agree upon , that our lord the king and his liege subject , for the say 4535 . noble demand off the english in consideration of recompense to be make for injury offer unto the Prussians , be to discharge and pay the sum of 764 . noble , which be not as yet disburse : but they have reserve a petition to they , unto who the say sum be due , or if they please , there shall | be make satisfaction : which will be very hard and extreme deal . item , that in the last assembly of the say ambassador of England and messenger of Prussia , hold at Hage , make as be aforesaid , for the behalf of England , there be exhibit anew certain article of injury against the Prussians . the value of which loss amount unto the sum of 1825 . noble and three shilling . item , on the contrary part for the behalf of the Prussians the sum of 1355 . noble , eight shilling and six penny . item , forasmuch as diverse article propound , as well on the behalf of England , as of Prussia , and of the city of the Hans , both heretofore and also at the last convention hold at Hage , be so obscure , that in regard of their obscurity , there can not resolute answer be make unto they : and other of the say article exhibit , for want of sufficient proof , can not clear be determine upon : it be appoint and conclude , that all obscure article give up by any of the foresay party whatsoever , aught before the end of easter then next ensue , and within one whole year after , to be declare before the chancellor of England , for the time be : and other article evident exhibit , but not sufficient prove , to be prove , under pain of perpetuali exclusion . which be do accord , complete justice shall be administer on both part . item , as concern the eleven article , for the behalf of the Prussians , first exhibit , which contain loss amount unto the sum of 2445 . noble : as touch 32 the first article on the behalf of England exhibit in the land of Prussia , contain loss which amount to the sum of 900 . noble : after many thing allege on both part , relation thereof shall be make in the audience of the king and of the master generail : so that they shall set down , ordain , and determine such a end and conclusion of those matter , as shall seem most expedient unto they .