a agreement make by the ambassador of England and Prussia , confirm by king Richard the second . Richard by the grace of God , king of England , and France , and lord of Ireland , to all , unto who these present letter shall come , greeting . we have see and consider the composition , ordination , concord , and treaty , between our well - beloved clerk , master Nicholas Stocket , licentiate in both law , Walter Sibil , and Thomas Graa , citizen of our city of London and York , our messenger and ambassador on the one part : and the honourable and religious personage , Conradus de Walrode , great commander , Sifridus walpode de Bassenheim , chief hospitalary commander in Elburg , and Ulricus Hachenberg treasurer , the messenger and ambassador of the right reverend and religious lord , lord Conradus Zolner de Rothenstein , master general of the knightly order of the dutch hospital of saint marry at Jerusalem on the other part , late conclude and agree upon in these word . in the name of the supreme and indivisible Trinitie , the father , the son , and the holy ghost , amen . forasmuch as the author of peace will have peacemaker to be the son of blessedness , and the execrable enemy of peace to be expel out of the dominion of Christians : therefore for the perpetuali memory of the thing , be it know unto all man who shall see or hear the tenor of these present : that there be matter of dissension and discord breed between the most renown prince and king , Richard by the grace of God king or England and France , and lord of Ireland , and his subject on the one part : and the right reverend and religious lord , lord Conradus Zolner de Rothinstein , master general of the knightly order of the dutch hospitali of saint marry at Jerusalem , and his land of Prussia , and his subject also , on the other part : the foresay lord and general master , upon mature counsel and deliberation have , send his honourable ambassador towards England unto the forename most sovereign prince and king , to propound and make their complaint unto he of violence and injury offer ( as it be say ) by the english unto the Prussians : in consideration whereof certain good of the merchant of England be arrest in the land of Prussia . who complaint the foresay most gracious prince do courteous and friendly admit , receive , and accept , and after many speech utter in this treaty , love dismiss they unto their own country again , promise by his letter unto the foresay reverend master general , that he will dispatch his ambassador unto the land of Prussia . whereupon , in the year 1388 . he send the hono : and reverend person - 1388 . age master Nicholas Stocket licentiate of both law , Thomas Graa , and Walter Sibil , citizen of London and York , with sufficient authority and full commandment , to handle , discuss , and final to determine the foresay business , and with letter of credence unto the right reverend lord and master generail aforesaid . which ambassador , together with John Bevis of London their informer , and the letter aforesaid , and their ambassage , the say right reverend lord and master general , at his castle of Marienburgh , the 28 . of July , in the year aforesaid , reverent and honourable receive and enter - tein : and in his mind esteem they worthy to treat and decide the cause aforesaid : and so unto the say ambassador he join in commission on his behalf , three of his own counseller , namely the honourable and religious personage Conradus de Walrode great commander , Seiffridus walpode de Bassenheim chief hospitalary and commander in Elburg , Wolricus hachen - berge treasurer , be all of the order aforesaid . which ambassador so entreat about the premise , and sundry conference and consultation have pass between they , friendly and with one consent , conclude a agreement and concord in manner follow : that be to say : 1 . first , that all arrestment , reprisal , and impignoration of whatsoever good and merchandise in England and Prussia , make before the date of these present , be from henceforth quiet , free , and release , without all fraud and dissimulation : insomuch that the damage , charge and expense occasion on both part by reason of the foresay good arrest , be in no case hereafter to be require or challenge by any man : but the demand of any man whatsoever propound in this regard , be and ought to be altogether frustrate and void , and all action which may or shall be commence by occasion of the say good arrest , be to be extinct and of none effect . 2 . Moreover , it be second conclude and agree , that all and singular Prussians pretend themselves to be injury by the english at the porte of Swen , or elsewhere , howsoever , and whensoever , before the date of these present , have receive the letter of the foresaid right reverend lord and master generail , and of the city of their abode , be to repair towards England , unto the say hon : ambassador who be to assist they , and to propound and exhibit their complaint , unto the forename lord and king . the most gracious prince be bind to do his endeavour , that the party damnify may have restitution of their good 1390 . make unto they , or at least complete justice and judgement without delay . also in like manner all english man affirm themselves to have be endamage by Prussians , wheresoever , howsoever , and whensoever , be to have recourse unto the often forename right reverend lord the master general , with the letter of their king and of the city of their abode , propound their complaint and cause unto he . who likewise be bind to do his endeavour that the say loss and damage may be restore , or at the least that speedy judgement may be , without all delay , execute . this caveat be premise in each clause , that it may and shall be free grant and permit unto every man that will civil make his suit and complaint , to do it either by himself , or by his procurator or procurator . also three it be agree , that whosoever of Prussia be 3 . determine criminal to propound his criminal complaint in England : namely that his brother or kinsman have be slay , wound , or maim , by english man , the same party be to repair unto the city of London in England , and unto the say ambassador , bring with he the letter of the say right reverend lord the master general , and of the city of their abode : which ambassador be to have free and full authority , accord to the complaint