a catalogue of the great master of the order of the dutch knight , common call the hospitalary of Jerusalem : and what great exploit every of the say master have achieve , either in conquer the land of Prussia , or in tame and subdue the infidel , or else in keep they under their obedience and subjection , take out of Munster . he order of the dutch knight have their first original at Jerusalem in the year of our lord 1190 . within the hospitali of the bless virgin : and the first master of the say order be call Henry of Walpot , under who many good thing , and much wealth and rich be throughout all Germany and Italy procure unto the order : and the say hospitali be remove from Jerusalem unto Ptolemais , otherwise call Aeon , and the foresay order grow and mighty increase , whereof i will hereafter discourse more at large in my treatise of Syria . Henry of Walpot decease in the year of Christ 1200 . the 2 . master be Otto of Kerpen , and he continue master of the order for the space of six year . the 3 . be Hermannus Bart a godly and devout person , who decease in the year 1210 . be inter at Aeon , as his predecessor be . the 4 . be Hermannus the Saltza , who thirty year together govern the say order , and manage the first expedition of 11 the first war move against the prussian infidel , anno dom . 1239 . war against the infidel of Prussia , and ordain another master also in Prussia to be his deputy in the same region . in the year 1239 . they knight of the sword , who travel into Livonia to convert the inhabitant thereof unto Christ , see they be not of sufficient force to perform that enterprise , and that their enemy increase on all side , they unite themselves unto the famous order of the dutch knight in Prussia , that their worthy attempt may be defend and promote by the aid and assistance of the say dutch knight . at the very same time the ensign of the cross be exalt throughout all Germany against the Prussians , and a great army of soldier be gather together , the burgrave of Meidenburg be general of the army , who combine themselves unto the dutch knight , join battle with the infidel , and slay about five hundred gentile , who beforetime have make horrible invasion and inroad into the dominion of Christians , waste all with fire and sword , but especial the land of Colm , and Lubonia , which be the province of Conradus duke of Massovia . now , the foresay knight have make so huge a slaughter , build the castle of Reden , between Pomerania and the land of Colm , and so by degree they get foot in the land , and daily erect more castle , as namely , Crutzburg , Wissenburg , Resil , Bartenstein , Brunsburg , and Heilsburg , and furnish they all with garrison . the five master of the order be Conradus Landgravius , the brother of lodo - vick , which be husband unto lady Elizabeth . This Conradus , by his father inheritance , give great riches and possession unto the order , and cause lady Elizabeth to be inter at Marpurg , within the religious house of his say order . under the government of this master , Aeon in the land of Palestina be subdue unto the Saracen . Moreover , in the year 1254 . there be another great army of soldier prepare against Prussia , by the prince of Germany . for Octacer , alias Odoacer king of Bohemia , Otto Marques of Brandeburg , the duke of Austria , the mark of Moravia , the bishop of Colen and of Olmutz come march on with great strength of their noble and common soldier , and invade the land of Prussia in the winter season , they constrain the inhabitant thereof to receive the christian faith , and to become obedient unto the knight . after which exploit , by the advice and assistance of king Odoacer , there be a castle build upon a certain hill of Samogitia , which immediate after grow to be a great city , be at this day the seat of the prince of Prussia : and it be call by Odoacer Kunigsberg , that be to say , king mount , or mount royal , be finish in the year 1255 . out of this fort the knight do bridle and restrain the fury of the infidel on all side , and compel they to obedience . the sixth master be call boppo ab osterna , under who the city of Kunigsberg be build . at the very same instant the knight be occupy about the war of Curland , the Prussians conspire together , and abandon the christian faith , in furious manner arm themselves against you Christians , deface and burn down church , slay priest , and to the utmost of their ability , banish all faithful people . the report of which misdemeanour be publish throughout all Germany , a huge army be levy and send for the defence and succour of the knight , which march into the land of Natan , make many slaughter , and through the inconstancy of fortune sometime win , and sometime lose the victory . also the infidel besiege these three castle , namely , barsten - stein , Crutzberg and Kunigsberg , and bring extreme famine upon the christian contain within the say fort . again , in the year of our lord 1262 . the earl of Juliers , with other prince and great chivalry come down , and give charge upon the Prussians , put three thousand of they to the edge of the sword . afterwards the Prussians band themselves together , be determine to spoil the castle of Kunigsberg , but the Prussians abandon Christianity . A . D . 1262 . their confederacy be disclose , they have the repulse . and when the knight have prevail against they , they lay in pledge , and yet for all that be not afraid to break their fidelity . for upon a certain time , after they have give diverse pledge , they slay two noble knight of the order , and so by that mean incense the principali of the say order , insomuch that they cause two pair of galloue to be set up beside the castle , and thirty of the Prussians pledge to be hang thereupon . which severity so vex and provoke the Prussians , that in revenge of the say injury , they renew bloody and cruel war , slay many Christians , yea , and put 40 . knight with the master of the order , and the marshal , unto the edge of the sword . there be at the same instant in Pomerania a duke call Suandepolcus , profess the christian faith , but be join in league with the Prussians , he endeavour for many year , not only to expel the knight , but all Christians whatsoever out of the land of Prussia , in which war the foresay knight of the order suffer many abuse . for they lose almost all their castle , and a great number of themselves also be slay . This Suandepolcus put in practice many lewd attempt against religion . for albeit he be baptize , he do more mischief than the very infidel themselves , until such time as the knight be assist by the prince of Germany , bring the say duke and the Prussians also into such straight , that ( maugre their head