the letter of fr : Ulricas master of Prussia direct unto the king of England , signify that he be content with the agreement conclude by his messenger at Hage . to the most renown prince and mighty lord l Henry king of England and France , and lord of Ireland , our most gracious lord . unto your highness pleasure at all assay humble recommend my voluntary service etc most renown king , mighty prince , and gracious lord , we receive of late with great reverence as it become we , by our well - beloved Arnold de Dassel the bearer of these present , your majesty letter of late direct unto we , makingmention among other matter of certain appointment first make and conclude between the noble and worthy personage William esturmy knight , John Kington clerk , and William Brampton citizen of London your ambassador and messenger on the one part , and our honourable and religious brethren , namely Conradus Lichtensten great commander , Warnherus de Tettingen chief hospitalary and commander in Elbing , and Arnold de Hacken treasurer , be the procurator and commissioner of Fra . Conradus de Jungingen our last predecessor of famous memory on the other part , concern the redress , reformation , and amendment of unjust attempt commit on both side , at our castle of Marienburgh , and also very late at the town of Hage in holland , namely the twenty eight of the month August in the year immediate pass , between your foresay ambassador William esturmy knight , and John Kington clerk , for your part , and our trusty and well - beloved commissioner and procurator , namely Arnold Hecht burgomaster of our city of Dantzik , and here relation be have unto you king of the roman . John crolow citizen of the same city , for our part . and for our more perfect knowledge in this behalf , our say commissioner make relation unto we and unto our whole counsel , that associate unto themselves our messenger of Livonia , namely , Tidman Myeul , and John Epensheid , together with your foresay ambassadors and messenger , they there final appoint and conclude , of and about the above mention sum of money due on both part , of the which mention be make in your letter aforesaid . with this special ! proviso , that in like manner satisfaction be make in all point , both unto other of our damnify subject of Prussia , namely such who good or the true value thereof have be final adjudge by the judge or professor of our law , and unto such who have bring their article of complaint unto the audience of the most dread and mighty prince and lord , our lord Rupertus king of the roman always most sovereign , be in conclusion to have the estimation of their good to be adjudge by the sentence of the say lord , with the advice of two of his counseller , and also unto other of our subject who have bring in sufficient proof of damage unjust inflict upon they by your subject , over and beside the premise . so that in like manner satisfaction be make unto the common society of the Hans merchant : and by the arbitrament set down in the conference have at marienburgh , of the which it be above provide and enact on their behalf , namely if they will rest content with our subject in the course and mean then conclude . if not , we intend not at all to adhere unto they in this behalf . afterwards our messenger aforesaid , both they of Prussia and of Livonia demand convenient , just , and speedy satisfaction , with the payment of all and singular the sum above mention , due unto both part ( so far forth as equity and reason will yield unto , for the recompense of the party injury and endamage on both side ) to be make within one whole year account from the feast of easter now last expire unto the very same feast next to come in the year immediate follow , and that in three several term of payment , by three portion of the say sum equal to be divide , at the town of Bruges in Flanders as be a place indifferent for all party , in manner and form as it be before at Marienburgh require and stand upon : namely that reformation , reparation , and amendment of all unjust attempt commit on both part ought to be perform within one year . howbeit contrariwise your ambassador aforesaid decree that the say satisfaction shall be perform unto the party injury of both part within three year , begin to account from the feast of easter last pass . and when your ambassador be not content with the manner of satisfaction set down by our man , nor our commissioner be willing in any sort to consent unto that course which be think convenient by your ambassador , the honourable messenger of the seatown of the Hans be there at that time present , make a motion that the foresay satisfaction may be perform within two year and a half , account from the feast of easter last pass , often before mention : yet under a certain protestation , namely if both party shall agree unto that form of satisfaction , and if they shall think good final and conclusive to yield their consent unto it . which kind of satisfaction also conceive by the messenger , your say ambassador without give notice thereof unto your royal majesty , refuse final to approve ; be rather desirous to make a true and faithful report of the say form of satisfaction last above mention unto your kingly highness , and that in such sort , that ( as they hope ) effectual satisfaction and payment of all and singular the sum due and to be due on both part shall more convenient and speedy be perform . whereupon we may be put in good hope , that more speedy and convenient appointment of term , for the say satisfaction friendly on both part to be perform in , will have proceed from your bountiful and gracious clemency . and in very deed ( most mighty prince ) albeit it be never the meaning of our foresay predecessor , so far forth as these affair concern he , to protract and delay the execution of the say business so many and such long distance of time , and that for diverse respect , both because restitution unto the party rob consist herein , and also because the say restitution and satisfaction be to be make unto poor people , widow , orphan , and other miserable creature , diverse and miserable slay and oppress : notwithstanding we be move with hearty and fervent zeal and speciali affection unto your royal crown of England , and have due regard and consideration of your most excellent majesty , upon the advice of our honourable brethren our counseller , do thankful receive , and by the tenor of these present total ratify and approve such satisfaction of the foresay sum howsoever due unto our subject both Prussians and livonians , in friendly sort to be perform at such time and season limit and prefix by your highness as be express in your majesty letter , and also of other sum which within one year immediate ensue after the feast of easter last pass , by sufficient proof to be make on their part before your chancellor at your city of London shall be find due unto they . conditional that without inconvenience of delay and impediment they be perform as they ought to be , accord to the premise . in like manner also we our self within the term of payment above mention will procure satisfaction to be without fail perform unto your subject endamage , with the sum of 766 . noble , be in regard of their loss , of the which they have give up sufficient information , due unto they : and with other like sum also which be by sufficient proof , within the year 1408 . aforesaid , and in manner and form prescribe to be exhibit before our treasurer at our city of Dantzik . the almighty vouchsafe prosperous and long time to preserve your majesty royal person . give at Sept . 27 . , our castle of Marienburgh the 27 . of September , in I +° 8 , the year of our lord 1408 . Fr . ulricus de Jungingen master general of the order of the dutch knight of saint Mary hospital of Jerusalem .