lest that etc continue unto that clause : et ut praescripta omnia etc in English : and that all the covenant above write etc it be also conclude between the foresay messenger , commissioner , and procurator , and with one general consent agree upon , that if from the first day of the month of May next to come , within one whole year follow , some convenient , just , and reasonable reformation be not perform unto the party injury and damnify general above mention , in regard of their damage , molestation , and injury : then , within three month after the say year be expire , the merchant of the Hans city aforesaid be bind , without any molestation , perturbation , and impediment whatsoever ( none other intimation or admonition be necessary in this behalf ) to avoid ( and if no lawful impediment shall hinder they ) to abstain and depart from the realm and dominion of the say sovereign king of England , with their merchandise and other good buy or get within the space of the say three month : and also the english likewise in all respect shall avoid , abstain , and depart from the territory and dominion of the Hans city aforesaid . also it be promise by the say William and John , that at the term appoint , namely upon the first of May next follow , or at some other term or term then limit or to be limit , there must be make a due recompense , and a proportionali satisfaction , for all those person of the land of Prussia , Livonia , and of the city , town , and other place of the Hans , who have unjust be drown , and slay by the english : and that accord to the tenor of a certain schedule write concern a recompense to be have in regard of the say person drown and slay , and present unto they by Albertus ride consul of the city of Thoren , and by the forename procurator and messenger of the city aforesaid , they must faithful and effectual , to the utmost of their ability endeavour , for the obtain of the say recompense and amends . in witness whereof ( these letter of indenture remain in the possession of the say William and John the messenger , procurator , and commissioner of England aforesaid , and leave in their custody , by the above name procurator and messenger Henri Rimarus , Thedericus , Simon , and John sotebotter , of their certain knowledge and assurance ) and for the full confirmation and testimony of all the premise , the foresay procurator and messenger have put to their seal . give in the town of dordract the 15 . day of December in the year of our lord 1405 . William esturmy knight , and John Kington canon of Lincoln ( be in this behalf sufficient authorize and depute as ambassador , procurator , messenger and commissioner , by our say sovereign lord the king , namely in regard of the molestation , injury and damage unjust do and commit against the liege people and subject of the foresay most excellent 59 prince and lord , lord Henry by the grace of God king of England and France , and lord of Ireland , by the commonalty of the city of Wismer and Rostok underwrite , their common counsel be assemble for the same purpose , and authorize also , and as well close as express maintain and ratify , by the whole company of the common society of the merchant of the dutch Hans ) doe , in this present diet at the town of Hage situate in the country of holland , be appoint for the very same occasion , demand of you sir John de Aa knight , and Hermannus Meyer deputy for the city of Wismer and Rostok , and sufficient ordain by authority requisite in this behalf , to be the procurator and messenger of the say city , that convenient , just , and reasonable satisfaction and recompense may certain and effectual be do unto the injury and endamage party , who be specify in the article under write . Newcastle . imprimis , that about the feast of easter , in the year of our lord 1394 . Henry van pomeren , godekin Michael , clay shield , Hans howfoote , Peter hawfoote , clay Boniface , Rainbek , and many other , with they of Wismer and of rostok , be of the society of the Hans , a english take , by main force , a ship of Newcastle upon Tine , 1tun - ms ' 2 ' qq ' ca ^ ed Godezere sail upon the sea towards Prussia , be of the burden of two hundred ton , and belong unto Roger de Thorneton , Robert Gabiford , John Paulin , and Thomas de Chester : which ship , together with the furniture thereof amount unto the value of four hundred pound : also the woollen cloth , the red wine , the gold , and the sum of money contain in the say ship amount unto the value of 200 . mark of english money : moreover they unjust slay John Patanson and John Russell in the surprise of the ship and good aforesaid , and there they imprison the say party take , and , to their utter undo , detain they in prison for the space of three whole year . hull . item , that in the year of our lord 13 94 - certain 60 person of Wismer and Rostok , with other of the Hans their confederate rob one Richard horuse of Hull of diverse good and merchandize in a ship call the Shipper berline of Prussia , be then value at 160 . noble . item , that in the year of our lord 1395 . Hans van Hull . wethemonkule , clay Scheid , godekin Mighel , and one call Strotbeker , by force of arm , and by the assistance of the man of Wismer and Rostok , and other of the Hans , do upon the sea near unto Norway , wicked and unjust take from John Tutteburie , five piece of wax , four hundred of work , and half a last of osmunde , and other good , to the value of four hundred seventie six noble . item , in the year of our lord 1396 . one John van Hull . Derlowe , hans van gelder , and other their complice of the Hans villainous and unjust take a ship of William Terry of hui call the cog , with thirty woollen broad clothes , and a thousand narrow clothes , to the value of 200 . pound . item , in the year of our lord 1398 . one John van Hull . Derlowe , Wilmer , hans van gelder , clay Scheid , everade pilgrimson , and diverse other of the Hans , do upon the sea near unto Norway villainous and unjust take a ship of John wisdom of Hull call the Trini tie , with diverse good and merchandize , namely oil , wax , and work , to the value of 300 . pound . item , in the year of our lord 1399 . one clay hull . Scheid , and other