Theise be the grievance and offence , whereat the merchant of the Hans of almain , come unto , and reside in the realm of England , do find themselves aggrieve , contrary to the article and privilege of the charter grant unto they by the worthy progenitor of the king of England that now be , and also by the say sovereign lord the king , ratify , and confirm . mprimis , whereas the foresay merchant have a privilege grant unto they by charter , that they may , in city , borough , and in other town and village throughout the whole realm of England , exercise traffic in gross , as well with the natural inhabitant of the kingdom , as with stranger , and private person : of late , those that be free denizen in the city , borough , and village within the foresay kingdom , do hinder and restrain all other that be stranger , foreigner , and alien , that they neither can , nor dare buy and sei with the merchant of the Hans aforesaid , to their great hindrance and loss . item , the foresay merchant by virtue of their charter be wont to have and to hold Innes and mansion , for the repose of themselves and of their good , wheresoever they please in any city , borough , or village , throughout the whole kingdom : howbeit of late the foresay merchant be not suffer to take up their mansion , contrary to the tenor of their charter . item , the foresay merchant be privilege not to undergo any other burden or imposition , but only to pay certain custom , as it do by their charter manifest appear . notwithstanding at you same time when Simon de Moreden be mayor of London , the foresay merchant be constrain , in the ward of dove - gate at London , to pay fifteenth , tallage , and 72 other subsidy contrary to the liberty of their charter . whereupon the say merchant prosecute the matter before the council of our sovereign lord the king , insomuch that they be release from pay afterward any such tallage , fifteenth , and subsidy . which merchant , a while after , of their own accord and free will , give unto the gildhall of London a hundred mark sterling , conditional , that they of the ci tie aforesaid shall not at any time after exact or demand of the say merchant , or of their successor , any tallage , fifteenth , or subsidy , contrary to the tenor of their charter , as by record in the foresay gildhall , it do moor plain appear . howbeit of late the officer of our lord the king , in the foresay ward of dove - gate , constrain the merchant aforesaid to pay tallage , fifteenth , and other subsidy . and because the say merchant murmur and refuse to pay any such contribution , allege their privilege , the foresay officer arrest the good of those say merchant ( which be as yet detain upon the arrest ) notwithstanding that they be release before the council of our sovereign lord the king , and also that they give unto the say gildhall one hundred mark to be release , as it be aforesaid . and also the foresay merchant be constrain to pay I2 . d . in the pound , and of late 6 . d . and other subsidy , more than their ancient custom , to the great damage of those merchant . item , the foresay merchant be privilege as touch the ancient custom of wol by they buy within the realm of 1 ° ™ * England , y £ they be not bind to pay , over and beside w °° ’ their ancient custom , but only forty . d . more than the homeborn merchant of England be wont to pay . but now you foresay merchant be compel to pay for every sack of wool ( beside the ancient custom and the 4o . d . aforesaid ) a certain imposition call penny for the penny for the town of Cales , namely for every sack of wool i9 . d . more than the merchant of England do pay , to their great loss , and against the liberty of their charter . item , the foresay merchant be privilege by their charter , that concern the quantity of their merchandise bring into the realm of England ( in regard whereof they be bind to pay 3 . d . for the worth of every pound of silver ) credit be to be give unto they for the letter of their master and of their company , if they be able to show they . and if so be they have no letter in this behalf to show , that then credit shall be give unto themselves , and that their oath , or the other of their attorney shall be take , without any other proof , as touch the value of their merchandise so bring in , and that thereupon they shall be bind to pay custom , namely the custom of 3 - d . just for that cause to be pay . but now the customer of our sovereign lord the king put their good to a high rate than they ought or be wont to be : and hereupon they compel they to pay custom for their good , at their pleasure , scan about their fraught and expense particular disburse in regard of the say good and merchandise , to the great hindrance of the say merchant , and against the tenor of their charter . item , the foresay merchant by way of pitiful complaint do allege , that whereas the worthy progenitor of our lord the king that now be , by virtue of the say great charter , grant liberty unto they to pay the custom of certain clothes , namely of scarlet , and cloth die in grain , and of other clothes of assize , which be by they to be carry out of the realm of England , even as by their foresay charter it do moor plain appear : and whereas our sovereign lord the king that now be ( ratify and confirm the say charter , and be willing that they shall have more especial favour show unto they ) grant unto they by their charter , that the say merchant shall be exempt and free from all custom and imposition of small clothes , as in piece and in narrow clothes which be not of assize , and in such other clothes of like quality : yet