of late the customer of our lord the king that now be , not allow - 74 ing their say speciali charter so grant unto the speciali merchant aforesaid , do compel they to pay for straight charter . clothes and for piece of clothes which be not of assize , ( together with other demand particular and several make ) as great custom as if the clothes be full out of assize . Moreover also of late , the customer of the small the customer or petty custom and of the subsidy do demand of they oftheW ) custom for kersey - clothe equal unto the custom of it those clothes , that be of full assize , whereas the foresay merchant be not wont to pay for those kersey by virtue of their charter , but only accord to the worth of each pound of silver , as namely for other good which be of gold weight : to the great hindrance of the foresay party , and against the manifest grant of our sovereign lord the king , as it appear in the say speciali charter . item , the say merchant allege , that they be privileged by their charter , if they pay custom and subsidy for their good in the behalf of our lord the king , at any port of England where those good have arrive , and afterward will transport the say good or any part of they unto any other port within the realm aforesaid : that than they shall be quite release from pay of any other custom for the same good , if they bring a warrant that they have pay the say custom , as be aforesaid . of late it fortune , that a certain man of their society name Nicholas crossehaire , be a 1405 . merchant of the land of Prussia , immediate after the concord be conclude between the english and the Prussians , bring unto the town of Sandwich a ship lade with bowstave and other merchandise , and there well and true pay the custom of our lord the king for all his ware : and sell there part of the same good , he afterward transport parcel thereof in a small bark unto London , there to be sell , and carry a warrant also with he , that he have at Sandwich pay the custom due unto our lord the king : and yet ( the say warrant notwithstanding ) the customer of the petty custom and subsidy of London come and demand custom of he at another time contrary to reason , and against the tenor of their charter : and the say Nicholas offer pledge unto they , yea , even ready money down into their hand , until the question be discuss and determine , whether he shall pay new custom or no : but this they will not do . then the say Nicholas bring a brief from our lord the king , to get himself discharge from pay the say custom : and for all that , the foresay customer will not as yet have regard unto he , but keep the say good within shipboard , upon the river of Thames , for the space of 15 . day , until he have pay another custom , to the great loss of the say Nicholas , for that which he sell first at Sandwich to be deliver at London for seven noble , he can not afterward have for it above four noble , and yet so be it sell , by reason of the harm which his ware have take by lie so long upon the water , contrary to the tenor of their charter . item , the say merchant do allege , that another of their company call Peter Hertson buy at Bristol certain clothes , and jade they same in a ship , to be transport for Prussia , for the which he true pay at Bristol , the custom and subsidy due unto our sovereign lord the king : which ship with the foresay good arrive at London : the customer of the petty - custom and of the subsidy there will not permit the say ship with the good to pass unto the part aforesaid , until the say Peter have pay another custom for the same good ( the warrant , which he bring with he notwithstanding ) to his great hindrance , and contrary to the tenor of their charter . item , pitiful complain the foresay merchant allege , that whereas every merchant , bring ware into the realm , be wont to have a schedule wherein his name be write , for a specification and certificate of the quantity of his good in the say schedule to be find at the arrival of the ship , without pay therefore ought at all , of late the customer of the petty custom do compel they to pay 76 for each man name write a penny , at the arrival of their good out of every ship wherein the say good be find , what commodity and merchandise soever they be : whenas notwithstanding , if there be a chest or any other small matter , there shall not therefore be any custom due unto our lord the king , nor any receive unto his majesty use . in like manner do the customer of the the customer subsidy deal . whereas also the foresay merchant be not wont to pay for a cocket for the conveyance and transportation of their good out of the realm ( albeit many name be write therein ) more than 4 - d . of late the customer of the petty custom do compel they to pay for every name contain in the same cocket , 4 - d . and in like sort do the customer of the say subsidy deal . which contribution in a year extend it self unto a great sum , to the unknown prejudice of our lord the king , more than any man can suppose , ( for the customer enjoy their fee and commodity from his majesty that they may do he faithful service ) and likewise to the great damage of the say merchant . item , pitiful complain the say merchant do allege that they be constrain to pay for subsidy , sometime I2 . d . and sometime 6 . d . in the pound , contrary to the tenor of their charter : and yet notwithstanding when their merchandise come to the wharf , the customer prolong and delay the time 3 . or 4 . week before they will take custom for their good , in the which space other merchant sei their good