above write of Wismer and Rostok , with certain other of the Hans , their confederate , wicked and unjust take from one William pound merchant of Hull , two cake of wax , to the value of 18 . pound , out of the ship call the Hawkin Berlin of Dantzik . item , in the year of our lord 1394 . one Goddekin York . Mighel , clay Scheid , Storbiker , and diverse other of Wismer and Rostok , and of the Hans , wicked and unjust take out of a ship of Elbing ( the master whereof be call Henry puy ) of the good and merchandize of Henry Wyman , John Topcliffe , and Henry lakenswither of York , namely in work , wax , osmunds , and bowstave , to the value of 1060 . noble . York . item , in the year of our lord 1394 . certain malefactor of Wismer and Rostok , with other of the Hans , their confederate , wicked and unjust take out of a ship of holland ( the master whereof be call hinkensman ) 140 . woollen clothes ( the price of one of the which clothes be eight noble ) from Thomas Thester of York , and a chest , with armour , silver and gold of the foresay Thomas , to the value of 9 pound . London . item , in the year of our lord 1393 . certain malefactor of Wismer and Rostok , and other their complice of the Hans , wicked and unjust take from one Richard Abel of London woollen cloth , green cloth , meal and fish , to the value of 133 . il 6 . s . London . item , in the year of our lord 1405 . about the feast of saint Michael , one Nicholas Femeer of Wismer merchant of the Hans , with the assistance of other his complice of the Hans aforesaid , wicked and unjust take from one Richard Morley citizen of London five last of herring , beside 32 . pound , in the sea call northsound . Colchester . item , in the year of our lord 1398 . about the month of September , one Godekin Wisle , and Gerard Sleyre of Wismer and Rostok , with other of the Hans , their confederate wicked and unjust take out of a ship of Prussia ( whereof the master be name Rorebek ) from John Seburgh merchant of Colchester two pack of woollen cloth , to the value of a 100 mark : from Stephan Flispe , and John Plumer merchant of the same town two pack of woollen cloth , to the value of 60 . pound : from Robert wight merchant of the same town , two pack of woollen cloth to the value of a 100 mark : from William Munde merchant of the same town , two fardel of woollen cloth , worth 40 . fi . and from John daw , and Thomas Cornwall merchant of the same town , three pack of woollen cloth , worth 200 . mark . Moreover they take and imprison certain english man , which be in the say ship , namely William fubborne servant unto John diere , Thomas Mersh servant unto Robert wight , which Thomas pay for his ransom 20 . noble of English money , William Munde merchant of the town aforesaid , which William , by reason of the extremity of that imprisonment , lose the sight of his eye , and Thomas Cornwall , merchant of the foresay town , which Thomas pay for his ransom twenty noble . item , in the year of our lord 1394 . certain male - Vermouth . factor of Wismer and Rostok , upon the coast of Denmark and Norway , beneath scawe , and at Anold , take Thomas Adam and John welter merchant of Yermouth : and Robert Caumbrigge and Reginald leman merchant of Norwich , in a certain ship of Elbing ' Norwich . in Prussia ( whereof one clay goldsmith be master ) with diverse woollen clothes of the say Thomas , John , Robert , and Reginald , to the value of one thousand mark English , and carry the person and good afore - say , away with they : and the say Thomas , John , Robert , and Reginald they imprison at courtbuttres - sow , and there detain they , until they pay a hundred mark for their redemption . item in the year of our lord 1401 . some of the Vermouth . inhabitant of Wismer and of rostok wicked take at longsound in Norway , a certain ship of west - stow Longsound in in Zealand ( the master whereof be one Gerard Dedissen ) Norway . lade with diverse good and merchandise of John Hughson of Yermouth , namely with the hide of ox and of sheep , with butter , mast , sparre , board , questingstone and wild work , to the value of a hundred mark , and do as yet detain the say thing in their possession , some of the Hans be their assistant in the premise . item , in the year of our lord 1402 . certain of Vermouth . Cley . Cley . the hans , of rostok , and of Wismer , take upon the coast of England , near unto Plymouth a certain barge call the Michael of Yarmouth ( whereof Hugh ap Fen be the owner , and Robert rigwey the master ) lade with bay salt , to the quanti tie of 130 . way , and with a thousand canvas clothes of Britain , and do as yet detain the say good in their possession , the say Hugh be endamage , by the loss of his ship , and of his good aforesaid 800 . noble and the foresay master and the mariner loose , in regard of their wage , canvas , and armour , 200 . noble . item , in the year of our lord 1405 . certain malefactor of Wismer wicked and unjust take , in a certain port of Norway call Selaw , a ship of Yarmouth ( the owner whereof be William oxney and the master Thomas smith ) lade with salt , cloth , and salmon , to the value of 40 . pound , and do as yet detain the say ship and good in their possession , some of the Hans their confederate aid and assist they at the same time . item , in the year of our lord 1395 . one Godekin Mighel , clay Scheid , Stertebeker , and other their accomplice of the Hans take upon the sea a certain ship of one John Dulwer of Cley , call the Friday ( whereof Laurence take of Cley be master ) and convey the say ship unto maustrond in Norway , and the say master and mariner they rob of diverse commodity , namely of artillery , furniture , and salt fish be in the same ship , to the value of 500 noble . item , in the year of our lord 1395 . Godekin Mighel , clay Scheid , Stertebeker , and other their accomplice of the Hans , unlawful take upon the sea a certain ship of one William bet of Cley call the Margaret ( wherein Robert robines be master