, the customer not regard whether the good aforesaid take wet or no ; to the great damage aswell of our lord the king , as of the say merchant : because , if they have quick dispatch , they may pay custom unto his majesty often than they do . item , the say merchant do far allege , that the customer of the petty custom , and of the subsidy in the port of London have appoint among themselves certain man to seal up the good of the say merchant , so soon as they be arrive at the port of safety , until the 77 say good be custom . by mean of the which seal , the foresay party do compel the merchant abovenamed , ( upon a use and custom whereof themselves have be the author ) to pay a certain sum of money , to the great hindrance of the say merchant , and contrary to justice and to their charter . Moreover , the say customer have ordain between themselves , that the say merchant shall put or make up no cloth into fardel , to transport out of the realm , unless certain man appoint by they for the same purpose be there present , to see what manner of clothes they be , under pain of the forfeiture of the say good . also of late , when the say march ant will have make up such fardel , the foresay party assign to be overseer refuse to come , unless they may have for their come some certain sum of money , delay and procrastinate from day to day , so long as themselves list , to the great loss and undo of the foresay merchant , and contrary to their liberty : because the foresay customer be bind by their office to do this , without any contribution therefore to be pay unto they by the say merchant : for that they do enjoy from our sovereign lord the king their fee and commodity , to the end that they may serve he and every merchant just and faithful , without any contribution by they to be impose anew upon the say merchant , of custom . item , the say merchant do allege , that the customer and bailiff of the town of Southampton do compel they to pay for every last of herring , pitch , and soap ash bring thither by they 2 . s . more than the king custom : and for each hundred of bowstave and board call waghenscot , 2 . d . for every hundred of board call Richolt , 4 . d . and for all other merchandise bring by the foresay merchant unto the same town : which contribution they never pay at any time heretofore , be great to their hindrance , and contrary to the tenor of their charter . hanse merchant ’ grievance a . d . . 1407 - item , the foresay merchant do allege , that one of their company , call Albert redewish of Prussia , bring diverse good and merchandize unto Newcastle upon Tine , and there pay the usual custom of 3 . d . in the pound for all his ware , the bailiff of the say town , against all reason , exact 7 . pound sterling at his hand more than the custom : whereupon the foresay merchant get a brief from the king majesty , for the recovery of the say 7 . H . accord to equity and reason : howbeit , that at the come of the say brief the foresay baliff will do nothing on his behalf , but will have slay their foresay associate , contrary to their charter and privilege . William esturmy knight , and John Kington canon of Lincoln , be by you most mighty prince and lord , lord Henry by God grace king of England and France and lord of Ireland , sufficient depute and appoint to parley , treat , and agree wl the common society of the merchant of the Hans of Dutchland or almain , concern and about the redress and reformation of unjust attempt happen between our say sovereign lord the king his liege people and subject on the one part , and between the common society aforesaid , the city , town , and particular person thereof on the other part : do ( for the behalf of our say sovraign lord the king , with a mind and intention to have all and singular you thing underwrite to come to the knowledge of the say common society ) intimate , declare , and make know unto you ( hono . sir ) Henr . Westhoff citizen and deputy of the city of Lubec , Henry Fredelaw , Joh . van Berk citizen of Colen , Mainard buxtehude citizen , 8c deputy of the city of Hamburgh , m . Simon clawsten clerk , sir John de Aa knight deputy of the city of rostok , Herman Meyer deputy of the city of Wismar , be , as the procurator , messenger , 8c commissioner of the foresay city , assemble together at the town of Hage in holland , with the forename will . 8c John in regard of the foresay redress 8c reformation : that , even as our say sovereign lord the king his meaning be not to disturb or hinder such privilege as have be heretofore grant and vouchsafe unto the common society of the merchant aforesaid , by the renown king of England , and the worthy progenitor of our lord the king that now be , and by himself also under a certain form confirm : even so he be determine ( without , you prejudice of foreign law ) upon just , mature and sober deliberation , by his royal authority to withstand such privilege , as by reason of the abuse thereof , have be infinite prejudicial ! unto himself and his subject . inprimis the said ambassador do affirm as afore , that whereas all and every the merchant of the say company , as often as they will , be , both in the realm of England , and in other territory and dominion subject unto our sovereign lord the king , admit and suffer ( accord to the tenor of the forename privilege grant unto they ) free , friendly and secure to traffic and converse with any of his majesty liege people and subject whatsoever , or with other people of whatsoever nation live in the realm of England , or in the dominion aforesaid : the say common society of merchant by their public and deliberate common counsel do appoint and ordain , y * no