) and convey the ship it self unto mawstrond in Norway , and there rob the master and his partner of diverse commodity , namely of artillery , furniture , and salt fish , to the value of 400 . noble , and one of the say master mate they malicious drown . item , in the year of our lord 1395 . about the feast Cley . of the nativi tie of saint John Baptist , the forename Godekin and Stertebeker , with other their accomplice of the Hans , unlawful take upon the sea a certain ship of Nicholas Steyhard and John Letis of Cley call the Nicholas ( whereof John breast be master ) and convey the say ship unto mawstrond , and there rob the say master and his company of diverse commodity , namely of furniture and salt fish , be in the say ship , to the value of 320 . noble . item , in the year of our lord 1395 . about the feast Cley . aforesaid , the say Godekins and Stertebeker , and their companion of the Hans unjust take upon the sea a certain ship of Thomas Peirs of Cley call the Isabel ( whereof William Noie be master ) and convey it unto mawstrond , and there rob the say master and his company of diverse commodity , as namely of furniture , and salt fish , be in the say ship , to the value of 406 . noble . item , in the year next above mention , upon the cley . Saturday , about the foresay feast , the forename Godekins and Stertebeker , and other their accomplice of the Hans unlawful take upon the sea , a certain ship of one Thomas Lyderpole of Cley , call the Helena , wherein Robert alway be master , and also wicked and unjust drown in the bottom of the sea diverse commodity , as namely salt fish , together with the ship it self . item , in the year of our lord 1398 . about the feast Cley . of s . Michael the archangel , the foresay Godekin and Stertebeker , with other their confederate of the Hans , take at langsound in Norway a certain crayer of one Thomas Motte of Cley , call the Peter , ( wherein Thomas smith be master ) and the foresay crayer they wicked and unjust carry away , be worth 280 . noble . item , in the year of our lord 1395 - about the feast Wiveton . of the nativi tie of saint John Baptist , the forename Godekins and Stertebeker , and other of the Hans unjust take a certain ship of Simon Durham , call the two 65 e dogger - ship , and the Peter of Wiveton , lade with salt fish ( whereof John Austen be master ) upon the coast of Denmark . and they carry away the say Dogger , with the furniture thereof , and the foresay salt fish , to the value of 170 . pound . Moreover , the master , and 25 . mariner in the same ship they malicious slay , and a certain lad of the say Dogger they carry with they into Wismer . Wiveton . item , in the foresay year , and about the feast aforesaid , the forename Godekins and Stertebeker , with other their complice , unjust take upon the sea a certain ship of Thomas Lyderpole , and John Coote of Wiveton : and the master and mariner which be in the say ship , they villanous slay , among who they put to death one Simon Andrew , the godson , nephew , and servant of the foresay Simon Durham . which ship , with the good and furniture that be therein be worth 410 . noble . Wiveton . item , in the very same year , about the feast aforesaid , the forename Godekins and Stertebeker and other their complice wicked spoil a certain ship of the foresay Simon Durham call the Dogger , wherein Gervase cat be master , lie at a anchor , while the company be occupy about fish , and likewise unjust take away with they the salt fish , and furniture of the say ship . Moreover , the master and his company that be in the say Dogger they beat and wound , so that they utter lose their fish for that year , the master and his say company be endamage thereby , to the sum of 200 . noble . Wiveton . item , in the year of our lord 1396 . the foresaid Godekins and Stertebeker , and other their complice unjust take upon the sea a certain crayer , call the buss of Zealand , which one John Ligate merchant , and servant unto the forename Simon Durham have lade in Prussia , on the behalf of the say Simon , to sail for England , and spoil the say craier , and also take and carry away with they the good and merchandise 66 of the say Simon , be in the foresay ship , to the value of 66 . pound . item , in the year of our lord 1397 . certain male - w ’ weton . factor of Wismer and Rostok , with certain other of the Hans , take a crayer of one Peter coal of Zealand , call the bussship , which Alan Barret the servant and factor of the foresay Simon Durham have lade with mast , sparre , and other merchandise , for the behalf of the say Simon , and unjust take from thence the good of the say Simon , to the value of 24 . pound , and carry the same away . item , in the year of our lord 1394 . certain male - lenne . factor of Wismer and other of the Hans unjust take upon the sea , and carry away with they a pack of woollen cloth of the foresay Simon , worth 42 . pound , out of a certain crayer of one Thomas fowler of lenne be lade and bind for Dantzik in Prussia . item , pitiful complain the merchant of lenne lenne . do avouch , verify , and affirm , that about the feast of saint George the martyr , in the year of our lord 1394 . sundry malefactor and robber of Wismer and Rostok , and other of the Hans , with a great multitude of ship , arrive at the town of Norbern in Norway , and take the say town by strong assault , and also wicked and unjust take all the merchant of lenne there reside with their good and cattle , and burn their house and mansion in the same place , and put their person unto great ransom : even as by the letter of safeconduct deliver unto the say merchant it may more evident appear , to the great damage and impoverishment of the merchant of lenne : namely , inprimis they burn there 21 . house of 21 . house belong unto the say merchant , to the english mar - value of 440 . noble . item , they take from Edmund ^ Norternln belyetere , Thomas hunt , John Brandon , and from other Norway . merchant of lenne , to the value of 1815 . pound . 67