society in any city , town , or place , neither yet any particular man of any such society ( there be no lawful or reasonable cause why ) shall in any wise admit any merchant of the realm of England resort unto their city or other place for merchandise , to enjoy intercourse of traffic : but that the say english merchant shall be altogether exclude from all traffic and mutual conversation among they , by denounce and inflict grievous penalty of money as well upon city as other place , and upon particular merchant also of the foresay society practise the contrary . item , that immediate after , the foresay party enact and ordain publish their say statute and 80 ordinance , in all kingdom , province , part , city , and town , wherein any merchant of the say society be conversant . item , that after that publication , the statute and ordinance aforesaid by every of the merchant of the forename society be inviolable observe . item , that the say statute and ordinance have be so rigorous put in execution , that whereas immediate after certain english merchant with their ship , mariner , and merchandise be in a certain part of one of the principali city of the foresay society , utter destitute of meat , drink , and money , public offer to sell their woollen clothes of England , only to provide themselves of necessary victual : yet the merchant of the say city , stout persist in their statute and ordinance aforesaid , straight prohibit the buy of such clothes , unchristian deny meat and drink unto the say english merchant . item , the foresay society decree and ordain , that no merchant of the say company shall in any place or country whatsoever , buy any woollen clothes of the realm or dominion of England ( albeit offer by other and not by english man ) or , have buy any , shall , after the term prefix , sei they , impose grievous pecuniary mulct , beside the forfeiture of the clothes so buy or sell , upon they that will attempt the contrary . item , that after the say statute and ordinance , the foresay society decree , that all merchant of the say company , have among their ware and merchandise any woollen clothes make in England , shall either sell the say clothes , or within a short space then limit shall , under penalty of forfeit the say clothes , utter renounce the use and commodi tie thereof : not - the Hans withstand a grievous penalty of money be impose society deter - upon the violater of the same statute . of item , that the statute and ordinance aforesaid might English mar - with moor speed and celerity be put in execution , the chant . n 81 f statute against english merchant in Norway and in Suedland . say author and publisher thereof imagine , accord to their desire , that by this mean a utter extirpation and overthrow of english merchant may , yea and of necessity must ensue : upon their serious and long premeditate deliberation , straite command and enjoin , under pain of lose the benefit of all privilege , wheresoever , or by the prince of what land , or the magistrate of what city or town soever vouchsafe unto the say common society , that not only the aiderman of that society in all place throughout the realm of England , but also all other merchant of the say company , after the manner of merchant converse in the say realm , shall , without exception of person , utter abstain from all intercourse of traffic with the merchant of the realm aforesaid : yea , and that they shall depart out of the say kingdom within a very short space limit . for the dispatch of all which premise without delay , it be accord to their commandment effectual provide . item , that the society aforesaid have approve diverse very unreasonable statute and ordinance , make and publish by the merchant of the same society reside in the kingdom of Norway and Swedland , to the great prejudice of the kingdom of England , and the merchant thereof : and as yet both covert and express do approve the same , unjust put they in daily execution . item , whereas in the privilege and indulgence grant by the renown prince sometime king of England , you worthy progenitor of our sovereign lord the king y1 now be , unto the society aforesaid , it be provide , y ‘ the say merchant shall not avow any man which be not of their company , nor shall not colour his good and merchandise under their company : whereas also in the confirmation of the say privilege make by our sovereign lord that now be , it be manifest provide , that the merchant of the Hans town , under the colour of their privilege in England , shall not upon pain of the perpetuali frustration and revocation of the foresaid privilege , receive any stranger of any other town in their liberty , by who the king custom may in any sort be withhold or diminish : and yet the contrary unto all these proviso have be every year , for these 20 . year or thereabouts notorious practise and commit , as well joint by the generail counsel , and toleration of the foresay society , as also several by the advice and permission of diverse particular city of the foresay Hans company to the great diminution of his majesty custom , the estimation whereof the foresay ambassador be not able at this present full to declare . but that all occasion of the last above mention diminution may be prevent for the time to come , the say ambassador do demand to have from how many u ’ the foresay society a declaration in write , what and be the i ' r . ■ . • • .. - two Hans town . what manner ot territory , city , town , village or company they be , for which the say society challenge and pretend , that they ought to enjoy the privilege grant unto their merchant , as be above mention . moreover , it be require by the foresay ambassador , if the society aforesaid have not decree nor ordain the thing above write , that the name of the city and place decree and ordain such statute and ordinance , may by the say common society either now or at some other time and place convenient for the same purpose , be express and set down in writing .