here begin the prologue of the process of the libel of english policy , exhort all England to keep the sea , and namely the narrow sea : show what profit come thereof , and also what worship and salvation to England , and to all Englishman . the true process of english policy of utterward to keep this regne in of our England , that no man may deny , ner say of sooth but it be one of the best , be this , that who see south , north , east and west , cherish merchandise , keep the admiralty ; that we be master of the narrow see . for Sigismond the great emperor , which yet reign , when he be in this land with king Henry the five , prince of honour , here much glory , as he think , he find , a mighty land which have take in hand to be in Francej and make mortality , and ever well keep round about the see . and to the king thus he say : my brother , ( when he perceive two town Caleis and Dover ) of all your town to choose of one and other , to keep the sea and soon to come over to be outward and your regne to recover : keep these two town sure , and your majesty as your tweyne eye : so keep the narrow see . for if this sea be keep in time of be , who can here pass without danger and woe ? who may escape , who may mischief differre ? what marchandie may forby be ago ? for need hem must take trewe every foe : 114 Flanders and Spain , and other , trust to i , or else hinder all for this narrow see . therefore i cast i by a little writing to show at eye this conclusion , for conscience and for my acquire against God and again abusion , and cowardice , and to our enemy confusion . for four thing our noble show to i , king , ship , and sword , and power of the see . where ben our ship , where ben our sword become ? our enemy bed for the ship set a sheep . alas our rule halt , it be benumb . who dare well say that lordship shall take keep ? i will assay , though my heart gin to weep , to do this work , if we will ever thou , for very shame to keep about the see . shall any prince , what so be his name , which have Nobles much leech we , bee lord of see : and Flemings to our blame , stop we , take we , and so make fade the flower of english state , and disteyne our honour ? for cowardice alas it shall so be . therefore i gin to write now of the see . of the commodity of Spain and of Flanders . the first chapter . know well all man that profit in certain commodity call come out of Spain and Marchandie , who so will weet what it be , bene fig , raisin , wine bastard , and Datis , and Licoris , Seville oil , and grain , white Pastill soap , and wax be not vain . iron , wool , wadmolle , gotefall , Kidfell also : for point - maker full needful bene they tweyn : saffron , quicksilver , which own Spain Marchandy , be into Flanders ship full crafty , unto Bruges as to her staple fair : IT5 A . D . c . 1437 - regni 18 . quatuor considerantur in moneta aurea anglic a , qua dicitur Nobile : scilicet rex , navis , gladius , y mare : qua designant potestatem an - glicorum super mare . in quorum opprobrium he diebus Britones minores ^ AElandrenses y alii dicunt anglicise Tollite de vestro Nobile navem y imponite ovem . intendentes , quod sicut quondam a tempore edwardi tertii AngUci erant domini maris , modo he diebus sunt vecorde , victi , y ad bellandum y mare observandum velut oves . fig , raisin , wine bastard , date , Lycoras , civil oil , groyne , white Pastel soft , wax , iron , wadmolle , gotefall , Kidfell , saffron , quicksilver . the haven of Scluse he haven for her repair which be clepe Swyn though ship gide : where many vessel and fair be abide . but these merchant with their ship great , and such chaffare as they buy and get by the weigh must need take on hand by the coast to pass of our England , betwixt Dover and Caleis , this be no doubt . who can well else such matter bring about ? and when these say merchant discharge be of Marchandie in Flanders near the see , than they be charge again with Marchandy , that to Flanders bouge full rich . fine cloth of Ypre that name be better than we . cloth of curtrike , fine cloth of all colour , much fustian , and also linen cloth . but Flemings , if you be not wroth , flemish cloth make of english wool . the great substance of your cloth at the full you wot you make it of our English will . then may it not sink in mannis brain , but that it must this Marchandy of Spain both out and in by our cost pass : he that say nay in wit be like a ass . we shall have peace with the ground tweyne the necessary conjunction of Spain and Flanders . thus if this see be keep , i dare well say . for Spain and Flanders be as each other brother , and nether may well live without other : they may not lve to maintain their degree , without our english commodity : wool and tin : for the wool of England sustain the commons Flemings i understand . then if England will her wool restrain from Flanders , this follow in certain , Flanders of need must with we have peace , or else she be destroy without lees . also if Flanders thus destroy be : some Marchandy of Spain will never ythee : 116 for destroy it be , and as in cheeffe the wool of Spain it come not to preeffe , but if it be cost and menge well among the english wool the great dell . for spanish wool in Flaunders drape be , and ever have bee , that man have mind of this : and yet wool be