166 to be see in it , and also for that i be in this science little expert : yet to remedy in part this difficulty , it be necessary to declare to your lordship my intent , with which i trust you shall perceive in this card part of your desire , if , for that i can express my intent , with my declaration i do not make it more obscure . first , your lordship know that the cosmographer have divide the earth by 360 degree in latitude , and as many in longitude , under the which be comprehend all the roundness of the earth : the latitude be divide into four quarter , ninety degree amount to every quarter , which they measure by the altitude of the pole , that be the north and south star , be from the line equinoctial till they come right under the north star the say ninety degree : and as much from the say line equinoctial to the south star be other ninety degree . and as much more be also from either of the say star again to the equinoctial . which imagine to be round , be soon perceive thus , 360 degree of latitude to be consume in the say four quarter of ninety degree a quarter : so that this latitude be the measure of the world from north to south , and from south to north . and the longitude , in which be also count other 360 , be count from west to east , or from east to west , as in the card be set . the say latitude your lordship may see mark take ™ ™ the and divide in the end of this card on the left hand : iatttudes - so that if you will know in what degree of latitude any region or coast stand , take a compass , and set the one foot of the same in the equinoctial line right against the say region , and apply the other foot of the compass to the say region or coast , and then set the say compass at the end of the card , where the degree be divide . and the one foot of the compass stand in the line equinoctial , the other will show in the scale the degree of altitude or latitude that the say region be in . also the longitude of the world i have set out in the nether part of the card , contain 167 also 360 degree : which begin to be count after ptoleme and other cosmographer from a headland call Capo Verde , which be over against a little cross make in the part occidental , where the division of the degree begin , and end in the same Capo Verde . now to know in what longitude any land be , your lordship must take a ruler or a compass , and set the one foot of the compass upon the land or coast who longitude you will know , and extend the other foot of the compass to the next part of one of the transversali line in the orientali or occidental part : which do , set the one foot of the compass in the say transversal line at the end of the nether scale , the scale of longitude , and the other foot show the degree of longitude that the region be in . and your lordship must understand that this card , though little , contain the universali whole world betwixt two collaterali line , the one in the occidentali part descend perpendicular upon the 175 degree , and the other in the orientali on the 170 degree , who distance measure the scale of longitude . and that which be without the two say transversali line , be only to show how the orientali part be join with the occident , and occident with the orient . for that that be set without the line in the oriental part , be the same that be set within the other line in the occidentali part : and that that be set without the line in the occidentali part , be the same that be set within the line in the orientali part , to show that though this figure of the world in plain or flat seem to have a end , yet one imagine that this say card be set upon a round thing , where the end shall touch by the line , it will plain appear how the orient part join with the occident , as there without the line it be describe and figure . and for more declaration of the say card , your lordship shall understand , that begin on the part occidental within the line , the first land that be set 168 out , be the main land and island of the Indies of the emperor . which main land or coast go northward , and finish in the land that we find , which be call here terra de Labrador . so that it appear the say land that we find , and the Indies to be all one main land . the say coast from the say Indies southward , as by the card your lordship may see , come to a certain straight sea , call Estrecho de todo santos : now call by which straight sea the Spaniard go to the spicery , straight of as i shall declare more at large : the which straight * ' sea be right against three hundred fifteen degree of longitude , and be of latitude or altitude from the equinoctial three and fifty degree . the first land from the say beginning of the card towards the orient be certain island of the canary , and island of Capo verde . but the first main land next to the line equinoctial be the say Capo verde , and from thence northward by the strait of this sea of Italy . and so follow Spain , France , Flanders , almain , Denmark , and Norway , which be the high part towards the north . and over against Flanders be our island of England and Ireland . of the land and coast within the strait i have set out only the region , divide they by line of their limit , by which plain i think your lordship may see , in what situation every region be , and of what highness , and with what region it be join . i do think few be leave out of all Europe . in the part of Asia and Africa i can not so well make the say division : for that they be not so well know , nor need not so much . this i write because in the say card be make the say line and strike , that your lordship shall understand wherefore they do serve . also return to the foresay Capo verde , the coast go southward to a cape call Capo de buona speransa : which be right over against the 60 . 8c 65 . degree of longitude . and by this