wage war against Constantine the emperor of Constantinople , and when he have waste and overrun Thracia , be return home with great and rich spoil , and make preparation for new war , Constantine send Neophytus the metropolitan of Ephesus and two bishop , with the governor of Antiochia , and Eustaphius the abbot of Jerusalem , to present rich and magnificent gift unto he ; as namely , part of the cross of our saviour Christ , a crown of gold , a drink cup curious make of Sardonyx stone , a cloak set all over with precious stone , and a golden chain ; command they to salute he by the name of Czar ( which name , as it may be prove by many argument , signify a king , and not a emperor ) and conclude a most inviolable league of amity and friendship with he . the foresay Vulodimir beget Vuszevolodus the second . This Vuszevolodus leave eight son behind he , Miscislaus , Isoslaus , Stoslaus , Teropolcus , Weceslaus , Romanus , Georgius , and Andrew . the son of George be Roseslaus , Andrew , Basilius , and Demetrius . 185 Demetrius beget George , who in the year 1237 . be slay by one bathy , a tartarian duke , which bathy waste Moscovia , and subdue the same unto himself . since which time the russian be tributary to the Tartar , and be govern by such duke as they please to set over they . howbeit the Tartar so great abuse that authority , that when they send their ambassador unto the prince of Moscovie , he be constrain to go forth and meet with they , and ( as Herbortus Fulstinius in his polonian history report ) to offer they a basin full of mare milk , and if they have spill any whit thereof upon their horse maines , to lick it off with his tongue , and have conduct they into his princely court , to stand bareheaded before they while they sit down , and with all reverence to give ear and attendance unto they . but by what mean they shake off at the length this yoke of servitude , i will forthwith declare . about the same time almost all Polonia , and the dukedom of Silesia be overrun by the Tartar with fire and sword . who have burn Presla the chief city of Silesia , and be come before the city of Legnitz , they fight there a most cruel and bloody field , wherein be slay duke Henry himself be son unto the most holy and devout lady hedvice , with many other , who monument and grave be as yet extant in sundry place , and with a infinite multitude of common soldier , insomuch that the Tartar fill nine great sack with the ear of they which they have slay . the Tartar to the end they may obtain the victory , present unto the view of our soldier the portraiture of a man head place by art magic upon a banner , wherein the letter x . be paint , which be shake and move up and down breathe forth a most loathsome stench , and strike such a terror into the heart of our man , that be as it be astonish with the snaky visage of Medusa , they be utter daunt and dismay . 186 from thence bathy and his company with the same bloodthirsty intent march into Hungary , and have almost slay king Bela the four , who together with his son escape by flight do scarce rid themselves out of the enemy hand . and when the whole world almost be exceed terrify at the cruel invasion of this most barbarous nation , at length pope Innocentius the four send ambassador unto bathy obtain peace for five year : but to forsake his heathenish superstition and to become a christian , he will by no mean be persuade . for he be by the instigation of the Saracen infect with devilish opinion of Mahomet , as be more agreeable unto his barbarous rudeness , which even unto this day the Tartar do maintain , like as the profane Turk also . this Bathy have a son call Tamerlan , who the moscovite call Temirkutla , who likewise , as it be record in history , attain unto great renown . for he carry about with he in a cage Bajazet the turkish emperor be fetter in golden chain , and make he a laugh stock unto all man . let we now return unto the russian . George be slay , Jaroslaus his brother succeed in his room , and leave behind he three son , Theodorus , Alexander and Andreas . Daniel the son of Alexander first establish his royal seat in the city of Moscow , and magnificent build the castle which before time have be obscure , he take upon he the title of the great duke of Russia . he have five son , namely , George , Alexander , Borissus , Ophonias , and John . This John succeed his father , and because he continual carry a scrip about with he to bestow alm , he be surname Kaleta , which word signify a scrip . his son be , Simeon , John , and Andrew . he give unto his son Simeon the province of Vulodimiria and Moscovia : which Simeon decease without issue his brother John succeed , who beget a son call Demetrius . This Demetrius have seven son , namely 187 A . D . 1580 . these ambassador be Johan , de Plano Carpini y Frier Benedict a polonian . the city of Moscow first make the seat of the great duke . the name of the moscovite first advance . Daniel , Basilius , George , Andrew , Peter , John , and Constantine . Basilius reign after his father death . this man dishinherit his son which be call after his own name , because he suspect his mother of adultery , at his death surrender his dukedom unto his brother George , who keep his nephew a long time in prison . howbeit at his death , though himself have two son namely Andrew and Demetrius , yet be strike perhaps with remorse of conscience , he bestow the dukedom upon his nephew Basilius . against who his two cousin bear a grudge wage war , and at length have take he by a wily stratagem they put out his eye . notwithstanding the boiarens ( for so the moscovite call their noble ) continue their dutiful allegiance unto this their blind duke , who for his blindness they call cziem - nox , that be to say , dark or darken . he leave a son behind he call Ivan Vasilowich who bring the russian common wealth , be before his time but obscure , unto great excellende and renown . who that he may the better get all the superiority into his own hand put to death so many son and nephew of the former duke as he can lay hold on , and begin to take upon