, but each be other brother , of one ligeance due unto the king . but i have pity in good faith of this thing that i shall say with advisement : i be afeard that Ireland will be shend : it must away , it wool be lose from we , but if thou help , thou Jesus gracious , and give we grace all slought to leave beside . for much thing in my heart be hide , which in another treatise i cast to write make all only for that soil and site , of fertile Ireland , which may not be forbear , but if England be nigh as good as go . God forbid that a wild irish wirlinge shall be choose for to be their king , after her conquest for our last puissance , and hinder we by other land alliance . wise man sayen , which felin not , ne douten , that wild irish so much of ground have get there upon we , as likeness may be like as England to sheeris two or three of this our land be make comparable : so wild Irish have win on we unable yet to defend , and of none power , that our ground be there a little corner , to all Ireland in true comparison . it need no more this matter to expon . which if it be lose , as Christ Jesus forb , farewell Wales , than England come to dread , for alliance of Scotland and of Spain , and other more , as the petty Bretaine , and so have enemy environ round about . i beseech God , that some prayer devout r34 Mutt let the say appearance probable thus dispose without feign fable . but all only for peril that i see thus imminent , it ’ s likely for to be . and well i wot , that from hence to roam , and , as man say , in all Christendom , be no ground ne land to Ireland liche , so large , so good , so plenteous , so rich , that to this word dominus do long . then i seem that right be and no wrong , to get the land : and it be piteous to we to less this high name dominus . and all this word dominus of name shall have the ground obeisant wild and tame . that name and people togidre may accord all the ground subject to the lord . and that it be possible to be subject , unto the king well shall it be detect , in the little book that i off speak . i trow reason all this wool undertake . and i know well how it stante , alas fortune begin so to scant , or else grace , that dead be governance . for so diminish party of our puissance , in that land that we less every year , more ground and more , as well as you may here . i hear a man speak to i full late . which be a lord of full great estate ; than expense of one year do in France war on man well will of puissance this say ground of Ireland to conquer . and yet because England may not forbear these say expense gather in one year , but in three year or four gather up here , may win Ireland to a finali conquest , in one sole year to set we all at rest . and how soon will this be pay again : which be it worth yearly , if we not feign : 135 this lord be the earl of Ormond that tell to i this matter , that he will undertake it , in pain of loss of all his livelihood . but this proffer can not be admit . ergo mall . i wool declare , who so lust to look , i trow full plain in my little book . but covetise , and singularity of own profit , envy , cruelty , have do we harm , and do we every day , and muster make that shame be to say : our money spend all to little avail , and our enemy so great do prevail , that what harm may fall and overthwerte i may uneath write more for sore of heart . a exhortation to the keep of wale . beware of wale , Christ Jesus mutt we keep , that it make not our childers child to weep , ne we also , so if it go his way , by unwarenes : se that many a day man have bee ferde of her rebellion , by great token and ostentation : seche the mean with a discrete advise , and help that they rude not arise for to rebel , that Christ it forbid . look well about , for God wot you have need , unfeigning , unfeyn and unfeint , that conscience for slought you not attaint : keep well that ground , for harm that may ben use , or afore God mutte you be accuse . the trade of Bristol to island . of the commodious stockfish of island , and keep of the sea , namely the narrow sea , with a incident of the keep of Caleis . Chap . xo . of island to write be little need , save of stockfish : yet forsooth in deed out of Bristol , and cost many one , man have practise by needle and by stone thither ward within a little while , within twelve year , and without peril 136 go and come , as man be wont of old of Scarborough unto the cost cold . and now so feel ship this year there wear , that much loss for unfreight they bear : island may not make they to be fraught unto the Hawys : thus much harm they catch . then here i end of the commodity for which need be well to keep the sea : Este and west , south and north they be . and chief keep the sharp narrow see , between Dover and Caleis : and as thus that foe pass none without good will of we : and they abide our danger in the length , what for our costis and Caleis in our strength . a exhortation for the sure keep of Caleis . and for the love of God , and of his bliss cherish you Caleis better than it be . see well thereto , and hear the great complaint that true man tell , that will no lie paint , and as you