have be rule , and follow their pilot mind , the land of the west Indies ( from whence all the gold come ) have be we . for all be one coast , as by the card appear , and be aforesaid . also in this card by the coast where you see C . your lordship shall understand it be set for cape or headland , where i . for hand , where P . for port , where R . for river . also in all this little card i think nothing be err touch the situation of the land , save only in these hand of spicery : which , for that ( as afore be say ) every one set they after his mind , there can be 178 no certification how they stand . i do not deny , that there lack many thing , that a consummate card shall have , or that a right good demonstration desire . for there shall be express all the mountain and river that be principali of name in the earth , with the name of port of the sea , the name of all principali city , which all i may have set , but not in this card , for the little space will not consent . your lordship may see that set only the name almost of every region , and yet not of all , the room be occupy . many island be also leave out , for the say lack of room , the name almost of all port put to silence , with the rose of the wind or point of the compass : for that this be not for pilot to sail by , but a summary declaration of that which your lordship command . and if by this your lordship can well perceive the meaning of this card , of the which i will not marveile , by reason of the rude composition of it , will it please your lordship to advise i to make a big and a better map , or else that i may cause one to be make . for i know my self in this and all other nothing perfect , but licet semper discens , nunquam tamen ad perfectam scientiam perveniens . also i know , to set the form spherical of the world in Plano after the true rule of cosmography , it will have be make otherwise then this be : howbeit the demonstration shall not have be so plain . and also these degree of longitude , that i set in the low part of this card , shall have be set along by the line equinoctial , and so then must be imagine . for the degree of longitude near either of the pole be nothing equal in bigness to they in the equinoctial . but these be set so , for that set they a long the equinoctial , it will have make obscure a great part of the map . many other curiosity may be require , which for the nonce i do not set down , as well for that the intent i have principal be to satisfy your doubt touch the spicery , as for that i lack leisure and time . i trust your lordship 179 correct that which be err , will accept my good will , which be to do any thing that i may in your lordship service . but from henceforth i know your lordship will rather command i to keep silence , than to be large , when you shall be weary with the read of this discourse . Jesus prosper your estate and health . your lordship Robert Thorne 1527 . also this card and that which i write touch the variance between the emperor and the king of Portugal , be not to be show or communicate there with many of that court . for though there be nothing in it prejudicial ! to the emperor , yet it may be a cause of pain to the maker : as well for that none may make these card , but certain appoint and allow for master , as for that peradventure it will not sound well to they , that a stranger shall know or discover their secret : and will appear worst of all , if they understand that i write touch the short way to the spicery by our sea . though peradventure of troth it be not to be look to , as a thing that by all opinion be unpossible , and i think never will come to effect : and therefore neither here nor else where be it to be speak of . for to move it among wise man , it shall be have in derision . and therefore to none i will have write nor speak of such thing , but to your lordship , to who bold i commit in this all my foolish fantasy as to my self . but if it please God that into England i may come with your lordship , i will show some conjecture of reason , though against the generail opinion of cosmographer , by which shall appear this that i say not to lack some foundation . and till that time i beseech your lordship let it be put to silence : and in the mean season it may please God to send our two Englishman , that be go to the spicery , which may also bring more plain declaration of that which in this case may be desire . also i know i need not to have be so prolix in 180 the declaration of this card to your lordship , if the say card have be very well make after the rule of cosmography . for your lordship will soon understand it better than i , or any other that can have make it : and so it shall appear that i show delphinum natare . but for that i have make it after my rude manner , it be necessary that i be the declarer or gloss of my own work , or else your lordship shall have have much labour to understand it , which now with it also can be excuse , it be so gross do . but i know you look for no curious thing of i , and therefore i trust your lordship will accept this , and hold i for excuse . in other man letter that they write they crave pardon that at this present they write no large : but i must finish , ask pardon that at this present i write so large . Jesus preserve your lordship with augmentation of dignity . your servant Robert thorn , 1527 . Epitaphium m . Roberti Thorni , sepulti in Ecclesia Templariorum Londini . Obertus iaceo hic thorn , quem Bristolia quondam Praetoris merito legit ad officium . huic etenim semper magna ; Respublica curae , charior and cunctis patria divitiis . far inopi auxilium , tristes componere light , dulce huic consilio qu6sque juvare fuit . qui pius exaudis miserorum voto precesque , Christe huic coeli des region locum .