cape go the Portugal to their spicery . for from this cape towards the 169 orient , be the land of Calicut , as your lordship may see in the headland over against the 130 . degree . from the say cape of Buona speransa the coast return towards the line equinoctial , and pass forth enter the red sea , and return out , enter again into the gulf of Persia , and return towards the equinoctial line , till that it come to the headland call Calicut aforesaid , and from thence the coast make a gulf , where be the river of Ganges , return towards the line to a headland call Malaca , where be the principali spicery : and from this cape return and make a great gulf , and after the coast go right towards the orient , and over against this last gulf and coast be many island , which be island of the spicery of the emperor . upon which the Portugal and he be at variance . n ° te - the say coast go towards the orient , and end right against the 155 . degree , and after return towards the occident northward : which coast not yet plain know , i may join to the new find land find by we , that i speak of before . so that i finish with this brief declaration of the card aforesaid . well i know i shall also have declare how the coast within the straight of the sea of Italy run . it be plain that pass the strait on the north side of that sea after the coast of Granado , and with that which pertain to Spain , be the coast of that which France have in Italy . and then follow in one piece all Italy , which land have a arm of the sea , with a gulf which be call mare Adriaticum . and in the bottom of this gulf be the city of Venice . and on the other part of the say gulf be Sclavonia , and next Grecia , than the streit of Constantinople , and then the sea call Euxinus , which be within the say strait : and come out of the say strait , follow Turcia major ( though now on both side it be call Turcia . ) and so the coast run southward to Syria , and over against the say Turcia be the 170 island of Rhodes , Candie , and Cyprus . and over against Italy be the island of Sicilia and Sardinia . and over against Spain be Majorca and Minorca . in the end of the gulf of Syria be Judea . and from thence return the coast towards the occident , till it come to the strait where we begin , which all be the coast of Africa and Barbary . also your lordship shall understand that the coast of the sea throughout all the world , i have colour with yellow , for that it may appear that all that be within the line colour yellow , be to be imagine to be main land or island : and all without the line so colour to be sea : whereby it be easy and light to know it . albeit in this little room any other description will rather have make it obscure then clear . and the say coast of the sea be all set just after the manner and form as they lie , as the navigation approve they throughout all the card , save only the coast and isle of the spicery of the emperor which be from over against the 160 . to the 215 . degree of longitude , for these coast and situation of the island , every of the cosmographers and pilot of portingal and Spain do set after their purpose . the Spaniard more towards the orient , because they shall appear to appertain to the emperor : and the Portugal moor towards the occident , for that they shall fall within their jurisdiction . so that the pilot and navigant thither , which in such case shall declare the truth , by their industry do set they false every one to favour his prince . and for this cause can be no certain situation of that coast and island , till this difference betwixt they be verify . now to come to the purpose of your lordship demand doctor Leys touch the difference between the emperor and the deman ^- king of portingal , to understand it better , i must declare the begin of this discovery . though peradventure your lordship may say that in that i have write aught of purpose , i fall in the proverb , a gemino ovo bellum : but your lordship command i to be large , 171 and i take licence to be prolixious , and shall | be peradventure tedious , but your lordship know that nihil ignorantia verbosius . in the year 1484 the king of portingal mind to arm certain caravel to discover this spicery . then forasmuch as he fear that be discover , every other prince will send and trade thither , so that the cost and peril of discover shall be he , and the profit common : wherefore first he give knowledge of this his mind to all prince christen , say that he will seek among the infidel new possession of region , and therefore will make a certain army : and that if any of they will help in the cost of the say army , he shall enjoy his part of the profit or honour that shall come of it . and as then this discover be hold for a strange thing and uncertain . now they say , that all the prince of Christendom answer , that they will be no part of such a army , nor yet of the profit that may come of it . after the which he give knowledge to the pope of his purpose , and of the answer of all the prince , desire he that see that none will help in the cost , that he will judge all that shall be find and discover to be of his jurisdiction , and command that none other prince the pope re - shall intermeddle therewith . the pope say not as prehend . Christ say , quis i constituit judicem inter vos ? he do not refuse , but make himself as lord and judge of all , not only grant that all that shall be discover from orient to occident , shall be the king of portingal , but also , that upon great censure no other prince shall discover but he . and if they do , all to be the king of portingal . so he arm a fleet , and in the year 1497 be discover the island of Calicut , from whence be bring all the spice he have . after this in the year 1492 the king of Spain will to discover land towards the occident without make any such diligence , or take licence of the king of portingal