, arm certain caravel , and then discover this 172 India occidentali , especial two island of the say India , that in this card i set forth , name the one la Dominica , and the other Cuba , and bring certain gold from thence . of the which when the king of portingal have knowledge , he send to the king of Spain , require he to give he the say island . for that by the sentence of the pope all that shall be discover be he , and that he shall not proceed further in the discovery without his licence . and at the same time it seem that out of castil into portingal have go for fear of burn infinite number of Jew that be expel out of Spain , for that they will not turn to be Christians , and carry with they infinite number of gold and silver . so that it seem that the king of Spain answer , that it be reason that the king of portingal ask , and that to be obedient to that which the pope have decree , he will give he the say island of the Indies . now for as much as it be decree betwixt the say king , that none shall receive the other subject fugitive , nor their good , therefore the king of portingal shall pay and return to the king of Spain a million of gold or more , that the Jew have carry out of Spain to portingal , and that in so do he will give these island , and desist from any more discover . and not fulfil this , he will not only not give these island , but procure to discover moor where he think best . it seem that the king of portingal will not , or can not with his ease pay this money . and so not pay , that he can not let the king of Spain to discover : so that he enterprise not towards the orient where he have begin and find the spicery . And consent to the king of Spain , that touch this discover they shall divide the world between they two . and that all that shall be discover from cape Verde , where this card begins to be count in the degree of longitude , to 180 of the say scale of longitude , which be half the world towards the orient , and finish in this card right over against a little cross make at the say 180 degree , to be 173 the longitude hard to be find out . the king of Portugal . and all the land from the say cross toward the occident , until it join with the other cross in the orient , which contain the other hundred and eighty degree , that be the other half of the world , to be the king of Spain . so that from the land over against the say hundred and eighty degree until it finish in the three hundred and sixty on both the end of the card , be the jurisdiction of the king of Spain . so after this manner they divide the world between they . now for that these island of spicery fall near the term and limit between these prince ( for as by the say card you may see they begin from one hundred and sixty degree of longitude , and end in 215 ) it seem all that fall from 160 to 180 degree , shall be of portingal : and all the rest of Spain . and for that their cosmographer and pilot can not agree in the situation of the say island ( for the Portugal set they all within their 180 degree , and the Spaniard set they all without : ) and for that in measure , all the cosmographer of both part , or what other that ever have be can give certain order to measure the longitude of the world , as they do of the latitude : for that there be no star fix from east to west , as be the star of the pole from north to south , but all move with the move divine : no manner can be find how certainly it may be measure , but by conjecture , as the navigant have esteem the way they have go . but it be manifest that Spain have the situation of all the land from cape Verde , towards the orient of the Portugal to their 180 degree . and in all their card they never hitherto set the say island within their limitation of the say 180 degree , ( though they know very well of the island , ) till now that the Spaniard discover they . and it be know that the king of portingal have trade to these island afore , but will never suffer portingal to go thither from Calicut : for so much as he know that it fall out of his dominion : lest by go thither there 174 may come some knowledge of those other island of the king of Spain , but buy the clove of merchant of that country , that bring they to Calicut , much dear than they will have cost , if he have send for they , think after this manner it will abide always secret . and now that it be discover he send and keep the Spaniard from the trade all that he can . also it shall seem that when this foresay consent of the division of the world be agree of between they , the king of portingal have already discover certain island that lie over against cape Verde , and also certain part of the main land of India towards the south , from whence he fette Brasill , and call it the land of Brasil . so for that all shall come in his term and limit , he take three hundred and seventie league beyond cape Verde : and after this , his 180 degree , be his part of the world , shall begin in the card right over against the 340 degree , where i have make a little compass with a cross , and shall finish at the 160 degree , where also i have make another little mark . and after this computation without any controversy , the island of the spicery fall out of the Portugal domination . so that now the Spaniard say to the Portugal , that if they will begin their 180 degree from the say cape Verde , to the intent they shall extend more towards the orient , and so to touch those island of the spicery of the emperor , which be all that be between the two cross make in this card , that than the island of cape Verde and the land of Brasil that the Portugal now obtain , be out of the say limitation , and that they be of the emperor . or if their 180 degree they count from the 370 league beyond the say cape Verde , to include in it the