say island and land of Brasil , then plain appear the say 180 degree shall finish long before they come to these island of the spicery of the emperor : as by this card your lordship may see . for their limit shall begin at the 340 degree of this card , and end at the 160 degree , 175 new find land discover by the Englishman . note . to sail by the pole . where i have make two little mark of the compass with cross in they . so that plain it shall appear by reason , that the Portugal shall leave these island of cape Verde and land of Brasil , if they will have part of the spicery of the emperor : or else hold these , they have no part there . to this the Portugal say , that they will begin their 180 degree from the self same cape Verde : for that it may extend so much more towards the orient , and touch these island of the emperor : and will win these island of cape Verde and land of Brasil nevertheless , as a thing that they possess before the consent of this limitation be make . so none can very tell which have the best reason . they be not yet agree , quare sub judice lie est . but without doubt ( by all conjecture of reason ) the say island fall all without the limitation of portingal , and pertain to Spain , as it appear by the most part of all the card make by the Portugal , save those which they have falsify of late purposely . but now touch that your lordship write , whether that which we discover touch any thing the foresay coast : once it appear plain , that the newfound land that we discover , be all a main land with the Indies Occidentali , from whence the emperor have all the gold and pearl : and so continue of coast more than 5000 league of length , as by this card appear . for from the say new land it proceed towards the occident to the Indies , and from the Indies return towards the orient , and after turn southward up till it come to the strait of todo santos , which i reckon to be more than 5000 league . so that to the India it shall seem that we have some title , at least that for our discover we may trade thither as other doe . but all this be nothing near the spicery . now then if from the say new find land the sea be navigable , there be no doubt , but sail northward and 176 pass the pole , descend to the equinoctial line , we shall hit these island , and it shall be a much short way , then either the Spaniard or the Portugal have . for we be distant from the pole but thirty and nine degree , and from the pole to the equinoctial be ninety , the which add together , be a hundred twenty and nine degree , league 2489 . and mile 7440 : where we shall find these island . and the navigation of the Spaniard to the spicery be , as by this card you may see , from Spain to the island of Canarie , and from these island they run over the line equinoctial southward to the cape of the main land of the Indians , call the cape of saint Augustine , and from this cape southwards to the strait of todo santos , in the which or the strait navigation to the say strait be 1700 . or 1800 league ; dfmaselane - and from these strait be pass they , they return toward the line equinoctial to the island of spicery , which be distant from the say strait 4200 . or 4300 . league . the navigation of the Portugal to the say island be depart from Portugal southward toward the cape Verde , and from thence to another cape pass the line equinoctial call Capo de bona speransa , and from portingal to the cape be 1800 league , and from this cape to the island of spicery of the emperor be 2500 . league . so that this navigation amount all to 4300 . league . so that ( as afore be say , ) if between our new find land or Norway , or island , the sea towards the north be navigable , we shall go to these island a short way by more than 2000 league . and though we go not to the say island , for that note . they be the emperor or king of portingal , we shall by the way and come once to the line equinoctial , find land no less rich of gold and spicery , as all other land be under the say line equinoctial : and also shall , if we may pass under the north , enjoy the navigation of all Tartary . which shall be no less two 177 m answer . a true opinion . a voyage of discovery by the pole . m . Thorne and m . Eliot discoverer of newfound land . the cause why the west Indies be not we : which also Sebastian Cabot write in a epistle to Baptista Ramusius . profitable to our commodity of cloth , than these spicery to the emperor , and king of portingal . but it be a general opinion of all cosmographer , that pass the seven clime , the sea be all ice , and the cold so much that none can suffer it . and hitherto they have all the like opinion , that under the line equinoctial for much heat the land be unhabitable . yet since ( by experience be prove ) no land so much habitable nor more temperate . and to conclude , i think the same shall be find under the north , if it be experiment . for as all judge , nihil fit vacuum in rerum natura : so i judge , there be no land unhabitable , nor sea innavigable . if i shall write the reason that present this unto i , i shall be too prolix , and it seem not requisite for this present matter . God know that though by it i shall have no great interest , yet i have have and still have no little mind of this business : so that if i have faculty to my will , it shall be the first thing that i will understand , even to attempt , if our sea northward be navigable to the pole , or no . i reason , that as some sickness be heredi - tarious , and come from the father to the son , so this inclination or desire of this discovery i inherit of my father , which with another merchant of Bristol name Hugh Eliot , be the discoverer of the new find land , of the which there be no doubt , ( as now plain appear ) if the mariner will then