a brief treatise of the great duke of Moscovia his genealogy , be take out of the moscovite manuscript chronicle write by a polack . t have almost ever be the custom of nation , in search out the infancy and first beginning of their estate , to ascribe the same unto such author as live among man in great honour and endue mankind with some one or other excellent benefit . now , this inbred desire of all nation to blaze and set forth their own pedigree have so much prevail with the great part , that leave the undoubted truth , they have betake themselves unto mere fable and fiction . yea and the chronicle of many nation write in diverse and sundry age do testify the same . Even so the grecian boast that they be either autocthones , that be earthbred , or else lineal descend from the god and the roman affirm that Mars be father unto their first founder Romulus . right well therefore and judicial say Titus Livius : neither mean i to avouch ( quoth he ) ne to disable or confute those thing which before the building and foundation of the city have be report , be more adorn and fraught with poetical fable then with incorrupt and sacred monument of truth : antiquity be it to be pardon in this behalf , namely in join together matter historical and poetical , to make the beginning of city to seem the more honourable . for sith antiquity it self be account such a notable argument of true nobility , even private man in all age have contend thereabouts . wherefore citizen of Rome be desirous to make demonstration of their gentry , use to have their ancestors arm paint along the wall of their house : in which regard they be so puff up , that oftentimes 182 1580 . they will arrogant disdain those man , which by their own virtue have attain unto honour . in like sort poet , when the originali of their worthiness and brave champion be either utter unknown or somewhat obscure , will oft refer it unto their god themselves . so in these our day ( to let pass other ) the turkish emperor with great presumption boast himself to be descend of the trojan blood . likewise the great duke of Moscovie , to make himself and his predecessor seem the more sovereign , derive the beginning of his parentage from the roman emperor , yea even from Augustus Caesar . albeit therefore no man be so fond as to accept of this report for truth , yet will we brief set down what the moscovite have write in their chronicle as touch this matter . Augustus ( believe it who list ) have certain brethren or kinsfolk which be appoint governor over diverse province . among the rest one Prussus ( of who Prussia be name ) have his place of government assign unto he upon the shore of the eastern or baltic sea , and upon the famous river of Wixel . this man grand child or nephew of the four generation be Rurek , Sinaus , and truvor , who likewise inhabit in the very same place . whereas therefore at the very same time the russian or the moscovite without any civil regiment possess large and spacious territory towards the north , the foresay three brethren , upon the persuasion of one Gostomislius the chief citizen of Novogrod , in the year since the world creation ( accord to the computation of the greek ) 6370 , which be in the year of our lord 572 > be Russia become send for , to bear rule . and so join their kinsman mw in you Olechus unto they , and divide these huge country among themselves , they labour to reduce the barbarous 57 ' and savage people unto a civil kind of life . sinaus and Truvor decease without issue , Rurek succeed and leave a son behind he name Igor ; 183 who not being of sufficient year to bear rule , be commit unto the protection of his kinsman Olechus . the say Igor beget of olha daughter unto a citizen of Plesco ( who , after her husband be slay by his enemy , take her journey to Constantinople , be there baptize by the name of Helena ) a son call Stoslaus , who fight many battle with the neighbour country . howbeit at length Stoslaus be slay by his foe , who make a drink cup of his skull , engrave thereupon in golden letter this sentence : seek after other man , he lose his own . he leave behind he three son , namely Teropolchus , Olega , and Vulodimir . the which Vulodimir have slay his two brethren , become sole governor of Russia , or ( as the moscovite call it ) Rosseia , his own self . this man begin at length to loathe and mislike the ethnik religion , and the multitude of false god , apply his mind unto the religion of Christ , and have take to wife Anna sister unto Basilius and Constantinus emperor of Constantinople , be together with his whole nation , in the year of Christ 988 . baptise , and embrace the christian religion , with the rite and ceremony of the greek church , and his name be change , he be call Basilius . howbeit Zonaras report that before the time of Vulodimir , Basilius emperor of Constantinople send a bishop unto the russian , by who mean they be convert unto the christian faith . he report moreover that they will not be persuade unless they may see a miracle : whereupon the say bishop have make his prayer unto almighty God , throw the book of the evangelist into the fire , which remain there unconsume . and that by this miracle they be move to give credit unto the doctrine of Christ , and to conform themselves thereunto . the son of Vulodimir be Vuiseslaus , Isoslaus , Jaroslaus , Suatopolcus , Borissus , Glebus , Stoslaus , Vulzevolodus , Stanislaus , Sudislaus , and Podius who 184 die in his childhood . among the residue all Russia be divide by their father , who not be content with their portion , but invade each other , be most of they slay by their mutual contention . Borissus and Glebus in regard of their holy conversation be register for saint , who feast be every year celebrate with great solemnity upon the twelve of November . at length Jaroslaus only get the sovereign authority into his own hand , and leave behind he four son , Vulodimir , isoslauus , weceslauus , and Vuszevolodus . the foresay Vulodimir son of Jaroslaus keep his residence at the ancient city of Kiow stand upon Kioto . the river of Boristhenes , and after diverse conflict with his kinsman , have subdue all the province unto himself , be call Monomachos , that be , the only champoin . this man ( for i think it not amiss to report those thing which their own manuscript chronicle make mention of )