the book make by the right worshipful m . Robert thorn in the year 1527 . in Sivil , to doctor ley , lord ambassador for king Henry the eight , to Charles the emperor , be a information of the part of the world , discover by he and the king of portingal : and also of the way to the molucca by the north . right noble and reverend in etc i have receive your letter , and have procure and send to know of your servant , who , your lordship write , shall be sick in Merchena . i can there or else where hair of he , without he be return to you , or go to saint Lucar , and ship . i can judge but that of some contagious sickness he die , so that the owner of the house for defame his house will bury he secret , and not be know of it . for such thing have often time happen in this country . also to write unto your lordship of the new trade of spicery of the emperor , there be no doubt but that the island be fertile of clove , nutmeg , mace , and cinnamom : and that the say island , with other there about , abound with gold , ruby , diamond , balass , granate , jacinct , and other stone and pearl , as all other land , that be under and near the equinoctial . for we see , where nature give any thing , she be no niggard . for as with we and other , that be apart from the say equinoctial , our metal be lead , tin , and iron , so they be gold , silver , and copper . and as our fruit and grain be apple , nut , and corn , so they be date , nutmeg , pepper , Cloves , and other spice . and as we have jeat , amber , crystal , jasper , and other like stone , so have they ruby , diamond , 164 balass , saphire , jacinct , and other like . and though some say that of such precious metal , grain , or kind of spice , and precious stone , the abundance and quantity be nothing so great , as our metal , fruit or stone above rehearse : yet if it be well consider , how the quantity of the earth under the equinoctial to both the tropical line , ( in which space be find the say gold , spice and precious stone ) be as much in quantity , as almost all the earth from the tropicke to both the pole ; it can be deny but there be more quantity of the say metal , fruit , spice , and precious stone , than there be of the other metal and other thing before rehearse . and i see that the preciousness of these thing be measure after the distance that be between we , and the thing that we have appetite unto . for in this navigation of the spicery be discover , that these island nothing set by gold , but set more by a knife and a nail of iron , then by his quantity of gold : and with reason , as the thing more necessary for man service . and i doubt not but to they shall be as precious our corn and seed , if they may have they , as to we their spice : and likewise the piece of glass that here we have counterfeit be as precious to they , as to we their stone : which by experience be see daily by they that have trade thither . this of the riches of those country be sufficient . touch that your lordship write , whether it may doctor Leys be profitable to the emperor or no ? it may be without letter . doubt of great profit : if , as the king of portingal do , he will become a merchant , and provide ship and their lade , and trade thither alone , and defend the trade of these island for himself . but other great business withhold he from this . but still , as now it be begin to be occupy , it will come to much . for the ship come in safety , there will thither many every year , of which to the emperor be due of all the ware and jewel that come from thence the five part for his custom clear without any cost . and beside 165 this be then . fleet wherein Cabot discover the river of plate , 1526 . note . the new find island discover by the english . a map of the world . this he put in every float a certain quantity of money , of which he enjoy of the gain pound and pound like as other adventurer do . in a fleet of three ship and a caravel that go from this city arm by the merchant of it , which depart in April last pass , 1 and my partner have one thousand four hundred ducat that we employ in the say fleet , principal for that two english man , friend of i , which be somewhat learned in cosmography , shall go in the same ship , to bring i certain relation of the situation of the country , and to be expert in the navigation of those sea , and there to have information of many other thing , and advise that i desire to know especial . see in these quarter be ship , and mariner of that country , and card by which they sail , though much unlike we , that they shall procure to have the say card , and learn how they understand they , and especial to know what navigation they have for those island northwards , and northeastward . for if from the say island the sea do extend , without interposition of land , to sail from the north point to the - north - east point one thousand seven hundred or one thousand eight hundred league , they shall come to the new find island that we discover , and so we shall be near to the say spicery by almost two thousand league then the emperor , or the king of portingal be . and to advise your lordship whether of these spicery of the king of portingal or the emperor be near , and also of the title that either of they have , and how our new find land be part from it , ( for that by write without some demonstration , it be hard to give any declaration of it ) i have cause that your lordship shall receive herewith a little map or card of the world : the which , i fear i , shall put your lordship to more labour to understand , then i to make it , only for that it be make in so little room that it can be but obscure set out , that be desire