nicetee of the venetian and florentine , with their gallee . Chap . 7 . ' ! yhe great Galees of Venice and Florence J . be well lade with thing of complacence , all spicery and of gross ware : with sweet wine all manner of chaffare , ape , and jape , and marmuset tail , nifle and trifle that little have avail : and thing with which they fete blere our eye : with thing not endure that we buy . for much of this chaffare that be wastable may be forbear for dear and deceivable . and that i ween as for infirmity in our England be such commodity without help of any other land which by wit and practise both yfound : that all humour may be void sure , which that our gleder with our english cure : that we shall have no need of scamonie , turbit , enforbe , correct diagredie , rhubarb , see , and yet they be to needful , but i know thing all so speedefull , that grow here , as those thing say . let of this matter no man be dismay ; but that a man may void infirmity without degree fetch fro beyond the sea . and yef they shall except be any thing it be but sugre , trust to my say : he that trust not to my say and sentence , let he better search experience . in this matter i will not far press , who so not believe , let he leave and cease . thus these galei for this lick ware , and eat ware , bear hence our best chaffare : cloth , will , and tin , which as i say before , out of this land worst might be forbear , 124 have great need to buy some of they three : and we receive of hem into this cost ware and chaffare that light will | be lose . and will Jesus , that our lords will consider this well both young and old : namely old that have experience , that may the young exhort to prudence ; what harm , what hurt , and what hindrance be do to we , unto our great grievance , of such land , and of such nation : as expert man know by probation , by write as discover our counsel , and false colour always the countertaile of our enemy ; that do we hinder unto our good , our realm , and to the king : as wise man have show well at eye ; and all this be colour by marchandye . a example of deceit . also they bear the gold out of this land , and suck the thrift away out of our hand : as the wasp souk honey from the bee , so diminish our commodity . now wool you hear how they in Cotteswold be wont to borrow or they shall be sell her will good as for year and year . of cloth and tin they do in like manner : and in her galy ship this marchandie : then soon at Venice of they man will it buy . then utterne there the chaflare by the peise , and light also there they make she reise . and when the good be at Venice sell , then to carry her change they this money have , they will it proffer , their subtlety to save , to english merchant to yeve it out by eschange to be pay again they make not strange , I25 at the receive and sight of a letter , here in England , seem for the better , by four penny less in the noble round : that be twelve penny in the golden pound . and if we wool have of payment a full month , than must he needs assent to eight penny loss , that be shilling twain in the english pound ; as eft soon again , for two month twelve penny must he pay . in the english pound what be that to say , but shilling three ? so that in pound fall for hurt and harm hard be with hem to dwell . and when english merchant have content this eschange in England of assent , that these say venetian have in win and Florentines to bear her gold soon over the see into Flanders again : and thus they live in Flanders , sooth to sane , and in London with such chevisance , that man call usury , to our loss and hindrance . another example of deceit . now lesten well how they make we a valley when they borrow at the town of Caleis as they be wont , their will that be hem lend , for year and year they shall make payment . and sometime also two year and two year . | | or , loan . this be fair two love : but yet will you hear , how they to Bruges will she will carry , and for hem take payment without tarry , and sell it fast for ready money in hand . for fifty pound of money of loss they will not wone in a thousand pound , and live thereby till the day of payment easy , come again in exchange : make full like usury , as man make undertake . than when this payment of a thousand pound be well content , they shall have chaffare sound 126 if they will from the staple full , receive again three thousand pound in will . in Cotteswold also they ride about , and all England , and buy without doubt what they listen with freedom and franchise , more than we English may gitten many wise . but will God that without long delay these galee be unfraught in forty day , and in forty day charge again , and that they may be put to certain to go to oste , as we there with hem do . it be expedient that they do right so , as we do there . if the king will it : ah what worship will fall to english wit ? what profit also to our marchandie which will of need be cherish hearty ? for i will wit , why now our navy fail , when many a foe we at our door assail . now in these day , that if there come a need , what navy shall we have it be to dread . in Denmark be full noble conqueror in time past , full worthy warrior : which when they have their merchant destroy , to poverty they fall