know that writing come from thence : do not to England for slought so great oftence , but that redress it be for any thing : lest a song of sorrow that we sing . for little wenith the fool who so may cheese what harm it be good Caleis for to less : what woe it be for all this english ground . which well conceive the emperor Sigismound , that of all joy make it one of the most , that Caleis be subject unto english cost . he think it be a jewel most of all , and so the same in latin do it call . and if you wool more of Caleis hear and know , i cast to write within a little scroll , like as i have do before by and by in other parteis of our policy . look how hard it be at the first to get ; and by my counsel light do not it let . 137 A . D . c - U37 - the old trade of Scarborough to island and the north . the joy oj Sigismond the emperor that Caleis be English . for if we less it with shame of face wilful , it be for lack of grace . Howe be harflew cry upon , and Rone , that they be likely for shought to be go ; how be it warn and cry on in England , i make record with this pen in my hand . it be waren plain in Normandy , and in England , and i thereon do cry . the world be defraud , it betide right so . Harflew be farewell * harflew : lewd it be a go . lose in the year jsjowe ware Caleis , i can say no better : z ^^ Henry my soul discharge i by this present letter . the six . after the chapitle of commodity of diverse land , show the conclusion of keep of the sea environ , by a story of king Edgar and two incident of king Edward the three , and king Henry the five . Chap . 11 . now see we well then that this round see to our noble by pariformitee under the ship show there the sail , and our king with royal apparel , with sword draw bright and extent for to chastise enemy violent ; shall be lord of the sea about , to keep enemy from within and without ; to behold through Christianitee master and lord environ of the see : all live man such a prince to dread , of such a regne to be afeard indeed . thus prove i well that it be thus of old ; * dicit Chro - which by a * chronicle anon shall tell , ntca , quod iste right curious : but i will interpret Etfpraxes - English , as i do it get : soribus suis of king Edgar : oh most marvellous fielic ' wr , nulli prince live , witty , and chevalerous : 138 so good that none of his predecessor be to he liche in prudence and honour . he be fortunate and more gracious than other before , and more glorious : he be beneath no man in holiness : he pass all in virtuous sweetness . of english king be none so commendable : to English man no less memorable , than Cyrus be to pierce by puissance , and as great Charles be to they of France , and as to the roman be great Romulus , so be to England this worthy Edgarus . i may not write more of his worthiness for lack of time , ne of his holiness : but to my matter i he exemplify , of condition tweyne and of his policy : within his land be one , this be no doubt , and another in the see without ; that in time of winter and off be , when boisterous wind put see man into fere ; within his land about by all province he pass through , perceive his prince , lord , and other of the commonty , who be oppressor , and who to poverty be draw and bring , and who be clean in life , and be by mischief and by strife with over lead and extortion : and good and bid of each condition he aspy : and his minister also , who do trought , and which of they be false : how the right and law of the land be execute , and who dare take in hand to disobey his statute and decree , if they be well keep in all country : of these he make subtle investigation of his own espy , and other man relation . among other be his great business , well to ben ware , that great man of riches , 139 A . D . c - u37 - sanctitate inferior , omnibus morum suavitate prastantior fuerit . Luxit ipse Anglis non minus memorabilis , quam Cyrus Persis , Carolus Francis Romulus verb Romanis . dicit Chronica , praeparaverat nave robustissimas numero tria millia sexcenta : in quibus re - deunte astate omneminsulam ad terrorem extraneorum , y ad suorum excitationem cum maximo apparatu circumnavigare consueverat . and man of might in city nor in town shall to the poor doe non oppression . thus be he wont in this winter tide on such enforchise busy to abide . this be his labour for the public thing , thus be he occupy : a pass holy king . now to purpose , in the summer fair of lusty season , when clear be the air , he have ready ship make before great and huge , not few but many a store : full three thousand and six hundred also stately enough on our sea to go . the chronicle say , these ship be full boisterous : such thing long to king victorious . in summer tide will he have in win and in custom to be full ready soon , with multitude of man of good array and instrument off be of best assay . who can hem well in any wise describe ? it be not light for any man alive . thus he and his will enter ship great habiliment have and the fleet of see werre , that joyful be to see such a navy and lord of majesty , there present in person hem among to sail and row environ all along , so regal liche about the english isle ; to all stranger terror and peril . who fame go about in all the world stout , unto