, betoken good rule and punish in very deed of England by the king . 13 ° and it be so , God bless may he be . so in likewise i will be on the see by the noble , that sword shall have power , and the ship on the sea about we here . what need a garland which be make of ivy show a tavern wineless , also thrive i ? if man be wise , the Frenchman and Fleming shall bear no state in sea by werring . then Hankin lion shall not be so bold to stop wine , and ship for to hold unto our shame . he have be beat thence . Alas , alas , why do we this offence , full to shend the old english fame ; and the profit of England , and their name : why be this power call of covetise ; with false colour cast beforn our eye ? that if good man call werriour will take in hand for the commons succour , to purge the sea unto our great avail , and win they good , and have up the sail , and on our enemy their life to impart , so that they may their prize well depart , as reason wold , justice and equity ; to make this land have lordship of the sea . then shall Lombard and other feign friend make their challenge by colour false offend , and say their chaffare in the ship be , and challenge all look if this be amiss . for thus may all that man have buy to sore , ben soon excuse , and save by false colour . beware you man that bear the great in hand that they destroy the policy of this land , by gift and good , and the fine golden clothes , and silk , and other : say you not this soothe be ? but if we have very experience that they take meed with privy violence , carpet , and thing of price and pleasance , whereby stop shall be good governance : 131 of Hankin lion . Lombard be cause enough to hurt this land , although there be none other cause . false colour of good by Lombard . alas for bribe if gift of god , feast if other mean , that stoppen our policy . this be the very state of our time . and if it be as you say to i , than will i say , alas cupidity , that they that have she life put in dread , shall soon out of win , all for meed , and lose her cost , and bring to poverty , that they shall never have lust to go to sea . a exhortation to make a ordinance against colour of maintainer and excuser of folk good . it be a marvellous thing that so great a sickness and hurt of you land may have no remedy of so many as take themselves wise man of governance . for this colour that must be say aloft and be declare of the great full oft , that our seaman wool by many wise spoil our friend in steed of our enemy : for which colour and Lombard maintenance , the king it need to make a ordinance with his counsel that may not fail , i trow , that friend shall from enemy be know , our enemy take and our friend spare : the remedy of hem must be declare . thus may the sea be keep in no saddle , for if aught be speak , wot you well , we have the stroke , and enemy have the win : but maintainer be partner of the finning . we live in lust and bide in covetise : this be our rule to maintain merchandise , and policy that we have on the sea . And , but God help , it will no other bee . of the commodity of Ireland , and policy and keep thereof , and conquer of wild irish : with a incident of wale . Chap . 9 i cast to speak of Ireland but a little : commodity of it i will entitle , hide , and fish , salmon , Hake , herring , irish wool , and linen cloth , faldinge , 132 and martern good ben her marchandie , herts hide , and other of * venery . skin of otter , squirrel and irish hare , of sheep , lamb , and fox , be her chaffare , fell of kid , and cony great plenty . so that if Ireland help we to keep the sea , because the king clepe be rex angliae , and be dominus also Hybernias , old possess by progenitor : the irish man have cause like to we our land and she together to defend , that no enemy shall hurt ne offend , Ireland ne we : but as one commontie shall help well to keep about the sea : for they have haven great , and goodly bay , sure , wide and deep , of good assay , at Waterford , and cost many one . and as man say in England be there none better haven , ship in to ride , no more sure for enemy to abide . why speak i thus so much of Ireland ? for all so much as i can understand , it be fertile for thing that there do grow and multiplien , look who lust to know , so large , so good , and so commodious , that to declare be strange and marvelous . for of silver and gold there be the oore , among the wild irish though they be poor . for they be rude and can thereon no skill : so that if we have their peace and good will to my and fine , and metal for to pure , in wild irish might we find the cure , as in London say a juellere , which bring from thence gold oore to we here , whereof be foam metal good and clean , as they touch , no better can be see . now here beware and hearty take intent , as you will answer at last judgement , 133 A . D . c 1437 - * or , hunt . mine of silver and golden Ireland . that for slought and for racheshede you remember with all your might to heed to keep Ireland that it be not lose . for it be a boterasse and a post , under England , and wale another : God forbid