, write to the king as he first do devise , he excuse : but our man wood with great power pass over the flood and war forth into the duke land , and have nigh destroy free and bond . but than the duke know that the town three shall have lose all his native country , he undertake by surety true not false , for mount Michael and saint Malo also , and other party of the little Brytaine , which to obey , as say be , be not fain . the duke himself for all do undertake : with all his heart a full peace do he make : 120 so that in all the life time of the king , merchant have peace without werring : he make a statute for Lombard in this land , that they shall in no wise take on hand here to inhabit , here to charge and discharge but forty day , no more time have they large . this good king by wit of such appreiffe keep his merchant and the sea from mischief . of the commodity of Scotland and drape of her wolle in Flanders . the four chapter . moreover of Scotland the commodity be fell , hide , and of wool the fleece . and all these must pass by we away into Flanders by England , sooth to say . and all her wool be drape for to sell in the town of poperinge and of bell ; which my lord of Gloucester with ire for her falsehood set upon a fire . dnno domini and yet they of bell and poperinge 1 ^ 56 . hen . 6 . can never drape her wool for any thing , i4 ’ but if they have English will withal . our goodly wool which be so generail needful to they in Spain and Scotland also , and other cost , this sentence be not false : you worthy merchant i do it upon you , i have this learn you wot well where and how : you wot the staple of that marchandie , of this Scotland be Flaunders sekerly . and the Scot be charge know at the eye , out of Flanders with little mercery , and great plenty of haberdasher wear , and half her ship with cart wheel bare , and with barrow be lade as in substance : thus most rude ware be in her chevesance . so they may not forbear this flemish land . therefore if we will manly take in hand , 121 StatutumRegis edwardi tertii proLombardis . to keep this sea from Flanders and from Spain , and from Scotland , like as from petty Britain , we shall right soon have peace for all her host , for they must needs pass by our english cost . of the commodity of pruce , and high dutch man , and Easterling . the five chapitle . now go forth to the commodity , that come from pruce in two manner degree . for two manner people have such use , that be to say , high dutch man of Pruse , and esterling , which may not be forbear , out of Flanders , but it be very lose . for they bring in the substance of the beer , that they drinken feele too good cheap , not dear . you have hear that two Fleming together will undertake or they go any whither , or they rise once to drink a ferkin full , of good Beerekin : so sore they hall and pull . under the board they pissen as they sit : this come of covenant of a worthy wit . without Caleis in their butter they cak when they flee home , and when they leisure lack to hold their siege , they go like as a doe : well be that Fleming that may truss , and go . for fear they turn back and hie fast , my lord of Gloucester make they so aghast with his come , and seek they in her land , and burn and slow as he have take on hand : so that our enemy dare not bide , nor steer , they flee to mew , they dare no more appear , rebuke sore for ever so shameful , unto her utter everlasting villainy . now beer and bacon be from Pruse bring into Flanders , as love and far ysought ; Osmond , copper , bowstave , steel , and wax , peltreware and grey pitch , Terre , board , and flex : 122 and colleyne the reed , fustian and canvas , card , bukeram : of old time thus it be . but the Fleming among these thing dear , in common loven best bacon and beer . also Pruse man make she adventure of plate of silver of wedge good and sure in great plenty which they bring and buy , out of the land of beam and Hungary : which be increase full great unto their land , and they be lade , i understand , with woollen cloth all manner of colour by dyer craft full diverse , that ben we . and they adventure full great unto the bay , for salt that be needful without nay . thus if they will not our friend be , we may light stop they in the see : they shall not pass our streeme without leave , it will not be , but if we shall hem grieve . of the commodity of the Genuoys and her great carrack . Chap . 6 . the Genuois come in sundry wife into this land with diverse merchandise in great carrack , array without lack with cloth of gold , silk , and pepper black they bring with they , and of two crood great plenty , will oil , woad ashen , by vessel in the see , cotton , Rochalum , and good gold of Genne . and then be charge with wool again i wen , and woollen cloth of we of colour all . and they adventure , as oft it do befall , into Flanders with such thing as they buy , that be their chief staple sekerly : and if they will be our full enemy , they shall not pass our stream with merchandise . A . D . c . u37 - pitch , tar , board , plexe , colleinthreed , fustian , canvas , card , bokeram , silver - plate , wedge of silver and mettle . | | or , woad . [ the 123 A . D . c . 1437 - the commodity and