; nor that any good of the subject of the say sovereign king or his heir or any of they , shall be attach , arrest , or detain . reserve always unto the forename master general and his subject all right and remedy any way requisite or competent unto they by mean of the obligation aforesaid . 8 . item it be covenant and agree that if any of the liege people or subject of the say sovereign prince or of his heir and successor shall ( contrary to the form of concord and grant next abovewritten ) chance to be molest or endamage ; that than the say master general and his successor , for all loss and hindrance which the liege people and subject then foresay sovereign prince or of his heir or successor , shall by that mean have unjust sustain , be bind to make full satisfaction unto the party endamage . which if the master general aforesaid or his successor be convenient request by the letter of the say 102 sovereign prince or of his heir , shall refuse to do ; that then , after the space of six month next ensue the time of the foresay request , it may be right lawful for the forename sovereign prince that now be , or that then for that time shall be ( convenient proof be first bring , that the foresay request have convenient be exhibit ) to arrest so many good of the say master generail his subject find in the realm of England , as may suffice for the reasonable satisfaction and amends of any person or person unjust molest in this behalf ; and also to detain the say good under safe custody , until condign satisfaction and amends be make unto the party or party aggrieve . item it be covenant , that beside the sum due 9 unto the say master general and his successor in the behalf of his subject both of Prussia and of Livonia ( whereof mention be make in the former article ) there be due to be pay unto the say master generail and his successor , for sundry other damage , grievance , and robbery against himself and diverse other of his subject of Prussia , namely Matthew Ludekensson , Arnold Ashen , henri culeman , John Unkeltop , John Halewater , Egghard scoff of Dantzik , and Nicolas Wolmerstene of Elbing , do and commit by the say sovereign king his liege people and subject underwritten , even before the date of these present , for the full satisfaction of the say damage , grievance and robbery , certain sum of noble hereafter follow . namely inprimis by Tutburie , and Terry of Hull , 82 . noble , which be due unto the foresay Matthew lude - kinson . item by Nicholas scot of Caleis the son of Tutbury , and Hilg of Hull , 256 . noble , which be due unto the foresay Arnold de Aschen . item by the inhabitant of Scardeburgh , Blakeney , and crowmer ( who have one John jolly of Blakeney for their captain ) 156 . noble , which be due unto Henry culeman aforesaid . item by the inhabitant of Bayon ( who Capitaine be 103 one Pideville ) 125 . noble which be due unto the say John Unkel top . item by the inhabitant of Plymmouth and Dertmouth ( who captain be Henry pay , and William gadel ) 600 . noble which be due unto the foresay John Halewater , in respect of his good by they violent take away . item 334 . noble to be pay by the self same party , be due unto the say a ship of the John halewater by reason that they detain his ship burden of from he three month and more , which ship be of the 300 . onne . hurthen of three hundred ton of wine , and have in it all the foresay time five and fourty servant maintain at the expense of the say John Halewater . item that sir William de Ethingham knight , who be viceadmiral for the sea , must be summon to allege a reasonable cause ( for that the say sir William with his servant expel the say John Halewater out of his ship for the space of fifteen day together , and take of the good and victual of the say John to the sum of 114 . noble ) why he ought not to pay the say sum of 114 . noble unto John Halewater aforesaid : which if he shall not be willing nor able to allege before the first of April next ensue , that then by the king authority he must be compel to pay unto the foresay John the say 114 noble . item by the inhabitant of Caleis ( who captain be Michael Scot , bishop , and William Horneby ) 1900 . noble , which be due unto the foresay eggard scoff , because the say sovereign king have give they in charge by the say Michael Scot and the rest concern the payment of the sum aforesaid . item by John Bilis near unto Crowmer , 68 noble , which be due unto Nicholas wolmersten of Elbing . which sum of noble must by the king authority be levy at the hand of his subject abovemention , between the time that now be and the feast of the purification of the bless virgin which shall fall in the year of our lord 1411 . effectual to be deliver and pay unto the say master general or his lawful procurator , or unto his successor or their lawful pro - 104 curator , at the city of London , upon the feast aforesaid . item it be covenant that beside the sum specify in the foresay letter obligatory make in the behalf of the say sovereign prince , there be due to be pay unto one John Marion of Wersingham late decease being in his life - time the liege subject of the foresay sovereign prince 200 . noble of English money in regard of certain injury and robbery do and commit before the date of these present against the foresay John , by one Eghard Scoff7 subject unto the say master generail , for the full satisfaction of the say damage and robbery to be make unto the say decease John , his wife , child , heir or executor by the say Egghard , his heir , or by the administrator of his good at the time and place abovementioned . item it be covenant , confirm , and promise , that 10 . for all the injury and robbery do and commit against one John dordewant of Elbing , be in his life time subject unto the say master generail , by the liege people and subject of the say sovereign king the inhabitant of Scardeburgh before the date of these present ; for the full recompense of all such injury and robbery , there must be pay unto one John gruk of Dantzik eight hundred noble of English money , upon the feast of easter next follow in the city of London by they of Scardeburgh be guilty and culpable in this behalf ; who be by definitive sentence condemn unto the say John in the sum of 800 . noble by reason of the injury and robbery aforesaid . except the lawful expense in this behalf lay out : they be also tax in due time for the issue . and therefore the foresay condemn party ( who name be in the sentence against they pronounce in this behalf , more express contain ) must in the mean season by the king authority be compel and constrain real and actual to obey the foresay sentence , namely by deliver and pay unto John gruk the sum of 800 . 105 noble at the time and place above mention , with reasonable expense , wherein also the say party stand condemn , their lawful taxation be reserve . item it be covenant and grant , that the heir of lord Henry de Percy the young after they shall come unto lawful age , and shall have attain unto the possession and good of their inheritance , must be compel by the king authority ( justice go before ) to make satisfaction unto the great procurator of Marienburgh with the sum of 838 . noble in lieu of certain corn and grain which the foresay lord Henry , in the year 1403 , buy and receive of the say great procurator , for the use of the castle of Zutberwik . in testimony and confirmation of all the which premise , the say Tedericus , Lefardus , and John Crolow , of their certain knowledge have put their seal unto these present letter indent , in the presence of the abovenamed Richard Merlow , John Kington , and William Askam , commissioner for the behalf of England . give at the city of London in England the four day of December , in the year of our lord 1409 .