, thus be they noy : and so they stand at mischief at this day . This learn i late well writon , this no nay . therefore beware , i can no better will , if grace it will , of other man peril . for if merchant be cherish to her speed , we be not likely to fail in any need . if they be rich , then in prosperity shall | be our land , lord , and commonty , and in worship . now think i on the son of marchandy Richard of Whitingdon ; that load star , and chief choose flower : what have by he our England of honour , and what profit have be of his riches , and yet last daily in worthiness ? 127 A . D . c . 1437 - note diligent . a woeful complaint of lack of navy if need come . a story of destruction of Denmark for destruction open their merchant . the praise of Richard of WhitAngdon merchant . that pen and paper may not i suffice he to describe : so high he be of price above merchant , that set he one of the best : i can no more , but God have he in rest . now the principal matter . what reason be it that we shall go to oste in their country , and in this english cost they shall not so ? but have more liberty than we our self now also motte i thou . i will to gift man shall take no heed that let our thing public for to speed . for this we see well every day at eye , gift and fest stopen our policy . now see that fool ben either they or we : but ever we have the worse in this country . therefore let they unto oste go here , or be our free with hem in like manner in their country : and if it will not be , compel they unto oste , and you shall see much advantage , and much proiite arise , much more than i can write in any wise . of our charge and discharge at her mart .. conceive well here , that Englishmen at mart be discharge , for all her craft and art , in Brabant of her marchandy in fourteen day , and again hasty in the same day fourteen acharge eft . and if they bide long all be bereave , anon they shall forfeit her good all , or marchandy : it shall no better fall . and we to martis in Brabant charge be with english cloth full good and fair to see : we ben again charge with mercery , haburdasher ware , and with grosserie : to which mart , that english man call fair , each nation oft make she repair : 128 c 1437 . English , and french , Lombard , jennoye , Catalones , thedre they take her way : Scots , Spaniard , Irishman there abide , with great plenty bring of sale hide . and i here say that we in Brabant bye , Flanders and Zealand moor of marchandy in common use then do all other nation : this have i hear of merchant relation : and if the english be not in the mart they be feeble , and as nought be her part . for they byemore , and from purse put out more marchandie than all the other rout . keep then the see , ship shall not bring ne fetch , and then the carrey will not thidre stretch : and so those mart will full evil thou , if we manly keep about the see . of the commodity of Brabant and Zealand and Henauld and marchandy carry by land to the mart . Cap . 8 . yet marchandy of Brabant and Zealand the Madre and woad , that dyer take on hand to die with , garlic and onion , and saltfishe also for husband and commons . but they of holland at Caleis byen our fell , and wolle our , that Englishman hem sell . and the chaflare that Englishmen do byen in the mart , that no man may denien , be not make in Brabant that country : it come from out of Henauld , not by see , but all by land , by cart , and from France , Bourgoyne , Colein , Cameret in substance , therefore at mart if there be a restraint , man seyne plain that listen no fable paint , if Englishmen be withdraw away , be great rebuke and loss to her affray : as though we send into the land of France ten thousand people , man of good puissance , 11 129 1 Mader , woad . garlic , onion , saltfish . what our merchant buy in that cost more than all other . to be unto she hinder multifarie , so ben our english merchant necessary . if it be thus assay , and we shall witten of man expert , by who i have this write . for say be that this cart marchandy draw in value as much very , as all the good that come in ship thither , which Englishmen bye m ● st and bring it hither . for her mart be febel , shame to say , but Englishman thither dress her way . a conclusion of this depend of keep of the sea . than i conclude , if never so much by land be by car bring unto their hand , if well the sea be keep in governance ' they shall by sea have no deliverance . we shall hem stop , and we shall hem destroy , as prisoner we shall hem bring to annoy . and so we shall of our cruel enemy make our friend for fear of marchandy , if they be not suffer for to pass into Flanders . but we be frail as glass and also brittle , not think never abide ; but when grace shine soon be we slide ; we will it not receive in any wise : that make lust , envy , and covetise : expone i this ; and you shall sooth it find , bear it away , and keep it in your mind . then shall worship unto our noble bee in feat and form to lord and majesty : Liche as the seal the great of this land on the one side have , as i understand , a prince ride with his sword ydraw , in the other side sit , soothe it be in see