one of the chief Marchandy that long to Spain : who so will espy , it be of little value , trust unto i , with english wool but if it menge be . thus if the sea be keep , than harken hither , if these two land come not together : so that the fleet of Flanders pass nought that in the narrow see it be not bring into the Rochelle to fetch the fumous wine , ner into bytonuse bay for salt so fine , what be then Spain ? what be Flanders also ? as who say , nought , the thrift be ago . for the little land of Flanders be but a staple to other land iwis : and all that grow in Flanders grain and seed may not a month find they meat and breed . what have then Flanders , be Fleming lieffe or loath , but a little Mader and Flemish cloth : by draper of our wool in substance lve her commons , this be her governance , without which they may not live at ease . thus must hem starve , or with we must have peace . of the commodity of Portugal . the second chapter . the Marchandy also of Portugal by diverse land turn into sale . portugaler with we have troth in hand : who Marchandy come much into England . they ben our friend , with their commodity , and we English pass into their country . wine , Hosea , wax , grain , fig , reisens , honey , cordeweyne , date , salt , hide . note well . the briton great rover and thief . her land have wine , Hosea , wax , and grain , fig , reysin , honey and cordoweyne : date , and salt , hide , and such Marchandy : and if they will to Flanders pass for by , they shall not be suffer one ner twye , for support of our cruel enemy , that be to say Flemings with her gyle : for changeable they be in little while . than i conclude by reason many more , if we suffer neither friend nor foe , what so enemy , and so support pass for by we in time of werring , Seth our friend will not be in cause of our hinder , if reason lead this clause : then need from Flanders peace be to we seek , and other land shall seek peace , doubt nought : for Flanders be staple , as man tell i , to all nation of Christianity . the commodity of petty Britain , with her rover on the sea . the three chapter . furthermore to write i be fain somewhat speak of the little Britain . commodity thereof there , be and be , salt , and wine , crest cloth and canvas . and the land of Flaunders sickerly be the staple of their Marchandy . which Marchandie may not pass away but by the coast of England , this be no nay . and of this Britain , who so truth lovis , be the great rover and the great theevis , that have be in the sea many one year : that our merchant have buy full deer . for they have take notable good of we , on this side see , these false pelour call of saint Malo , and else where : which to their duke none obeisance will bear : 118 with such colour we have be hinder sore . and feign peace be call no be herefore . thus they have be in diverse coast many of our England , more than rehearse can i : in Norfolk coast , and other place about , and rob and burn and slay by many a rout : and they have also ransom town by town : that into the regne of boast have run her sound : which have be ruth unto this realm and shame : they that the sea shall keep be much to blame . for Britain be of easy reputation ; and saint Malo turn hem to reprobation . a story of Edward the three his ordinance for Britain . here bring i in a story to i lend , that a good squire in time of parliament take unto i well write in a scroll : that i have commend both with high and low , of which all man accorden into one , that it be do not many year ago . but when noble king Edward the third reign in grace , right thus it betide . for he have a manner jealousy to his merchant and love they hearty . he fell the weigh to rule well the see , whereby merchant may have prosperity . that for harflew houndflew do he make ; and great be that time be undertake , betwixt the king and the duke of Britain : at last to fall to peace both be they fain : upon the which make with convention our merchant make they ready bowne towards Britain to load their marchandie , ween they friend they go forth bold : but soon anon our merchant be ytake , and we speed never the better for truce sake . " 9 A . D . c - 1437 - historiaosten - den quam ordinationem rex ed - viardus tertius feeit contra depradatore marinos britannia minoris , ad debellandum eos and subjugandum britannos minores . they lose she good , her navy and spend : but their complaint come unto the king . then wax he wroth , and to the duke he send , and complain that such harm be hent ; by convention and peace make so refuse : which duke send again , and he excuse , rehearse that the mount of saint Michael , and saint Malo will never a dell be subject unto his governance , nor be under his obeisance : and so they do without he that deed . but when the king anon have take heed : he in his heart set a judgement , without call of any parliament , or great tarry to take long advise to fortify anon he do devise of english town three , that be to say , Dertmouth , Plymouth , the three it be Fowey : and give they help and notable puissance with insistence set they in governance upon petty bretayne for to be . those good sea man will no more differre , but beat they home and make they may not rout , take prisoner , and make they for to lout . and eft the duke , a ensample wise