great fere of all that be without , and exercise to knight and his meynee to he long of his natall country . for courage of need must have exercise , thus occupy for esshewin of vice . this know the king that policy espy ; winter and summer he be thus occupy . thus conclude i by authority of chronike , that environ the see 140 shall be our subject unto the king , and he be lord thereof for any thing : for great worship and for profit also to defend his land from every foe . that worthy king i leave , Edgar by name , and all the chronike of his worthy fame : Saffe only this i may not pass away , a word of mighty strength till that i say , that grant he God such worship here , for his merit , he be without peer , that sometime at his great festivity king , and earl of many a country , and prince feel be there present , and many lord come thither by assent , to his worship : but in a certain day he bid ship to be ready of array : for to visit saint Johns church he list row unto the good holy baptist , he assign to earl , lord , and knight many ship right goodly to sight : and for himself and eight king moo subject to he he make keep one of thoo , a good ship , and entrede into it with eight king , and down do they sit ; and each of they a ore take in hand , at ore hale , as i understand , and he himself at the ship behind as steris man it become of kind . such another row baptize dare well say , be not see of prince many a day . Lo then how he in water get the price , in land , in see , that 1 may not suffice to tell , oh right , oh magnanimity , that king Edgar have upon the see . dicit Chronica ut non minus quantam ei etiam in hac vita bonorum operum merce - dem donaverit : cum aliquando ad maximam ejus festivitatem , reges , comites , multariimque provinciarum protectore convenissent , ' c . 141 [ a a incident of the lord of the sea king Edward the three . Caleis way yield to you english 1347 . king Edward have 700 . English ship , and 14151 . English mariner before Caleis . the battle of scluse by sea . of king Edward i pass and his prowess on land , on sea you know his worthiness : the siege of Caleis , you know well all the matter round about by land , and by the water , how it last not year many ago , after the battle of crecye be ydoe : how it be close environ about , oide man see it , which lve , this be no doubt . old knight say that the duke of Burgoyn , late rebuke for all his golden coin ; of ship on see make no besiege there , for want of ship that dare not come for fear . it be nothing besiege by the see : thus call they it no siege for honesty . gun assail , but assault be there none , no siege , but fuge : well be he that may be go : this manner carp have knight far in age , expert through age of this manner language . but king Edward make a siege royal , and win the town : and in especial the sea be keep , and thereof he be lord . thus make he Nobles coin of record ; in who time be no navy on the see that may withstand his majesty . battle of scluse you may read every day , how it be do i leave and go my way : it be so late do that you it know , in comparison within a little throw : for which to God give we honour and glory ; for lord of see the king be with victory . 142 another incident of keep of the see , in the time of the marvelous werriour and victorious prince , king Henry the five , and of his great ship . a nd if i shall conclude all by the king Henry the five , what be his purpose , when at Hampton he make the great dromon , which pass other great ship of all the commons ; the Trinity , the grace de dieu , the holy ghost , and other more , which as now be lose . what hope you be the king great intent of thoo ship , and what in mind he mean ? it be not else , but that he cast to be lord round about environ of the see . and when Harflew have her siege about , there come carrack horrible great and stout in the narrow see willing to abide , to stop we there with multitude of pride . my lord of Bedford come on and have the cure , destroy they be by that discomfiture . this be after the king harflew have win , when our enemy to siege have begin ; that all be slay or take , by true relation , to his worship , and of his english nation . there be present the king chamberlain at both battle ; which know this in certain ; he can it tell otherwise then i : ask he , and wit ; i pass forth hasty . what have this king of his magnificence , of great courage , of wisdom , and prudence ? provision , forewitte , audacity , of fortitude , justice , and agility , discretion , subtle avisednesse , attemperance , noblesse , and worthiness : science , prowess , devotion , equity , of most estate , with his magnanimity 143 the great ship of Henry the five , make at Hampton . great carrack of Genua take by the duke of Bedford . 1416 . the french name thus overthrow be of five hundred sail . the Trinity , the grace de dieu , the holy ghost . Exhortatio generalis in custodiam totius anglia , per diligentiam custodia circuitus maris circa littora ejusdem : qua debet esse per liche to Edgar , and the say Edward , as much of both liche hem as in regard . where be on live a man more victorious , and in so short time prince so marvelous ? by land and sea , so well he