he acquit , to speak of he i stony in my wit . thus here i leave the king with his noblesse , Henry the five , with who all my process of this true book of pure policy of sea keep , intend victory i leave endly : for about in the see no prince be of better strenuity . and if he have to this time live here , he have be prince name without peer : his great ship shall have be put in preefe , unto the end that he mean of in chief , for doubt it not but that he will have bee lord and master about the round see : and keep it sure to stop our enemy hence , and win we good , and wise bring it thence : that no passage shall be without danger , and his licence on see to move and star . of unity , show of our keep of the see : with a endly or finali process of peace by authority . Chap . 12 . now than for love of Christ , and of his joy , bring it England out of trouble and noy : take heart and wit , and set a governance , set many wit without variance , to one accord and unanimity . put to good will for to keep the see , first for worship and profit also , and to rebuke of each evil will foe . thus shall worship and riches to we long . than to the noble shall we do no wrong , to bear that coin in figure and in deed , to our courage , and to our enemy dread : 144 for which they must dress they to peace in haste , or else their thrift to stand , and to waste . as this process have prove by and by all by reason and expert policy ; and by story which prove well this part : or else i will my life put in jeoparte , but many lond will seche her peace for need , the see well keep : it must be do for dread . thus must Flanders for need have unity and peace with we : it will none other bee , within short while : and ambassador will be here soon to treat for their succour . this unity be to God pleasance : and peace after the werre variance . the end of battle be peace sickerly , and power cause peace final . keep then the sea about in speciali , which of England be the town wall . as though England be liken to a city , and the wall environ be the see . keep than the sea that be the wall of England : and then be England keep by God hand ; that as for any thing that be without , England be at ease without doubt , and thus shall every land one with another Entercommon , as brother with his brother , and live together werrelesse in unity , without rancour in very charity , in rest and peace , to Christ great pleasance , without strife , debate and variance . which peace man shall enserche with business , and knit it sadde hold in holiness . the Apostle say , if you listen to see , be you busy for to keep unity of the spirit in the bond of peace . which be needful to all without less . the prophet bid we peace for to inquire to pursue it , this be holy desire . n i4 king A . D . c - 1437 - unanimitata Consiliariorum regis , y hominum bona voluntatis . tres sunt causa pradic - ta custodia : scilicet , honour , commodum regni , y opprobrium inimicis . Ephes . solliciti sitis servare unitatem spiritus in vinculo pacis . c . 1437 - our lord Jesus say , bless motte they be maith . 5 . Beati pacifici , quoniam filii dei vocabuntur . that make peace ; that be tranquillity . for peace maker , as Matthew write aright , shall be call the son of God almight . God give we grace , the weigh for to keep of his precept , and slugly not to sleep in shame of sin : that our very foe may be to we converse , and turn so . cum placuerint domino vice hominis ejus inimicos ad pacem convertet . for in the proverb be a text to this purpose plain enough without any gloss : when man weigh please unto our lord , it shall convert and bring to accord man enemy unto peace very , in unity , to live to gods pay , with unity , peace , rest and charity . he that be here clothe in humanity , that come from heaven , and sty up with our nature , or he ascend , he yave to we cure , and leave with we peace , again strife and debate , must give we peace , so well irradicate here in this world : that after all this feste we may have peace in the land of behest , Urbs beata Jerusalem dicta pacis visio . Jerusalem , which of peace be the sight , with his brightness of eternal light , there glorify in rest with his tuition , the deity to see with full fruition : he second person in divineness be , who we assume , and bring we to the bliss . amen . here end the true process of the libel of english policy , exhort all England to keep the sea environ : show what profit and salvation , with worship come thereof to the reign of England . / ^ 1 oe forth libel , and meek show thy face ; six appear ever with humble countenance : and pray my lord to take in grace , 146 in opposaile and cherish the advance . to hardiness if that not variance thou have fro trought by full experience author and reason : if ought fail in substance remit to hem that yafe thou this science ; that se it be soothe in very faith , that the wise lord baron of Hungerford have thou oversee , and very he say that thou be true , and thus he do record , next the gospel : God wot it be his word , when he thou red all over in a night . go forth true book , and Christ defend thy right . A . D . I462 . the wise lord of Hungerfords judgement of this book . explicit libellus de politia conservativa maris .