he the title of the great duke of Vulodimiria , Moscovia , and Novogardia , and to call himself the monarch or Czar of all Russia . he bring under his subjection two principali city , namely Plesco be the only wall city in all moscovy , and Novogrod , both of they be in regard of traffic most rich and flourish city , and have be subject unto the lithuanians for the space of 50 . year before . the treasure of Novogrod be so exceed , that the great duke be report to have carry home from thence 300 . cart lade with gold and silver . he also be the first man that wage war against the polonians and the livonians : against Polonia he pretend a quarrel , allege that his daughter Helena ( who he have marry unto Alexander the great 188 duke of Lithuania , which be afterward king of Polonia ) be evil entreat , and be withdraw from the greekish religion unto the ceremony of the church of Rome . but against the livonians for none other cause , but only for a incredible desire of enlarge his dominion . howbeit what impulsive cause of little or no moment happen in the mean season , we will in another place more plain declare . notwithstanding he be very often and in diverse battle vanquish by Plettebergius the great master of the dutch knight : but it be not to the purpose to stand any long upon this discourse . he be marry first unto marry the duke of Tyversky his daughter , and of she he beget John , unto who in his life time he surrender his dukedom , and marry he unto the daughter of Stephan the palatine of Moldavia : which John , after he have beget his son Demetrius , decease before his father . afterwards Ivan Vasilowich aforesaid marry a wife call Sophia be daughter unto Thomas Palaelogus , which be report to have have her dowry out of the pope treasury , because the Moscovite have promise to conform himself unto the romish church . This Sophia be a woman of a princely and aspire mind , and often complain that she be marry unto the Tartar vassal , at length by her instant intreaty and continual persuasion , and by a notable stratagem she cast off that slavish yoke very much unbeseem so mighty a prince . for whereas the tartarian duke have his procurator and agent in the moscovite court , who dwell in their own house build within the very castle of Moscow , and be eye witness of all affair which be there perform : Sophia say she be admonish from heaven to build a temple in the self same place where the Tartar house stand , and to consecrate it unto saint Nicholas . be therefore deliver of a son she invite the tartarian duke unto the solemn baptize of he , and be come , she request he to give she his house , and obtain it at 189 the yoke of the Tartar shake of . Basilius . Ivan Vasilowich . his hand . which house be raze and those tartarian espial be exclude , the Tartar at length be quite bereave and utter dispossess of their authority which they have exercise over the russian for many year , and can never yet recover it ; albeit they have give sundry attempt . of his wife Sophia he beget six child , namely , a daughter call Helena , and five son , that be to say , Gabriel , Demetrius , George , Simeon , and Andrew . the dukedom of right appertain unto Demetrius the son of John , which be the son of Vasilowich by his first marriage . howbeit Sophia prevail so with her husband , that neglect his grandchild Demetrius , he bestow his dukedom upon Gabriel his son . Andrew the young have a son call Vulodimir , of who Mary be bear , which in the year of Christ 1573 . be marry unto Magnus the duke of Holst . Gabriel have obtain the great dukedom of Russia , change his name call himself Basilius , and apply his mind to the achieve of high and great enterprise . for he reduce a great part of the dukedom of moscovy , which Vitoldus the great duke of Lithuania hold in possession , under his own jurisdiction , and win upon the river of Boristhenes ( which the russian call Neiper ) many city and especial Smolensco , in the year of our lord 1514 . have divorce his first wife , he beget of Helena daughter unto duke Glinskie , Ivan Vasilowich , which now this present 1580 . reign as great duke . he be bear in the year of our lord 1528 . the 25 . of August , six hour after the rise of the son . the great dukedom of Russia fall unto the say Ivan Vasilowich in the five year of his age , have his uncle George for his great protector : be 25 . year of age , and be of a strong body and of a courageous mind he subdue the Tartar of Cazan and astracan upon the river of Volgha , carry their duke and chieftains into captivity . 190 but by what way and mean ( after the league which by the intercession of the most sacred Roman emperor , continue from the year 1503 . for the space of fifty year , be expire ) have renew war against Livonia , he bring that most flourish province into extreme misery , use for the same purpose a new pretense , and allege that it belong unto he by right of inheritance , i tremble to recount : and it require a large history , which perhaps in time and place convenient some more learned than my self will take upon they to address . he be exceed addict unto piety and devotion , and do oftentimes observe very strict fast and abstinence with his monk : and whereas the russes in do reverence and adoration unto God do beat their forehead against the ground , this Ivan Vasilowich with perform of the same ceremony cause his forehead to be full of boine and swell , and sometime to be black and blue , and very often to bleed . he be much delight with building of church and spare no cost for that purpose . whether therefore by nature , or ( which he pretend to be the cause ) by reason of his subject malice and treachery , he be so addict unto all rigour and cruelty , i dare not determine , especial since he have not a illiberal or misshape countenance , as Attila be report to have have . of his first wife which be sister unto Mikita Romanowich , be now great steward of his household , he beget two son , namely Ivan and Theodore . and albeit he be five time marry , yet have Theodore . he not one child more . whereas this Ivan Vasilowich upon certain frivolous reason call himself the natural lord of Livonia