, i think it not amiss to add a epistle hereunto , which be write by a certain honourable man concern the same matter . s . all we which inhabit this province with all seemly reverence and submission of mind , do offer most humble thank unto the emperor most sacred and peer - 191 less majesty our most gracious lord , in that accord to his fatherly affection which he bear towards all christendom , and for the good 8c commodity of this our distress and afflict country , which these many year have be in stead of a bulwark against the invasion of barbarous nation , he have send his ambassador unto the great duke of Moscovia . in regard of which his fatherly love and great benefit vouchsafe on we , we be ready when occasion shall serve , to adventure our life and good : pray in the mean season unto almighty God , who be the only establisher and confounder of common wealth , to bring this excellent work , the foundation whereof be already lay unto a prosperous conclusion . but as touch the title which the Moscovite make to this province , to say the very truth , we great wonder and be astonish at the declaration thereof . for it be most apparent , not only out of all ancient and credible history , but even from the experience and state of these region , that the say title and allegation be fabulous and feign . for out of all ancient monument , by what name soever they be call ( whereof there be diverse extant among we ) it can be prove by any mention , nor yet by any likelihood or conjecture , that those thing which the Moscovite affirm concern the people which be governor of these region in time past , and concern the right and title of his ancestor unto this province , be ground upon truth . the commodi - for it be not unknown by what mean this province , tie of traffic partiy through the industry of merchant , and partly by cion . the benente or navigation , be first discover : neither be it unknown how the inhabitant thereof be whole addict unto heathenish superstition and idolatry , be by the croise knight ( who draw other knight profess the same order in Prussia to aid and accompany they in this their enterprise ) and that with great labour and difficulty , convert unto the christian faith : when as at the same time the livonians have no knowledge at all of the jurisdiction , religion , manner , or language of Moscovie : 192 Ivan VASILOWICH , emperor of Russia who have not only no conversation nor deal with the moscovite , but be estrange also from all other nation whatsoever : for lead a miserable , poor , barbarous , and heathenish life , in savage manner among wild beast , and in the desert and solitary wood , they be utter ignorant of God and destitute of civil magistrate . howbeit this kind of government be peculiar unto they , namely that all of one family and society use a kind of reverence unto their elder more than to any other , who also , that their authority may be the great , they call by the name of king , and ( albeit one of their family consist of a 100 person ) they obey they in all respect , and after their rude and barbarous manner do they loyal service . at the very same time the moscovite have receive the religion , and the ecclesiastical ceremony of the greek and eastern church , which religion they publish and disperse throughout all province subject to their dominion , use their own proper letter and character for the same purpose . of all which thing the livonians which very barbarous inhabit a land be environ with Russia , Lithuania , Samogitia , Prussia , and the balthic sea , never hear any report at all . it be moreover to be note that never at any time heretofore either within the earth , or in other place of Livonia , there have be find any monument at all of the antiquity or letter of the russes : which very must needs have come to pass , if the moscovite , russes , or any other nation which use the foresay particular , have bear rule and authority over the livonians : yea there have be leave some remainder and token , either of their religion and divine worship , or of their law and custom , or at the least of their manner , language , and letter . This indeed we can in no wise deny , that even in Livonia it self , there have be in time past and at this present be many and diverse language speak by the people . howbeit no one language of they all have any affinity either with the moscovian tongue , or with the tongue of any other nation . but whereas the Moscow - two 193 n vite pretend that there have be usual pay a pension or tribute unto himself and his predecessor out of the whole province , it be as incredible as the former .. about the begin of this tragical war , the Moscovite , to cloak his tyranny and ambition under some fair pretense , among other of his demand , make mention also of a tribute which shall be due unto he out of the bishop of dorpat his jurisdiction , whereof notwithstanding he can neither bring any just account , nor affirm any certainty : howbeit there be no man live to be find which either can tell of his own remembrance , or from the relation of other , that any such tribute be ever pay unto the Moscovite . what time therefore he refer all this negotiation unto the master of the livonian order , and command he to get what knowledge he can thereof from the man of dorpat , and urge the tribute , say if it be worth but one hair , that he will not remit it : at length it be find record in the ancient chronicle of dorpat , that beyond the memory of man , when the territory of Plesco contain nothing but wood and forest for wild beast , that the peasant of the liberty of dorpat call neuhus , by the consent of the russian borderer , enjoy beehive in the say wood , and pay every year in lieu thereof unto the russian governor , six shilling of livonian coin . but so soon as the russian have fell the wood and have build town and village in their place , the say pension cease together with the tree which be cut down . wherefore the say six shilling be never since that time either demand by the russes or pay by the livonians . Theise thing which i know concern the cause of the livonian war i think good to signify unto you . give the 22 . of may , in the year of our lord 1576 .