himself hold in this suspense with long and vain expectation , and think that of intention to delude he , they post the matter off so often , ) be very instant with they to perform their promise : which if they will not do , he tell they that he will depart and proceed in his voyage . so that the moscovite ( although as yet they know not the mind of their king ) yet fear the departure in deed of our man who have such ware and commodity as they great desire , they at last resolve to furnish our people with all thing necessary , and to conduct they by land to the presence of their king . and so master Chanceler begin his journey , which be very long and most troublesome , wherein he have the use of certain sled , which in that country be very common , for they be carry themselves upon sled , and all their 250 carriage be in the same sort , the people almost not know any other manner of carriage , the cause whereof be the exceed hardness of the ground congeal in the winter time by the force of the cold , which in those place be very extreme and horrible , whereof hereafter we will say something . but now they have pass the great part of their journey , meet at last with the sleddeman ( of who i speak before ) send to the king secret from the justice or governor , who by some ill hap have lose his way , and have go to the sea side , which be near to the country of the Tartar , think there to have find our ship . but have long err and wander out of his way , at the last in his direct return , he meet ( as he be come ) our captain on the way . to who he the emper - by and by deliver the emperor letter , which be ° urs c ( > urteous write to he with all courtesy and in the most love ' manner that can be : wherein express commandment be give , that post horse shall be get for he and the rest of his company without any money . which thing be of all the russes in the rest of their journey so willing do , that they begin to quarrel , yea , and to fight also in strive and contend which of they shall put their post horse to the sledde : so that after much ado and great pain take in this long and weary journey , ( for they have travail very near fifteen hundred mile ) master Chanceler come at last to Moscow the chief city of the kingdom , and the seat of the king : of which city , and of the emperor himself , and of the principali city of Moscovie , we will speak immediate more at large in this discourse . of Moscovie , which be also call Russia . MOscovie , which have the name also of Russia the white , be a very large and spacious country , every way bound with diverse nation . towards the south and the east , it be compass with Tartary : the northern side of it stretch to the scytian ocean : upon 251 the west part border the lappians , a rude and savage nation , live in wood , who language be not know to any other people : next unto these , more towards the south , be Swecia , than Finlandia , than Livonia , and last of all Lituania . this country of Moscovie , have also very many and great river in it , and be marish ground in many place : and as for the river , the great and most famous among all the rest , be that , which the russes in their own tongue call Volga , but other know it by the name of Rha . next unto it in fame be Tanais , which they call don , and the three Boristhenes which at this day they call neper . two of these , to wit , Rha , and Boristhenes issue both out of one fountain , run very far through the land : Rha receive many other pleasant river into it , and run from the very head or spring of it towards the east , after many crooked turn and wind , discharge it self , and all the other water and river that fall into it by diverse passage into the caspian sea Tanais spring from a fountain of great name in those part , and grow great near to his head , spread it self at length very large , and make a great lake : and then grow narrow again , do so run for certain mile , until it fall into another lake , which they call Ivan : and therehence fetch a very crooked course , come very near to the river Volga : but disdain as it be the company of any other river , do there turn it self again from Volga , and run towards the south , and fall at last into the lake of Moeotis . Boristhenes , which come from the same head that Rha do , ( as we say before ) carry both it self , and other water that be near unto it , towards the south , not refuse the mixture of other small river : and run by many great and large country false at last into Pontus Euxinus . beside these river , be also in Moscovie certain lake , and the nightie poo ^ es ’ lake breed fish by the celestial influence : lake of and among they all , the chief and most principali be Bealozera . call Bealozera , which be very famous by reason of a 252 very strong tower build in it , wherein the king of Moscovie reserve and repose their treasure in all time of war and danger . touch the riphean mountain , whereupon the snow lie continual , and where hence in time past it be think that Tanais the river do spring , and that the rest of the wonder of nature , which the grecian feign and invent of old , be there to be see : our man which late come from thence , neither see they , nor yet have bring home any perfect relation of they , although they remain there for the space of three month , and have get in that time some intelligence of the language of Moscovie . the whole country be plain and champion , and few hill in it : and towards the north