to fight , the judge grant it : in which case they may not use public champion . and he that be of any good birth , do contemn the other , if he be base bear , and will not fight with he . if a poor man happen to grow in debt , his creditor take he , and make he pay the debt , in work either to himself , or to some other man , who wage he take up . and there be some among they , that use willing to make themselves , their wife , and child , bondslave unto rich man , to have a little money at the first into their hand , and so for ever after content themselves with meat and drink : so little account do they make of liberty . 264 if any man be take upon commit of theft , he be imprison , and often beat , but not hang for the first offence , as the manner be with we : and this they call the law of mercy . he that offend the second time have his nose cut off , and be burn in the forehead with a hot iron . the three time , he be hang . there be many cutpurse among they , and if the rigour of the prince do not cut they off , they can not be avoid . of their religion . they maintain the opinion of the greek church : they suffer no grave image of saint in their church , but their picture paint in table they have in great abundance , which they do adore and offer unto , and burn wax candle before they , and cast holy water upon they , without other honour . they say that our image which be set up in church , and carve , have no divinity in they . in their private house they have image for their household saint , and for the most part , they be put in the dark place of the house : he that come into his neighbour house do first salute his saint , although he see they not . if any foorme or stool stand in his way , he oftentimes beat his brow upon the same , and often duck down with his head , and body , worship the chief image . the habit , and attire of the priest , and of the lay man , do nothing at all differ : as for marriage , it be forbid to no man : only this be receive and hold among they for a rule , and custom , that if a priest wife do die , he may not marry again , nor take a second wife : and therefore they of secular priest , as they call they , be make monk , to who then chastity for ever be command . their divine service be all do and say in their own language , that every man may understand it : they receive the lord supper with leaven bread , 265 and after the consecration , they carry it about the church in a saucer , and prohibit no man from receive and take of it , that be willing so to do . they use both the oide and the new testament , and read both in their own language , but so confuse , that they themselves that do read , understand not what themselves do say : and while any part of either testament be read , there be liberty give by custom to prattle , talk , and make a noise : but in the time of the rest of the service they use very great silence and reverence and behave themselves very modest , and in good sort . as touch the lord prayer , the ten man among they know it not : and for the article of our raith , and the ten commandment , no man , or at the least very few of they do either know they or can say they : their opinion be , that such secret and holy thing as they be shall not rash and imprudent be communicate with the common people . they hold for a maxim among they , that the old law , and the commandment also be abolish by the death and blood of Christ : all study and letter of humanity they utter refuse : concern the latin , greek , and hebrew tongue , they be altogether ignorant in they . every year they celebrate four several fast , which they call accord to the name of the saint : the first begin with they , at the time that our lent begin . the second be call among they the fast of saint Peter . the three be take from the day of the virgin marie . and the four and last begin upon saint Philips day . but as we begin our lent upon Wednesday , so they begin they upon the Sunday . upon the Saturday they eat flesh : whensoever any of those fast feast do draw near , look what week do immediate go before they , the same week they live altogether upon white meat , and in their common language they call those week , the fast of butter . in the time of their fast , the neighbour every 266 where go from one to another , and visit one another , and kiss one another with kiss of peace , in token of their mutual love and Christian concord : and then also they do more often then at any other time go to the holy communion . when seven day be past , from the begin of the fast , than they do often either go to their church , or keep themselves at home , and use often prayer : and for that sevennight they eat nothing but herb : but after that sevennight fast be once past , than they return to their old intemperancy of drink , for they be notable tosspot . as for the keep of their fast day , they do it very straight , neither do they eat any thing beside herb , and salt fish , as long as those fast day do endure : but upon every Wednesday and Friday , in every week throughout the year , they fast . there be very many monastery of the order of saint Benedict , among they , to which many great live , for their maintenance , do belong : for the friar and the monk do at the least possess the three part of the live , throughout the whole Moscovite empire . to those monk that be of this