it have very large and spacious wood , wherein be great store of fir tree , a wood very necessary , and fit for the build of house : there be also wild beast breed in those wood , as buff , bear , and black wolf , and another kind of beast unknown to we , but call by they Rossomakka : and the nature of the same be very rare and wonderful : for when it be great with young , and ready to bring forth , it seek out some narrow place between two stake , and so go through they , press it self , and by that mean be ease of her burden , which otherwise can not be do . they hunt their buff for the most part a horseback , but their bear a foot , with wooden fork . the north part of the country be report to be so cold , that the very ice or water which distil out of the moist wood which they lie upon the fire be present congeal and freeze : the diversity grow sudden to be so great , that in one and the self same firebrand , a man shall see both fire and ice . when the winter do once begin there it do still more 8c more increase by a perpetuity of cold : neither do that cold slake , until the force of the sun beam do dissolve the cold , and make glad the earth , return to it again . our mariner which we leave in the ship in the mean time to keep it , in their go up 253 the sharpness of the winter in Moscovie . only from their cabin to the hatch , have their breath oftentimes so sudden take away , that they eftsoon fall down as man very near dead , so great be the sharpness of that cold climate : but as for the south part of the country , they be somewhat more temperate . of Moscow the chief city of the kingdom , and of the emperor thereof . it remain that a large discourse be make of Moscow , the principali city of that country , and of the prince also , as before we have promise . the empire and government of the king be very large , and his wealth at this time exceed great . and because the city of Moscow be the chief of all the rest , it seem of it self to challenge the first place in this discourse . our man say , that in bigness it be as great as the city of London , with the suburb thereof . there be many and great building in it , but for beauty and fairness , nothing their manner comparable to we . there be many town and of building . village also , but build out of order , and with no handsomeness : their street and way be not pave with stone as we be : the wall of their house be of wood : the roof for the most part be cover with shingle board . there be hard by the city a very fair castle , strong , and furnish with artillery , whereunto the city be join direct towards the north , with a brick wall : the wall also of the castle be build with brick , and be in breadth or thickness eighteen foot . this castle have on the one side a dry ditch , on the other side the river Moscua , whereby it be make almost inexpugnable . the same Moscua trending towards the east do admit into it the company of the river Occa . in the castle aforesaid , there be in number nine church , or chapel , not altogether unhandsome , which be use and keep by certain religious man , over who there be after a sort , a patriarch , or governor , and with he other reverend father , all which for the great part , dwell within the castle . as for the king 254 court and palace , it be not of the neat , only in form it be four square , and of low build , much surpass and excel by the beauty and elegancy of the house of the king of England . the window be very narrow build , and some of they by glass , some other by lettiss admit the light : and whereas the palace of our prince be deck , and adorn with hang of cloth of gold , there be none such there : they build and join to all their wall bench , and that not only in the court of the emperor , but in all private man house . now after that they have remain about twelve day in the city , there be then a messenger send unto they , to bring they to the king house : and they be after a sort weary with their long stay , be very ready , and will so to do : and be enter within the gate of the court , there sit a very honourable company of courtier , to the number of one hundred , all apparel in cloth of gold , down to their ankle : and therehence be conduct into the chamber of presence , our man begin to wonder at the majesty of the emperor : his seat be aloft , in a very royal throne , have on his head a diadem , or crown of gold , apparel with a robe all of goldsmith work , and in his hand he hold a sceptre garnish , and beset with precious stone : and beside all other note and appearances of honour , there be a majesty in his countenance proportionable with the excellency of his estate : on the one side of he stand his chief secretary , on the other side , the great commander of silence , both of they array also in cloth of gold : and then there sit the counsel of one hundred and fifty in number , all in like sort array , and of great state . This so honourable a assembly , so great a majesty of the emperor , and of the place may very well have amaze our man , and have dash they out of countenance : but notwithstanding master Chanceler be therewithal ! nothing dismay salute , and do his duty to the emperor , 255 after the manner of England , and withal , deliver unto king he the letter of our king , Edward the sixth . the etten ^ emperor have take , and read the letter , begin a deliver to question with they , and to