and of the sea , insomuch that the top of the hill sound therewith , the valley and the water give a echo , and 244 the mariner , they shout in such sort , that the sky ring again with the noise thereof . one stand in the poop of the ship , and by his gesture bid farewell to his friend in the best manner he can . another walk upon the hatch , another climb the shrowd , another stand upon the main yard , and another in the top of the ship . to be short , it be a very triumph ( after a sort ) in all respect to the beholder . but ( alas ) the good king Edward ( in respect of who principal all this be prepare ) he only by reason of his sickness be absent from this show , and not long after the departure of these ship , the lamentable and most sorrowful accident of his death follow . but to proceed in the matter . the ship go down with the tide come at last to Woolwich , where they stay and cast anchor , with purpose to depart therehence again , as soon as the turn of the water , and a better wind shall draw they to set sail . after this they depart and come to Harwich , in which port they stay long , not without great loss and consume of time : yet at the last with a good wind they hoist up sail , and commit themselves to the sea , give their last adieu to their native country , which they know not whether they shall ever return to see again or not . many of they look oftentimes back , and can not refrain from tear , consider into what hazard they be to fall , and what uncertainty of the sea they be to make trial of . among the rest , Richard Chanceler the captain of the Edward Bonaventure , be not a little grieve with the fear of want victual , part whereof be find to be corrupt and putrify at Harwich , and the hogshead of wine also leak , and be not staunch : he natural and fatherly affection also somewhat trouble he , for he leave behind he his two little son , which be in the case of orphan if he speed not well : the estate also of his company move he to care , be in the former respect after a sort unhappy , and be to 245 abide with himself every good or bid accident : but in the mean time while his mind be thus torment with the multiplicity of sorrow and care , after many day sail , they ken land afar off , whereunto the pilot direct the ship : and be come to it , they land , and find it to be roast island , where they stay certain day , and afterward set sail again , and proceed towards the north , they espy certain other island , which be call the cross of island . from which place when they be a title depart , sir Hugh Willoughby the general , a man of good foresight and providence in all his action , erect and set out his flag , by which he call together the chief man of the other ship , that by the help and assistance of their counsel , the order of the government , and conduction of the ship in the whole voyage may be the better : who be come together accord , they conclude and agree , that if any great tempest shall arise at any time , and happen to disperse and scatter they , every ship shall endeavour his best to go to Wardhouse , a haven or castle of some name in the kingdom of Norway , and that they that arrive there first in safety shall stay and expect the come of the rest . the very same day in the afternoon , about four of the clock , so great a tempest sudden arise , and the sea be so outrageous , that the ship can not keep their intend course , but some be perforce drive one way , and some another way , to their great peril and hazard : the generail with his loud voice cry out to Richard chancellor , and earnest request he not to go far from he : but he neither will nor can keep company with he , if he sail still so fast : for the admiral be of better sail than his ship . but the say admiral ( i know not by what mean ) bear all his sail , be carry away with so great force and swiftness , that not long after he be quite out of sight , and the three ship also with the same storm and like rage be disperse and lose we . 246 the ship boat of the admiral ( strike against they they retume ship , ) be overwhelm in the sight and view of the the next year mariner of the Bonaventure : and as for they that be already return and arrive , they know nothing or the come the rest of the ship what be become of they . other 2 . ship . but if it be so , that any miserable mishap have overtake they , if the rage and fury of the sea have devour those good man , or if as yet they live , and wander up and down in strange country , encage must needs say they be man worthy of better fortune , and if they be live , let we wish they safety and a good return : but if the cruelty of death have take hold of they , God send they a christian grave and sepulchre . now Richard chancellor with his ship and company be thus leave alone , and become very pensive , heavy , and sorrowful , by this dispersion of the fleet , he ( accord to the order before take , ) shape his course for Wardhouse in Norway , there to expect and abide the arrival of the rest of the ship . And be come thither , and have stay there the space of 7 . day , and look in vain for their come , he determine at length to proceed alone in the purpose voyage . and as he be prepare himself to depart , it happen that he fall in company and speech with certain scottishman : who have understanding of his intention , and wish well to his action , begin earnest to dissuade he from the further prosecution of the discovery , by amplify the