the copy of the duke of Moscovie and emperor of Russia his letter , send to king Edward the sixth , by the hand of Richard chancellor . Ivan vasi - livich , that be to say , John the son of Basilius . he almighty power of God , and the incomprehensible holy Trinity , rightful Christian belief , etc we great duke Ivan Vasilivich , by the grace of God great lord and emperor of all Russia , great duke of volodemer , Moscow , and Novograd , king of Kazan , king of astracan , lord of Plesko , and great duke of Smolensko , of Twerria , Joughoria , Permia , Vadska , Bulghoria , and other , lord and great duke of Novograd in the low country , of Chernigo , rezan , Polotskoy , Rostove , yaruslave , Bealozera , Liefland , Oudoria , Obdoria and condensa , commander of all Siberia , and of the north part , and lord of many other country , greeting . before all , right great and worthy of honour Edward king of England , etc accord to our most hearty and good zeal , with good intent and friendly desire , and accord to our holy christian faith , and great governance , and be in the light of great understanding , our answer by this our honourable writing unto your kingly governance , at the request of your faithful servant Richard chancellor , with his company , as they shall let you wise know , be this . in the strength of the twenty year of our governance , be it know , that at our sea coast arrive a ship , with one Richard , and his company , and say , that he be desirous to come into our dominion , and accord to his request , have see our majesty , and two our eye : and have declare unto we your majesty desire , as that we shall grant unto your subject , to go and come , and in our dominion , and among our subject , to frequent free mart , with all sort of merchandize , and upon | | that be , come into our presence . 2JI the same to have ware for their return . and they have also deliver we your letter , which declare the same request . and hereupon we have give order , that wheresoever your faithful servant Hugh Willoughbie land or touch in our dominion , to be well entertain , who as yet be not arrive , as your servant Richard can declare . and we with christian belief and faithfulness , and accord to your honourable request , and my honourable commandment will not leave it undo : and be furthermore willing that you send unto we your ship and vessel , when and as often as they may have passage , with good assurance on our part to see they harmless . and if you send one of your majesty counsel to treat with we whereby your country merchant may with all kind of ware , and where they will make their market in our dominion , they shall have their free Marte with all free liberty through my whole dominion with all kind of ware to come and go at their pleasure , without any let , damage or impediment , accord to this our letter , our word and our seal which we have command to be under seal . write in our dominion , in our city and our palace in the castle of Moscow , in the year 7060 , the second month of February . this letter be write in the moscovian tongue , in letter much like to the greek letter , very fair write in paper , with a broad seal hang at the same , seal in paper upon wax . this seal be much like the broad seal of England , have on the one side the image of a man on horseback in complete harness fight with a dragon . under this letter be another paper write in the dutch tongue , which be the interpretation of the other write in the moscovian letter . Theise letter be send the next year after the date of king Edward letter , 1554 .