, they lose their privilege , a restitution whereof they earnest sue for at the time that our man be there . but those Flemings hear of the arrival of our man in those part , write their letter to the emperor against they , accuse they for pirate and rover , wish he to detain , and imprison they . which thing when they be know of our man , they conceive fear , that they shall never have return home . but the emperor believe rather the king letter , which our man bring , than the lie and false suggestion of the Fleming , use no ill intreaty towards they . [ yeraslave 261 the knavery of the Fleming against our man . yeraslave also be a town of some good fame , for the commodity of hide , tallow , and corn , which it yield in great abundance . cake of wax be there also to be sell , although other place have great store : this yeraslave be distant from Moscow , about two hundred mile : and betwixt they be many populous village . their field yield such store of corn , that in convey it towards Moscow , sometime in a forenoon , a man shall see seven hundred or eight hundred sled , go and come , lade with corn and salt fish : the people come a thousand mile to Moscow , to buy that corn , and then carry it away upon sled : and these be those people that dwell in the north part , where the cold be so terrible , that no corn do grow there , or if it spring up , it never come to ripeness . the commodity that they bring with they , be saltfish , skin , and hide . five ologda . vologda be from Moscow , 550 . mile yield the commodity of hemp and flax also : although the great store of flax be sell at Novogrode . Plesco . the town of Plesco , be frequent of merchant for the good store of honey and wax that it yield . Colmagro . the north part of Russia yield very rare and precious skin : and among the rest , those principal , which we call Sables , wear about the neck of our noble woman and lady : it have also martins skin , white , black , and red fox skin , skin of hare , and ermyn , and other , which they call and term barbarous , as Bevers , minxes , and Miniver . the sea adjoin , breed a certain beast , which they call the mors , which seek his food upon the rock , 262 climb up with the help of his tooth . the russes use to take they , for the great virtue that be in their tooth , whereof they make as great account , as we do of the elephant tooth . Theise commodity they carry upon dear back to the town of Lampas : and from thence to Colmagro , and there in the winter time , be keep great fair for the sale of they . this city of Colmagro , serve all the country about it with salt , and salt fish . the russian also of the north part , send thither oil , which they call train , which they make in a river call two Una , although it be also make elsewhere : and here they use to boil the water of the sea , whereof they make very great store of salt . of controversy in law , and how they be end . or , Dwina have hitherto speak so much of the chief city of Russia , as the matter require : it remain that we speak somewhat of the law , that the moscovit do use , as far forth as the same be come to our knowledge . if any controversy arise among they , they first make their landlord judge in the matter , and if they can end it , than they prefer it to the magistrate . the plaintiff crave of the say magistrate , that he may have leave to enter law against his adversary : and have obtain it , the officer fetch the defendant , and beat he on the leg , till he bring forth a surety for he : but if he be not of such credit , as to procure a surety , then be his hand by a officer tie to his neck , and he be beat all the way , till he come before the judge . the judge then ask he ( as for example in the matter of debt ) whether he owe any thing to the plaintiff . if he deny it , then say the judge , how can thou deny it ? the defendant answer , by a other : thereupon the officer be command to cease from beat of he , until the matter be further try . they have no lawyer , but every man be his own advocate , and both the complaint of the accuser , 263 and the answer of the defendant , be in manner of petition deliver to the emperor , entreat justice at his hand . the emperor himself hear every great controversy , and upon the hear of it , give judgement , and that with great equity , which i take to be a thing worthy of speciali commendation , in the majesty of a prince . but although he do this with a good purpose of mind , yet the corrupt magistrate do wonderful pervert the same : but if the emperor take they in any fault , he do punish they most severe . now at the last , when each party have defend his cause with his best reason , the judge demand of the accuser , whether he have any more to say for himself : he answer , that he will try the matter in fight by his champion , or else intreat , that in fight betwixt themselves the matter may be end : which be grant , they both fight it out : or if both of they , or either of they seem unfit for that kind of trial , than they have public champion to be hire , which live by end of quarrel . Theise champion be arm with iron axe , and spear , and fight on foot , and he who champion be overcome , be by and by take , and imprison , and terrible handle , until he agree with his adversary . but if either of they be of any good call , and degree , and do challenge one another