, and find 40 fathom , and fair sand . the 12 day the wind be at south and by east , we lay with our sail east , and east and by north 30 league . the 14 day early in the morning we descry land , which land we bear with all , hoist out our boat to discover what land it may be : but the boat can not come to land the water be so shoal , where be very much ice also , but there be no similitude of habitation , and this land lie from Seynam east and by north 160 league , be in latitude 72 degree . than we ply to the northward the 15 , 16 and 17 day . the 18 day , the wind come at the north - east , and the confidence be trouble with bilge water , and stock , we think it good to seek harbour for her redress : than we bare room the 18 day southsoutheast , about 70 league . the 21 day we sound , and find 10 fathom , after that we sound again , and find but 7 fathom , so 221 A . D . I553 - Willoughbie his land , in " z degree . shoald and shoald water , and yet can see no land , where we marvel great : to avoid this danger , we bare roomer into the sea all that night northwest and by west . the next day we sound , and have 20 . fathom , then shape our course , and run west Southwest until the 23 . day : than we descry low land , unto which we bear as nigh as we can , and it appear unto we unhabitable . than we ply westward along by that land , which lie west Southwest , and east Northeast , and much wind blow at the west , we hale into the sea north and by east 30 . league . then the wind come about at the north - east , we sail west northwest : after that , the wind bear to the northwest , we lay with our sail west southwest , about 14 . league , and then descry land , and bear in with it , be the 28 . day , find shoal water , and bear it till we come to 3 . fathom , then perceive it to be shoal water , and also see dry sand , we hale out again Northeast along that land until we come to the point thereof . that land turn to the westward , we run along 16 . league northwest : then come into a fair bay , we go on land with our boat , which place be unhabit , but yet it appear unto we that the people have be there , by cross , and other sign : from thence we go all along the coast westward . September . the four day of September we lose sight of land , by reason of contrary wind , and the eight day we descry land again . within two day after we lose the sight of it : then run west and by south about 30 . league , we get the sight of land again , and bear in with it until night : then perceive it to be a lee shore , we get we into the sea , to the end to have sea room . the 12 . of September we hail to shoareward again , have then indifferent wind and weather : then be near unto the shore , and the tide almost spend , we come to a anchor in 30 . fathom water . 222 the 13 . day we come along the coast , which lie northwest and by west and southeast and by east . the 14 . day we come to a anchor within two league of the shore , have 60 . fathom . there we go a shore with our boat , and find two or three good harborough , the land be rocky , and high , but as for people can we see none . the 15 day we run still along the coast until the 17 day : then the wind be contrary unto we , we think it best to return unto the harbour which we have find before , and so we bear roomer with the same , howbeit we can not accomplish our desire that day . the next day be the 18 of September , we enter into the haven , and there come to a anchor at 6 fathom . this haven run into the main , about two league , this haven and be in breadth half a league , wherein be very they many seal fish , and other great fish , and upon the main we see bear , great deer , fox , with diverse strange beast , as two guloine , and such other which be | | or , elion . to we unknown , and also wonderful . thus remain in this haven the space of a week , see the year far spend , and also very evil wether , as frost , snow , and hail , as though it have be the deep of winter , we think best to winter there . wherefore we send out three man southsouthwest , to search if they can find people , who go three day journey , but can find none : after that , we send other three westward willoughby four day journey , which also return without find his note , which any people . then send we three man southeast three be write day journey , who in like sort return without find of people , or any similitude of habitation . ' these two note follow be write upon the outside of this pamphlet , or book . 1 the proceed of sir Hugh Willoughbie after he be separate from the Edward Bonaventure . 2 our ship be at a anchor in the harbour call sterfier in the island lofoote . 223 the river or haven wherein sir Hugh Willoughbie with the company of his two ship perish for cold , be call Arzina in Lapland , near unto Kegor . but it appear by a will find in the ship that sir Hugh Willoughbie and most of the company be alive in January 1554 .