ask they of the welfare of our king : whereunto our man answer he direct , and in few word : hereupon our man present some thing to the emperor , by the chief secretary , which at the delivery of it , put of his hat , be before all the time cover : and so the emperor have invite they to dinner , dismiss they from his presence : and go into the chamber of he that be master of the request to the emperor , and have stay there the space of two hour , at the last , the messenger come , and call they to dinner : they go , and be conduct into the golden court , ( for so they call it , although not very fair ) they find the emperor sit upon a high and stately seat , apparel with a robe of silver , and with another diadem on his head : our man be place over against he , sit down : in the mid of the room stand a mighty cupboard upon a square foot , whereupon stand also a round board , in manner of a diamond , broad beneath , and towards the top narrow , and every step rise up more narrow than another . upon this cupboard be place the emperor plate , which be so much , that the very cupboard it self be scant able to sustain the weight of it : the better part of all the vessel , and goblet , be make of very fine gold : and among the rest , there be four pot of very large bigness , which do adorn the rest of the plate in great measure : for they be so high , that they think they at the least five foot long . there be also upon this cupboard certain silver cask , not much differ from the quantity of our fyrkin , wherein be reserve the emperor drink : on each side of the hall stand four table , each of they lay and cover with very clean table clothes , whereunto the company ascend by three step or degree : 256 all which be fill with the assembly present : the guest be all apparel with linen without , and with rich skin within , and so do notable set out this royal feast the emperor , when he take any bread or knife in his hand , do first of all cross himself upon his forehead : they that be in speciali favour with the emperor sit upon the same bench with he , but somewhat far from he : and before the come in of the meat , the emperor himself , accord to a ancient custom of the king of mos - covy , do first bestow a piece of bread upon every one of his guest , with a loud pronunciation of his title , and honour , in this manner : the great duke of Moscovie , and chief emperor of Russia , John Basiliwich ( and then the officer name the guest ) do give thou bread . whereupon all the guest rise up , and by and by sit down again . this do , the gentleman usher of the hall come in , with a notable company of servant , carry the dish , and have do his reverence to the emperor , put a young swan in a golden platter upon the table , and immediately take it thence again , deliver it to the carver , and seven other of his fellow , to be cut up : which be perform , the meat be then distribute to the guest , with the like pomp , and ceremony . in the mean time , the gentleman usher receive his bread , and taste to the emperor , and afterward , have do his reverence , he depart . touch the rest of the dish , because they be bring in out of order , our man can report no certainty : but this be true , that all the furniture of dish , and drink vessel , which be then for the use of a hundred guest , be all of pure gold , and the table be so lade with vessel of gold , that there be no room for some to stand upon they . we may not forget , that there be 140 . servitor array in cloth of gold , that in the dinner time , change thrice their habit and apparel , which servitor be in 11 257 r like sort serve with bread from the emperor , as the rest of the guest . last of all , dinner be end , and candle bring in , ( for by this time night be come ) the emperor call all his guest and noble man by their name , in such sort , that it seem miraculous , that a prince , otherwise occupy in great matter of estate , shall so well remember so many and sundry particular name . the russes tell our man , that the reason thereof , as also of the bestow of bread in that manner , be to the end that the emperor may keep the knowledge of his own household : and withal , that such as be under his displeasure , may by this mean be know . of the discipline of war among the russes . whensoever the injure of their neighbour do call the king forth to battle , he never arm a less number against the enemy , than 300 . thousand soldier , 100 thousand whereof he carry out into the field with he , and leave the rest in garrison in some fit place , for the better safety of his empire . he press no husbandman , nor merchant : for the country be so populous , that these be leave at home , the youth of the realm be sufficient for all his war . as many as go out to warfare do provide all thing of their own cost : they fight not on foot , but altogether on horseback : their armour be a coat of make , and a helmet : the coat of mail w ' out be gild , or else adorn with silk , although it pertain to a common soldier : they have a great pride in show their wealth : they use bow , and arrow , as the turk do : they carry lance also into the field . they ride with a short stirrup , after the manner of the turk : they be a kind of people most spare in diet , and most patient in extremity of cold , above all other . for when