and by west , continue in the same course 40 league , 218 1553 - whereby we can not fetch Shotland : than we sail north 16 league by estimation , after that north and by west , and northnorthwest , than southeast , with diverse other course , traverse and trace the sea , by reason of sundry and manifold contrary wind , until the 14 day of July : and then the sun enter into Leo , we July . discover land eastward of we , unto the which we sail that night as much as we may : and after we go on shore with our pinnace , and find little house to the number of 30 , where we know that it be inhabit , but the people be flee away , as we judge , for fear of we . the land be all full of little island , and that innu - i ” t ! lie land merable , which be call ( as we learn afterward ) dwellt cthe ' it JEgeland and Halgeland , which lie from orfordnesse ‘ north and by east , be in the latitude of 66 degree . the distance between orfordnesse and ^ Egeland 250 league . than we sail from thence 12 league northwest , and find many other island , and there come to anchor the 19 day , and man our pinnace , and go on shore to the island , and find people mow and make of hay , which come to the shore and welcome we . in which place be a innumerable sort of island , which be call the isle of Rost , be under the roast island . dominion of the king of Denmark : which place be in latitude 66 degree , and 30 minute . the wind be contrary , we remain there three day , and there be a innumerable sort of fowl of diverse kind , of which we take very many . the 22 day the wind come fair , we depart from Rost , sail northnortheast , keep the sea until the 27 day , and then we draw near unto the land , which be still east of we : then go forth our pinnace to seek harbour , and find many good harbour , of the which we enter into one with our ship , which be call stanfew , and the land be island , be call stanfew Lewfoot , or Lofoot , which be plentiful inhabit , and very gentle people , be also under the king of Denmark : but we can not learn how far it be from 219 the main land : and we remain there until the 30 day , be in latitude 68 degree , and from the foresay roast about 30 league northnortheast . the 30 day of July about noon we weigh our anchor , and go into the sea , and sail along these island Northnortheast , keep the land still in sight until the August . second day of August : then hail in close aboard the land , to the intent to know what land it be , there come a skiff of the island aboard of we , of who we ask many question , who show unto we , that the island be Seynam in 70 call Seynam , which be the latitude of seventy degree , degree . anj from stanfew thirty league , be also under the king of Denmark , and that there be no merchandise there , but only dry fish , and train oil . than we be purpose to go unto Finmarke , inquire of he , if we may have a pilot to bring we unto Finmarke , and he say , that if we can bear in , we shall have a good harbour , and on the next day a pilot to bring we to Finmarke , unto the wardhouse , which be the strong hold in Finmarke , and most resort to by report . but when we will have enter into a harbour , the land be very high on every side , there come such flaw of wind and terrible whirlwind , that we be not able to bear in , but by violence be constrain to take the sea again , our pinnace be unshipt : we sail north and by east , the wind increase so sore that we be not able to bear any sail , but take they in , and lie a drift , to the end to let the storm over pass . and that night by violence of wind , and thickness of mist , we be not able to keep together within sight , and then about midnight we lose our pinnace , which be a discomfort unto we . assoon as it be day , and the fog overpast , we look about , and at the last we descry one of our ship to leeward of we : than we spread a hullock of our foresail , and bare room with she , which be the confidence , but the Edward we can not see . then the flaw something abate , we and the confidence hoist up our sail the four day , sail Northeast and by 220 north , to the end to fall with the Wardhouse , as we do consult to do before , in case we shall part company . thus run Northeast and by north , and Northeast fifty league , than we sound , and have 160 fathom , whereby we think to be far from land , and perceive that the land lay not as the globe make mention . wherefore we change our course the sixth day , and sail southeast and by south eight and forty league , think thereby to find the Wardhouse . the eight day much wind rise at the westnorthwest , we not know how the coast lie , strike our sail , and lie a drift , where we sound and find 160 fathom as afore . the nine day , the wind vear to the south southeast , we sail Northeast 25 league . the ten day we sound , and can get no ground , neither yet can see any land , whereat we wonder : then the wind come at the north - east , we run southeast about 48 league . the 11 day , the wind be at south , we sound