the book of the great and mighty emperor of Russia , and duke of Moscovia , and of the dominion order and commodity thereunto belong ; draw by Richard chancellor . | | Duyna . note . orasmuch as it be meet and necessary for all those that mind to take in hand the travel into far or strange country , to endeavour themselves not only to understand the order , commodity , and fruitfulness thereof , but also to apply they to the set forth of the same , whereby it may encourage other to the like travail : therefore have i now think good to make a brief rehearsal of the order of this my travail in Russia and Moscovia , and other country thereunto adjoin ; because it be my chance to fall with the north part of Russia before i come towards Moscovia , i will partly declare my knowledge therein . Russia be very plentiful both of land and people , and also wealthy for such commodity as they have . they be very great fisher for salmon and small cod : they have much oil which we call treine oil , the most whereof be make by a river call two Duina . they make it in other place , but not so much as there . they have also a great trade in seethe of salt water . to the north part of that country be the place where they have their fur , as sable , martern , grief Bevers , fox white , black , and red , minx , ermine , Miniver , and heart . there be also a fish tooth , which fish be call a morsse . the taker thereof dwell in a place call 224 1553 - postesora , which bring they upon heart to Lampas to sell , and from Lampas carry they to a place call Colmogro , where the high market be hold on saint Nicholas day . to the west of Colmogro there be a place call Gratanove , in our language novogorode , where much fine flax and hemp grow , and also much wax and honey . the dutch merchant have a Staplehouse there . there be also great store of hide , and at a place call Plesco : and thereabouts be great store of flax , hemp , wax , honey ; and that town be from colmogro 120 mile . there be a place call Vologda ; the commodity whereof be tallow , wax , and flax : but not so great plenty as be in Gratanove . from Vologda to Colmogro there run a river call Duyna , and from thence it fall into the sea . Colmogro serve gratanowe , Vologda and the Moscow with all the country thereabouts with salt and saltfish . from Vologda to jeraslave be two hundred mile : which town be very great . the commodity thereof be hide , and tallow , and corn in great plenty , and some wax , but not so plentiful as in other place . the Moscow be from jeraslave two hundred mile . the country betwixt they be very well replenish with small village , which be so well fill with people , that it be wonder to see they : the ground be well store with corn which they carry to the city of Moscow in such abundance that it be wonder to see it . you shall meet in a morning seven or eight hundred sled come or go thither , that carry corn , and some carry fish . you shall have some that carry corn to the Moscow , and some that fetch corn from thence , that at the least dwell a thousand mile off ; and all their carriage be on sled . those which come so far dwell in the north part of the duke dominion , where the cold will suffer no corn to grow , it be so extreme . [ I . 2 3 8 . i they bring thither fish , fur , and beast skin . in those part they have but small store of cattle . 11 225 p the Moscow it self be great : i take the whole town to be great than London with the suburb : but it be very rude , and stand without all order . their house be all of timber very dangerous for fire . there be a fair castle , the wall whereof be of brick , and very high : they say they be eighteen foot thick , but i do not believe it , it do not so seem , notwithstanding i do not certain know it : for no stranger may come to view it . the one side be ditch , and on the other side run a river call Moscua which run into Tartary and so into the sea call mare Caspium : and on the north side there be a base town , the which have also a brick wall about it , and so it join with the castle wall . the emperor lie in the castle , wherein be nine fair church , and therein be religious man . also there be a metropolitan with diverse bishop . i will not stand in description of their building nor of the strength thereof because we have better in all point in England . they be well furnish with ordinance of all sort . the emperor or duke house neither in building nor in the outward show , nor yet within the house be so sumptuous as i have see . it be very low build in eight square , much like the old build of England , with small window , and so in other point . now to declare my come before his ’ majesty : after i have remain twelve day , the secretary which have the hear of stranger do send for i , advertise i that the duke pleasure be to have i to come before his master with the king my master letter : whereof i be right glad , and so i give my attendance . and when the duke be in his place appoint , the interpretor come for i into the utter chamber , where sit one hundred or more gentleman , all in cloth of gold very sumptuous , and from thence i come into the counsel chamber , where sit the duke himself with his noble , which be a fair company : they sit round about the chamber on high , yet so that he 226 himself sit much high than any of his noble in a chair gilt , and in a long garment of beat gold , with a imperial crown upon his head , and a staff of crystal and gold in his right hand , and his other hand half lean on his chair . the chancellor stand up with the secretary before the duke . after my duty do and my letter deliver , he bid i welcome , and inquire of i the health of the king my master , and i answer that he be in good health at my departure from his court , and that