miserable : for i have see they eat the pickle of hear and other stink fish : nor the fish can be so stink nor rot , but they will eat it and praise it to be more wholesome than 235 other fish or fresh meat . in my opinion there be no such people under the sun for their hardness of live . well , i will leave they in this point , and will in part declare their religion . they do observe the law of the greek with such excess of superstition , as the like have not be hear of . they have no grave image in their church , but all paint , to the intent they will not break the commandment : but to their paint image they use such idolatry , that the like be never hear of in England . they will neither worship nor honour any image that be make forth of their own country . for their own image ( say they ) have picture to declare what they be , and how they be of God , and so be not we : they say , look how the painter or carver have make they , so we do worship they , and they worship none before they be christen . they say we be but half Christians : because we observe not part of the old law with the turk . therefore they call themselves more holy than we . they have none other learning but their mother tongue , nor will suffer no other in their country among they . all their service in church be in their mother tongue . they have the old and new testament , which be daily read among they : and yet their superstition be no less . for when the priest do read , they have such trick in their read , that no man can understand they , nor no man give ear to they . for all the while the priest read , the people sit down and one talk with another . but when the priest be at service no man sit , but gagle and duck like so many goose . and as for their prayer they have but little skill , but use to say as body pomele : as much to say , lord have mercy upon i . for the ten man within the land can say the pater noster . and as for the creed , no man may be so bold as to meddle therewith but in the church : for they say it shall not be speak of , but in the church . Speake to they of the commandment , and they will say they be give to Moses in the law , which Christ have now 236 abrogate by his precious death and passion : therefore , ( say they ) we observe little or none thereof . and i do believe they . for if they be examine of their law and commandment together , they shall agree but in few point . they have the sacrament of the lord supper in both kind , and more ceremony than we have . they present they in a dish in both kind together , and carry they round about the church upon the priest head , and so do minister at all such time as any shall require . they be great offerer of candle , and sometime of money , which we call in England , soul pense , with more ceremony than i be able to declare . they have four Lents in the year , whereof our lent be the great . look as we do begin on the Wednesday , so they do on the Monday before : and the week before that they call the butter week : and in that week they eat nothing but butter and milk . howbeit i believe there be in no other country the like people for drunkenness . the next lent be call saint Peter lend , and begin always the Monday next after Trinity Sunday , and end on saint Peter even . if they shall break that fast , their belief be , that they shall not come in at heaven gate . and when any of they die , they have a testimoniali with they in the coffin , that when the soul come to heaven gate it may deliver the same to saint Peter , which declare that the party be a true and holy Russian . the three lent begin fifteen day before the late lady day , and end on our lady even . the four lent begin on saint Martins day , and end on Christmas even : which lend be fast for saint Philip , saint Peter , saint Nicholas , and saint Clement . for they four be the principali and great saint in that country . in these Lents they eat neither butter , egg , milk , nor cheese ; but they be very straite keep with fish , cabbage , and root . and out of their Lents , they observe true the wednesdaye and Friday throughout the year : and on the Saturday they do eat flesh . 237 furthermore they have a great number of religious man : which be black monk , and they eat no flesh throughout the year , but fish , milk and butter . by their order they shall eat no fresh - fish , and in their Lents they eat nothing but colewort , cabbage , salt cucumber , with other root , as radish and such like . their drink be like our penny ale , and be call quass . they have service daily in their church ; and use to go to service two hour before day , and that be end by day light . at nine of the clock they go to mass : that end , to dinner : and after that to service again : and then to supper . you shall understand that at every dinner and supper they have declare the exposition of the gospel that day : but how they wrest and twine the scripture and that together by report it be wonderful . as for whoredom and drunkenness there be none such living : and for extortion , they be the most abominable under the sun . now judge of their holiness . they have twice as much land as the duke himself have : but yet he be reasonable even with they , as thus : when they take bribe of any of the poor and simple , he have it by a order . when the abbot of any of their house die , than the duke have all his good movable and moveable : so that the successor buy all at the duke hand : and by this mean they be the best fermer the duke have . thus with their religion i make a end , trust hereafter to know it better . to the right worshipful and my singular good uncle , master Christopher Frothingham , give these . sir , read and correct ; for great be the defect .