danger which he be to fall into , and omit no reason that may serve to that purpose . but he hold nothing so ignominious and reproachful , as inconstancy and levity of mind , and persuade himself that a man of valour can not commit a more dishonourable part then for fear of danger to avoid and shun great attempt , be nothing at all change or discourage with the speech and word of the Scot , remain steadfast and immutable in his first resolution : determine either to bring that to pass which be intend , or else to die the death . 247 they arrive in the bay of saint Nicholas . and as for they which be with master chancellor in his ship , although they have great cause of discomfort by the loss of their company ( who the foresay tempest have separate from they , ) and be not a little trouble with cogitation and perturbation of mind , in respect of their doubtful course : yet notwithstanding , they be of such consent and agreement of mind with master chancellor , that they be resolute , and prepare under his direction and government , to make proof and trial of all adventure , without all fear or mistrust of future danger . which constancy of mind in all the company do exceed increase their captain carefulness : for he be swallow up with like good will and love towards they , fear lest through any error of he , the safety of the company shall be endanger . to conclude , when they see their desire and hope of the arrival of the rest of the ship to be every day more and more frustrate , they provide to sea again , and master chancellor hold on his course towards that unknown part of the world , and sail so far , that he come at last to the place where he find no night at all , but a continual light and brightness of the sun shine clear upon the huge and mighty sea and have the benefit of this perpetuali light for certain day , at the length it please God to bring they into a certain great bay , which be of one hundred mile or thereabouts over . whereinto they enter , and somewhat far within it cast anchor , and look every way about they , it happen that they espy a far off a certain fisher boat , which master chancellor , accompany with a few of his man , go towards to common with the fisherman that be in it , and to know of they what country it be , and what people , and of what manner of live they be : but they be amaze with the strange greatness of his ship , ( for in those part before that time they have never see the like ) begin present to avoid and to flee : but he still follow they at last overtake they , and be come to they , 248 * 553 - they ( be in great fear , as man half dead ) prostrate themselves before he , offer to kiss his foot : but he ( accord to his great and singular courtesy , ) look pleasant upon they , comfort they by sign and gesture , refuse those duty and reverence of they , and take they up in all love sort from the ground . and it be strange to consider how much favour afterward in that place , this humanity of he do purchase to himself . for they be dismiss spread by and by a report abroad of the arrival of a strange nation , of a singular gentleness and courtesy : whereupon the common people come together offer to these newcome guest victual free , and not refuse to traffic with they , except they have be bind by a certain religious use and custom , not to buy any foreign commodity , without the knowledge and consent of the king . by this time our man have learn that this country discovery be call Russia , or Moscovie , and that Ivan Vasiliwich ( which be at that time their king name ) rule and govern far and wide in those place . and the barbarous russes ask likewise of our man whence they be , and what they come for : whereunto answer be make , that they be Englishmen send into those coast , from the most excellent king Edward the sixth , have from he in commandment certain thing to deliver to their king , and seek nothing else but his amity and friendship , and traffic with his people , whereby they doubt not , but that great commodity and profit will grow to the subject of both kingdom . the barbarian herd these thing very glad , and promise their aid and furtherance to acquaint their king out of hand with so honest and a reasonable request . in the mean time master Chanceler entreat victual for his money of the governor of that place ( who together with other come aboard he ) and require hostage of they likewise for the more assurance of safety to himself and his company . to who the governor answer , that they know not in that case 249 the will of their king , but yet be willing in such thing as they may lawful do , to pleasure he : which be as then to afford he the benefit of victual . now while these thing be a do , they secret send a messenger unto the emperor , to certify he of the arrival of a strange nation , and withal to know his pleasure concern they . which message be very welcome unto he , insomuch that voluntary he invite they to come to his court . but if by reason of the tediousness of so long a journey , they think it not best so to do , than he grant liberty to his subject to bargain , and to traffic with they : and further promise , that if it will please they to come to he , he himself will bear the whole charge of post horse . in the mean time the governor of the place differ the matter from day to day , pretend diverse excuse , and say one while that the consent of all the governor , and another while , that the great and weighty affair of the kingdom compel they to differ their answer : and this they do of purpose , so long to protract the time , until the messenger ( send before to the king ) do return with relation of his will and pleasure . but master chancellor , ( see