order , there be among they a perpetuali prohibition , that they may eat no flesh : and therefore their meat be only salt fish , milk , and butter : neither be it permit they by the law , and custom of their religion , to eat any fresh fish at all : and at those four fast time , whereof we speak before , they eat no fish at all : only they live with herb , and cucumber , which they do continual for that purpose cause and take order to grow and spring , for their use and diet . as for their drink , it be very weak , and small . for the discharge of their office , they do every day say service , and that early in the morning before day : and they do in such sort , and with such observation begin their service , that they will be sure to make a end of it , before day : and about nine of the clock in the morning they celebrate the communion . when 267 they have so do , they go to dinner , and after dinner note . they go again to service , and the like also after supper : and in the mean time while they be at dinner there be some exposition or interpretation of the gospel use . whensoever any abbot of any monastery die , the emperor take all his household stuff , beast , flock of sheep , gold , silver , and all that he have : or else he that be to succeed he in his place and dignity do redeem all those thing , and buy they of the emperor for money . their church be build of timber , and the tower of their church for the most part be cover with shingle board . at the door of their church , they usual build some entrance or porch as we do , and in their churchyard they erect a certain house of wood , wherein they set up their bell , wherein sometime they have but one , in some two , and in some also three . there be one use and custom among they , which be strange and rare , but yet it be very ridiculous , and that be this : when any man die among they , they take the dead body and put it in a coffin or chest , and in the hand of the corpse they put a little scroll , and in the same there be these word write , that the same man die a ruff of russes , have receive the faith , and die in the same . This write or letter they say they send to saint Peter , who receive it ( as they affirm ) read it , and by and by admit he into heaven , and that his glory and place be high and great than the glory of the Christians of the latin church , repute themselves to be follower of a more sincere faith and religion then they : they hold opinion that we be but half Christians , and themselves only to be the true and perfect church : these be the foolish and childish dotage of such ignorant babarian . 268 of the moscovite that be idolater , dwell near to Tartary . there be a certain part of Moscovie border upon the country of the Tartar , wherein those moscovite that dwell be very great idolater : they have one famous idol among they , which they call the golden old wife : and they have a custom that whensoever any plague or any calamity do afflict the country , as hunger , war , or such like , than they go to consult with their idol , which they do after this manner : they fall down prostrate before the idol , and pray unto it , and put in the presence of the same , a cymbal : and about the same certain person stand , which be choose among they by lot : upon their cymbali they place a silver toad , and sound the cymbali , and to whosoever of those lot person that toad go , he be take , and by and by slay : and immediate , i know not by what illusion of the devil , or idol , he be again restore to life , and then do reveal and deliver the cause of the present calamity . and by this mean know how to pacific the idol , they be deliver from the imminent danger . of the form of their private house , and of the apparel of the people . the common house of the country be every where build of beam of fir tree : the low beam do so receive the round holownesse of the uppermost , that by the mean of the build thereupon , they resist , and expel all wind that blow , and where the timber be join together , there they stop the chink with moss . the form and fashion of their house in all place be four square , with strait and narrow window , whereby with a transparent casement make or cover with skin like to parchment , they aurea vetula , or Zelotibaba . receive the light . the roof of their house be make of board cover without with you bark of tree : within their house they have bench or grieze hard by their wall , which common they sleep upon , for the common people know not the use of bed : they have stoove wherein in the morning they make a fire , and the same fire do either moderate warm , or make very hot the whole house . the apparel of the people for the most part be make of wool , their cap be pick like unto a rike or diamond , broad beneath , and sharp upward . in the manner of make whereof , there be a sign and representation of nobility : for the lofty or high their cap be , the great be their birth suppose to be , and the great reverence be give they by the common people . the conclusion to queen marie . these be the thing most excellent queen , which your subject new return from Russia have bring home concern the state of that country : wherefore if your majestic shall be favourable , and grant a continuance of the travel , there be no doubt but that the honour and renown of your name will be spread among those nation , whereunto three only noble personage from the very creation have have access , to who no man have be comparable .