man can rule he . their war 232 be hold against the Crimme tartarian and the nagaians . i will stand no long in the rehearsal of their power and war . for it be too tedious to the reader . but i will in part declare their law , and punishment , and the execution of justice . and first i will begin with the commons of the country , which the gentleman have rule on : and that be , that every gentleman have rule and justice upon his own tenant . and if it so fall out that two gentleman servant or tenant do disagree , the two gendeman examine the matter , and have the party before they , and so give the sentence . and yet can they make the end betwixt they of the controversy , but either of the gentleman must bring his servant or tenant before the high judge or justice of that country , and there present they , and declare the matter and case . the plaintiff say , i require the law ; which be grant : then come a officer and arrest the party defendant , and use he contrary to the law of England . for when they attach any man they beat he about the leg , until such time as he find surety to answer the matter : and if not , his hand and neck be bind together , and he be lead about the town and beat about the leg , with other extreme punishment till he come to his answer : and the justice demand if it be for debt , and say : owe thou this man any such debt ? he will perhaps say nay . then say the judge : be thou able to deny it ? let we hear how ? by other say the defendant . than he command to leave beat he till further trial be have . their order in one point be commendable . they have no man of law to plead their cause in any court : but every man plead his own cause , and give bill and answer in write : contrary to the order in England . the complaint be in manner of a supplication , and make to the duke grace , and deliver he into his own hand , require to have justice as in his complaint be allege . 233 the duke give sentence himself upon all matter in the law . which be very commendable , that such a prince will take pain to see ministration of justice . yet notwithstanding it be wonderful abuse : and thereby the duke be much deceive . but if it fall out that the officer be espy in cloak the truth , they have most condign punishment . and if the plaintiff can nothing prove , than the defendant must take his oath upon the crucifix whether he be in the right or no . then be demand if the plaintiff be any thing able further to make proof : if he be not ; then sometime he will say , baptize they able to prove it by my body and hand , or by my champion body , so require the camp . after the other have his oath , it be grant aswell to the one as to the other . so when they go to the field , they swear upon the crucifix , that they be both in the right , and that the one shall make the other to confess the truth before they depart forth of the field : and so they go both to the battle arm with such weapon as they use in that country : they fight all on foot , and seidome the party themselves do fight , except they be gentleman , for they stand much upon their reputation , for they will not fight , but with such as be come of as good a house as themselves . so that if either party require the combat , it be grant unto they , and no champion be to serve in their room : wherein be no deceit : but otherwise by champion there be . for although they take great oath upon they to do the battle true , yet be the contrary often see : because the common champion have none other live . and assoon as the one party have get the victory , he demand the debt , and the other be carry to prison , and there be shameful use till he take order . there be also another order in the law , that the plaintiff may swear in some cause of debt . and if the party defendant be poor , he shall | be set under the crucifix , and the party plaintiff must swear over his head , and when he have take his oath , the duke take the 234 party defendant home to his house , and use he as his bondman , and put he to labour , or let he for hire to any such as need he , until such time as his friend make provision for his redemption : or else he remain in bondage all the day of his life . again there be many that will sell themselves to gentleman or merchant to be their bondman , to have during their life meat , drink and cloth , and at their come to have a piece of money . yea and some will sell their wife and child to be bawd and drudge to the buyer . also they have a law for felon and picker contrary to the law of England . for by their law they can hang no man for his first offence ; but may keep he long in prison , and oftentimes beat he with whip and other punishment : and there he shall remain until his friend be able to bail he . if he be a picker or a cutpurse , as there be very many , the second time he be take , he have a piece of his nose cut off , and be burn in the forehead , and keep in prison till he find surety for his good behaviour . and if he be take the three time , he be hang . and at the first time he be extreme punish and not release , except he have very good friend , or that some gentleman require to have he to the war : and in so do , he shall enter into great bond for he : by which mean the country be bring into good quietness . but they be natural give to great deceit , except extreme beat do bridle they . they be natural give to hard live aswell in fare as in lodging . i hear a russian say , that it be a great deal merry live in prison then forth , but for the great beat . for they have meat and drink without any labour , and get the charity of well dispose people : but be at liberty they get nothing . the poor be very innumerable , and live most