their sumptuousness be above measure , not only in themselves , but also in their horse , as velvet , cloth of gold , and cloth of silver set with pearl and not scant . what shall i far say ? i never hear of nor see man so sumptuous : but it be no daily guise , for when they have not occasion , as i say before , all their do be but mean . and now to the effect of their war : they be man without all order in the field . for they run hurl on heap , and for the most part they never give battle to their enemy : but that which they do , they do it all by stealth . but i believe they be such man for hard live as be not under the sun : for no cold will hurt they . yea and though they lie in the field two month , at such time as it shall freeze more than a yard thick , the common soldier have neither tent nor any thing else over his head : the most defence they have against the wether be a self , which be set against the wind and weather , and when snow come he do cast it off , and make he a fire , and lay he down thereby . thus do the most of all his man , except they be gentleman which have other provision of their own . their lie in the field be not so strange as be their hardness : for every man must carry and make provision for himself and his horse for a month or two , which be very wonderful . for he himself shall live upon water and otemeale mingle together cold , and drink water thereto : he horse shall eat green wood , and such like baggage , and shall stand open in the cold field without covert , and yet will he labour and serve he right well . i pray you among all our boast warrior how many shall we find to endure the field with they but one month . i know no such region about we that bear that name for 230 1553 - man and beast . now what may be make of these man if they be train and break to order and knowledge of civil war ? if this prince have within his country such man as can make they to understand you thing aforesaid , i do believe that 2 of the best or great prince in Christendom be not well able to match with he , consider the greatness of his power and the hardness of his people and strait live both of people and horse , and the small charge which his war stand he in : for he give no wage , except to stranger . they have a yearly stipend and not much . as for his own country man every one serve of his own proper cost and charge , save that he give to his harcubusier certain allowance for powder and shot : or else no man in all his country have one penny wage . but if any man have do very good service he give he a farm or a piece of land ; for the which he be bind at all time to be ready with so many man as the duke shall appoint : who consider in his mind what that land or farm be well able to find : and so many shall he be bind to furnish at all and every such time as war be hold in any of the duke dominion . for there be no man of live , but he be bind likewise , whether the duke call for either soldier or labourer , to furnish they with all such necessary as to they belong . also , if any gentleman or man of living do die without issue male , immediate after his death the duke enter his land , notwithstanding he have never so many daughter , and peradventure give it forthwith to another man , except a small portion that he spare to marry the daughter with all . also if there be a rich man , a fermour , or man of live , which be strike in age or by chance be maim , and be not able to do the duke service , some other gentleman that be not able to live and more able to do service , will come to the duke and complain , say , your grace have such a one , which be unmeet to do service to your highness , who 231 have great abundance of wealth , and likewise your grace have many gentleman which be poor and lack live , and we that lack be well able to do good service , your grace may do well to look upon he , and make he to help those that want . immediate the duke send forth to inquire of his wealth : and if it be so prove , he shall be call before the duke , and it shall be say unto he , friend , you have too much live , and be unserviceable to your prince , less will serve you , and the rest will serve other man that be more able to serve , whereupon immediate his live shall be take away from he , save a little to find himself and his wife on , and he may not once repine thereat : but for answer he will say , that he have nothing , but it be god and the duke grace , and can say , as we the common people in England say , if we have any thing ; that it be god and our own . Men may say , that these man be in wonderful great awe , and obedience , that thus one must give and grant his good which he have be scrape and scratch for all his life to be at his prince pleasure and commandment . oh that our sturdy rebel be have in the like subjection to know their duty toward their prince . they may not say as some snudge in England say , i will find the queen a man to serve in my place , or make his friend tarry at home if money have the upper hand . no , no , it be not so in this country : for he shall make humble suit to serve the duke . and who he send most to the war he think he be most in his favour : and yet as i before have say , he give no wage . if they know their strength no man be able to make match with they : nor they that dwell near they shall have any rest of they . but i think it be not god will : for 1 may compare they to a young horse that know not his strength , who a little child rule and guide with a bridle , for all his great strength : for if he do , neither child nor