the oath minister to the master of the ship , etc ou shall swear by the holy content in that book , that you accord and to the uttermost of your knowledge , and good understanding in mariner science and craft , shall in your vocation do your best to conduct the good ship call the N . etc whereof you now be master under God , both unto and from the port of your discovery , and so use your endeavour and faithful diligence , in charge , discharge , lade again , and roomage of the same ship , as may be most for the benefit and profit of this right worshipful fellowship : and you shall not private bargein , buy , sell , exchange , barter , or distribute any good , ware , merchandise , or thing whatsoever ( necessary tackle and victual for the ship only except ) to or for your own lucre , gain or profit , neither to nor for the private lucre , gain , or profit of any other person or person whatsoever . and further , if you shall know any boatswain , mariner , or any other person or person whatsoever , to buy , sell , barter , truck , or exchange any good , ware , merchandize , or thing for private account , reckon , or behalf , you shall do your best to withstand and let the same : and if you can com - modiously so do , that then before the discharge of such good buy for private account , you shall give knowledge thereof to the cape merchant of this say fellowship for the time be . and you shall not receive nor take , nor suffer to be receive or take into your say ship during this voyage any manner person or person whatsoever , go or return , but only those mariner which without fraud or guile shall be hire to be of your company , and to serve in mariner craft and science only : so help you God , etc 2l6 these foresay ship be full furnish with their pinnace and boat , well appoint with all manner of artillery , and other thing necessary for their defence with all the man aforesaid , depart from Ratcliff , and vale unto Detford , the io . day of May , 1553 . the 11 . day about two of the clock , we depart from Detford , pass by Greenwich , salute the king majesty then be there , shoot off our ordinance , and so vale unto Blackwall , and there remain until the 17 . day , and that day in the morning we go from Blackwall , and come to Woolwich by nine of the clock , and there remain one tide , and so the same night unto heyr . the 18 . day from heyr unto Gravesend , and there remain until the twenty day : that day be saturday , from Gravesend unto tilberie hope , remain there until the two and twenty day . MaJ - the 22 . day from Tilbery hope to holly haven . the 23 . day from holly haven , till we come against lee , and there remain that night , by reason that the wind be contrary to we . the 24 . day the wind be in the southwest in the morning , we sail along the coast over the spit , until we come against saint Osyth , about six of the clock at night , and there come to anchor , and abide there all that night . the 25 . day about ten of the clock we depart from saint Osyth , and so sail forward unto the Nase , and there abide that night for wind and tide . the 26 . day at five of the clock in the morning , we weigh our anchor , and sail over the Nase , the wind be at the southwest , until we come to Orwell wand , and there come to a anchor , and abide there until the 28 . day . the same day be Trinity Sunday about 7 . of the clock before noon we weigh our anchor , and sail till we come athwart walsursye , and there come to a anchor . the 29 . day from thence to holmehead , where we 217 stay that day , where we consult which way , and what course be best to be hold for the discovery of our voyage , and there agree . the 30 . day of may at five of the clock in the morning we set sail , and come against Yermouth about three league into the sea , ride there at anchor all that night . the last of may into the sea six league Northeast , and there tarry that night , where the wind blow very sore . June . the first of June the wind be at north contrary to we , we come back again to Orwell , and remain there until the 15 . day , tarry for the wind , for all this time the wind be contrary to our purpose . the 15 day be at orwel in the latitude of 52 degree , in the morning we weigh our anchor , and go forth into the wand about two mile from the town , and lie there that night . the 16 day at eight of the clock we set forward , and sail until we come athwart Alburrough , and there stay that night . the 17 day about five of the clock before noon we go back unto orfordnesse , and there remain until the 19 day . the 19 day at eight of the clock in the morning we go back to orwel , and abide there three day tarry for the wind . the 23 day of June the wind be fair in the southwest we hail into the sea to orfordnesse , and from thence into the sea ten league north - east : then be past the sand , we change our course six league northnortheast : about midnight we change our course again , and go due north , continue in the same unto the 27 day . the 27 day about seven of the clock northnorthwest 42 league to the end to fall with Shotland : then the wind vear to the west , so that we can lie but north