the ground be cover with snow , and be grow terrible and hard with the frost , this ruff hang up his mantle , or soldier coat , against that part from whence the wind and snow drive , and so make 258 a little fire , lie down with his back towards the weather : this mantle of he serve he for his bed , wall , house and all : he drink be cold water of the river , mingle with oatmeal , and this be all his good cheer , and he think himself well , and dainty feed therewith , and so sit down by his fire , and upon the hard ground , roast as it be his weary side thus dainty stuff : the hard ground be his feather bed , and some block or stone his pillow : and as for his horse , he be as it be a chamber - fellow with his master , fare both alike . how just may this barbarous , and rude Russe condemn the daintiness and niceness of our captain , who live in a soil and air much more temperate , yet common use fur boot , and cloak ? but thus much of the furniture of their common soldier . but those that be of high degree come into the field a little better provide . as for the furniture of the emperor himself , it be then above all other time , most notable . the cover of his tent for the most part , be all of gold , adorn with stone of great price , and with the curious workmanship of plumasier . as often as they be to skirmish with the enemy , they go forth without any order at all : they make no wing , nor military division of their man , as we do , but lie for the most part , in ambush , do sudden set upon the enemy . their horse can well abstain two whole day from any meat . they feed upon the bark of tree , and the most tender branch , in all the time of war . and this scant and miserable manner of live , both the horse and his master can well endure , sometime for the space of two month , lusty , and in good state of body . if any man behave himself valiant in the field , to the contentation of the emperor , he bestow upon he in recompense of his service , some farm , or so much ground as he and he may live upon , which notwithstanding after his death , return again to the emperor , if he die without a male issue . for although his daughter be never so many , yet no part of that inheritance come to they , except peradventure the emperor of his good - 259 A . D . * 553 - nes , give some portion of the land among they , to bestow they withal . as for the man , whosoever he be , that be in this sort reward by the emperor liberality , he be bind in a great sum , to maintain so many soldier for the war , when need shall require , as that land , in the opinion of the emperor , be able to maintain . and all those , to who any land fall by inheritance , be in no better condition : for if they die without any male issue , all their land fall into the hand of the emperor . and moreover , if there be any rich man among they , who in his own person be unfit for the war , and yet have such wealth , that thereby many noble man and warrior may be maintain , if any of the courtier present his name to the emperor , the unhappy man be by and by send for , and in that instant , deprive of all his riches , which with great pain and travel all his life time he have get together : except perhaps some small portion thereof be leave he , to maintain his wife , child and family . but all this be do of all the people so willing at the emperor commandment , that a man will think , they rather make restitution of other man good , then give that which be their own to other man . now the emperor have take these good into his hand , bestow they among his courtier , accord to their desert : and often that a man be send to the war , the more the favour he think be bear to he by the emperor , although he go upon his own charge , as i say before . so great be the obedience of all man general to their prince . of the ambassador of the emperor of Moscovie . the Moscovite , with no less pomp , and magnificence , then that which we have speak of , send his ambassador to foreign prince , in the affair of estate . for while our man be abide in the city of Moscow , there be two ambassador send to the king of Poland , 260 accompany with 500 notable horse , and the great part of the man be array in cloth of gold , and of silk , and the worst apparel be of garment of blow colour , to speak nothing of the trappings of the horse , which be adorn with gold and silver , and very curious embroider : they have also with they one hundred white and fair spare horse , to use they at such time , as any weariness come upon they . but now the time require i to speak brief of other city of the moscovite , and of the ware and commodity that the country yield . novogorode . next unto Moscow , the city of Novogorode be repute the chief of Russia : for although it be in majesty inferior to it , yet in greatness it go beyond it . it be the chief and great Marte town of all Moscovie : and albeit the emperor seat be not there , but at Moscow , yet the commodiousness of the river , fall into that gulf , which be call Sinus Finnicus , whereby it be well frequent by merchant , make it more famous than Moscow it self . this town excel all the rest in the commodity of flax and hemp : it yield also hide , honey , and wax . the Fleming there sometime have a house of merchandise , but by reason that they use the like ill deal there , which they do with we