diverse man seem willing , and make offer of themselves thereunto , yet by a common consent one Richard Chanceler , a man of great estimation for many good part of wit in he , be elect , in who alone great hope for the performance of this business rest . this man be bring up by one master Henry Sidney , a noble young gentleman and very much belove of king Edward , who at this time come to the place where the merchant be gather together , begin a very eloquent speech or oration , and speak to they after this manner follow . my very worshipful friend , i can but great commend your present godly and virtuous intention , in the serious enterprise ( for the singular love you bear to your country ) a matter , which ( i hope ) will prove profitable for this nation , and honourable to this our land . which intention of you we also of the nobili tie be ready to our power to help and further : neither do we hold any thing so dear and precious unto we , which we will not willing forgo , and lie out in so commendable a cause . but principal i rejoice in my self , that i have nourish and maintain that wit , which be like by some mean and in some measure , to profit and steed you in this worthy action . but yet i will not have you ignorant of this one thing , that i do now part with chancellor , not because 1 make little reckon of the man , or that his maintenance be burdenous and chargeable unto i , but that you may conceive and understand my good will and promptitude for the furtherance of this business , and that the authority and estimation which he deserve may be give he . you know the man by report , i by experience , you by word , i by deed , you by speech and company , but i by the daily trial of his life have a full and perfect knowledge of he . and you be also to remember , into how many peril 242 for your sake , and his country love , he be now to run : whereof it be requisite that we be not unmindful , if it please God to send he good success . we commit a little money to the chance and hazard of fortune : he commit his life ( a thing to a man of all thing most dear ) to the rage sea , and the uncertainty of many danger . we shall here live and rest at home quiet with our friend , and acquaintance : but he in the mean time labour to keep the ignorant and unruly mariner in good order and obedience , with how many care shall he trouble and vex himself ? with how many trouble shall he break himself ? and how many disquieting shall he be force to sustain ? we shall keep our own coast and country : he shall seek strange and unknown kingdom . he shall commit his safety to barbarous and cruel people , and shall hazard his life among the monstrous and terrible beast of the sea wherefore in respect of the greatness of the danger , and the excellency of his charge , you be to favour and love the man thus depart from we : and if it fall so happy out that he return again , it be your part and duty also , liberal to reward he . after that this noble young gentleman have deliver this or some such like speech , much more eloquent than i can possible report it , the company then present begin one to look upon another , one to question and confer with another : and some ( to who the virtue and sufficiency of the man be know ) begin secret to rejoice with themselves , and to conceive a speciali hope , that the man will prove in time very rare and excellent , and that his virtue already appear and shine to the world will grow to the great honour and advancement of this kingdom . after all this , the company grow to some silence , it seem good to they that be of great gravity among they , to inquire , search and seek what may be learned and know , concern the easterly part or 243 tract of the world . for which cause two tartarian , which be then of the king stable , be send for , and a interpreter be get to be present , by who they be demand touch their country and the manner of their nation . but they be able to answer nothing to the purpose : be in deed more acquaint ( as one there merry and open say ) to toss pot , than to learn the state and disposition of people . but after much ado and many thing pass about this matter , they grow at last to this issue , to set down and appoint a time for the departure of the ship : because diverse be of opinion , that a great part of the best time of the year be already spend , and if the delay grow long , the way will be stop and bar by the force of the ice , and the cold climate : and therefore it be think best by the opinion of they all , that by the twenty day of May , the captain they depart and mariner shall take ship , and depart from from Ratcliff Radcliffe upon the ebb , if it please God . they have salute their acquaintance , one his wife , another ’ his child , another his kinsfolk , and another his friend dear than his kinsfolk , be present and ready at the day appoint : and have weigh anchor , they depart with the turn of the water , and sail easy , come first to Greenwich . the great ship be tow down with boat , and oar , and the mariner be all apparel in watchet or sky colour cloth , row amain , and make way with diligence . And be come near to Greenwich , ( where the court then lie ) present upon the news thereof , the courtier come run out , and the common people flock together , stand very thick upon the shore : the privy counsel , they look out at the window of the court , and the rest run up to the top of the tower : the ship hereupon discharge their ordinance , and shoot off their piece after the manner of war ,