my trust be that he be now in the same . upon the which he bid i to dinner . the chancellor present my present unto his grace bareheaded ( for before they be all cover ) and when his grace have receive my letter , i be require to depart : for i have charge not to speak to the duke , but when he speak to i . So encage depart unto the secretary chamber , where i remain two hour , and then i be send for again unto another palace which be call the golden palace , but i see no cause why it shall be so call ; for i have see many fair than it in all point : and so i come into the hall , which be small and not great as be the king majesty of England , and the table be cover with a tablecloth ; and the martial sit at the end of the table with a little white rod in his hand , which board be full of vessel of gold : and on the other side of the hall do stand a fair cupborde of plate . from thence i come into the dine chamber , where the duke himself sit at his table without cloth of estate , in a gown of silver , with a crown imperial upon his head , he sit in a chair somewhat high : there sit none near he by a great way . there be long table set round about the chamber , which be full set with such as the duke have at dinner : they be all in white . also the place where the table stand be high by two step then the rest of the house . in the midst of the chamber stand a table or cupboard to set plate on ; which stand full of cup of gold : and 227 among all the rest there stand four marvellous great pot or crudence as they call they , of gold and silver : i think they be a good yard and a half hie . by the cupborde stand two gentleman with napkin on their shoulder , and in their hand each of they have a cup of gold set with pearl and precious stone , which be the duke own drink cup : when he be dispose , he drink they off at a draught . and for his service at meat it come in without order , yet it be very rich service : for all be serve in gold , not only he himself , but also all the rest of we , and it be very massy : the cup also be of gold and very massy . the number that dine there that day be two hundred person , and all be serve in golden vessel . the gendeman that wait be all in cloth of gold , and they serve he with their cap on their head . before the service come in , the duke send to every man a great shiver of bread , and the bearer call the party so send to by his name aloud , and say , John Basilivich emperor of Russia and great duke of Moscovia do reward thou with bread : then must all man stand up , and do at all time when those word be speak . and then last of all he give the martial bread , whereof he eat before the duke grace , and so do reverence and depart . then come the duke service of the swan all in piece , and every one in a several dish : the which the duke send as he do the bread , and the bearer say the same word as he say before . and as i say before , the service of his meat be in no order , but come in dish by dish : and then after that the duke send drink , with the like say as before be tell . also before dinner he change his crown , and in dinner time two crown ; so that i see three several crown upon his head in one day . and thus when his service be all come in he give to every one of his gentleman waiter meat with his own hand , and so likewise drink . his intent thereby be , as i have hear , that 228 every man shall know perfect his servant . thus when dinner be do he call his noble before he name by name , that it be wonder to hear how he can name they , have so many as he have . thus when dinner be do i depart to my lodging , which be a hour within night . i will leave this , and speak no more of he nor his household : but i will somewhat declare of his land and people , with their nature and power in the war . this duke be lord and emperor of many country , and his power be marvelous great . for he be able to bring into the field two or three hundred thousand man : he never go into the field himself with under two hundred thousand man : and when he go himself he furnish his border all with man of war , which be no small number . he leave on the border of Liefland forty thousand man , and upon the border of Letto 60 thousand man , and toward the nagayan Tartars sixty thousand , which be wonder to hear of : yet do he never take to his war neither husbandman nor merchant . all his man be horseman : he use no footman , but such as go with the ordinance and labourer , which be thirty thousand . the horseman be all archer , with such bow as the Turk have , and they ride short as do the Turk . their armour be a coat of plate , with a skull on their head . some of their coat be cover with velvet or cloth of gold : their desire be to be sumptuous in the field , and especial the noble and gentleman : as i have hear their trim be very costly , and partly i have see it , or else i will scarce have believe it : but the duke himself be rich attire above all measure : he pavilion be cover either with cloth of gold or silver , and so set with stone that it be wonderful to see it . i have see the king majesty of England and the french king pavilion , which be fair , yet not like unto he . and when they be send into far or strange country , or that stranger come to they , they be very gorgeous . else the duke 229 himself go but mean in apparel : and when he go betwixt one place and another he be but reasonable apparel over other time . in the while that i be in Moscow the duke send two ambassador to the king of Poleland , which have at the lest five hundred horse ;