ordinance , instruction , and advertisement off and for the direction of the intend voyage for Cathay , compile , make , and deliver by the right worshipful m . Sebastian Cabota esquire , governor of the mystery and company of the merchant adventurer for the discovery of region , dominion , island and place unknown , the 9 day of May , in the year of our lord God 1553 . an ^ in the 7 . year of the reign of our most dread sovereign lord Edward the 6 . by the grace of God , king of England , France and Ireland , defender of the faith , and of the church of England and Ireland , in earth supreme head . irst the captain general , with the pilot major , the master , merchant and other officer , to be so knit and accord in unity , love , conformity , and obedience in every degree on all side , that no dissension , variance , or contention may rise or spring betwixt they and the mariner of this company , to the damage or hindrance of the voyage : for that dissension ( by many experience ) have overthrow many notable intend and likely enterprise and exploit . 2 item , for as much as every person have give a oath to be true , faithful , and loyal subject , and liege man to the king most excellent majesty , his heir and successor , and for the observation of all law and statute , make for the preservation of his most excellent majesty , and his crown Imperiali of his realm of England and Ireland , and to serve his grace , the realm , and this present voyage true , and not to give up , intermit , or leave off the say voyage and enterprise until it shall | be accomplish , so far forth as possibility and life of 195 A . D . 1553 man may serve or extend : therefore it behoove every person in his degree , as well for conscience , as for duty sake to remember his say charge , and the accomplishment thereof . 3 item , where furthermore every mariner or passenger in his ship have give like oath to be obedient to the captain general , and to every captain and master in his ship , for the observation of these present order contain in this book , and all other which hereafter shall make by the 12 . counsellor in this present book name , or the most part of they , for the better conduction , and preservation of the fleet , and achieve of the voyage , and to be prompt , ready and obedient in all act and feat of honesty , reason , and duty to be minister , show and execute , in advancement and preferment of the voyage and exploit : therefore it be convenient that this present book shall once every week ( by the discretion of the captain ) be read to the - said company , to the intent that every man may the better remember his oath , conscience , duty and charge . 4 item , every person by virtue of his oath , to do effectual and with good will ( as far forth as he shall comply ) all , and every such act and act , deed and deed , as shall to he or they from time to time command , commit and enjoin ( during the voyage ) by the captain general , with the assent of the counsel and assistant , as well in and during the whole navigation and voyage , as also in discover and land , as case and occasion shall require . 5 item , all course in navigation to be set and keep , by the advice of the captain , pilot major , master , and master mate , with the assent of the counsellor and the most number of they , and in voice uniform agree in one to prevail , and take place , so that the captain general , shall in all counsel and assembly have a double voice . 6 item , that the fleet shall keep together , and not separate themselves asunder , as much as by wind and 196 1553 - weather may be do or permit , and that the captain , pilot and master shall speedy come aboard the admiral , when and as often as he shall seem to have just cause to assemble they for counsel or consultation to be have concern the affair of the fleet and voyage . 7 item , that the merchant , and other skilful person in writing , shall daily write , describe , and put in memory the navigation of every day and night , with the point , and observation of the land , tide , element , altitude of the sun , course of the moon and star , and the same so note by the order of the master and pilot of every ship to be put in writing , the captain general assemble the master together once every week ( if wind and weather shall serve ) to confer all the observation , and note of the say ship , to the intent it may appear wherein the note do agree , and wherein they dissent , and upon good debatement , deliberation , and conclusion determine , to put the same into a common leger , to remain of record for the company : the like order to be keep in proportion of the card , astrolabes , for the voyage , at the charge of the company . 8 item , that all enterprise and exploit of discover or land to search isle , region , and such like , to be search , attempt , and enterprise by good deliberation , and common assent , determine advise . and that in all enterprise , notable ambassage , suit , request , or presentment of gift , or present to prince , to be do and execute by the captain general in person or by such other , as he by common assent shall appoint or assign to do or cause to be do in the same . 9 item , the steward and cook of every ship , and their associate , to give and render to the captain and other head officer of their ship weekly ( or often ) if it shall seem requisite , a just or plain and perfect