, who forsake his harbour and company , and come as near we as he may , and point we to the eastwards , and then we weigh and follow he , and go east and by south , the wind be at westnorthwest , and very misty . Saturday we go eastsoutheast and follow Gabriel , n and he bring we into a harbour call morgiovet , morgovet a which be 30 league from Caninoz , and we have upon the harbour . 333 bar go in two fathom and a four part : and after we be pass in over the bar , it wax deep , for we have 5 fathom , 4 and a half , and 3 fathom etc our bark be more , i send some of our man to shore to pro - drlft wood . vide wood , where they have plenty of drift wood , but none grow : and in this place we find plenty of young foul , as guile , seapy , and other , whereof the russes will eat none , whereof we be nothing sorry , for there come the more to our part . 12 Sunday our man cut wood on shore , and bring it aboard , and we ballast our ship with stone . this morning Gabriel see a smoke on you way , who row unto it with his skiff , which smoke be two league from the place where we ride : and at a northwest sun he come aboard again , and bring with he samoe . a samoe , which be but a young man : he apparel be then strange unto we , and he present i with three young wild goose , and one young barnacle . 13 Monday i send a man to the main in gabriels boat , and he bring we aboard 8 barricoe of fresh water : the latitude of the say morgiovet be sixty eight degree and a terce . it flow there at a southsouthwest moon full sea , and hy two fathom and a half water . 14 at a westnorthwest sun we depart from this place , and go east 2 5 league , and then see a island north and by west of we eight league , which dolgoieve a island be call dolgoieve : and from the eastermost island . par ( . o £ there lie a sand east and by south 7 league long . 15 Wednesday at a north and by east sun Swetinoz be south of we 5 league . this day at afternoon Pechora . we go in over the dangerous bar of Pechora , and have upon the bar but one fathom water . 16 Thursday we ride still . \ 7 Friday i go on shore and observe the variation ^ theCmpas compass , which be three degree and a half a from the north to the west : the latitude this day be sixty nine degree ten minute . 334 from two or three league to the eastward of Swetinoz , until the enter of the river Pechora , it be all sandy hill , and towards Pechora the sandy hill be very low . it high on the bar of Pechora four foot water , and it flow there at a southwest moon a full sea . Monday at a north and by east sun , we weigh , and 20 come out over the say dangerous bar , where we have but five foot water , insomuch that we find a foot less water come out then we do go in . i think the reason be , because when we go in the wind be off the sea , which cause the sand to break on either side of we , and we keep in the smooth between the breach , which we dare not have do , except we have see the russes to have go in before we : and at our come out the wind be off the shore , and fair weather , and then the sand do not appear with breach as at our go in : we thank God that our ship do draw so little water . when we be a seaboord the bar the wind scant upon we , and be at eastsoutheast , insomuch that we stop the ebb , and ply all the flood to the windward , and make our way Eastnortheast . Tuesday at a northwest sun we think that we have 21 see land at east , or east and by north of we : which afterward prove to be a monstrous heap of ice . within a little more than half a hour after , we first ice . see this ice , we be enclose within it before we be aware of it , which be a fearful sight to see : for , for the space of six hour , it be as much as we can do to keep our ship aloof from one heap of ice , and bear roomer from another , with as much wind as we may bear a coarse . and when we have pass from the danger of this ice , we lay to the eastwards close by the wind . the next day we be again trouble with the ice . 22 Thursday be calm , we ply to the windward , 23 the wind be northerly . we have the latitude this thelat . ode - day at noon in 70 degree 11 minute . ees 11 min - 335 25 s . James island . 26 27 the variation of the gompas 7 degree and a half . 28 the relation of Loshak . we have not run past two hour northwest , the wind be at northnortheast and Northeast and by north a good gale , but we meet again with another heap of ice : we wether the head of it , and lie a time to the seaward , and make way west 6 league . Friday at a southeast sun we cast about to the eastwards , the wind be at northnortheast : the latitude this day at noon be 70 degree 15 minute . on s . James his day bolt to the windewarde , we have the latitude at noon in seventy degree twenty minute . the same day at a southwest sun , there be a monstrous whale aboard of we , so near to our side that we may have thrust a sword or any other weapon in he , which we dare not do for fear he shall have overthrow our ship : and then i call my company together , and all of we shout , and with the cry that we make he depart from we :