the letter of m . George Killingworth the come - pany first agent in Moscovie , touch their entertainment in their second voyage . anno 1555 . the 27 . of November in Moscow . right worshipful , my duty consider , etc it may please your worship to understand , September we our ware up , that at the make hereof we all be in good health , thank be to God , save only William our cook as we come from colmogro fall into the river out of the boat , and be drown . and the 11 . day of come to Vologda , and there we lay all and sell very little : but one merchant will have give we 12 . roble for a broad cloth , and he say he will have have they all , and 4 . altines for a pound of sugar , but we do refuse it because he be the first , and the merchant be not come thither , nor will not come before winter , trust to have more : but i fear it will not be much better . yet notwithstanding we do for the best . and the house that our ware lie in cost from that day until Easter ten roble . and the 28 . day of September we do determine with our self that it be good for m . grey , Arthur Edwards , Thomas hautory , Christopher Hudson , John Segewicke , Richard Johnson , and Richard Judde , to tarry at Vologda , and m . chancellor , Henry lane , Edward prize , Robert Best and i shall go to Moscow . and we do lade the emperor sugar , with part of all sort of ware to have have to the Moscow with we , but the way be so deep , that we be fain to turn back , and leave it still at Vologda till the frost . and we go forth with post horse , and the charge of every horse be still ten in number , come to 10 . S . y . d . half penny , beside the guide . and we come to the Moscow the 4 . day of October , and be lodge that night in a simple house : but the next day 291 queen Mary letter to the emperor of Russia . we be send for to the emperor his secretary , and he bid we welcome with a cheerful countenance and cheerful word , and we show he that we have a letter from our queen grace to the emperor his grace , and then he desire to see they all , and that they may remain with he , to have they perfect , that the true meaning may be declare to the emperor , and so we do : and then we be appoint to a better house : and the seven day the secretary send for we again , and then he show we that we shall have a better house , for it be the emperor his will , that we shall have all thing that we do lack , and do send we mead of two sort , and two hen , our house free , and every two day to receive eight hen , seven altines , and two penny in money , and mead a certain , and a poor fellow to make clean our house , and to do that whereunto we will set he . and we have give many reward before , which you shall perceive by other , and so we give the messenger a reward with thank : and the nine day we be send to make we ready to speak with the emperor on the morrow . and the letter be send we , that we may deliver they our self , and we come before he the ten day : and before we come to his presence we go through a great chamber , where stand many small ton , pail , bowl and pot of silver , i mean , like wash bowl , all parsel gilt : and within that another chamber , wherein fate ( i think ) near a hundred in cloth of gold , and then into the chamber where his grace sit , and there i think be more than in the other chamber also in cloth of gold , and we do our duty , and show his grace our queen grace letter , with a note of your present which be leave in Vologda : and then his grace do ask how our queen grace do , call her cousin , say that he be glad that we be come in health into his realm , and we go one by one unto he , and take he by the hand , and then his grace do bid we go in health , and come to dinner again , and 292 we dine in his presence , and be set with our face towards his grace , and none in the chamber sit with their back towards he , be i think near a hundred at dinner then , and all serve with gold , as platter , charger , pot , cup , and all not slender but very - massy , and yet a great number of platter of gold , stand still on the cupboard , not move : and diverse time in the dinner time his grace send we meat and drink from his own table , and when we have dine we go up to his grace , and receive a cup with drink at his own hand , and the same night his grace send certain gentleman to we with diverse sort of wine and meed , to who we give a reward . and afterward we be by diverse italian counsel to take heed who we do trust to make the copy of the privilege that we will desire to have , for fear it shall not be write in the Russie tongue , as we do mean . So first a russian do write for we a breviate to the emperor , the tenor whereof be , that we do desire a strong privilege : and when the secretary see it , he do deliver it to his grace , and when we come again , his grace will we to write our mind , and he will see it , and so we do . and his grace be so trouble with preparation to war , that as yet we have no answer : but we have be require of his secretary , and of they under chancellor , to know what ware we have bring into the realm , and what ware we do intend to have , that be , or may be have in this realm : and we show they , and they show the emperor thereof . and then they say his grace pleasure be , that his best merchant of the Moscow shall be speak to , to meet and talk with we . and so a day be appoint , and we meet in the secretary his office , and there be then under chancellor , who be not pass two year since the emperor merchant , and not his chancellor : and then the conclusion of our talk be , that the chancellor will we to bethink we , where we will desire to have a house or house , 293 the italian counsel to our people . the diversity of weight E5 measure in Russia . that we may come to they as to our own house , and for merchandise to be make preparation for we , and they will know our prize of our ware and frise : and we answer , that for our price they must see the ware before we can make any price thereof , for the like in goodness have not be bring into the realm , and we do look for a example of all sort of our ware to come from Vologda , with the first sledway , and then they shall see they , and then we will show they the price of they : and likewise we can not tell they what we will give they just , till we do know as well their just weight as their measure