, and lose the flag : with the mast there fall two man over board , but God be praise , they be save : the flag be a token , whereby we may understand whether there be a good harbour there or not . at a north sun the north cape ( which i so name the north the first voyage ) be thwart of we , which be nine league c * pe 50 name to the eastwards of the foresay chapel from the g ^^ g eastermost point of it . June . the Sunday we weigh in corpus christi bay , at a 7 north - east and by east sun : the bay be almost half a league deep : the headland which be corpus christi point , lie southeast and by east , one league from the head of the bay , where we have a great tide , like a race over the flood : the bay be at the least two league over : so do i imagine from the fair foreland to corpus christi point ten league southeast and by east : it flow in this bay , at a south and by west moon full sea . from that we go until seven a clock at after noon twenty league southeast and by south : 325 and than we take in all our sail , because it be then very misty , and also we meet with much ice that run out of the bay , and then we go southsoutheast with our foresail : at eight of the clock , we hear a piece of ordinance , which be out of the Edward , which bid we farewell , and then we shoot off another piece , and bid her farewell : we can not one see the other , because of the thick mist : at a northwest sun it begin somewhat to clear , and then we see a head land , and the shore trend to the southwestward , which i judge to be about cross island : it be off we at a northnorthwest sun , westsouthwest . 8 from this northnorthwest sun , until Monday , we go southeast , and this morning we come at anchor among the shoal that lie off of point look out , at a north - east and by east sun , the wind be at eastsoutheast . at this point look out , a south moon make a full sea . cape good fortune lie from the isle of cross southeast , and between they be ten league : point look out lie from cape good fortune eastsoutheast , and between they be six league . S . Edmonds point lie from point look out eastsoutheast , and half a point to the southward , and between they be six league . there be between these two point , a bay that be half a league deep , and be full of shoal and danger . at a southeast sun we weigh , and turn to the windward , the wind be at eastsoutheast : and at a southeast sun , we come to a anchor , be then a full sea , in five fathom and a half water . it hi at this place where we ride , and also 9 at point look out , four fathom water . at a westnorthwest sun we weigh , and drive to the windward , until Tuesday , a northnortheast sun , and then be a high water , we come to a anchor open of the river Cola , in eight fathom water . cape S . Bernard lie from saint Edmonds point , southeast and by south , and betwixt they be six league , and also betwixt they be the river Cola , into which river we go this evening . 326 Wednesday we ride still in the say river , the wind 10 being at the north : we send our skiff aland to be dress : the latitude of the mouth of the river Cola latitude be sixty five degree , forty and eight minute . of Cola . Thursday at 6 of the clock in the morning , there n come aboard of we one of the ruff lodiaes , row with a ruff twenty oar , and there be four and twenty man in lodta - h . the master of the boat present i with a great loaf of bread , and six ring of bread , which they call colache , and four dry pike , and a peck of fine otemeale , and i give unto the master of the boat , a comb , and a small glass : and he declare unto i , that he be bind to Pechora , and after that , i make they to drink , the tide be somewhat break , they gentle depart . the master name be Pheodor . whereas the ten day i send our pinnace on shore to be mend , because she be leak , and weak , with the carpenter and three man more to help he , the weather chance so , that it be Sunday before they can get aboard our ship . all that time they be without provision of victual , but only a little bread , which they spend by Thursday at night , think to have come aboard when they have list , but wind and weather deny they : insomuch that they be fain to eat grass , and such weed as they can find then above ground , but fresh water they have plenty , but the meat with some of they can scant frame by reason of their queasy stomach . from Thursday at afternoon , until Sunday in the 14 . morning , our bark do ride such a road stead that it be to be marveil , without the help of God , how she be able to abide it . in the bite of the southeast shore of the river Cola , there be a good road in five fathom , or four fathom and a half , at a low water : but you shall have no land northnortheast of you then . i prove with our pinnace , that the depth go on the southeast shore . Thursday we weigh our anchor in the river Cola , and 18 327 from Cola to Pechora be but 7 or % day sail . 21 22 the courtesy of one Gabriel . 23 a good y necessary note . go into the sea seven or eight league , where we meet with the wind far northerly , that of force it constrain we to go again back into the say river , where come aboard of we sundry of their