boat be make of deer skin , and when they come on shore they carry their boat with they upon their back : for their carriage they have no other beast to serve they , but deer only . as for bread and corn they have none , except the russes bring it to they : their knowledge be very base , for they know no letter . Tuesday we turn for the harbour where Lo - . 4 shak bark lie , whereas before we ride under a island . and there he come aboard of we and say unto i : if God send wind and weather to serve , i will go to the ob with you , because the morse be scant at these island of vaigat , but if he can not get to the river of ob , than he say he will go to the river of naramzay , where the people be not altogether so savage naramzay . as the Samoyds of the ob be : he show i that they will shoot at all man to the uttermost of their power , that can speak their speech . Wednesday we see a terrible heap of ice approach 5 near unto we , and therefore we think good with all speed possible to depart from thence , and so i return to the westwards again , to the island where we be the 31 . of July . Thursday i go a shore , and take the latitude , 6 which be 70 degree 2 5 minute : and the variation of latitude . the compass be 8 degree from the north to the west . Loshak and the two small Lodias of Pechora depart from this island , while i be on shore take the latitude , and go to the southward : i marvele why he depart so sudden , and go over the shoal among the island where it be impossible for we to follow they . but after i perceive they to be weatherwise . 339 7 Friday we ride still , the wind be at northnortheast , with a cruel storm . the ice come in so abundant about we at both end of the island that we ride under , that it be a fearful sight to behold : the storm continue with snow , rain , and hail plenty . 8 Saturday we ride still also , the storm be somewhat abate , but it be altogether misty , that we be not able to see a cable length about we , the wind be at north - east and by east . 9 Sunday at four of the clock in the morning we depart from this island , the wind be at southeast , and as we be clear a sea board the small island and shoal , it come so thick with mist , that we can not see a base shot from we . than we take in all our sail to make little way . at a southeast sun it wax clear , and then we set our sail , and lie close by the wind to the southward alongst the island of vaigat . at a west sun we take in our sail again because of the great mist and rain . we sound at this place , and have five and twenty fathom water , and soft black oz , be three league from the shore , the wind be at south and by east , but still misty . 10 Monday at a east sun we sound , and have 40 fathom , and oz , still misty : at noon we sound again , and have 36 fathom , still misty . 11 Tuesday at a eastnortheast sun we let fall our anchor in three and twenty fathom , the mist still continue . 12 Wednesday at three of the clock in the morning the mist break up , the wind be at north - east and by east , and then we see part of the island of vaigat , which we bear withal , and go eastsoutheast close by the wind : at a west sun we be at a anchor under the south - they land west part of the say vaigat , and then i send our skiff to upon Palgatz . shore with three man in she , to see if they may speak with any of the samoed , but can not : all that day be rainy , but not windy . 34 ° Thursday the wind come Westerly , so that we be fain to seek we another place to ride in , because the wind come a seaboord land , and although it be misty , yet we follow the shore by our lead : and as we bring land in the wind of we , we let fall our anchor . at a west sun the mist break up , so that we may see about we , and then we may perceive that we be enter into a sound . this afternoon we take in two or three skiff lade of stone to ballast our ship withal . it hy here four foot water , and flow by fit , uncertain to be judge . Friday we ride still in the sound , the wind at Southwest , with very much rain , and at the end of the rain it wax again misty . Saturday there be much wind at west , and much rain , and then again misty . Sunday be very misty , and much wind . Monday very misty , the wind at westnorthwest . Tuesday be also misty , except at noon : then the sun break out through the mist , so that we have the latitude in 70 degree encage oh minute : the afternoon be misty again , the wind be at westnorthwest . Wednesday at three of the clock afternoon the mist break up , and the wind come at Eastnortheast , and then we weigh , and go south and by east , until seven of the clock , eight league , think to have have sight of the sandy hill that be to the eastwards of the river A . D . i556 - 13 the uncertainty of ebb wonderful flow . > 4 i5 16 17 18 19 Pechora . at a northwest sun we take in our main sail , because the wind increase , and go with a foresail westnorthwest , the wind be at eastnortheast : at night there grow so terrible a storm , that we see not the like , although we have endure many storm since we come out of England . it be wonderful that our bark be able to brook such monstrous and