worth entertainment , they have it accord , he bring nothing with he , and therefore i regard he but little . and thus we end , and they take their leave 330 and go a shore . at their come ashore , Gabriel and Keril be at unconvenient word , and by the ear , as i understand : the cause be because the one have better entertainment than the other : but you shall understand that Gabriel be not able to make his party good , because there be 17 lodias of the kerils company who take his part , and but 2 of gabriels company . the next high water Gabriel and his company depart from thence , and row to their former company and neighbour , which be in number 28 at the least , and all of they belong to the river Cola . twenty eight Lodias belong to Cola . and as i understand keril make reckon that the 27 hawser which be fast in his anchor shall have be his own , and at first will not deliver it to our boat , insomuch that i send he word that i will complain upon he , whereupon he deliver the haws to my company . the next day be Saturday , i send our boat on shore to fetch fresh water and wood , and at their come on shore this keril welcome our man most gentle , and also banquete they : and in the mean time cause some of his man to fill our baricoe with water , and to help our man to bear wood into their boat : and then he put on his best silk coat , and his collar of pearl , and come aboard again , and bring his present with he : and thus have more respect unto his present then to his person , because i perceive he to be vainglorious , i bid he welcome , and give he a dish of fig : and then he declare unto i that his father be a gentleman , and that he be able to show i pleasure , and not Gabriel , who be but a priest son . after their departure from we we weigh , and ply 28 all the ebb to the windward , the wind be northerly , and towards night it wax very stormy , so that of force we be constrain to go room 331 the latitude of cape S . John 66 degree 50 minute . earth swim above water like wood . with cape S . John again , in which storm we lose our skiff at our stern , that we buy at Wardhouse , and there we ride until the four of July . the latitude of cape S . John be 66 degree 50 minute . and it be to be note , that the land of cape S . John be of height from the full sea mark , as i judge , 10 fathom , be clean without any tree grow , and also without stone or rock , and consist only of black earth , which be so rot , that if any fall into the sea , it will swim as though it be a piece of wood . in which place , about three league from the shore you shall not have above 9 fathom water , and clay ground . Julie . 4 OAturday at a north northwest sun the wind come oh at Eastnortheast , and then we weigh , and ply to the northward , and as we be two league shoot past the cape , we see a house stand in a valley , which be dainty to be see in those part , and by and by i see three man on the top of the hill . than i judge they , as it afterward prove , that they be man which come from some other place to set trap to take vermin for their fur , which trap we do perceive very thick alongst the shore as we go . 5 Sunday at a east sun we be thwart off the creek where the russes lie , and there come to a anchor , and perceive the most part of the Lodias to be go we think it not good to tarry any long there , but weigh and spend all the ebb , ply to the windward . 6 Monday at a south sun it be high water . all alongst the coast it flow little , only a south moon make a full sea : and as we be a weigh we espy the ruff Lodias , which we first lose . they come out of a creek among the sandy hill , which hill begin 15 league northnortheast from cape S . John . 332 the latitude 68 degree and a half . Stephen Burrough ply this ebb to a end , we come to a anchor 6 league northnortheast from the place where we see the russes come out : and there the russes harbour themselves within a sink bank , but there be not water enough for we . at a north sun we weigh and ply to the northward , the land lie northnortheast , and southsouthwest , until a south sun , and then we be in the latitude of 68 degree and a half : and in this latitude end those sandy hill , and the land begin to lie north and by west , south and by east , and north - northwest , and to the westwards , and there the water begin to wax deep . at a northwest sun we come to a anchor within half a league of the shore , where we have good plenty of fish , both haddock and cod , ride in io fathom water . Wednesday we weigh , and ply near the headland , 8 which be call Caninoz , the wind be at east and by north . Thursday the wind be scant we turn to windwards 9 the ebb , to get about Caninoz : the latitude this day at noon be 68 degree 40 minute . Friday we turn to the windward of the ebb , but to 10 no purpose : and as we ride at a anchor , we see the similitude of a storm rise at northnorthwest , and can not tell where to get road nor succour for that wind , and harbour we know none : and that land which we ride under with that wind be a lee shore . and as i be muse what be best to be do , i see a sail come out of a creek under the foresay Caninoz , which be my friend Gabriel