terrible sea , without the great help of God , who never fail they at need , that put their sure trust in he . Thursday at a southsouthwest sun , thank be to 20 341 they be within 15 league of Pechora . 21 22 they return the 22 of August . god , the storm be at the high , and then the wind begin to slake , and come northerly withal , and then i reckon the westermost point of the river Pechora to be south of we 15 league . at a westsouthwest sun we set our main sail , and lie close by the wind , the wind be at northwest and by north , make but little way , because the billow go so high : at midnight we cast about , and the ship cape Northnortheast , make little way . Friday at noon we have the latitude in 70 degree 8 minute , and we sound , and have 29 fathom sand , and in manner stremy ground . at a west sun we cast about to the westwards , and a little after the wind come up at west . Saturday be calm : the latitude this day at noon be 70 degree and a terce , we sound here , and have nine and forty fathom and oz , which oz signify that we draw towards Nova Zembla . and thus we be out of all hope to discover any more to the eastward this year , we think it best to return , and that for three cause . the first , the continual north - east and northerly wind , which have more power after a man be pass to the eastwards of caninoze , then in any place that i do know in these northerly region . second , because of great and terrible abundance of ice which we see with our eye , and we doubt great store abide that in those part : i adventure already somewhat too far in it , but i thank God for my safe deliverance from it . three , because the night wax dark , and the winter begin to draw on with his storm : and therefore i resolve to take the first best wind that God shall send , and ply towards the bay of saint Nicholas , and to see if we may do any good there , if God will permit it . this present Saturday we see very much ice , and be within two or three league of it : it show unto we as though it have be a firm land as far as we may see 342 from northwest off we to the eastwards : and this afternoon the lord send we a little gale of wind at south , so that we bear clear off the westermost part of it , thank be to God . and then against night it wax calm again , and the wind be at Southwest : we make our way until Sunday noon northwest and by west , and 24 . then we have the latitude in 70 degree and a half , the wind at Southwest : there be a billow , so that we can not discern to take the latitude exact , but by a reasonable guess . Monday there be a pretty gale of wind at south , so 25 that we go west and by south , the latitude this day at noon be 70 degree 10 minute : we have little wind all day : at a westnorthwest sun we sound , and have 29 fathom black sandy oz , and then we be north - east 5 league from the north - east part of the island colgoieve . Tuesday the wind all westerly we ply to the wind 26 ward . Wednesday the wind be all Westerly , and calm : we 27 have the latitude this day in 70 degree 10 minute , we within three league of the north part of the island colgoieve . Thursday , we go room about the westermost part 28 of the island , seek where we may find a place to ride in for a northwest wind , but can find none , and then we cast about again to the seaward , and the wind come at Westsouthwest , and this morning we have plenty of snow . Friday , the wind be at southwest and by west , we 29 ply to the windward . Saturday , the wind be at south , we ply to the westwards , and at afternoon the mist break up , and then we may see the land seven or eight league to the eastwards of Caninoz : we sound a little before and have 35 . fathom and oz . and a while after we sound again , and have 19 fathom and sand : than we be within three league and a half of the shore , and towards night there come down so much wind , that we be 343 fain to bring our ship a try , and lay her head to the westwards . 3 ° Sunday , the wind become more calm , and then it wax very misty : at noon we cast about to the eastwards , the wind be at south , and run eight hour on that board , and then we cast about and cape west southwest : we sound and have 32 . fathom , and tough oaze like clay . 31 Monday , we double about caninoze , and come at a anchor there , to the intent that we may kill some fish if God will permit it , and there our gate a great Nuse , which nuse be there so plenty , that they will scarce suffer any other fish to come near the hook : the say nuse carry away sundry of our hook and lead . a little after at a west sun , the wind begin to blow stormy at west southwest , so that we be fain to weigh and forsake our fish ground , and go close by the wind Southwest , and Southwest and by west , make our way south southwest . September . i r i ' Uesday at a west sun we sound and have 20 . a fathom , and break wilkeshel : i reckon canonize to be 24 . league northnortheast from we . 11 the eleven day we arrive at Colmogro , and there we winter , expect the approach of the next summer to proceed far in our intend discovery for the ob : which ( by reason of our employment to Wardhouse the next spring for the search of some english ship ) be not accord perform .