the coin , weight and measure use in Russia , f1 - 256 - ] write by John Hasse , in the year , 1554 . orasmuch as it be most necessary for all merchant which seek to have traffic in any strange region , first to acquaint themselves with the coin of those land with which they do intend to join in traffic , and how they be call from the valuation of the high piece to the low , and in what sort they make their payment , as also what their common weight and measure be : for these cause i have think good to write some thing thereof accord to my own knowledge and experience , to the end that the merchant of that new adventure , may the better understand how the wealth of that new frequent trade will arise . first , it be to be note that the emperor of Russia have no other coin then silver in all his land , which go for payment among merchant , yet notwithstanding there be a coin of copper , which serve for the relief of the poor in Moscow , and no where else , and that be but only for quasse , water and fruit , as nut , apple , and such other like . the name of which money be call pole or pole , of which pole there go to the least of the silver coin , 18 . but i will not stand upon this , because it be no currant money among merchant . of silver coin there be three sort of piece : the least be a Poledenga , the second a Denga , the three , nowgrote , which be as much to say in english as halfpenny , penny , and twopence , and for other value money then this , there be none : there be oftentimes there coin of gold , but they come out of foreign country , whereof there be no ordinary valuation , but they pass accord to the agreement of merchant . their order in sum of money be this : as we say n no coin of gold in Russia , but all of silver . 273 in England , halfpenny , penny , shilling and pound , so say they Poledenga , Denga , Altine and Rubble : there go two Poledengas to a Denga , six denga to a Altine , and 23 altines , and two denga to a Rubble . concern the weight of Russia they be these : there be two sort of pound in use among they , the one great , you other small : the great pound be just two small pound : they call the great weight by the name of Beasemar , and the small they call the Skalla weight : with this small weight they weigh their silver coin , of the which the emperor have command to put to every small pound three rubble of silver , and with the same weight they weigh all grocery ware , and almost all other ware which come into the land , except those which they weigh by the Pode , as hop , salt , iron , lead , tin and batrie with diverse other , notwithstanding they use to weigh batrie more often by the small weight then by the great . whensoever you find the price of your ware rate by the Pode , consider that to be the great weight , and the pound to be the small . also they divide the small pound into 48 part , and they call the eight and forty part a slotnike , by the which Slotnike the retailer sell their ware out of their shop , as goldsmith , grocer , silkeseller and such other like as we do use to retail by the ounce : and as for their great weight which they call the Beasemar , they sei by pode , or shippond . the pode do contain of the great weight , 40 pound , and of the small 80 : there go 10 . podes to a shippond . yet you must consider that their great weight be not full with we : for i take not their great pound to be full 13 ounce , but above 12 i think it be . but for your just proof , weigh 6 rubble of Russia money with our pound weight , and then shall you see what it lack : for 6 rubble of Russia be by the emperor standard , the great pound : so that i think it the next way to know the just weight , as well of the great pound as of the small . 274 there be another weight needful to be know , which the weight of be the weight of Wardhouse , for so much as they weigh Wardhouse . all their dry fish by weight , which weight be the Beasemar , as they of Russia do use , notwithstanding there be another sort in it : the name of those weight be these : the mark pound , the great pound , the weigh , and the shippond . the mark pound be to be understand as our pound , and their great pound be 24 of their mark pound : the weigh be 3 great pound , and 8 weigh be a shippound . now concern their measure . as they have two than Russia sort of weight , so they have also two sort of mea - mm ™ ™ - sure : wherewith they measure cloth both linen and woollen : they call the one a areshine , and the other a locut : the areshine i take to be as much as the Flanders ell , and their locut half a english yard : with their areshine they may mete all such sort of clothes as come into the land , and with the Locut all such cloth both linen and woollen , as they make themselves . and whereas we use to give yard and inch , or yard and handful , they do give nothing but bare measure . they have also a measure wherewith they do mete their corn , which they call a setforth , and the half of that a osmine : this setforth i take to be three bushel of London measure . and as for their drink measure , they call it a span , which be much like a bucket , and of that i never see any true rate , but that some be great than other some . and as for the measure of measure Wardhouse wherewith they meet their cloth , there be no difference between that and the measure of dansk , measu , . e which be half a english ell . dansk . concern the toil and custom of Russia , it