the navigation and discovery towards the river of ob , make by master Steven Burrough , master of the pinnace call the serchthrift , with diverse thing worth the note , pass in the year 1556 . April 23 27 e depart from Ratcliff to Blackewall the 23 of April . Satturday be saint mark day , we depart from Blackewall to Grays . the 27 be Monday , the right worshipful Sebastian Cabota come aboard our pinnace at Gravesende , accompany with diverse gentleman , and gentlewoman , who after that they have view our pinnace , and taste of such cheer as we can make they aboard , they go on shore , give to our mariner right liberali reward : and the good old gentleman master Cabota give to the poor most liberali alm , wish they to pray for the good fortune , and prosperous success of the serchthrift , our pinnace . and then at the sign of the Christopher , he and his friend banquet , and make i , and they that be in the company 322 1556 . great cheer : and for very joy that he have to see the towardness of our intend discovery , he enter into the dance himself , among the rest of the young and lusty company : which be end , he and his friend depart most gentle , commend we to the governance of almighty God . Tuesday we ride still at Gravesend , make provision 28 for such thing as we want . Wednesday in the morning we depart from grave - 29 end , the wind be at Southwest , that night we come to a anchor thwart our lady of holland . Thursday at three of the clock in the morning we 3 ° weigh , and by eight of the clock , we be at a anchor in Orwell wanness , and then incontinent i go aboard the Edward Bonaventure , where the worshipful company of merchant appoint i to be , until the say good ship arrive at Wardhouse . than i return again note . into the pinnace . Friday the 15 of may we be within 7 league may 15 . of the shore , on the coast of Norway : the latitude at a south sun , 58 degree and a half , where we see three sail , beside our own company : and thus we follow the shore or land , which lie northnorthwest , north and by west , and northwest and by north , as it do appear by the plat . Saturday at a east sun we come to saint Dunstan 16 island , which island i so name . it be off we east two league and a half , the wind be at southeast : the latitude this day at a south sun 59 degree , 42 minute . also the high round mountain bare east of we , at a south sun : and when this hill be east of you , and be bind to the northward , the land lie north and half a point Westerly , from this say south sun , unto a north sun twenty league northwest alongst the shore . upon Sunday at six of the clock in the morning , the 17 far land that we can see that lie northnorthwest , be east of we three league , and then it trend to the 323 northwards , and to the eastwards of the north , which headland i judge to be scoutsnesse . at seven of the clock we change our course and go north , the wind be at southsoutheast , and it wax very thick and misty , and when it clear , we go Northnortheast . at a south sun we lose sight of the serchthrift , because of the mist , make our way north . and when we lose sight of the shore and pinnace , we be within two league and a half of the shore : the last land that we see when this mist come upon we , which be to the northward of scowtsnesse , lie Northnortheast , and southsouthwest , and we make our way north until a west sun five league . 18 from that until Monday three a clock in the morning ten league northnortheast : and then we go north and by east , because the wind come at the westsouthwest with thick mist : the latitude this day at a south sun sixty three degree and a half true take : at this season we have sight of our pinnace again . 19 from that until Tuesday a south sun Northnortheast forty four league , and then Northeast . from a south sun until eight of the clock , fifteen league Northeast . 20 from that until Wednesday a south sun Northnortheast , except the first watch Northeast : then have we the latitude in sixty seven degree , thirty nine minute . from that unto a northwest sun eighteen league Northeast , and then we be within two league off the shore , and see the high land to the southward of low - foot break out through the mist , and then we go north and by east . 21 from the say northwest sun until four of the clock in the morning north and by east ten league and a half : and then Northnortheast until a south sun , the latitude be sixty nine degree , and a half . from that until half a hour past seven of the clock , Northnortheast eleven league and a half , and then we 22 go Northeast ten league . from that 3 league and a 324 1556 . half eastnortheast , and then we see the land through the cloud and hazy thwart on the broad side of we the wind be then at Southsouthwest . from that until Saturday , at eight of the clock in 23 the morning Eastnortheast , and to the northward forty eight league , and then the wind come up at north , we be aboard the shore , and thwart of the chapel , which i suppose be call kedilwike : than we cast the Kedelwike ship head to the seaward , because the wind be very chapped - scant : and then i cause the pinnace to bear in with the shore , to see whether she may find a harbour for the ship or not , and that she find and see two reader ride in the sound : and also they see house . but notwithstanding , God be praise , the wind enlarge upon we , that we have not occasion to go into the harbour : and then the pinnace bear she Myssen mast over board with flag and all