be report to i in Moscovia , that the Turk and the Turk Armenians pay the ten penny custom of all the ware rme they bring into the emperor land , and above that they ususme ^ pay for all such good as they weigh at the emperor the emperor beam , two penny of the Rubble , which you buyer or beam . « 75 the dutch nation lose their privileges , you renew they with a great sum . the commodity of Russia . seller must make report to of the master of the beam : they also pay a certain horse toll , which be in diverse place of his realm four penny of a horse . the dutch nation be free of this : notwithstanding for certain offence , they have lose their privilege which they have recover this summer to their great charge . it be report to i by a justice of that country , that they pay for it thirty thousand rubble , and also that rye , Dorpte and revel have yield themselves under the government of the emperor of Russia : whether this be a brag of the russes or not , i know not , but thus he say , and in deed while we be there , there come a great ambassador out of Liefland , for the assurance of their privilege . to speak somewhat of the commodity of this country , it be to be understand , that there be a certain place four score mile from the sea call Colmogro : to which place there resort all the sort of ware that be in the north part , as oil , salt , stockfish , salmon , feather and fur : their salt they make of saltwater by the sea side : their oil they make of seal , whereof they have great store which be bring out of the bay where our ship come in : they make it in the spring of the year , and bring it to colmogro to sell , and the merchant there carry it to novogrode , and so sell it to the dutch nation . their stockfish and salmon come from a place call mallum , not far from Wardhouse : their salmon and their salt they carry to Moscow , and their dry fish they carry to novogrode , and sell it there to the lieflander . the fur and feather which come to Colmogro , as sable , beaver , minx , Armine , lettuce , Graies , wool - verings , and white fox , with dear skin , they be bring thither , by the man of pen , Lampas , and Powstezer , which fetch they from the samoede that be count savage people : and the merchant that bring these fur do use to truck with the merchant 276 i55 +- of Colmogro for cloth , tin , batrie , and such other like , and the merchant of Colmogro carry they to novogrode , Vologda , or Moscow , and sell they there . the feather which come from pen they do little esteem . if our merchant do desire to know the meet place of Russia for the stand house , in my opinion i take it to be Vologda , which be a great town stand in the heart of Russia , with many great and good town about it . there be great plenty of corn , victual , and of all such ware as be raise in Rusland , but special , flax , hemp , tallow and bacon : there be also great store of wax , but it come from the Mosko . the town of Vologda be meet for our merchant , Vologda and because it lie amongst all the best town of Russia , sta ^ and there be no town in Russia but trade with it : also the water be a great commodity to it . if they plant themselves in Moscow or Novogrode , their charge will be great and wonderful , but not so in Vologda : for all thing will there be have better cheap by the one half . and for their vent , i know no place so meet . it be likely that some will think you Mosko to be the meet by the reason of the court , but by that reason i take it to be worse : for the charge there will be so great by craver and expense , that the moiety of the profit will be whole consume , which in the other place will be save . and yet notwithstanding our merchant may be there in the winter to serve the emperor and his court . The the emperor emperor be a great merchant himself of wax and l sable , which with good foresight may be procure to mseife n their hand : as for other commodity there be little or none in Moscovia , beside those above rehearse : if there be other , it be bring thither by the Turk , who will be dainty to buy our clothes consider the charge of carriage over land . our merchant may do well to provide for the russes such ware as the dutch nation do serve they of , as Flanders and Holland clothes , which i believe , they shall 277 serve better and with less charge than they of rye or dorpt , or revel : for it be no small adventure to bring their clothes out of Flanders to either of these place , and their charge not little to carry they over land to novogrode , which be from rye nine hundred russian mile . this novogrode be a place well furnish with flax , wax , hide , tallow and many other thing : the best flax in Russia be bring thither and there sell by the hundred bundle , which be do also at Vologda , and they that bring the flax to novogrode , dwell as near Vologda , as novogrode , and when they hear of the utterance which they may have with our nation , they will as willing come to they as go to other . two sort of they have in Russia two sort of flax , the one be axe - call great flax , and the other small : that which they call great flax be better by four rubble in 100 bundle then the small : it be much long than the other , and clean without wood : and whereas of the small flax there go 27 . or 28 bundle to a shippound , there go not of the great sort above 22 . or 24 at the most . there be many other trifle in Russia , as soap , mat , etc but i think there will be no great account make of they .