: for in all place where we do come , all weight and measure do vary . then the secretary ( who have make promise unto we before ) say , that we shall have all the just measure under seal , and he that be find faulty in the contrary , to buy or sei with any other measure then that , the law be , that he shall be punish : he say moreover , that if it so happen that any of our merchant do promise by covenant at any time to deliver you any certain sum of ware in such a place , and of such like goodness , at such a day , for such a certain price , that then because of variance , we shall cause it to be write , accord as the bargain be , before a justice or the next ruler to the place : if he do not keep covenant and promise in all point , accord to his covenant , that then look what loss or hindrance we can just prove that we have thereby , he shall make it good if he be worth so much : and in like case we must do to they : and to that we do agree , save only if it be to come over the sea , then if any such fortune shall be ( as God forbid ) that the ship shall mischance or be rob , and the proof to be make that such kind of ware be lade , the english merchant to bear no loss to the other merchant . than you chancellor say , i think you shall do best to have your house at Colmogro , which be but 100 mile from 294 the right discharge of the ship , and yet i trust the ship shall come near hereafter , because the ship may not tarry long for their lade , which be rooo . mile from Vologda by water , and all our merchant shall bring all our merchandise to Colmogro to you , and so colmogro . shall our merchant neither go empty nor come empty : for if they lack lade homeward , there be salt , which be good ware here , that they may come load again . so we be very glad to hear that , and do agree to his say : for we shall nevertheless , if we lust , have a house at Vologda , and at the Moscow , yea , and at novogrode , or where we will in Rusland : but the three and twenty of this present we be with the secretary , and then among other talk , we move , that if we shall tarry at colmogro with our ware , and shall not come to Vologda , or further to seek our market , but tarry still at Colmogro , and then the merchant of the Moscow and other shall not come and bring their ware , and so the ship shall come , and not have their lade ready , that than it be a great loss and hindrance for we : then say he again to we , that the merchant have be again together with he , and have put the like doubt , that if they shall come and bring their ware to Colmogro , and that they shall not find ware there sufficient to serve they , that than they shall be at great loss and hindrance , they leave their other trade to fall to that : and to that we do answer , that after the time that we do appoint with they to bring their ware to Colmogro , God will , they shall never come thither , but at the begin of the year , they shall find that our merchant will have at the least for a thousand roble , although the ship be not come : so that he say , that than we must talk further with the merchant : so that as yet i know not , but that we shall have need of one house at Colmogro , and another at Vologda , and if that they bring not their ware to Col - Vologda . mogro , than we shall | be sure to buy some at Vologda , and to be out of bondage . 295 the russian secretary his name . and thus may we continue three or four year , and in this space we shall know the country and the merchant , and which way to save our self best , and where to plant our house , and where to seek for ware : for the Moscow be not best for any kind of ware for we to buy , save only wax , which we can have under seven penny the ruff pound , and it lack two ounce of our pound , neither will it be much better cheap , for i have bid 6 . penny for a pound . and i have buy more , five hundred weight of yarn , which stand i in eight penny farthing the ruff pound one with another . and if we have receive any store of money , and be dispatch here of that we tarry for , as i doubt not but we shall short ( you know what i mean ) then as soon as we have make sale , i do intend to go to novogrode , and to Plesco , whence all the great number of the best tow flax come , and such ware as be there i trust to buy part . and fear you not but we will do that may be do , if God send we health , desire you to prepare full for one ship to be ready in the begin of April to depart off the coast of England . concern all those thing which we have do in the ware , you shall receive a perfect note by the next bearer ( God will ) for he that carry these from we be a merchant of Terwill and he be cause to carry these by the commandment of the emperor his secretary , who name be Ivan Mecallawich weskawate , who we take to be our very friend . and if it please you to send any letter to dantiske to Robert Elson , or to William Watsons servant Dunstan Walton to be convey to we , it may please you to enclose we in a letter send from you to he , write in polish , dutch , latin or italian : so enclose , come to the Moscow to his hand , he will convey our letter to we wheresoever we be . and i have write to dantiske already to they for the conveyance of letter from thence . and to certify you of the weather here , man say that 296 these hundred year be never so warm weather in this country at this time of the year . but as yesternight we receive a letter from Christopher Hudson from a city call yeraslave , who be come hither with certain of our ware , but the winter do deceive he , so that he be fain to tarry by the way : and he write that the emperor present be deliver to a gentleman at Vologda , and the sled do overthrow , and the butt of hollock be lose , which make we all very sorry . i pray you be not offend with these my rude letter for lack of time : but assoon as sale be make , i will find the mean to convey you a letter with speed : for the way be make so doubtful , that the right messenger be so much in doubt , that he will not have any letter of any effect send by any man , if he may , for he know not of these : and to say the truth , the way be not for he to travel in . but i will make another shift beside , which i trust shall serve the turn till he come , if sale be make before he be ready , which be and shall be as please God : who ever preserve your worship , and send we good sale . write in haste . by you to command George Killingworth draper .