there be as much above water of his back as the breadth of our pinnace , and at his fall down , he make such a terrible noise in the water , that a man will great have marvel , except he have know the cause of it : but God be thank , we be quiet deliver of he . and a little after we spy certain island , with which we bear , and find good harbour in 15 or 18 fathom , and black oz : we come to a anchor at a north - east sun , and name the island S . James his island , where we find fresh water . Sunday , much wind blow we ride still . Monday i go on shore and take the latitude , which be 70 degree 42 minute : the variation of the compass be 7 degree and a half from the north to the west . Tuesday we ply to the westwards alongst the shore , the wind be at northwest , and as i be about to come to anchor , we see a sail come about the point , wherunder we think to have anchor . than i send a skiff aboard of he , and at their come aboard , they take acquaintance of they , and the chief man say he 336 have be in our company in the river Cola , and also declare unto they that we be past the way which the way to shall bring we to the Ob . this land , say he , be call thr ^ er Nova Zembla , that be to say , the new land : and than ' he come aboard himself with his skiff , and at his / mighty hill come aboard he tell i the like , and say further , that in this nova Zembla be the high mountain in the ’ world , as he think , and that come Boldshay , which be on the main of Pechora , be not to be compare to this mountain , but i see it not : he make i also certain demonstration of the way to the ob , and seem to make haste on his own way , be very loath to tarry , because the year be far pass , and his neighbour have fetch Pechora , and not he : so i give he a steel glass , two pewter spoon , and a pair of velvet sheathe knife : and then he seem somewhat the more willing to tarry , and show i as much as he know for our purpose : he also give i 17 wild goose , and show i that four of their lodias be drive perforce from caninoze to this nova Zembla . this man name be Loshak . Loshak . Wednesday , as we ply to the eastwards , we espy 29 another sail , which be one of this loshak company , and we bare room , and speak with he , who in like sort tell we of the ob , as the other have do . Thursday , we ply to the eastwards , the wind be 30 at eastnortheast . Friday , the gale of wind begin to increase , and come 31 westerly withal , so that by a northwest sun we be at a anchor among the island of vaigat , where we see the island two small lodias , the one of they come aboard of we , and ° ftagaits . present i with a great loaf of bread : and they tell i that they be all of Colmogro , except one man that dwell at Pechora , who seem to be the chief among they in kill of the Morse . there be some of their company on shore , which do chase a white bear over the high cliff into the water , which bear the lodia that be aboard of we kill in our sight . n 337 y this day there be a great gale of wind at north , and we see so much ice drive a seaboord , that it be then no go to sea . August . i OAturday i go ashore , and there i see three morse oh that they have kill : they hold one tooth of a Morse , which be not great , at a roble , and one white bear skin at three roble and two roble : they further tell i , that samoeds . there be people call samoeds on the great island , and that they will not abide they nor we , who have no house , but only cover make of deersskin , set over they with stake : they be man expert in shoot , and have great plenty of deer . this night there fall a cruel storm , the wind be at west . 2 Sunday we have very much wind , with plenty of snow , and we ride with two anchor a head . 3 Monday we weigh and go room with another island , which be five league eastnortheast from we : and there i meet again with Loshak , and go on shore with he , and he bring i to a heap of the samoed idol , mamr of which be in number above 300 , the worst and the most the samoed . ^ artificiali work that ever i see : the eye and mouth of sundry of they be bloody , they have the shape of man , woman and child , very gross wrought , and that which they have make for other part , be also sprinkle with blood . some of their idol be a old stick with two or three notch , make with a knife in it . i see much of the foot of the say samoed , and of the sled that they ride in . there be one of their sled break , and lie by the heap of idol , and there i see a deer skin which the fowl have spoil : and before certain of their idol block be make as high as their mouth , be all bloody , i think that to be the table whereon they offer their sacrifice : i see also the instrument , whereupon they have roast flesh , and as far as i can perceive , they make their fire direct under the spit . 338 Loshak be there present tell i that these the samoed samoeds be not so hurtful as they of ob be , and that they have no house , as indeed i see none , but only tent make of deer skin , which they underprop with stake and pole : their