boat , which declare unto i that they be also bind to the northward , a fish for Morse , and salmon , and give i liberal of their white and wheaten bread . as we ride in this river , we see daily come down the river many of their Lodias , and they that have least , have four and twenty man in they , and at the last they grow to thirty sail of they : and among the rest , there be one of they who name be Gabriel , who show i very much friendship , and he declare unto i , that all they be bind to Pechora , a fish for salmon , and morse : insomuch that he show i by demonstration , that with a fair wind we have seven or eight day sail to the river Pechora , so that i be glad of their company . This Gabriel promise to give i warning of shoal , as he do indeed . Sunday be the one and twenty day , Gabriel give i a barrel of Meade , and one of he speciali friend give i a barrel of beer , which be carry upon man back at least 2 mile . Monday we depart from the river Cola , with all the rest of the say Lodias , but sail before the wind , they be all too good for we : but accord to promise , this Gabriel and his friend do often strike their sail , and tarry for we forsake their own company . Tuesday at a eastnortheast sun we be thwart of cape S . John . it be to be understand , that from the cape S . John unto the river or bay that go to Mezen , it be all sink land , and full of shoal and danger , you shall have scant two fathom water , and see no land . and this present day we come to a anchor thwart of a creek , which be 4 or 5 league to the northward of the say cape , into which creek Gabriel and his fellow row , but we can not get in : and before night there be above 20 328 .. I556 , sail that go into the say creek , the wind be at the north - east . we have indifferent good landfang . this afternoon Gabriel come aboard with his skiff , and then i reward he for the good company that he keep with we over the shoal with two small ivory comb , and a steel glass , with two or three trifle more , for which he be not ungrateful . but notwithstanding , his first company have get further to the northward . Wednesday be midsummer day , we send our 24 skiff aland to sound the creek , where they find it almost dry at a low water . and all the Lodais within be on ground . although the harbour be evil , yet the stormy similitude of northerly wind tempt we to set our sail , and we let slip a cable and a anchor , and bear with the harbour , for it be then near a high water : and as always in such journey variety do chance , when we come upon the bar in the entrance of the creek , the wind do shrink so sudden upon we , that we be not able to lead it in , and before we can have flat the ship before the wind , we shall have be on ground on the lee shore , so that we be constrain to let fall a anchor under our sail , and ride in a very breach , think to have warp in . Gabriel come out with his skiff , and so do sundry other also , show their good will to help we , but all to no purpose , for they be likely to have be drown for their labour , in so much that i desire Gabriel to lend i his anchor , because our own anchor be two big for our skiff to lay out , who send i his own , and borrow another also and send it we . than we lay out one of those anchor , with a hawser which he have of 140 fathom long , think to have warp in , but it will not be : for as we short upon you say warp the anchor come home , so that we be fain to bear the end of the warp , that we rush in upon the 329 other small anchor that Gabriel send aboard , and lay that anchor to seawards : and then between these two anchor we traverse the ship head to seawards , and set our foresail and main sail , and when the bark have way , we cut the haws , and so gate the sea to our friend , and try out all that day with our main corpse . 25 than Thursday we go room with cape S . John , where we find indifferent good road for a northnortheast wind , and for a need , for a north and by west wind . 26 Friday at afternoon we weigh , and depart from thence , the wether be meet fair , and the wind at eastsoutheast , and ply for the place where we leave our cable and anchor , and our hawser : and as soon as we be at a anchor , the foresay Gabriel come aboard of we , with 3 or four more of their small boat , and bring with they of their aquavitae and mead , profess unto i very much friendship , and rejoice to see we again , declare that they earnest think that we have be lose . This Gabriel declare unto i , that they have save both the anchor and our hauser , and after we have thus commune , i cause 4 or 5 of they to go into my cabin , where i give they fig , and make they such cheer as i can . while i be thus banquet of they , there come another of their skiffe aboard with one who be a keril , who name afterward i learn , and that he dwell in Colmogro , and Gabriel dwell in the town of Cola , which be not far from the river mouth . this foresay keril say unto i that one of the anchor which i borrow be he , i give he thank for the loan of it , think it have be suffi - cient . and as i continue in one accustom manner , that if the present which they bring be