it may not lie upon their hand that have it to sell , always have consideration in the price and time as our next dispatch may correspond . whereof you may send a certain advice , as well what you shall receive of credit , and to what quantity , 386 the article of their first commission elven quoth . letter to the agent as also what ware be remain in your hand : which together well consider , you may advertise we as well for how many hundred ton we must provide fraught against the next year , as also what sort , quantity and quality of ware we shall send you , as well to pay your credit , as also to furnish the next adventure after . of this we will be answer large . for we trust by this time you be able to give full instruction of the state of the country : accord to the article of your first commission , and what commodity do principal abound there with their price : and likewise what of our commodity have most utterance there , and what price will be give for they there : and all other thing requisite and necessary to be know . also we do understand that in the country of Permia or about the river of Pechora be great quantity of yew , and likewise in the country of Ugory , which we be desirous to have knowledge of , because it be a speciali commodity for our realm . therefore we have send you a young man , who name be Leonard Leonard Brian , that have some knowledge in the wood , to show ™ nt t0 you in what sort it must be cut and cleave . so our yew - in tfie mind be if there be any store , and that it be find north part off to be good , that there you do provide a good quantity Russia . against the next year for the come of our ship : and if there can be find none that will serve for our purpose , than you may set the say Leonard Brian to any other business that you shall find most fit for he , until the return of our ship the next year . for he be hire by the year only for that purpose . we doubt not but that he shall do you good service there . for he have good knowledge of ware of that country : for he bring up have be most in dansk , and have good understanding in make of rope and cable . also we do send you two Cooper 2 . Cooper to remain there with you at our find for meat send ™ t0 and drink and lodging to make in a readiness all russta - such cask as shall needful for train oil , tallow , 387 or any thing else . one of they may go with Leonard Brian to cut and cleve such yew as he shall like there . and because we be not sure what timber they shall find there to make cask , we have lade in these ship 140 . ton empty cask , that be 94 . ton shake cask and 46 . ton whole , and ten thousand hoop , and 480 . wreathe of twig : they may be do with that till they can provide other timber , which we will be glad to hear of . they have a example with they of the bigness of the cask they shall make . nevertheless , all such butt and hogshead as may be find to serve we will shall | be fill with train oil . also we charge you that you suffer no good nor marchandy of any person be not free of the company , and of the account of the company to be lade in any wise in our ship either now or at any time hereafter : except the emperor or ambassador mind to send any thing to the king and queen majesty , or to any noble man , or to the merchant of the company : nor likewise that you suffer any good that go in these ship to be bring on land there , except the ambassador good , and the physician and apothecary , and other that he have with he , who carry no merchandise . and because our ship be freight by the great , it shall | be very needful that you do appoint certain to see the rummage of the ship , and to give the master or boatswain , or he that will take upon he to rummage , a good reward for his labour to see the good well rummage . if it be three . d . or four . d . the ton , it shall not be amiss . for if it be not substantial well look unto , it may be a great deal of money out of our way . also because we reckon that from the Moscow will be always better conveyance of letter to we by land : our mind be that from time to time as occasion shall serve , our agent shall write to he that shall lie at Moscow of all thing that shall pass , that he may give 388 we large instruction , aswell what be sell and buy , as also what lade we shall take , and what quantity and kind of good we shall send . for hitherto we have have but a slender advice , more like a bill to serve a chapman , then for quantity of ware to serve a kingdom . for we must procure to utter good quantity of ware , especial the commodity of our realm , although we afford a good pennyworth , to the intent to make other that have trade thither , weary , and so to bring our self and our commodity in estimation , and likewise to procure to have the chief commodity of that country in our hand , as wax and such other , that other nation may be serve by we and at our hand . for we do understand that the great quantity of wax that come to dansk , Lubeck , and Hambourgh , come out of Russia . therefore if we shall buy part , and they also buy , it will raise the price there , and will be little worth here . and all such letter of importance and secrecy as you themarchant do send by land for any ware