or otherwise , you must letter over write they in cipher , after the order of a book send write you in the ship : always take good heed in place of your letter and cipher , that we may understand they by the same book here , and to send they in such sort , that we may have they here by Christmas or Candlemas , if it be possible . and because you can so certain advertise we by letter of your do , but some doubt may arise , whereof we will most glad be certify : our mind be therefore that with these ship you send we home one such young man as be most expert in knowledge of that country , and can best certify we in such question as may be demand , who we will remit unto you again in the next ship . we think Arthur Edwards will fit for that purpose : nevertheless use your discretion in that matter . as touch our good that be rob and pilfer out of our ship at colmogro and Vologda we trust by this time they be restore again , and the malefactor 389 the voyage of Steven burrow for the discovery of the river of Ob . m . Anthony Jenkinson his first travail intend for Cathay by the caspian sea and boghar . good cask make in Russia . so punish that other may take example for do the like , otherwise it will be a evil precedent . Moreover , we do perceive that Richard Gray do buy mast to send into England , they will not quit the cost , except we have a ship of purpose for they . and likewise that Steven Burrow be return from his discovery with the serchthrift , and winter at Colmogro , and be mind to set forth in the begin of June next to seek the river of Ob . we pray God to speed he well , and trust to have he here in England this year to bring we good news . we do perceive there be a river find about the mouth of saint Nicholas bay that have thirteen foot upon the bar at a low water , and be as near colmogro as S . Nicholas : which will be a great pleasure unto we . we will that Steven Burrowe do proceed on his voyage to discover . also we have send you one Anthony Jenkinson gentleman , a man well travel , who we mind to use in further travel , accord to a commission deliver he , subscribe by master Anthony Huse and other . wherefore we will you deliver he one or more of such painful young man as he shall think meet for his purpose : and likewise such money and ware as he shall think best to take with he . he must have forty pound a year for four year , to be pay he by the half year , or as he will demand it of you , so let he have it from easter last . also the price of ware here at this present be , bale flax twenty pound the pack and better , tow flax twenty eight pound the hundred , train oil at nine pound the ton , wax at four pound the hundred , tallow at sixteen shilling the hundred , cable and rope very dear : as yet there be no ship come out of dansk . keep until the ten day of this present . as this day come the good out of Scotland that be recover out of the Edward Bonaventure : and now we do perceive that the cask that the train oil come in , be very good , and much better than we . therefore our 390 mind be , that you shall lade it all in such barrel of the big sort as you jade in the Edward , and no long barrel nor small . and that cask that we have send may serve for the tallow or any other ware that be not leakage . nevertheless , this voyage you must take such as you can get . also if the emperor be mind to deliver you any sum of money , or good wax at as reasonable a price as you may buy for ready money , we will that you shall take it and lade it for our account , and to come at our adventure , and he to be pay at the return of the ship in velvet , satin , or any other kind of silk , or cloth of gold , cloth of tissue , or accord as his commission shall be that he shall send we in the ship , and accord to such pattern as he shall send . we do not find the ambassador now at the last so conformable to reason as we have think we shall . he be very mistrustful , and think every man will beguile he . therefore you have need to take heed how you have to do with he or with any such , and to make your bargain plain , and to set they down in writing . for they be subtle people , and do not always speak the truth , and think other man to be like themselves . therefore we will have none of they to send any good in our ship at any time , nor none to come for passenger , unless the emperor do make a bargain with you , as be aforesaid , for his own person . also we charge you not to suffer any of our nation to send any ware to their wife or friend in any of our ship ; but to take their money there to be pay here by the company and not otherwise : and to have consideration how you do take the roble . for although we do rate it after sixteen shilling eight penny of our money , yet it be not worth past 12 . or 13 . shilling sterling . Moreover , you have need to send new account , for they that come in the 391 Edward be mar and tear , so that we can make no reckon by they : and likewise to write we a perfect note of all the good which you receive the last voyage out of the Edward , and herein not to fail . ' Andrew judde . George bairn . Anthony Huse . William Garrard . William Chester . < 557 - John Sedgewick at Novogrode .