to take charge of the stuflfe wrought , and to foresee that neither the yarn be burn in tarring , nor the hemp rot in the water ; and also to furnish they so with labourer , workman and stuflfe , as hereafter when these workman shall come away , we be not destitute of good workman , and that these may dispatch as much as possible they may , do it substantial : for we esteem it a principal commodity , and that the counsel Cables and of England do well allow . let all diligence be a 1 ™ - use , that at the return of these ship we may see clp ^ commq ' sample of all rope and cable if it be possible , and so after to continue in work , that we may have good store against the next year . therefore they have need to 381 dansk the old chief place for cable . commodity not bear have a place to work in , in the winter : and at any hand let they have help enough to spin their stuff : for see you have great plenty of hemp there , and at a reasonable price , we trust we shall | be able to bring as good stuff from thence , and better cheap than out of dansk : if it be diligent use , and have a good overseer . let the chief lade of these four ship be principal in wax , flax , tallow and train oil . and if there be any more ware than these ship be able to take in , then leave that which be least in value and gross in stouage until the next ship : for we do purpose to ground our self chief upon these commodity , as wax , cable and rope , train oil , flax and some linen yarn . as for mast , tar , hemp , feather , or any such other like , they will not bear oflmgfraigkt charge to have any , consider our dear fraught . we have send you a Skinner to be there at our charge for meat , drink and lodging , to view and see such fur as you shall cheap or buy , not mind nevertheless , that you shall charge your self with many , fum most except those which be most vendible , as good martern , vendible . minivers , otherwise call lettuce and mynke . of these you may send we plenty , find they good and at a reasonable price . as for sable and other rich fur , they be not every man money : therefore you may send the few , use partly the discretion of the skinner in that behalf . steel . we hear that there be great plenty of steel in Russia and Tartary , whereof we will you send we part for a example , and to write your mind in it what store be to be have : for we hear say there be great plenty , and that the Tartar steel be better than that in Russia . and likewise we be inform that there copper . be great plenty of copper in the emperor dominion : we will be certify of it what plenty there be , and whether it be in plate or in round flat cake , and send we some for a example . also we will have you to 382 woollen cloth of rye and revel , of Poland and Lettowe . russianlether . letter to the agent certify we what kind of woollen cloth the man of rye and revel , and the pole and lettoe do bring to Russia , and send the skantling of they with part of the list , and a full advice of the length and breadth , colour and price , and whether they be strain or not : and what number of they may be utter in a year , to the intent we may make provision for they for the like sort , and all other flemish ware which they bring thither and be most vendible there . and to certify we whether our set clothes be vendible there or not : and whether they be row and shear : because ofttimes they go undress . Moreover , we will you send we of every commodity in that country part , but no great quantity other then such as be before declare . and likewise every kind of leather , whereof we be inform there be great store buy yearly by the esterling and duchess for high Almaigne and Germany . more , that you do send we for proof a quantity of such earth , herb , or what thing soever it be , that the russes do die and colour any kind of cloth linen or woollen , leather or any other thing withal : and also part of that which the Tartar and Turk do bring thither , and how it must be use in die and colour . Moreover , that you have a speciali foresight in the choose of your tallow , and that it may be well purify and try , or else it will in one year putrify and consume . also that you certify we the truth of the weight and measure , and how they do answer with we , and to send we 3 . roble in money , that we may try the just value of they . also we do send you in these ship ten young ten young man man that be bind prentice to the company , who tent into rus - we will you to appoint every of they as you shall there sia - finde most apt and meet , some to keep account , some to buy and sell by your order and commission , and some to send abroad into the notable city of the country for understanding and knowledge . and we 3 ^ 3 thing good to die withal . will you send we advertisement from time to time as well of the demeanour of our prentice which we do send now , as also of such other as be already there with you . and if you find any of they remiss , negligent , or otherwise misuse themselves and will not be rule , that than you do send he home , and the cause why . and because we do perceive the country to be large , and that you have three household , we do appoint Henry lane to be one of our