no word nor knowledge be have at this present day , nor yet of the arrival of the ship or good from Scotland . the three of May the ambassador depart from London to Gravesend , accompany with diverse aiderman 358 1557 - and merchant , who in good guard set he aboard the noble ship , the primrose admiral to the fleet , where leave be take on both side and part , after many embracement and diverse farewell not without express of tear . Memorandum , that the first day of may the counseller , the king and videlicet , the bishop of Elye , and sir William Peter on queen second the behalf of the king and queen majesty repair r ^ nurof to the lord ambassador do not only deliver unto he Russia . their highness letter of recommendation under the great seal of England to the emperor , very tender and friendly write , but also on their majesty behalf give and deliver certain notable present to the emperor person , and also gift for the lord ambassador proper use and behoof , as by the particular under write appear , with such further good word and commendation , as the more friendly have not be hear , whereby it appear how well affect their honour be to have and continue amity and traffic between their honour and their subject : which thing as the king and queen majesty have show of their princely munificence and liberality , so have likewise the merchant and fellowship of the adventurer , for and to Russia , manifest to the world their good will , mind and zeal bear to this new commence voyage , as by the discourse above mention , and other the notable act over long to be recite in this present memoriali , do and may most clear appear , the like whereof be not in any precedent or history to be show . forasmuch as it may be doubt how the ship name the Edward Bonaventure suffer shipwreck , what become of the good , how much they be spoil and detain , how little restore , what charge and expense ensue , what personage be drown , how the rest of the ship either arrive or perish , or how the disposition of almighty God have wrought his pleasure in they , how the same ambassador have be after the miserable 359 case of shipwreck in Scotland unreverent abuse , and consequent into England receive and conduct , there entertain , use , honour , and final in good safety towards his return , and repair furnish , and with much liberality and frank handle friendly dismiss , to the intent that the truth of the premise may be to the most mighty emperor of Russia sincere signify in eschewment of all event and misfortune that may chance in this voyage ( which God defend ) to the ambassador person , train , and good , this present memoriali be write , and autentike make , and by the say ambassador his servant , who name be underwrite , and train in presence of the notary , and witness undername , recognize , and acknowledge . give the day , month , and year underwritten , of which instrument into every of the say ship one testimoniali be deliver , and the first remain with the say company in London . gift send to the king and queen majesty of England by the emperor of Russia , by the report of the ambassador , and spoil by the Scot after the shipwreck . i First , six timber of Sables rich in colour and hair . 2 item , twenty entire sable exceed beautiful with tooth , ear and claw . 3 item , four live sable with chain and collar . 4 item , thirty lusarne large and beautiful . 5 item , six large and great skin very rich and rare , wear only by the emperor for worthiness . 6 item , a large and fair white jerfawcon for the wild swan , crane , goose , and other great fowl , together with a drum of silver , the hoop gild , use for a lure to call the say hawk . 360 gift send to the emperor of Russia by the king and queen majesty of England . i First , two rich piece of cloth of tissue . 2 item , one fine piece of scarlet . 3 item , one fine violet in grain . 4 item , one fine azure cloth . 5 item , a notable pair of brigandine with a murrian cover with crimson velvet and gild nail . 6 item , a male and female lion . gift give to the ambassador at his departure , over and above such as be deliver unto he at his first arrival . i First , a chain of gold of one hundred pound . 2 item , a large basin and Ewer , silver and gilt . 3 item , a pair of pottle pot gild . 4 item , a pair of flagon gild . the name of all such russy as be attendant upon the ambassador , at and before his departure out of England . ' Isaak Fwesscheneke . Demetre . gorbolones . symonde . 1 Yeroffia . Stephen . lowca . Andria . Foma . Memorandum , the day and year of our lord above mention , in the house of the worshipful John dim - mocke citizen and draper of London , situate within the famous city of London in the realm of England , 361 the above name honourable Osep Gregorywich Napea ambassador and orator above mention , personal constitute and present , have declare unto he by the mouth of the right worshipful master Anthony Hussie esquire , the effect of the cause and content , of , and in this book , at the interpretation of Robert best his interpreter swear , recognize , and knowledge in presence of i the notary and personage underwritten , the content of this book to be true , aswell for his own person as for his servant above name , who do not subscribe their name as be above mention , but only recognize the same . in witness whereof , i John Incent notary public , at the request of the say master Anthony Hussie , and other of the merchant have to these present underwritten set my accustom sign , with the subscription of my name , the day and year above write , be present the right worshipful , ' Andrew judde . 0 ) George bairn . > knight a William Chester . i > alder man of London . Ralph greeneaway . --------- i > John Mersh esquire . John Dimmock . blaze Sanders . Hubert Hussie , and Robert best above mention .