the voyage of the foresay m . Stephen Burrough , An . 1557 . from colmogro to Wardhouse , which be send to seek the bona Esperanza , the bona Confidentia , and the fillip and marry , which be not hear of the year before . may . Pon Sunday the 23 . of may , i depart 23 with the searchthrift from Colmogro , the latitude whereof be 64 . degree , 25 . minute , and the variation of the compass , 5 . degree , 10 minute from the north to the east . Wednesday we come to the island 26 call pozanka , which island be within four league of the bar Berozova . it flow here at a east and by south moon full sea . Saturday in the morning we depart from pozanka , 29 and ply to the bar of Berdzova Gooba , whereupon we come to anchor , at a low water , and sound the say bar with our two skiff , and find in the best upon the shoald of the bar 13 . foot water by the rule . it high upon this bar , in spring stream 3 . foot water : and a east moon make a full sea upon this bar . Sunday in the morning we depart from the bar 3 ° of Berozova , and ply along by the shoald in five fathom , until i have sight of saint Nicholas ride , and then we cast about to the northward , and go with a hommocke , which be half a mile to the eastwards of Coya Reca , which hommocke and saint Nicholas abbey Coia Reca . lie southsouthwest , and northnortheast , and between they be 11 . league . Coia Reca be half a mile to the eastwards of coscaynos . coscaynos and the mid of coscaynos . the island call Mondeustova ostrove , which be thwart of the bar of Berozova lie south and by 363 east , north and by west , and between they be 4 . league , or as you may say from the seaboord part of the bar to coscaynos be 3 . league and a half . 31 Monday at a north - east and by east sun we be thwart of coscaynos . dog nose lie from coscaynos northnorthwest , and between they be eight league : and dog nose show like a Gurnerds head , if you be inward on both side of it : on the low point of dog nose there stand a cross alone . 2 dog nose . the variation of the compass 4 . degree . 3 4 June . from dog nose to Foxenose be three league , north and by west . the 2 . day of June i go on shore 2 . mile to the northward of dog nose , and have the latitude of that place in 65 . degree , 47 . minute . it flow a shore at this place , at a east moon full sea , and the ship lay thwart to wend a flood , in the off , at a southsoutheast moon . so that it be to be understand , that when it be a full sea on the shore , it be two point to ebb , before it be a low water in the off . the variation of the compass at this place be 4 . degree from the north to the east . this day the northnorthwest wind put we back again with dog nose , where a ship may ride thwart of a salt house , in 4 . fathom , or 4 . fathom and a half of water , and have landfange for a north and by west wind : which salt house be half a mile to the southward of dog nose . Friday at a Southsouth west sun , we depart from this salt house . it be to be note that four mile to the northward of dog nose there grow no tree on the bank by the water side : and the bank consist of fuller earth . over the cliff there grow some tree : so that dog nose be the better to be know because it be fuller earth , and the like i have not see in all that country . 364 a head of fox nose a league from the shore there fox nose . be 15 . fathom : betwixt fox nose and Zolatitsa there be 6 league , i mean the southerly part of fox nose . Sunday i sound the bar of Zolatitsa , which the 6 russes tell i be a good harbour , but in the best of it i find but 4 . foot water . Monday , i have the latitude in 66 . degree , and then 7 be point Pentecost six league south of we . point pente - Wednesday i go on land at cross island , and c ^‘ take the latitude , which be 66 . degree 24 minute . cross island . we be one league north - east of cross island , i see the land on the Eastside , which i judge to be cape good fortune , and it be then eastsoutheast of cape good they 9 league . fortune . cape grace be 7 . league and a half north - east from cape grace . cross island . there be 2 . Islands 5 . league northnortheast from cape grace , the southermost of they be a little long island almost a mile long , and the northermost a little round island , and they be both hard aboard the shore . cape race be from the southermost island north cape race . and by west , and between they be two league , and from that and half a league northnorthwest , there be another point . between which point and cape race , the russes have a stanavish or harbour for their Lodias : and to the westwards of the say point , there be a shoal bay . three league and a half to northward of cape 10 race , we have the latitude on the 10 . day of this month in 67 . degree 10 . minute . ride within half a league of the shore in this latitude i find it to be a full sea at a north and by east moon . i have where we ride two and twenty fadoome , and the tallow which be take up be full of great break shell , and some stone withal like unto small sand congeal together . from a south sun that we weigh , the wind 365 be at north and by east , we drive to the windward half the ebb , with the ship head to the eastwards . and then when we cast her head to the westwards , we sound , and have 22 . fathom break shell , and grey sand ; this present day be very misty , frost in June , with frost on the shrowd as the mist fall . Friday