Instructions give to the master and mariner to be observe in and about this fleet , pass this year 1557 . towards the bay of S . Nicolas in Russia , for this present race to be make and return of the same by god grace to the port of London , the place of their right discharge , as in the article ensue be deduce . irst , it be accord and agree between the several proprietary and owner , master and company of the four ship , surname the primrose , the John Evangelist , the anne and the Trinity , and the lieutenant , consul , assistant and company of the merchant advent turer , that the above name four ship shall in good order and conduct , sail , pass , and travail together in one float , ging , and conserve of society , to be keep indissoluble and not to be sever , but unite within continual sight , so far forth as ( by wind and weather ) by possibility shall or may be without any separation or departure of one from the other . 2 item , it be agree that the good ship name the primerose , shall admiral of this float , and that Anthony Jenkinson gentleman , shall captain thereof : and that all other the 3 . ship shall ensue and follow she in all course , and that no course nor weigh ( in 375 harbour especial ) shall be make without advice , consent and agreement of the say captain , the master , his mate , and two other officer of the say ship , or of three of they at the least . 3 item , that the say Anthony be and shall | be repute and take for captain general of the say float together with all such order , preeminence , privilege and preferment as by the order of sea be due and accustom to a captain during his abode and exercise of the same . 4 it be also ordain , that if any one or more of the say 3 . ship shall out of sight either before or behind the admiral , that than the rest of the ship shall tack or take off their sail in such sort as they may meet and come together , in as good order as may be , to the intent to keep the consortment exact in all point . 5 it be constitute , that if any ship shall | be sever by mist or dark weather , in such sort as the one can have sight of the other , then and in such case the admiral shall make sound and noise by drum , trumpet , horn , gun or otherwise or mean , that the ship may come as nigh together , as by safety and good order they may . 6 it be also to be observe , that every day once the other three ship shall send and come aboard the admiral , and there consult and determine of such matter and thing as shall be for the assurance of their navigation , and most expedition of the same . 7 item , that note and entry be daily make of their navigation put in writing and memory , and that the young mariner and apprentice may be teach and cause to learn and observe the same . 8 it be accord that the say captain shall have the principali rule and government of the apprentice : and that not only they , but also all other the sailor , shall attendant and obedient to he , as of duty and reason appertain . 376 9 also that no beer nor broth , or other liquor be spill upon the ballast , or other place of the ship , whereby any annoyance , stink , or other unsavoriness shall grow in the ship to the infection or hurt of the person in the same . io item , that the captain by discretion shall from time to time disship any artificer or english servingman or apprentice out of the primrose into any of the other three ship , and in lieu of he or they , take any such apprentice as he shall think convenient and most meet to serve the benefit of the company . two item , that great respect be have to the gunner and cook room , that all danger and peril of powder and fire may be eschew and avoid . 12 item , that singular care and respect be have to the port of the ship , aswell in navigation as in harbour , and especial in lade and unlade of the ship , that nothing be lack or surcharge : and that the book may oftentimes be confer and make to agree in eschuement of such loss , as may ensue . 13 special foresight be to be have , that at the Wardhouse no treachery , invasion , or other peril of molestation be do or procure to be attempt to our ship by any king , prince , or company , that do mislike this new find trade by sea to Russia , or will let and hinder the same : whereof no small boast have be make : which give occasion of more circumspection and diligence . 14 if the wind and weather will serve , it be think good rather to go by the Wardhouse then to come in and anchor there , lest any male engine , or danger may be the rather attempt against we , our good and ship as above . 15 it be think good that Richard Johnson , late servant to m . chancellor , shall be send home in this next return , to instruct the company of the state of the country , and of such question as may be demand of he , for our better advertisement and 377 resolution , in such doubt as shall arise here : and that he shall have the room of the captain in such sort , as master Jenkinson be in this present cocket assign unto . and if Johnson can not , may not , nor will not return and occupy the say place , than any other person to be prefer thereunto , as by the discretion of our say captain , with consent of our agent , shall be think meet and apt to supply the same . 16 provide always , that the ship return be not disfurnish of one such able man , as shall occupy the captainship in like order , as be , and have be in such case appoint , as reason and good order require . 17 item that all other former order , rule , and devise , make and provide for the good order of our ship , ware , and good , be not repugnant , contrary or diverse , to these article , and the content of the same , shall be , and stand in full force and effect , to be in all respect observe and keep of all and every person and person , who the same do or shall touch or concern . in witness of the premise faithful to be observe and keep , the owner and master of the say four ship , together with the say captain , to these seventeen article , contain in two sheet of paper , have subscribe their hand . give in London , the three of May , in the year of our lord God 1557 . fl owner of the primerose . Andrew judde . William Chester . Anthony Hickman . Edward Casteline . fl owner of the John Evangelist . Andrew judde . William Chester . fl owner of the anne . John dimocke . fl owner of the Trinity . R . T .