a discourse of the honourable receive into England of the first ambassador from the emperor of Russia , in the year of Christ 1556 . and in the three year of the reign of queen marie , serve for the three voyage to Moscovie . register by master John Incent protonotary . t be here record by writing and authentical testimony , partly for memory of thing do , and partly for the verity to be know to posterity in time to come , that whereas the most high and mighty Ivan Vasilivich emperor of all Russia , great duke of volodemer , Mos - covia and Novogrode , emperor of Cassan , and of Astrachan , lord of Pleskie , and great duke of smolensky , Tuerskie , Yowgoriskie , Permskie , Viatskie , Bolgarskie and Sibierskie , emperor and great duke of many other , as novogrode in the nether country , Chernigoskie , Rezanskie , Polodskie , Rezewskie , Bielskie , Rostoskie , Yeraslaveskie , Bealozarskie , Oudarskie , ob - dorskie , condenskie , and many other country , and lord over all those part , in the year of our lord God , follow the account of you latin church , 1556 . send by the sea from the port of saint Nicholas in Russia , his right honourable ambassador surname Osep Napea , his high officer in the town and country of Vologda , to the most famous and excellent prince , Philip and marry by the grace of God , king and queen of England , Spain , France and Ireland , defender of the faith , archduke of Austria , duke of Burgundy , Milan , and Brabant , county of haspurge , Flanders and Tyroll , his ambassador and orator with certain letter tender conceive , together with certain present and gift mention in the foot of this memorial , as a manifest argument and token of a mutual amity and friendship 35 ° first ambassage from Russia a . d . ... J556 . to be make and continue between their majesty and subject respective , for the commodity and benefit of both the realm and people : which orator be the 20 . day of July embark and ship in , and upon a good english ship name the Edward Bonaventure , belong to the governor , consul and company of english merchant , Richard chancellor be grand pilot , and John Buckland master of the say ship . in which be lade at the adventure of the foresay ambassador , and merchant at several account , good and merchandize , viz . in wax , trane oil , tallow , fur , felt , yarn and such like , to the sum of 2oooo . li . sterling , together with 16 . russy attendant upon the person of the say ambassador . over and above ten tower ship . other russy ship within the say bay of S . Nicholas , in one other good ship to the say company also belong call the bona Speranza , with good of the say orator and merchant to the value of 6000 . lib . sterling , as by the invoise and letter of lade of the say several ship ( whereunto relation be to be have ) particular appear . which good ship come in good order into the sea , and traverse the same in their journey towards the coast of England , be by contrary wind and extreme tempest of weather sever the one from the other , that be to say , the say bona Speranza with two other english ship also appertain to the say company , the one surname the fillip and marry , the other the Confidentia , be drive on the coast of Norway , into Drenton water , where the say Confidentia be see to perish on a rock , and the other , videlicet , the bona Speranza , with her whole company , be to the number of four and twenty person seem to winter there , whereof no certainty at this present day be know . the three , videlicet , the fillip and marry arrive in the Thames nigh London the eighteenth day of April , in the year of our lord one thousand five hundred fifty and seven . the Edward Bonaventure traverse the sea four month , the Edward final the ten day of November of the aforesaid year Bonaventure 351 1556 . arrive in Scotland , in the bay of Pettislego , Novemb . 7 . 1556 . Richard chancellor drown . of our lord one thousand five hundred , fifty and six , arrive within the scottish coast in a bay name pettislego , where by outrageous tempest , and extreme storm , the say ship be beat from her ground tackle , be drive upon the rock on shore , where she break and split in piece in such sort , as the grand pilot use all carefulness for the safety of the body of the say ambassador and his train , take the boat of the say ship , trust to attain the shore , and so to save and preserve the body , and seven of the company or attendant of the say ambassador , the same boat by rigorous wave of the sea , be by dark night overwhelm and drown , wherein perish not only the body of the say grand pilot , with seven russes , but also diverse of the mariner of the say ship : the noble personage of the say ambassador with a few other ( by God preservation and speciali favour ) only with much difficulty save . in which shipwreck not only the say ship be break , but also the whole mass and body of the good lade in she , be by the rude and ravenous people of the country thereunto adjoin , rifle , spoil and carry away , to the manifest loss and utter destruction of all the lade of the say ship , and together with the ship , apparel , ordinance and furniture belong to the company , in value of one thousand pound , of all which be not restore towards the cost and charge to the sum of five hundred pound sterling . as soon as by letters ' address to the say company , and in London deliver the sixth of December last pass , it be to they certain know of the loss of their pilot , man , good and ship , the same merchant with all celerity and expedition , obtain not only the queen majesty most gracious and favourable letter to the lady dowager , and lord of the council of Scotland for the gentle comfortment and entertainment of the say ambassador , his train and company , with preservation and restitution of his good , as in such miserable