shall not draw past 11 . or 12 . foot water , for all wind , a east Northeast wind be the worst . it be a ledge of rock , that defend the northerly wind from the place where they moare . when we come into the bay we see there a bark which be of two Dronton , and three or four Norway yeaghe , belong to Northberne : so when i come a shore , i meet first with the Dutchman , among who be the borrowmaster son of Dronton , who tell i that the fillip and marry winter at Dronton , and depart from thence for England in march : and withal he show i that the confidence be lose , and that he have buy her sail for his ship . then the Dutchman carry i to their Boothe , and make i good cheer , where i see the lappians chepen of the say Dutchman , both silver platter and dish , spoon , gild ring , ornament for girdle of silver and gilt , and certain thing make to hang about the neck , with silver chain belong to they . the Dutchman bring hither mighty strong beer , i be certain that our english double beer will not be like of the keril and lappians , as long as that will last . here i see the Dutchman also have course cloth , both blow , green and red , and sad horseflesh colour : and hither they bring also ottar case and fox case , both 372 1557 - blacke and red : our english fox case be but counterfeit unto they . they will not let i understand any of their prize , but as i otherwise understand they barter 2 . load of silver for 100 of stockfish , and 2 . load be a doller . and the Dutchman tell i , that they have make a notable good year this present year 1557 . they tell i that they shall be fain to go to Wardhouse with one lade , and lie it on land there , and so come again and fetch another . the borrowmasters son tell i , that he will go to Amsterdam with his lade of stockfish , who give i a barrel of strong beer , and bring it in aboard our ship himself . after this i go among the russes and keril , who offer i fish to sell , and likewise the lappians desire i to look upon their fish . i make they answer , that i have now no ware nor money to barter with they , and say that i come only to see if i may meet with our english ship . than they desire i that i will come thither the next year : i say to they , if i shall come the next year , i think here will a gainefidl not be fish enough to serve the Dutchman and we trade of fish also . they answer i , that if moor ship do at es ° r ' resort thither , there will more people labour to kill and make fish : and further they say , that some of they come thither a fish 8 . week journey with deer , which deer will travail more speedy than horse will . as i be thus in talk with the keril and lappians , the emperor of Russia his deputy ( who be there to gather the tribute of the lappians ) send for i to come to his tent , who after familiar salutation , make i good cheer . he demand of i , why none of our ship come thither . i answer he , because we know not the place before now , neither yet hear of any fair that be keep there . then say he , if you will come hither , here will moor people resort to kill fish , i think it good ( say he ) that you make a beginning . i tell he , that 373 by the grace of God the next year , one english ship shall come thither . because i see the servant of the king of Denmark there also gather the tribute , i ask vasilie pheodor - vich the Russie deputy , whether the denmark will not be a let to we , if we shall come to this Kegor . and he say , no , they shall not : for this land be my king , and therefore be bold to come hither . the keril and the lappians sell not fish , until the say deputy have look upon it , and have give they leave to sell . i ask he what ware be best for we to bring thither , and he say , silver , pearl , cloth , blow , red , and green , meal , strong beer , wine , pewter , fox case , and gold . the lappians pay tribute to the emperor of Russia , to the king of Denmark , and to the king of Sweden . he tell i that the river Cola be little more than 20 . league to the southward of Kegor , where we shall have great plenty of salmon , if corn be any thing cheap in Russia : for then poor man will resort thither to kill salmon . the Dutchman tell i that they have make a good year of this , but the keril complain of it , because they can not sell all their fish , and that which they sell be as please the Dutchman , and at their own price . i ask the keril at what price they sell their fish to the russes , and they say good cheap : we sell 24 . fish for 4 . altines . i think they sell little above 20 . penny , the 25 . fish this year . the Dutchman tell i that the best stockfish be make at Kegor . i see at vasilies tent 7 . or 8 . javelin , and half a dozen of bow bend , with their budget of arrow , and likewise sword with . other weapon : otherwise i see no weapon there . i be also convey to their lodging , which gather tribute for the king of Denmark , where i see a pair of bilboe : and i ask whether they be for the lappians ( if need be , ) and they say no , but only 374 1557 - for their own company if they shall chance to be unruly . the keril and the lappians be not to be trust , for they will steal as well as the russes , if they may convenient come by any thing . concern my voyage , because the wind be scant to go back again to Colmogro , i tarry to the eastwards of the point Kegor , and send to land , and bake two batch of bread in the oven that the keril have for their provision .