good morrow . lomme lemaufe , i thank you . passevellie , a friend . olmvelke , a man . Captella , a woman . alke , a son . neit , a daughter , or young wench . Oyvie , a head . cyelme , a eye . nenna , a nose . Nealma , a mouth . Pannea , tooth . Neughtema , a tongue . seaman , a beard . peallee , a ear . teappat , the neck . voapt , the hair . Keat , a hand . soarme , finger , lowlkie , a leg . peelkie , the thumb , or great toe . sarke , woollen cloth . Lein , linen cloth . payte , a shirt . Tol , fire . Keatse , water . murr , wood . vannace , a boat . Arica , a oar . Nurr , a rope . Peyve , a day . her , a night . Peyvezea , the sun . manna , the moon . last , star . Cozam volka , whither go you . Ottapp , sleep . Tallye , that . Keiedde pieve , a week . Isckie , a year . Kesse , summer . talve , winter , lowksam , cold . Parox , warm . Abrye , rain . youghang , ice . keatykye , a stone . sellowpe , silver . soldan , gold . Tennae , tin . veskue , copper . Rowadt , iron . Neybx , a knife . Axshe , a hatchet . 369 2 a Leabee , bread , laevegoat , meal . Pencka , the wind . lout , a platter . kemnie , a kettle . Keestes , glove . sapege , shoe . Conde , a wild deer . Poatsa , the labour deer . their word of number be these as foliow . fafte , wonderful noumpte , 1 . 2 . colme , 3 - Nelly e , 4 - Vitte , 5 - cowte , 6 . keydeem , 7 - Kaffts , 8 . Owghchte , lock , ostretumbelocke , cowghtnumbelocke , colmenonbelocke , in ellynombelocke , vittie nombelocke , cowtenombelocke , keydemnombelocke , kafts nombelocke , ought nombelocke , coffteylocke , colmelocke , Nelly lock , Vitte lock , cowtelocke , keydemlocke , kaffstelocke , oughcheteloke , tewet . 9 - io . two . 12 . j3 - 14 . 16 . u - 18 . 1920 . 30 . 40 . 50 . 60 . 70 . 80 . 90 . 100 Juana creos . s . George island . cape comfort . 25 Friday in the morning we depart from saint Johns island : to the westwards thereof , a mile from the shore , we sound , and have 36 . fathom , and oazy sand . Juana Creos be from cape gallant westnorthwest , and half a point to the northward , and between they be 7 . league . the point of the island , which be cape comfort , lie from Juana Creos , northwest and by north , and almost the 3 . part of a point to the westwards , and between they be 3 . league . the eastermost of saint George island , or the 7 . Islands , lie from Juana Creos northwest , and half a point to the northward , and between they be 14 . league and a half . the uttermost of the 7 . Islands , and cape comfort lie northwest , and by north , southeast , and by south . under the southermost island you shall find good road for all northerly wind from the northwest to the 37 ° j557 - northeast . from the southeast part of the 7 . Islands , unto the northwest part of they , be 3 . league and a half . from the northwest part of the island aforesaid , unto saint Peter saint Peter island , be n . league northwest . Islands . 26 saint Peter island rise a indifferent low point , not seem to be a island , and as if it have a castle upon it . s . Paul island lie from saint Peter island north - s . Paul west and to the westwards , and between they be wand . , 6 . league . within these island there be a fair sandy bay , and there may be find a good road for northerly wind . cape sour beer lie from saint Paul island north - cape sower west and by west , and between they be 5 . league . beere ‘ cape comfort , which be the island of Kildina , lie from Kildina . cape sour beer , 6 . league west northwest , and it be altogether a bay between they seem many island in it . from cape Bonaventure , to Chebe Navoloche be 10 . cape bona -\ league northwest , and a little to the westwards . Chebe venture - navoloche be a fair point , whereon stand a certain black , like a empty butt stand a head . from Chebe Navoloch to Kegor , be 9 league and a Kegor . half northwest , and half a point to the westwards . Kegor rise as you come from the eastwards like 2 . round hammock stand together , and a fair saddle between they . 27 it flow where we ride this Sunday to the eastwards of Kegor , at a southeast and by east moon , a full sea : we ride in 15 . fathom water within half a mile of the shore : at a northwest sun the mist come down so thick , that we be fain to come to a anchor within less than a mile of the point that turn to Dorns domshaff . have , where we have 33 . fathom , and the sound like to the skurfe of a skalde head . 28 Monday at afternoon , we come into the sound of Wardhouse . Wardhouse , although it be very misty . than i send a 371 | | which be the bona Esperanza , the bona confidentia and the fillip and marry . whereof the two first be lose . | | or , Trondon . the Philip and marry . the bona Confidentia cast away . man a shore to know some news , and to see whether they can hear any thing of our two ship . 29 Tuesday i go on shore , and dine with the captain deputy , who make i great cheer : the captain himself be not as yet come from Bergen : they look for he every hour , and they say that he will bring news with he . at a northwest and by north sun we depart from Wardhouse , towards Colmogro . 30 Wednesday we come to Kegor , where we meet with the wind at east southeast , so that we be fain to go in to a bay to the westwards of the point Kegor , where a man may moare 2 . or 3 . small ship , that