in the morning at a east sun , the mist break up a little , the wind be at north and by west a stiff gale , our shrowd and rope over head be cover with frost , and likely to be a storm : i think it good to seek a harbour , and so ply room with the island which be two league to the southward of cape race , and within these island ( thanks be to God ) we find harbour for we . it high at these island two fathom water : it flow in the harbour at this place at a southsoutheast moon full sea : and a sea board it flow at a southsouthwest moon a full sea . the russes call Tri ostrove . this island , Tri ostrove . you may come in between the little island and the great island , and keep you in the mid of the sound , and if you borrow on any side , let it be on the great island , and you shall have at a low water , four fathom , and three fathom and a half , and three fathom , until that you be shoot so far in as the narrow , which be between the northermost point of the great island , and the southern point of the main which be right against it , and then hale to the northward with the cross which stand in the main , and you shall have at a low water 10 . foot water , and fair sand . and if you be dispose to go through the sound to the southward , keep they northwest shore aboard , for on the island side after you be shot so far in as the cross , it be a shoal of rock half the sound over : which rock do last unto the southerly part of the great island , and rather to the southward . and if you be constrain to seek a harbour for northerly wind , when you come out of 366 the sea , hale in with the southerly part of the great island , give the island a fair birth , and as you shoot towards the main , you shall find road for all northerly wind , in four fathom , five , six and seven fathom , at a low water . also within this great island ( if need be ) you may have a good place to ground a ship in : the great island be almost a ' mile long and a quarter of a mile over . this storm of northerly wind last until the 16 . 16 of this month , and then the wind come southerly , but we can not get out for ice . i go on shore ice . at the cross , and take the latitude , which be 66 . degree , 58 . minute , 30 . second : the variation of the the variation . compass 3 . degree and a half from the north to the east . Thursday be fair weather , and the wind at 17 north we ply to the windward with sail and oar : we stop the flood this day three league to the northward of cape race , two mile from the shore , and have twenty fathom water , fair grey and black sand , and break shell . and when the slake come we 18 weigh and make aboard to the shoreward , and have within two cable length of the shore , eighteen fathom fair grey and black sand : a man may find road there for a north wind , and so to the westwards . two league to the southward of Corpus Christi point , you may have landfang for a north and by east wind , and from that to the westwards in 23 . fathom almost a mile from shore , and fair sand , and among the sand little young small limpet , or such like as grow upon muscle : and within two cable length and less of the shore be eighteen fathom , and the sound aforesaid , but the young limpet more plentiful . it be a full sea where we ride , almost a mile from shore , at a south and by west moon : two league to the southward of corpus christi point be the uttermost land , which land and 367 cape race lie south and half a point to westwards , and north and half a point to the eastwards , 19 and between they be six league . ride this day six league to the northward of cape race , the wind at northnorthwest , with mist and frost , at noon the sun appear through the mist , so that i have the latitude in 67 . degree , 29 . minute . 21 Monday we be thwart of corpus christi point , gorpuschrlsti fWO league and a half from shore , or rather more , ^ nt ' where we sound , and have 36 . fathom and break code shell , with branny sand , but the break shell very thick . 22 Tuesday in the morning we be shoot a head of cape gallant . Cape gallant , which the russes call Sotinoz . and as we be shoot almost half a league betwixt it , and cape comfort , the wind come up at the northwest , and after to the northward , so that we be fain to bear room to seek a harbour , where we find good harbour for all wind , and the least 7 . fathom water between saint Johns island , and the main . after that we come to a anchor , we take the latitude , which be 68 degree 1 . minute , after noon , the wind at north with plenty of snow . at a west sun there come aboard we certain lappians in a boat , to the number of sixteen person , and among they there be two wench , and some of they can speak the ruff tongue : i ask they where their abide be , and they tell i that there be a company or hear of they , to the number of 100 man , beside woman and child , but a little from we in the river lekonga . they tell i that they have be to seek meat among the rock , say , if we get no meat , we eat none . i see they eat rock weed as hungerly , as a cow do grass when she be hungry . i see they also eat fowl egg raw , and the young bird also that be in the egg . 368 i observe certain word of their language , [ 1 . 293J which i think good to set down for their use , that hereafter shall have occasion to continue this voyage . cowghtie coteat , what call you this . poddythecke , come hither . avanchythocke , get the hence . Anna , farewell . teyrve ,