a letter of the company of the merchant adventurer to Russia unto George Killingworth , Richard grey , and Henry Lane their agent there , to be deliver in Colmogro or else where : send in the John Evangelist . ft our hearty commendation unto you 1557 . and to either of you : your general letter and other particular letter with two book of the sale and remainder of our good , and the buy of ware there with you , we receive about the end of November out of the Edward , with heavy news of the loss of the say good ship and good at Petslego in Scotland , with the death of Richard chancellor and his boy , with certain of the ambassador servant , and he himself with nine of his servant escape very hardly only by the power of God : but all his good and we in manner be lose and pilfer away by the Scot , and that that be save be not yet come to our hand , but we look for it daily , and it will scant pay the charge for the recover of it . no remedy but patience : and to pray to God to send we better fortune hereafter . as touch the receive and entertain of the ambassador and his retinewe since his come to England at the king and queen majesty hand , with the counsel and lord of this realm , and the merchant that be free in Russia with feast and benevolence give he , we refer it to his report and other . the like we think have not be see nor show here of a long time to any ambassador . the fillip and Marie arrive here ten day past : she winter in Norway . the confidence be lose there . and as for the bona Esperanza , as yet we have no news of she . we fear it be wrong with she . by your bill of lade receive in your general letter we perceive what ware be lade in they both . your 379 letter have no date nor mention where they be make , which be write by Henry lane , and firm by you George Killingworth , and Richard grey : both it and the other letter and book come so sore spoil and break with water that we can make our reckon by they . you shall understand we have freight for the part of Russia four good ship to be lade there by you and your order : that be to say , the primerose of the burden of 240 . ton , master under God John Buckland : the John Evangelist of 170 . ton , master under God Laurence roundal : the anne of London of the burden of 160 . ton , master under God David Philly , and the Trinity of London of the burden of 140 . ton , master under God John Robins , as by their charter party may appear : which you may require to see for diverse cause . you shall receive , God will , out of the say good ship , God send they in safety for the use of the company , these kind of ware follow , all mark with the general mark of the company as ware send follow . 25 . fardel contain 207 . sort clothes , into Russia one fine violet in grain , and one scarlet , and 40 . cotton out of England . for wrapper ) begin with number 1 . and end with number 52 . the sort clothes may cost the first penny 5 - li . 9 S . the cloth , one with the other . the fine violet 18 . 1i . 6 . s . 6 . d . the scarlet 17 . il 13 . S . 6 . d . the cotton at 9 il lo . s . the pack , account 7 . cotton for a pack . moor 500 piece of Hampshire kersy , that be 400 . watchet , 43 . blow , 53 . red , 15 . green , 5 . ginger colour , and 2 . yelowe which cost the first penny 4 . il 6 . s . the piece , and 3 . pack contain 21 cotton at 9 il lo . s . the pack : and part of the clothes be measure the arshine by arshine . moor 9 barrel of pewter of Thomas be a Russie hasel make , etc also the ware be pack and measure . lade as be aforesaid , as by a Invoyce in every ship more plain may appear . so that when it shall please God to send the say good ship to you in safety , you be to receive our say good , and to procure the sale 380 to our most advantage either for ready money , time or barter : have consideration that you do make good debt , and give such time , if you give any , as you may employ and return the same against the next voyage ; and also foresee that you barter to a profit , and for such ware as be here most vendible , as wax , tallow , train oil , hemp and flax . of fur we desire no great plenty , because they be dead ware . and as for Felts , we will in no wise you send any . and whereas you have provide tar , and as we suppose , some hemp ready buy , our advice be , that in no wise you send any of they hither unwrought , because our fraught be 4 . H . a ton or little less : which be so dear , as it will not bear the charge : and therefore we have send you 7 . ropemaker , as by the copy of their i . ropemakers covenant here enclose shall appear . who we will you set to work with all expedition in make of ’ cable and rope of all sort , from the small rope to twelve . inch : and that such tar and hemp as be already bring to the water side , they may there make it out , and after that you settle their work in Vologhda or Colmogro as you shall think good , where their stuflfe may be near to they : at which place and place you do assign they a principali overseer aswell to see the delivery of the stuflfe unwrought , as also