good by the trade there : but that we have a further hope of some good trade to be find out by master Antony Jenkinson : by reason we do perceive by your letter , that raw silk be as plentiful in Persia , as flax be in Russia : beside other commodity that may come from thence . we understand by your letter that you be at a point with the ruff for the wax , tallow , and train oil that he ship the last year for 311 roble 20 altines , which be well : although much be not get by it , but because they shall not understand our reckon we much marvel what you mean to buy seal skin and tanne they . all that you have send in time past lie here unsold , and will yield no money . if you send 100 of they taw with the hair on , they will be sell , or else not . in our ship we will send you such thing as you write to have for the roper : and we will they shall make more store of small cable and rope , as cable of 7 , 8 , 9 , 10 , 11 , 12 . inch . for these great cable be not for every man ; and the great cable be not best jade : and likewise small rope for shroud , shoal , and other small tackle : and that you look better to the spin of their yarn 4 ° 4 that it be even and well tar . the sable that you do mind to send we let they be principali and fair , and not past four or five timbar . for they will not be so common wear here as they have be with noble man : and likewise of lusern send few and principal good . we mind to send you in our ship 100 ton of salt . and because we perceive that ballast be hardly to be have at our lade place there with you , we will you shall have in a readiness 100 ton of the white stone whereof you send we home a example two year past . and likewise to have in a readiness mast of all mast of all sort for our ship : for we know not sort i0 J * what need we shall have of they . the bringer hereof p p ' be Thomas Alcock , he can not be suffer the last year to pass through Poland . and as we write unto you in our ship , he be our servant for year : and for that we know he to be honest , true and painefiill , our mind be he shall | be place where he may do best service . he do know the commodity and discommodity of all kind of ware which you do send we . therefore we will you shall credit his say both in quantity of ware and goodness , as also wherein be most our profit . we see by your letter that your opinion be that the ropemaker shall remain there two year more ; and that you have provide great plenty of hemp , which we be content withal . but as yet we have sell none of our cable nor halser , neither be the proof of they know ; because the first you send we be make of flax , which be worth not money : for after they be once wet they will rot and moulder away like moss . and those which you send we now last , by misfortune there with you at the lade be wet and fret in many place , and have lose their colour : by mean whereof they be not so vendible as if they have come well condition . of a hard beginning we trust God will send we a good end . we hope in your next letter to hear good news of the proceed of master Antony Jenkinson . we 405 Christopher Hodson and Thomas Glover appoint agent 1560 . perceive by his letter that astracan be not so good a mart town as the fame have go of it : and marvel much that round pewter shall be so good , and good cheap there , and from whence it shall come . and whereas you write that you will come for England in our next ship , we will glad have you to remain there until the next year follow , for the better instruction of our servant there ; who have not have so long time of continuance for the language , and knowledge of the people , country , and ware as you have have . nevertheless if you will needs come away , we have no doubt , but that you will leave good order with our servant there , namely with Christopher Hodson and Thomas Glover , who we appoint to remain there as agent in your room , till further order be take : not doubt but that they will use themselves so discreet and wise in all their do , as shall be to the worship and benefit of this company . and as we have a good hope in they that they will be careful , diligent and true in all their do : so have we no less hope in all the rest of our servant there , that they will be not only obedient to they ( consider what room they be in ) but also will be careful , painful , diligent , and true every one in his room and place for the benefit and profit of the company : that hereafter in the absence of other they may be call and place in the like room there or elsewhere . and if you find any to be disobedient and stubborn , and will not be rule ; we will you shall send he home in our ship : who shall find such small favour and friendship during the time that he have to serve , as by his disobedience and evil service he have deserve . and whereas Christopher Hodson have write to come home , as partly he have good cause , consider the death of his father and mother : yet in regard that sir George bairn and the lady his wife be his special friend in his absence , we doubt not but that he will remain in the room , which we 406 have appoint he , if you do not tarry and remain there , till far order be take : and for his service and pain he shall be consider , as reason be , as friendly as if his friend be live . thus we trust you will take such order the one to remain at the Moscow , and the other at Colmogro , or elsewhere , as most need be . Thomas Alcocke be desirous to be in the Moscow : nevertheless you shall find he reasonable to serve where he may do most good . the 62 roble which you receive of John Boucher we have pay he here , and also the 8 roble , which you receive the year before of Christopher rise , and the money which you receive more of George Burton , for the which we have you our debtor . thus we rest , refer that which be here omit to the report of the bringer : and so God have you in his keep . also we will that you shall send we in our ship 200 horse - clothe more . the thing before write we will that you shall let our servant see and read , to the intent they may perceive our mind .