agent , and to join with you in all your do , and to have like authority and power as you George Killingworth and Richard Gray have : not doubt but you three will so confer together , as both our prentice and other may be appoint and divide every of they to his office , and to that he can best skill of : and you also so divide your self every of you to a house , as by advertisement one from another , our business and traffic may take good success . and for diverse consideration , to avoid many trouble and business that may happen , we have appoint that he which shall abide at Colmogro ( which we do think to be most meet Henry lane ) shall have with he there such of our young man , as can best skill in keep of account after the manner of merchant , that be , by debtor and creditor : and that there shall be the place , where our book shall | be keep : because it be near the sea side , where our good shall | be discharge and our ship lade . and the say Henry lane to be charge with all such good as we shall discharge there out of our ship , accord to our invoyce . which good be to be send from Colmogro to Vologhda or to Moscow , or to any other place where you three or two of you do appoint they to be sell , so that Henry lane be one . and so from time to time immediate as any thing be sell , do you certify . the same to Henry lane , that he may enter it into the book as appertain : otherwise he shall be too far behind in his book 384 * 557 - at the come of our ship , when he shall send we the account of the whole year pass . and we will also that you George Killingworth and Richard grey doe in the fine of April next send either of you unto Henry lane a whole , perfect , and just account firm with your own hand of all the good you have sell and buy until that time , and what remain unsold : and also the account of all manner cost of ware , and charge of you and the young man under you particular in such sort as the say account may be with he in colmogro at the fine of may at the further : to the intent that he may make all our account perfect against the come of our ship : and in any wise to keep account of every voyage by it self , and not mingle one voyage with another at no hand . and as we will have you to keep account of every voyage by it self , even so we will have all the whole cost and charge of every year put into the voyage of that year . as the charge of all the last year must be put to the account of the three voyage : and the charge of this year present , must in the fine of April next , be put to the four voyage . the four not doubt but your wisdom be such , that you will not take it in evil part , that we do appoint Henry lane to take the account of the rest . for we do it for none other cause , but to keep a good order in our book , that his book and we may by this mean agree : and he be the young man , may best take pain : and that you do keep account of every kind of ware by it self , to the intent we may perceive wherein be our most gain . and also in the make of your return , in any wise name in your bill of lade , letter , and account , what ware do appertain to the first , second , and three voyage : and that we may know the same by the number or otherwise as you shall think good by your wisdom , put the charge of the say ware unto they , as nigh as you can . and all such money as shall be n 385 2 b the old traffic of Russia to rye , revel and Poland turn to sainttl icholas . make of your good in any place , we refer that to your discretion , where it shall remain until it be employ , either at Vologhda , Moscow , or else where . and likewise we will that Henry lane do make in a readiness about the begin of June every year our whole account of the voyage in that year pass : in such sort that we may receive the same by our ship : and that we may plain perceive what sale be make , and what remain of the first , second , three , and four voyage , and what charge have be lay out for the say voyage , and what ware be buy , and lade , and what they cost , and for what voyage every parcel thereof be : and to send we a copy of the same account in every ship . and also forasmuch as at this time we have send you but small store of ware in comparison of that we have hope will be utter in short space , and yet nevertheless much more than you write for , whereby there shall not be sufficient to make any ample return : and understand that there be great quantity of good stay for our trade there by the emperor , we have move the ambassador that you may have credit for such quantity as shall seem good to you to provide for our benefit . which credit if you may by his mean obtain , or otherwise have , we will you buy as much wax principal as you may get . for if there be in that country so great quantity , as we be inform there be , it will be the best commodity we may have : for have that whole in our hand , we may serve our own country and other . therefore see the emperor do mind , that such commodity as be in his dominion shall not pass to rye and revel and Poland as they have do , but be reserve for we : therefore we must so lay for it , that