but he give i his letter , and a horse worth seven rubble . and so i depart from he be glad that i be go : for he be report to be a very tyrant , and if i have not go unto he , i understand his commandment be , that i shall have be rob and destroy . this sultan live in the field without castle or town , and sit , at my be with he , in a little round house make of reed cover without with felt , and within with carpet . there be with he the great metropolitan of that wild country , esteem of the people , as the bishop of Rome be in most part of Europe , with diverse other of his chief man . the sultan with this metropolitan demand of i many question , as well touch our kingdom , law , and religion , as also the cause of my come into those part , with my further pretence . to who i answer 460 concern all thing , as unto i seem best , which they take in good part . So have leave i depart and overtake our Caravan , and proceed on our journey , and travail 20 . day in the wilderness from the sea side without see town or habitation , carry provision of victual with we for the same time , and be drive by necessity to eat one of my camel and a horse for our part , as othei * do the like : and during the say 20 . day we find no water , but such as we draw out of old deep well , be very brackish and salt , and yet sometime pass two or three day without the same . and the 5 . day of October ensue , we come unto a gulf of the caspian sea again , where we find the water very fresh and sweet : at this gulf the customer of the king of turkeman meet we , who take custom of every 25 . one , and 7 . ninth for the say king and his brethren , which be receive they depart , and we remain there a day after to refresh our self . 20 day travail in the wilderness , with scarcity of water . another gulf of the caspian sea . note that in time pass there do fall into this gulf the great river Oxus , which have his spring in the mountain of Paraponisus in India , and now come not so far , but fall into another river call Ardock , ill - de which run towards the north , and consume himself , cribeththis in the ground pass under ground above 500 mile , river of and then issue out again and fall into the lake ardok , cap . 4 . of Kithay . we have refresh our self at the foresay gulf , depart thence the 4 . day of October , and the seven day arrive at a castle call sellizure , where you king selrzure , or call Azim can , remain with 3 . other of his brethren , ha ^ ure - and the 9 day i be command to come before his presence , to who i deliver the emperor letter of Russia : and i also give he a present of a nine , who entertain i very well , and cause i to eat in his presence as his brethren do , feast i with flesh of a wild horse , and mare milk without bread . and the next day he send for i again , and ask of i diverse 461 urgence . question , as well touch the affair of the emperor of Russia , as of our country and law , to which i answer as i think good : so that at my departure he give i his letter of safe conduct . this castle of sellizure be situate upon a high hill , where the king call the can lie , who palace be build of earth very base , and not strong : the people be but poor , and have little trade of merchandise among they . the south part of this castle be low land , but very fruitful , where grow many good fruit , among which there be one call a dynie , of a great bigness and full of moisture , which the people do eat after meat in stead of drink . also there grow another fruit call a carbuse of the bigness of a great cucumber , yellow and sweet as sugar : also a certain corn call legur , who stalk be much like a sugar cane , and as high , and the grain like rice , which grow at the top of the cane like a cluster of grape ; the water that serve all that country be draw by ditch out of the river Oxus , unto the great destruction of the say river , for which cause it fall not into the caspian sea as it have do in time past , and in short time all that land be like to be destroy , and to become a wilderness for want of water , when the river of Oxus shall fail . the 14 . day of the month we depart from this castle of sellizure , and the 16 . of the same we arrive at a city call urgence , where we pay custom as well for our own head , as for our camel and horse . and have there sojourn one month , attend the time of our further travail , the king of that country call aly sultan , brother to the forename azym can , return from a town call Corasan , within the border of Persia , which he late have conquer from the persian , with who he and the rest of the king of Tartary have continual war . before this king also i be command to come , to who i likewise present the emperor letter of Russia , and he entertain 462 i well , and demand of i diverse question , and at my departure give i his letter of safeconduct . this city or town of urgence stand in a plain ground , with wall of the earth , by estimation 4 . mile about it . the building within it be also of earth , but ruin and out of good order : it have one long street that be cover above , which be the place of their market . it have be win and lose 4 . time within 7 . year by civil war , by mean whereof there be but few merchant in it , and they very poor , and in all that town i can