we throw away , when we have find our iron anchor again . within two day after , there arise another great storm , at the north - east , and we lay a try , be drive far into the sea , and have much ado to keep 476 1559 - our bark from sink , the billow be so great : but at the last , have fair weather , we take the sun , and know how the land lie from we , we fall with the river Yaik , accord to our desire , whereof the Tartar be very glad , fear that we shall have be drive to the coast of Persia , who people be unto they great enemy . note , that during the time of our navigation , we the english set up the red cross of saint George in our flag , for it 5 honour of the christian , which i suppose be never p ' see in the caspian sea before . we pass in this voyage diverse fortune : notwithstanding the 28 . of may we arrive in safety at astracan , and there remain till the ten of June follow , as well to prepare we small boat , to go up against the stream of Volga , with our good , as also for the company of the ambassador of Tartary , commit unto i , to be bring to the presence of the emperor of Russia . this caspian sea ( to say some thing of it ) be in length about two hundred league , and in breadth 150 . without any issue to other sea : to the east part whereof , join the great desert country of the Tartar , call turkeman : to the west , the country of the chyr - casses , the mountain of Caucasus , and the mare Euxinum , which be from the say caspian sea a hundred league . to the north be the river Volga , and the land of Nagay , and to the south part join the country of Media and Persia . this sea be fresh water in many notable deplace , and in other place as salt as our great ocean , tcription of they it have many goodly river fall into it , and it avoid casfian sea - not it self except it be under ground . the notable river that fall into it , be first the great river of Volga , call in the tartar tongue Edell , which spring out of a lake in a marsh or plain ground , not far from the city of Novogrode in Russia , and it be from the spring to the sea , above two thousand english mile . it have diverse other goodly river fall into it , as out of Siberia , Yaic , and Yem : also out of the moun - 477 taine of Caucasus , the river of Cyrus and Arash , and diverse other . as touch the trade of shamaky in Media and tebris , with other town in Persia , i have inquire , and do well understand , that it be even like to the trade of Tartary , that be little utterance , and small profit : and i have be advertise that the chief trade of Persia be into Syria , and so transport into the Levant sea . the few ship upon the caspian sea , the want of mart and port town , the poverty of the people , and the ice , make that trade nought . at astracan there be merchant of Shamaky , with who i offer to barter , and to give they kersy for their ware , but they will not , say , they have they as good cheap in their country , as i offer they , which be six rubble for a kersie , that i ask : and while i be at Boghar , there be bring thither out of Persia , cloth , and diverse commodity of our country , which be sell as good cheap , as i may sell we . the ten day of June , we depart from astracan towards the Moscow , have a hundred gunner in our company at the emperor charge , for the safe conduct of the tartar ambassador and i . and the eight and twenty day of July follow , we arrive at the city of Cazan , have be upon the way from astracan thither , six week and more , without any refresh of victual : for in all that way there be no habitation . the seven of August follow , we depart from Cazan , and transport our good by water , as far as the city of morum , and then by land : so that the second of September , we arrive at the ci tie of Moscow , his arrival at and the four day i come before the emperor September majesty , kiss his hand , and present he a white cow tail of Cathay , and a drum of Tartary , which he well accept . also i bring before he all the ambassador that be commit to my charge , with all the ruff slave : and that day i dine in his 478 majesty presence , and at dinner , his grace send i meat by a duke , and ask i diverse question touch the land and country where i have be . and thus i remain at the Moscow about your affair , until the 17 . day of February that your ware be send down : and then have licence of the emperor majesty to depart , the 21 . day i come to your house at Vologhda , and there remain until the break up of the year : and then have see all your good laden into your boat , i depart with the same , and arrive withal in safety at Colmogro the 9 of May 1560 . and here i cease for this time , entreat you to bear with this my large discourse , which by reason of the variety of matter , i can make no short , and i beseech God to prosper all your attempt . the latitude of certain principali place in Russia , and other region . Deg . Min . ' Moscow in 55 ' io Novogrod the great 58 26 Novogrod the less 33 Colmogro 64 10 Vologhda 59 11 Cazan 55 33 oweke 51 40 astracan 47 9 at the entrance into the caspian sea . > 46 ► 72 manguslave beyond the caspian sea . ► 45 00 urgence in Tartary 20 . day journey from the caspian sea . > 42 18 Boghar a city in Tartary 20 . day journey ^ 39 io from urgence . i i i