this there follow certain young man with wax taper in their hand burn , and a great lantern that all the light shall not go out : after they follow two with long banner , and six with round plate set upon long staff : the plate be of copper very full of hole and thin : then follow 6 carry paint image upon their shoulder , after the image follow certain priest to the number of 100 or moor , with goodly vesture , whereof 10 or 12 be of white damask , set and embroidered round about with fair and orient pearl , as great as pease , and among they certain sapphire and other stone . after they follow the one half of the emperor noble man : then come the emperor majesty and the metropolitan , after this manner . first , there be a horse cover with white linen cloth down to you ground , his ear be make long with the same cloth like to a ass ear . upon this horse the metropolitan sit sidelong like a woman : in his lap lie a fair book , with a crucifix of goldsmith work upon the cover , which he hold fast with his left hand , and in his right hand he have a cross of gold , with 434 which cross he cease not to bless the people as he ride . there be to the number of 30 man which spread abroad their garment before the horse , and as soon as the horse be pass over any of they , they take they up again and run before , and spread they again , so that the horse do always go on some of they . they which spread the garment be all priest son , and for their labour the emperor give unto they new garment . one of the emperor noble man lead the horse by the head , but the emperor himself go on foot lead the horse by the end of the rein of his bridle with one of his hand , and in the other of his hand he have a branch of a palm tree : after this follow the rest of the emperor noble man and gentleman , with a great number of other people . in this order they go from one church to another within the castle , about the distance of two flight shoot : and so return again to the emperor church , where they make a end of their service . which be do , the emperor majesty and certain of his noble man go to the metropolitan his house to dinner , where of delicate fish and good drink there be no lack . the rest of this week until Easter day they keep very solemn , continue in their house for the most part , and upon Monday or Thursday the emperor do always use to receive the sacrament , and so do most of his noble . upon good Friday they continue all the day in contemplation and prayer , and they use every year on good Friday to let loose a prisoner in the stead of bar - rabas . the night follow they go to the church where they sleep until the next morning , and at easter they have the resurrection , and after every of the Lents they eat flesh the next week follow , Friday , Saturday and all . they have a order at easter which they always observe , and that be this : every year against easter to die or colour red with Brazell a great number of 435 the emperor lead the metropolitans horse in procession . kiss use in the greek church . with these letter m . Jenkinson take his voyage the same April to Boghar . egg , of which every man and woman give one unto the priest of their parish upon Easter day in the morning . and moreover the common people use to carry in their hand one of their red egg , not only upon easter day , but also three or four day after , and gentleman and gentlewoman have egg gild which they carry in like manner . they use it as they say for a great love , and in token of the resurrection , whereof they rejoice . for when two friend meet during the easter holy day , they come and take one another by the hand : the one of they say , the lord or Christ be rise , the other answer , it be so of a truth , and then they kiss and exchange their egg both man and woman , continue in kiss 4 day together . the 12 of April be Tuesday in the easter week , master Jenkinson and master grey , and certain other of we English man dine with the emperor , where we be serve as we have be before time . and after dinner the emperor majesty give unto master Jenkinson and unto m . grey , and so orderly unto every one of we a cup of mead , accord to his accustom manner which when every man have receive and give thank , m . Jenkinson step into the midst of the chamber before the emperor majesty , and give thanks to his highness for his goodness unto he extend , desire his grace to licence he to depart , and in like manner do master grey . his majesty do not only licence they to depart , but also grant unto master Jenkinson his letter under his great seal , unto all prince through who dominion master Jenkinson shall have occasion to pass , that he may the soon and quiet pass by mean thereof . which be grant , master Jenkinson and Gray low submit themselves , thank his majesty . So the emperor give unto either of they a cup of mead to drink , and will they to depart at their pleasure in god peace . the 14 . of April in the morning when m . grey and i be ready to depart towards Enggland , the 436 chancellor send unto we and will we to come to their office in the chancery , where at our come they show we a great number of the emperor jewel , and rich robe , will we to mark and behold they well , to the end that at our arrival into England , we may make report what we have see there . the chief be his majesty crown , be close under the top very fair wrought : in my opinion , the workmanship of so much gold few man can amend . it be adorn and deck with rich and precious stone abundant , among the which one be a ruby , which stand a handful high than the top of the crown upon a small wier , it be as big as a good bean : the same crown be line with a fair black