the voyage of master Anthony Jenkinson , make from the city of Moscow in Russia , to the city of Boghar in Bactria , in the year 1558 : write by himself to the merchant of London of the Moscovie company . [ i - 3 ^- 1 he 23 . day of April , in the year 1558 . ( have obtain the emperor of Russia his letter , direct unto sundry king and prince , by who dominion i shall pass ) i depart from Moscow by water , have with i two of your servant , namely , Richard Johnson , and Robert Johnson , and a tartar tolmach , with diverse parcel of ware , as by the inventory appear : and the 28 . day we come to a town call Collom , distant from the Moscow 20 . league , and pass one league beyond the say Collom , we come unto a river call Occa , into the which the river Moscow fall , and lose his name : and pass down the say river Occa 8 . league , we come unto a castle call Terrevettisko , which we leave upon our right hand , and proceed forward , the second day of May , we come unto another castle call peroslave , distant 8 . league , leave it also on our right hand . the three day we come unto the place where old rezan be situate , be now most of it ruin and overgrow , and distant from the say peroslave , 6 . league : the 4 . day we pass by a castle call Terrecovia , from rezan 12 . league , and the 6 . 11 449 2 f day we come to another castle call Cassim , under the government of a tartar prince name Utzar Zegoline , sometime emperor of the worthy city of Cazan , and now subject unto the emperor of Russia . but leave Cassim on our left hand , the 8 . day we come unto a fair town call Morom , from Cassim 20 . league , where we take the son , and find the latitude 56 . degree : and proceed forward the 11 . day , we come unto another fair town and castle call nice Novogrod , situate at the fall of the foresay river Occa into the worthy river of Volga , distant from the say Moron 25 . league , in the latitude of 56 . degree 18 . minute . from rezan to this nice Novogrod , on both side the say river of Occa , be raise the great store of wax and honey in all the land of Russia . we tarry at the foresay nice Novogrod until the 19 day , for the come of a captain which be send by the emperor to rule at astracan , who be arrive , and have the number of 500 great boat under his conduct , some lade with victual , soldier , and munition : and other some with merchandise , depart altogether the say 19 day from the say nice Novogrod , and the 22 . we come unto a castle call Vasiliagorod , distant 25 . league , which we leave upon our right hand . this town or castle have his name of this emperor father , who be call Vasilius , and gorod in the ruff tongue be as much to say as a castle , so that Vasiliagorod be to say , Vasilius castle : and it be the further place that the say emperor conquer from the Tartar . but this present emperor his son , call Ivan Vasiliwich , have have great good success in his war , both against the Christians and also the mahometist and gentile , but especial against the Tartar , enlarge his empire even to the caspian sea , have conquer the famous river of Volga , with all the country thereabouts adjacent . thus proceed on our journey the 25 . day of May aforesaid , we come to another castle call Sabowshare , which we 45 ° leave on our right hand , distant from Vasiliagorod 16 . league . the country hereabout be call mordovit , and the habitant do profess the law of the gentile : but now be conquer by this emperor of Russia , most of they be christen , but lie in the wood and wilderness , without town or habitation . the 27 . day we pass by another castle call Swyasko , distant from shabowshare aforesaid 25 . league : we leave it on our right hand , and the 29 . come unto a island one league from the city of Cazan , from Cazan . which fall down a river call cazanka reca , and enter into the foresay Volga . Cazan be a fair town after the ruff or Tartar fashion , with a strong castle , situate upon a high hill , and be wall round about with timber and earth , but now the emperor of Russia have give order to pluck down the old wall , and to build they again of free stone . it have be a city of great wealth and riches , and be in the hand of the Tartar it be a kingdom of it self , and do more vex the russes in their war , than any other nation : but 9 year past , this emperor of Russia conquer it , and take the king captive , who be but young be now baptise , and bring up in his court with two other prince , which be also king of the say Cazan , and be each of they in time of their reign in danger of their subject through civil discord , come and render themselves at several time unto the say emperor , so that at this present there be three prince in the court of Russia , which have be emperor of the say Cazan , who the emperor use with great honour . we remain at Cazan till the 13 . day of June , and then depart from thence : and the same day pass by a island call the island of merchant , because it be the island of wont to be a place where all merchant , as well russes merchant . and Cazanites , as nagayan and crimme , and diverse other nation do resort to keep mart for buy and sell , but now it be forsake , and stand without 451 horde . any such resort thither , or at Cazan , or at any place about it , from Moscow unto mare Caspium . thus proceed forward the 14 . day , we pass by a goodly river call Cama , which we leave on our left hand . this river fall out of the country of