have no use of money , and be all man of war , and pasturer of cattle , and give much to theft and murder . thus be at a anchor against this river laic , and all our man be on land , save i , who lie sore sick , and five Tartar , whereof one be repute a holy man , because he come from Mecka , there come unto we a boat with thirty man well arm and appoint , who board we , and begin to enter into our bark , and our holy 457 Tartar call azy , perceive that , ask they what they will have , and withal make a prayer : with that these rover stay , declare that they be gentleman , banish from their country , and out of live , and come to see if there be any russes or other Christians ( which they call Caphars ) in our bark ? to who this Azi most stout answer , that there be none , avow the same by great oath of their law , ( which light they will not break ) who the rover believe , and upon his word depart . and so through the fidelity of that tartar , i with all my company and good be save , and our man be come on board , and the wind fair , we depart from that place , and wind east and southeast , that day be the 20 . of August sail 16 . league . the 21 . day we pass over a bay of 6 . league broad , and fall with a cape of land , have two island at the southeast part thereof , be a good mark in the sea : and double that Cape the land trend Northeast , and make another bay , into which fall the great river the country Yem , spring out of the land of Colmack . of Colmack . the 22 . 23 . and 24 . day , we be at a anchor . the 25 . the wind come fair , and we sail that day 20 . league , and pass by a island of low land , and there about be many flat and sand : and to the northward of this island there go in a great bay , but we set off from this island , and wind south to come into deep water , be much trouble with shoald and flat , and run that course 10 . league , than east southeast 20 . league , and fall with the main land , be full of cop hill , and pass along the coast 20 . league , the further we sail , the high be the land . the 27 . day we cross over a bay , the south shore be the high land , and fall with a high point of land : and be overthwart the cape , there rise such a storm at the east , that we think very we shall have perish : this storm continue 3 . day . from 458 1558 . this cape we pass to a port call manguslave . The the port of place where we shall have arrive at the southermost manguslave . part of the caspian sea , be 12 . league within a bay : but we be sore torment and toss with this foresay storm , be drive unto another land on you other side the bay , overthwart the say manguslave be very low land , and a place as well for the ill commodity of the haven , as of those brute field people , where never bark nor boat have before arrive , not like of we . but yet here we send certain of our man to land to talk with the governor and people , as well for our good usage at their hand , as also for provision of camel to carry our good from the say sea side to a place call sellyzure , be from the place of our land five and twenty day journey . our messenger return with comfortable word and fair promise of all thing . wherefore the 3 . day of September 1558 . we this - they go on charge our bark , and i with my company be gentle entertain of the prince and of his people . but before our departure from thence , we find they to be very bad and brutish people , for they cease not daily to molest we , either by fight , steal or beg , raise the prize of horse and camel , and victual , double that it be wont there to be , and force we to buy the water that we do drink : which cause we to hasten away , and to conclude with they as well for the hire of camel , as for the prize of such as we buy , with other provision , accord to their own demand : so that for every camel lade , be but 400 . weight of we , we agree to give three hide of Russia , and four wooden dish , and to the prince or governor of the say people , one nine , and two seventh : namely , nine several ! thing , and twice seven several thing : for money they use none . and thus be ready , the fourteen of September we depart from that place , be a Caravan of a 459 thousand camel . and have travail five day journey , we come to another prince dominion , and upon the way there come unto we certain Tartars on horseback , be well arm , and servant unto the say prince call timor sultan , governor of the say country of manguslave , where we mean to have arrive and discharge our bark , if the great storm aforesaid have not disappoint . Theise aforesaid Tartar stay our Caravan in the name of their prince , and open our ware , and take such thing as they think best for their say prince without money , but for such thing as they take from i , which be a nine ( after much dissension ) i rid unto the same prince , and present my self before he , request his favour , and passport to travail through his country , and not to be rob nor spoil of his people : which request he grant i , and entertain i very gentle , commanding i to be well feast with flesh and mare milk : for bread they use none , nor other drink except water : but money he have none to give i for such thing as he take of i , which may be of value in Russe money , fifteen rubble ,