home to their house , and diverse child be throw in , and sick people , and pluck out quick again , and diverse Tartar christen : all which the emperor behold . also there be bring the emperor best horse , to drink at the say hallow water . all this be end , he return to his palace again , and go to dinner by candle light , and sit in a wooden house , very fair gild . there dine in the place , above 300 stranger , and i sit alone as i do before , direct before the emperor , and have my meat , bread and drink send i from the emperor . the city of Moscow be great , the house for the most part of wood , and some of stone , with window of iron , which serve for summer time . there be many fair church of stone , but more of wood , which be make hot in the winter time . the emperor lodging be in a fair and large castle , wall four square of brick , high , and thick , situate upon a hill , 2 mile about , and the river on the southwest side of it , and it have 16 gate in the wall , and as many bulwark . his palace be separate from the rest of the castle , by a long wall go north and south , to the river side . in his palace be church , some of stone and some of wood , with round tower fair gild . in the church door and within the church be image of gold : the chief market for all 422 thing , be within the say castle , and for sundry thing sundry market , and every science by it self . and in the winter there be a great market without the castle , upon the river be freeze , and there be sell corn , earthen pot , tub , sled , etc the castle be in circuit 2900 pase . the country be full of marish ground , and plain , in wood and river abundant , but it bring forth good plenty of corn . this emperor be of great power : for he have conquer much , as well of the lieflander , pole , lettoe , and Swethens , as also of the Tartar , and gentile , call samoeds , have thereby much enlarge his dominion . he keep his people in great subjection : all matter pass his judgement , be they never so small . the law be sharp for all offender . the metropolitan deal in matter of religion , as himself list , who the emperor great honour . they use the ceremony , and order of the greek church . they worship many image paint on table , and special the image of saint Nicholas . their priest be marry , but their wife be dead , they may not marry the second time , and so become monk , whereof there be a great number in the land . they have four Lents in the year , and the week before Shrofetide , they call the butter week , etc they have many sort of meat and drink , when they banquet and delight in eat of gross meat , and stink fish . before they drink they use to blow in the cup : their great friendship be in drink : they be great talker and liar , without any faith or trust in their word , flatterer and dissembler . the woman be there very obedient to their husband , and be keep straight from go abroad , but at some season . at my be there , i hear of man and woman that drink away their child , and all their good at the emperor tavern , and not be able to pay , have impane himself , the taverner bring he out to the high way , and beat he upon the leg : then they that 423 pass by , know the cause , and have peradventure compassion upon he , give the money , and so he be ransom . in every good town there be a drunken tavern call a cursemay , which the emperor sometime let out to farm , and sometime bestow for a year or two on some duke or gentleman , in recompense of his service : and for that time he be lord of all the town , rob and spoil , and do what please he : and then he be grow rich , be take by the emperor , and send to the war again , where he shall spend all that which he have get by ill mean : so that the emperor in his war be little charge , but all the burden lie upon the poor people . they use saddle make of wood and sinew , with the tree gild with damask work , and the seat cover with cloth , sometime of gold , and the rest saphian leather , well stitch . they use little drum at their saddle bow , by the sound whereof their horse use to run more swift . the Russe be apparel in this manner : his upper garment be of cloth of gold , silk , or cloth , long , down to the foot , and button with great button of silver , or else lace of silk , set on with brooch , the sleeve thereof very long , which he wear on his arm , ruff up . under that he have another long garment , button with silk button , with a high collar stand up of some colour , and that garment be make straight . than his shirt be very fine , and wrought with red silk , or some gold , with a collar of pearl . under his shirt he have linen breech , upon his leg , a pair of hose without foot , and his boot of red or yellow leather . on his head he wear a white colepecke , with button of silver , gold , pearl , or stone , and under it a black fox cap , turn up very broad . when he ride on horseback to the war , or any journey , he have a sword of the turkish fashion , and his bow and arrow of the same manner . in the town he 424 wear no weapon , but only two or three pair of knife , have the haft of the tooth of a fish , call the Morse . in the winter time , the people travel with sled , in town and country , the way be hard , and smooth with snow : the water and river be all freeze , and one horse with a sled , will draw a man upon it 400 mile , in three day : but in the summer time , the way be deep with mire , and travel be very ill . the Russe , if he be a man of any ability , never go out of his house in the winter , but upon his sled , and in summer upon his horse : and in his sled he sit upon a carpet , or a white bear skin : the sled be draw with a horse well deck , with many fox and wolves tail at his neck , and be conduct by a little boy upon his back : he servant stand upon the tail of the sled etc A . D . 1557 -