not sell above 4 . kersei . the chief commodity there sell be such ware as come from Boghar , and out of Persia , but in most small quantity not worth the write . all the land from the caspian sea to this city of urgence be call the land of turkeman , and be subject to the say Azim can , and his brethren which be five in number , and one of they have the name of the chief king call can , but he be little obey save in his own dominion , and where he dwell : for every one will be king of his own portion , and one brother seek always to destroy another , have no natural love among they , by reason that they be beget of diverse woman , and common they be the child of slave , either Christians or Gentiles , which the father do keep as concubine , and every can or sultan have at the least 4 . or 5 . wife , beside young maiden and boy , live most vicious : and when there be war betwixt these brethren , ( as they be seidome without ) he that be overcome if he be not slay , fly to the field with such company of man as will follow he , and there live in the wilderness resort to water place , and so rob and spoil as many Caravans of merchant and other as they be able to overcome , continue in this sort his wicked life , until such time as he may get power and aid to invade some of his brethren again . from the caspian sea unto the castle of sellizure aforesaid , and all the country about the say sea , the people live without 463 the country of turkoman . town or habitation in the wild field , remove from one place to another in great company with their cattle , whereof they have great store , as camel , horse , and sheep both tame and wild . their sheep be of great stature with great buttock , weigh 60 . or 80 . pound in weight . there be many wild horse which the Tartar do many time kill with their hawk , and that in this order . the hawk be lure to seize upon the beast neck or head , which with chafe of themselves and sore beat of the hawk be tire : then the hunter follow his game do slay the horse with his arrow or sword . in all this land there grow no grass , but a certain brush or heath , whereon the cattle feed become very fat . the Tartar never ride without their bow , arrow , and sword , although it be on hawk , or at any other pleasure , and they be good archer both on horseback , and on foot also . Theise people have not the use of gold , silver , or any other coin , but when they lack apparel or other necessary , they barter their cattle for the same . bread they have none , for they neither till nor sow : they be great devourer of flesh , which they cut in small piece , and eat it by handful most greedy , and especial the horseflesh . their chief drink be mare milk sour , as i have say before of the nagayans , and they will | be drink with the same . they have no river nor place of water in this country , until you come to the foresay gulf , distant from the place of our land 20 . day journey , except it be in well , the water whereof be saltish , and yet distant the one from the other two day journey and more . they eat their meat upon the ground , sit with their leg double under they , and so also when they pray . art or science they have none , but live most idle , sit round in great company in the field , devise , and talk most vain . the 26 . day of November , we depart from the 464 town of urgence , and have travail by the river Oxus , too . mile , we pass over another great river call Ardock , where we pay a certain petty custom . this river Ardock be great , and very swift , fall out off nuum of the foresay Oxus , and pass about 1000 mile to the rtirjckfal northward , it then consume it self in the ground , a ‘ and pass under the same about 500 mile , issue out again , and fall into the lake of kitay , as i have before declare . the 7 . of December follow , we arrive at a castle the castle of call kait , subject to a sultan call Saramet sultan , ka , tl who mean to have rob all the christian in the Caravan , have it not be for fear of his brother the king of urgence , as we be inform by one of his chief counsellor , who will we to make he a present , which he take , and deliver : beside , we pay at the say castle for custom , of every camel one red hide of Russia , beside petty gift to his officer . thus proceed in our journey , the ten day at night be at rest , and our watch set , there come unto we four horseman , which we take as spy , from who we take their weapon and bind they , and have well examine they , they confess that they have see the tract of many horseman , and no footing of camel , and give we to understand , that there be rover and thief abroad : for there travail few people that be true and peaceable in that country , but in company of Caravan , where there be many camel : and horse - feeting new without camel be to be doubt . whereupon we consult and determine among our self , and send a post to the say sultan of kayte , who immediate come himself with 300 . man , and meet these four suspect man which we send unto he , and examine they so straight , and threaten they in such sort , that they confess , there be a banish prince with 40 . man 3 . day journey forward , who lie in wait to destroy we , if he can , and that they themselves be of his company . n 465 2 g the sultan therefore understand , that the thief be not many , appoint we 80 . man well arm with a captain to go with we , and conduct