or upon the wall of the church round about , and even the roof of the church be paint full of image . the chief image be of our lady , which be garnish with gold , ruby , saphir and other rich stone abun - . dandy . in the midst of the church stand 12 . wax taper of two yard long , and a fathom about in bigness , and there stand a ketde full of wax with about 100 weight , wherein there be always the wick of a candle burn , as it be a lamp which go not out day nor night . • they show i a coffin cover with cloth of gold which stand upon one side within their church , in which they tell i lay a holy man , who never eat or drink , and yet that he live . and they tell i ( suppose that i have believe they ) that he heal many disease , and give the blind their sight , with many other 440 a large description of Russia a . d . 1558 . miracle , but i be hard of belief because i see he work no miracle while i be there . after this they bring i into their seller , and make i taste of diverse kind of drink , both wine and beer , mead and quassie , of sundry colour and kind . such abundance or drink as they have in their seller , i do suppose few prince have more , or so much at once . their barrel or vessel be of a unmeasurable bigness and size : some of they be 3 . yard long and more , and 2 . yard and more broad in their head : they contain 6 . or 7 . ton a piece : they have none in their seller of their own make that be less than a ton . they have 9 or 10 . great vault which be full of those barrel which be seidome remove : for they have trunk which come down through the roof of the vault in sundry place , through which they power drink down , have the cask right under it to receive the same , for it shall be a great trouble to bring it all down the stair . they give bread , meat and drink unto all man that the hospltall - come to they , not only while they be at their abbey , but also when they depart , to serve they by the way . mmastery - there be a great number of such monastery in the realm , and the emperor majesty ride oftentimes from one to another of they , and lie at they 3 . or 4 . day together . the same monk be as great merchant as any in [ i . 32l - l the land of Russia , and do occupy buy and sell as much as any other man , and have boat which pass too and fro in the river with merchandise from place to place where any of their country do traffic . they eat no flesh during their life as it be report : but upon Sunday , Monday , Tuesday , Thursday and Saturday it be lawful for they to eat egg , butter , cheese and milk , and at all time to eat fish , and after this sort they lead their life . they be all black garment , and so do none other in all the land , but at that abbey only . 441 want of preacher cause of great ignorance and idolatry . they have no preacher no not one in all the land to instruct the people , so that there be many , and the most part of the poor in the country , who if one ask they how many god there be , they will say a great many , mean that every image which they have be a god : for all the country and the emperor majesty himself will bless and bow , and knock their head before their image , in so much that they will cry earnest unto their image to help they to the thing which they need . all man be bind by their law to have those image in their house , and over every gate in all their town and city be image set up , unto which the people bow and bend , and knock their head against the ground before they : as often as they come by any church or cross they do in like manner . and when they come to any house , they bless themselves 3 . or 4 . time before they will salute any man in the house . they reckon and hold it for great sin to touch or handle any of their image within the circle of the board where the paint be , but they keep they very dainty , and rich man deck they over and about with gold , silver and stone , and hang they over and about with cloth of gold . the priest be marry as other man be , and wear all their garment as other man do , except their nightcap , which be cloth of some sad colour , be round , and reach unto the ear : their crown be shave , but the rest of their hair they let grow , as long as nature will permit , so that it hang beneath their ear upon their shoulder : their beard they never shave : if his wife happen to die , it be not lawful for he to marry again during his life . they minister the communion with bread and wine after our order , but he break the bread and put it into the cup unto the wine , and common some be partaker with they : and they take the bread out again with a spoon together with part of the wine , 442 a large description of Russia a . d . . 1558 . and so take it themselves , and give it to other that receive with they after the same manner . their ceremony be all as they say , accord to the greek church use at this present day , and they allow no other religion but the Greeks , and their own : and will not permit any nation but the Greeks to be bury in their sacred burial , or churchyard . all their church be full of image , unto the which the people when they assemble , do bow and knock their head , as i have before say , that some will have knob upon their forehead with knock , as great as egg . all their service be in the ruff tongue , and they all their ser - and the common people have no other prayer but this , vice be in their ghospodi Jesus christos esine