wall about with earth : the building and house ( except it be the captain lodging , and certain other gentleman ) most base and simple . the island be most destitute and barren of wood and pasture , and the ' ground will bear no corn : the air be there most infect , by reason ( as i suppose ) of much fish , and special sturgeon , by store of stur - which only the inhabitant live , have great scarcity and ms ' of flesh and bread . they hang up their fish in their street and house to dry for their provision , which cause such abundance of fly to increase there , as the like be never see in any land , to their great plague . and at my be at the say astracan , there be a great famine and plague among the people , and special among the Tartar call Nagayans , who the same time come thither in great number to render themselves to the russes their enemy , and to seek succour at their hand , their country be destroy , as i say before : but they be but ill entertain or relieve , for there die a great number of they for hunger , which lie all the island through in heap dead , and like to beast unbury , very pitiful to behold : many of they be also sell by the russes , and the rest be banish from the island . at that time it have be a easy thing to have convert that wicked nation to the christian faith , if the russes themselves have be good Christians : but how shall they show compassion unto other nation , when they be not merciful ! unto their own ? at my be there i can have buy many goodly Tartar child , if i will have have a thousand , of their own father and mother , to say , a boy or a wench for a loaf of bread worth six penny in England , but we have more need of victual at that time then of any such merchandise . this astracan be the further hold that this emperor of Russia have conquer of the Tartar towards the caspian sea , which he keep very strong , send thither every year provision of man , and victual , and timber to build the castle . 455 the length of the island of astracan . they enter into the caspian sea . there be a certain trade of merchandise there use , but as yet so small and beggarly , that it be not worth the make mention , and yet there come merchant thither from diverse place . the chief commodity that the russes bring thither be red hide , red sheep skin , wooden vessel , bridle , and saddle , knife , and other trifle , with corn , bacon , and other victual . the Tartar bring thither diverse kind of ware make of cotton wool , with diverse kind of wrought silk : and they that come out of Persia , namely from Shamacki do bring sow silk , which be the course that they use in Russeland , Crasko , diverse kind of pied silk for girdle , shirt of male , bow , sword , and such like thing : and some year corn , and walnut , but all such thing in such small quantity , the merchant be so beggarly and poor that bring the same , that it be not worth the writing , neither be there any hope of trade in all those part worth the follow . this foresay island of astracan be in length twelve league , and in breadth three , and lie east and west in the latitude of forty seven degree , nine minute : we tarry there until the sixth day of August , and have buy and provide a boat in company with certain Tartar and persian , we jade our good and embark our self , and the same day depart i , with the say two Johnsons have the whole charge of the navigation down the say river Volga , be very crooked , and full of flat towards the mouth thereof . we enter into the caspian sea the ten day of August at the easterly side of the say river , be twenty league from astracan aforesaid , in the latitude of forty six degree , twenty seven minute . Volga have seventie mouth or fall into the sea : and we have a large wind , keep the north - east shore , and the eleven day we sail seven league eastnortheast , and come unto a island have a high hill therein , call Accurgar , a good mark in the sea . 456 from thence east ten league , we fall with another island call Bawhiata , much high than the other . within these two island to the northward , be a great bay call the blue sea . from thence we sail east the blue sea . and by north ten league , and have a contrary wind , we come to a anchor in a fathom water , and so rid until the fifteen day , have a great storm at southeast , be a most contrary wind , which we rid out . then the wind come to the north , and we weigh , and set our course southeast , and that day sail eight league . thus proceed forward , the 17 . day we lose sight of land , and the same day sail thirty league , and the 18 . day twenty league wind east , and fall with a land call Baughleata , be 74 . league from the taughkata mouth of the say Volga , in the latitude of 46 . degree 7 + 54 . minute , the coast lie near east and by south , i and west and by north . at the point of this land lie bury a holy prophet , as the Tartar call he , of their law , where great devotion be use of all such maho - metists as doe pass that way . the nineteenth day the wind be west , and we wind eastsoutheast , we sail ten league , and pass by a great river call laic , which have his spring laic river . in the land of Siberia , nigh unto the foresay river Cama , and run through the land of Nagay , fall into this mare Caspium . and up this river one day journey be a town call Serachick , subject to the serachick . aforesaid tartar prince call murse Smille , which be now in friendship with the emperor of Russia . here be no trade of merchandise use , for that the people