either slay or drive away , to the great destruction of the country and merchant . the 26 day of the month i be command to come before the say king , to who i present the emperor of Russia his letter , who entertain we most gentle , and cause we to eat in his presence , and diverse time he send for i , and devise with i familiar in his secret chamber , as well of the power of the emperor , and the great Turk , as also of our country , law , and religion , and cause we to shoot in handgun before he , and do himself practise the use thereof . but after all this great entertainment before my departure he show himself a very tartar : for he go to the war owe i money , and see i not pay before his departure . and although indeed he give order for the same , yet be i very ill satisfy , and force to rebate part , and to take ware as payment for the rest contrary to my expectation : but of a beggar better payment i can not have , and glad i be so to be pay and dispatch . but yet i must needs praise and commend this barbarous king , who immediate after my arrival at Boghar , 471 have understand our trouble with the thief , send 100 man well arm , and give they great charge not to return before they have either slay or take the say thief . who accord to their commission range the wilderness in such sort , that they meet with the say company of thief , and slay part , and part flee , and four they take and bring unto the king , and two of they be sore wound in our skirmish with our gun : and after the king have send for i to come to see they , he cause they all 4 to be hang at his palace gate , because they be gentleman , to the example of other . and of such good as be get again , i have part restore i , and this good justice i find at his hand . there be yearly great resort of merchant to this city of Boghar , which travail in great Caravans from the country thereabouts adjoin , as India , Persia , Balgh , Russia , with diverse other , and in time pass from Cathay , when there be passage : but these merchant be so beggarly and poor , and bring so little quantity of ware , lie two or 3 year to sell the same , that there be no hope of any good trade there to be have worthy the follow . the chief commodity that be bring thither out of these foresay country , be these follow . the Indians do bring fine white , which the Tartar do all roll about their head , and all other kind of white , which serve for apparel make of coton wool and crasko , but gold , silver , precious stone , and spice they bring none . i inquire and perceive that all such trade pass to the ocean sea , and the vein where all such thing be get be in the subjection of the Portugal . the indian carry from Boghar again wrought silk , red hide , slave , and horse , with such like , but of kersei and other cloth , they make little account . i offer to barter with merchant of those country , which come from the further part of India , even from the country of Bengala , and the river Ganges , to give 472 1558 . they kersey for their commodity , but they will not barter for such commodity as cloth . the persian do bring thither Craska , woollen cloth , merchandise linen cloth , diverse kind of wrought pied silk , argo - macks , with such like , and do carry from thence red hide with other ruff ware , and slave , which be of diverse country , but cloth they will by none , for that they bring thither themselves , and be bring unto they as i have inquire from Aleppo in Syria , and the part of turquoise . the russes do carry unto Boghar , red Marchaudiu hide , sheepskin , woollen cloth of diverse sort , ° fRussia ' wooden vessel , bridle , saddle , with such like , and do carry away from thence diverse kind of ware make of cotton wool , diverse kind of silk , Crasca , with other thing , but there be but small utterance . from the country of Cathay be bring thither in merchandise time of peace , and when the way be open , musk , rhubarb , of Cathay . satin , damask , with diverse other thing . at my be at Boghar , there come Caravans out of all these foresay country , except from Cathay : and the cause why there come none from thence be the great war that have dure 3 year before my come thither , and yet dure betwixt 2 great country and city of Tartar , that be direct in the way betwixt the say Boghar and the say Cathay , and certain barbarous field people , as well Gentiles as Mahometists border to the say city . the city be call Taskent and Caskar , and the people that war against Taskent and Taskent be call cassak of the law of Mahomet : cascar - and they which war with the say country of Caskar be call king , gentile and idolater . Theise 2 barbarous nation be of great force live in the field without house or town , and have almost subdue the foresay city , and so stop up the way , that it be impossible for any Caravan to pass unspoiled : so that 3 year before our being there , no Caravan have go , or use trade betwixt the country of Cathay and Boghar , and when the way be clear , it be 9 month journey . 473 he return the eight of march 1559 . to speak of the say country of Cathay , and of such news as i have hear thereof , i have think it best to reserve it to our meeting . i have make my solace at Boghar in the winter time , and have learn by much inquisition , the trade thereof , as also of all the other country thereto adjoin , and the time of the year be come , for all Caravans to depart , and also the king be go to the war , and news come that he be flee , and i advertise by the metropolitan himself