, that i shall depart , because the town be like to be besiege : i think it good and meet , to take my journey some way , and determine to have go from thence into Persia , and to have see the trade of that country , although i have inform my self sufficient thereof , as well at astracan , as at Boghar : and perceive well the trade not to be much unlike the trade of Tartary : but when i shall have take my journey that way , it be let by diverse occasion : the one be , the great war that do new begin betwixt the sophy , and the king of Tartary , whereby the way be destroy : and there be a Caravan destroy with rover and thief , which come out of India and Persia , by safe conduct : and about ten day journey from Boghar , they be rob , and a great part slay . also the metropolitan of Boghar , who be great than the king , take the emperor letter of Russia from i , without which i shall have be take slave in every place : also all such ware as i have receive in barter for cloth , and as i take perforce of the king , and other his noble , in payment of money due unto i , be not vendible in Persia : for which cause , and diverse other , i be constrain to come back again to mare Caspium , the same way i go : so that the eight of march 1559 , we depart out of the say city of Boghar , be a Caravan of 600 camel : and if we have not depart when we do , i and my company have be in danger to have lose life and good . for ten day after our departure , the king of Samarcand come 474 with a army , and besiege the say city of Boghar , the king be absent , and go to the war against another prince , his kinsman , as the like chance in those country once in two or three year . for it be marvel , if a king reign there above three or four year , to the great destruction of the country , and merchant . the 25 of march , we come to the foresay town of urgence , and escape the danger of 400 rover , which urgence . lay in wait for we back again , be the most of they of kindred to that company of thief , which we meet with go forth , as we perceive by four spy , which be take . there be in my company , and commit to my charge , two ambassador , the one from the king of Boghar , the other from the king of balk , king of and be send unto the emperor of Russia . and after ° r have tarry at urgence , and the castle of sellysure , ag it eight day for the assemble , and make ready of our Caravan , the second of April we depart from thence , have four more ambassador in our company , send from the king of urgence , and other Sol tan , his brethren , unto the emperor of Russia , with answer of such letter as i bring they : and the same ambassador be also commit unto my charge by the say king and prince : to who i promise most faithful , and swear by our law , that they shall be well use in Rusland , and suffer to depart from thence again in safety , accord as the emperor have write also in his letter : for they somewhat doubt , because there have none go out of Tartary into Russia , of long time before . the 23 of April , we arrive at the mare Caspium again , where we find our bark which we come in , but neither anchor , cable , cock , nor sail : nevertheless we bring hemp with we , and spin a cable our self , with the rest of our tackle , and make we a sail of cloth of cotton wool , and rig our bark as well as we can , but boat or anchor we have none . in the mean time be devise to make a anchor of wood 475 of a cart wheel , there arrive a bark , which come from astracan , with Tartar and russes , which have 2 anchor , with who i agree for the one : and thus be in a readiness , we set sail and depart , i , and the two Johnsons be master and mariner our self , have in our bark the say six ambassador , and 25 russes , [ i . 334 . i which have be slave a long time in Tartary , nor ever have before my come , liberty , or mean to get home , and these slave serve to row when need be . thus sail sometime along the coast , and sometime out of sight of land , the 13 . day of May , have a contrary wind , we come to a anchor , be three league from the shore , and there rise a sore storm , which continue 44 . hour , and our cable be of our own spin , break , and lose our anchor , and be off a lee shore , and have no boat to help we , we hoist our sail , and bare roomer with the say shore , look for present death : but as God provide for we , we run into a creek full of oz , and so save our self with our bark , and live in great discomfort for a time . for although we shall have escape with our life the danger of the sea , yet if our bark have perish , we know we shall have be , either destroy , or take slave by the people of that country , who live wild in the field , like beast , without house or habitation . thus when the storm be seize , we go out of the creek again : and have set the land with our compass , and take certain mark of the same , during the time of the tempest , while we rid at our anchor , we go direct to the place where we rid , with our bark again , and find our anchor which we lose : whereat the Tartar much marveil , how we do it . while we be in the creek , we make a anchor of wood of cart wheel , which we have in our bark , which