they settle themselves in order . and when the emperor majesty be settle where he will be , and where he may see all the ordinance discharge and shoot off , the harquebusier begin to shoot off at the bank of ice , as though it have be in any skirmish or battle , who cease not shoot , until they have beat all the ice flat on the ground . after the handgun , they shoot off their wild fire up into the air , which be a goodly sight to behold . and after this , they begin to discharge the small piece of brass , begin with the small and so orderly big and big , until the last and big . when they have shoot they all off , they begin to charge they again , and so shoot they all off 3 time after the first order , begin with the small , and end with the great . and note that before they have end their shoot , the 2 house that they shoot unto be beat in piece , and yet they be very strong make of wood and fill with earth , be at the least 30 foot thick . this triumph be end , the emperor depart and ride home in the same order that he come forth into the field . the 431 ordinance be discharge every year in the month of December , accord to the order before mention . on Christmas day we be all will to dine with the emperor majesty , where for bread , meat and drink , we be serve as at other time before : but for goodly and rich plate , we never see the like or so much before . there dine that day in the emperor presence above 500 stranger , and two hundred russes , and all they be serve in vessel of gold , and that as much as can stand one by another upon the table . beside this there be four cupboard garnish with goodly plate both of gold and silver . among the which there be 12 barrel of silver , contain above 12 gallon a piece , and at each end of every barrel be 6 hoop of fine gold : this dinner continue about six hour . the hallow every year upon the 12 day they use to bless or the nver of sanctify the river Moscua , which run through the ’ city of Moscow , after this manner . first , they make a square hole in the ice about 3 fathom large every way , which be trim about the side and edge with white board . then about 9 of the clock they come out of the church with procession towards the river in this wise . first and foremost there go certain young man with wax taper burn , and one carry a great lantern : then follow certain banner , than the cross , than the image of our lady , of saint Nicholas , and of other saint , which image man carry upon their shoulder : after the image follow certain priest to the number of 100 or moor : after they the metropolitan who be lead between two priest , and after the metropolitan come the emperor with his crown upon his head , and after his majesty all his noble man orderly . thus they follow the procession unto the water , and when they come unto the hole that be make , the priest set themselves in order round about it . and at one side of the same pool there be a scaffold of board make , upon which stand a fair chair in which the Metro - 432 politan be set , but the emperor majesty stand upon the ice . after this the priest begin to sing , to bless and to sense , and do their service , and so by that time that they have do , the water be holy , which be sanctify , the metropolitan take a little thereof in his hand , and cast it on the emperor , likewise upon certain of the duke , 8c than they return again to the church with the priest that sit about the water : but that press that there be about the water when the emperor be go , be wonderful to behold , for there come above 5000 pot to be fill of that water : for that Moscovite which have no part of that water , think himself unhappy . and very many go naked into the water , both man and woman and child : after the press be a little go , the emperor jennet and horse be bring to drink of the same water , and likewise many other man bring their horse thither to drink , and by that mean they make their horse as holy as themselves . all these ceremony be end , we go to the emperor to dinner , where we be serve in vessel of silver , and in all other point as we have be beforetime . the russes begin their lent always 8 week before the russes easter : the first week they eat egg , milk , cheese 8c lent - butter , and make great cheer with pancake and such other thing , one friend visit another , and from the same Sunday until our Shrofesunday there be but few russes sober , but they be drink day by day , and it be account for no reproach or shame among they . the next week be our first week of Lent , or our cleanse week , begin our Shrofesunday , they make and keep a great fast . it be report , and the people do very believe that the metropolitan neither eat nor drink any manner of thing for the space of seven day , and they say that there be many religious man which do the like . two 433 2 e the emperor majesty eat but one morsel of bread , and drink but one draught of drink once in the day during that week , and all man that be of any reputation come not out of their house during that time , so that the street be almost void of company , save a few poor folk which wander to and fro . the other six week they keep as we do we , but not one of they will eat either butter , cheese , egg or milk . on palm Sunday they have a very solemn procession in this manner follow . first , they have a tree of a good bigness which be make fast upon two sled , as though it be grow there , and it be hang with apple , raisin , fig and date , and with many other fruit abundant . in the midst of you same tree stand 5 boy in white vesture , which sing in the tree before the procession : after