plenty of cod . thus ply along the north the coast , we fall with a cape , call the north cape , ^ ape - which be the northermost land that we pass in our voyage to saint Nicholas , and be in the latitude of 71 degree and ten minute , and be from Inger sound east , and to the northward 15 league . And be at this north cape the second day of July , we have the sun at north 4 degree above the horizon . the three day we come to Wardhouse , have such mist Wardhouse , that we can not see the land . This Wardhouse be a castle stand in a island 2 mile from the main of Finland , subject to the king of Denmark , and the eastermost land that he have . there be two other cattle feed with fish . the monastery of Pechinchow . island near adjoin unto that , whereon the castle of Wardhouse stand . the inhabitant of those three island live only by fish , and make much stockfish , which they dry with frost : their most feed be fish ; bread and drink they have none , but such as be bring they from other place . they have small store of cattle , which be also feed with fish . from Wardhouse we sail southsoutheast ten league , and fall with a cape of land call Kegor , the northermost part of the land of Lappia . and between Wardhouse , and the say cape be a great bay , call DommeshafF , in the south part whereof be a monastery of monk of the russes religion , call Pechinchow . thus proceed forward and sail along the coast of the say land of Lappia , wind southeast , the four day through great mist and darkness we lose the company of the other three ship , and meet not 416 with they again , until the seven day , when we fall with a cape or headland call Swetinoz , which be the enter into the bay of S . Nicholas . at this cape lie a great stone , to the which the bark that pass thereby , be wont to make offering of butter , meal , and other victual , think that unless they do so , their bark or vessel shall there perish , as it have be oftentimes see : and there it be very dark and misty . note that the sixth day we pass Arzina reca by the place where sir Hugh Willoughbie , with all the n ™ his company perish , which be call arzina reca , that be to say , the river Arzina . loughbiewa the land of Lappia be a high land , have snow freeze . lie on it common all the year . the people of the country be half Gentiles : they live in the summer time near the sea side , and use to take fish , of the which they make bread , and in the winter they remove up into the country into the wood , where they use ' hunt , and kill deer , bear , wolves , fox , and other beast , with who flesh they be nourish , and with their skin apparel in such strange fashion , that there be nothing see of they bear but their eye . the lapplans they have none other habitation , but only in tent , cover all remove from place to place , accord to the season of the year . they know no art nor faculty , but only shoot , which they exercise daily , as well man as woman , and kill such beast as serve they for their food . thus proceed along the coast from Swetinoz aforesaid , the nine day of July we come to cape grace , be in the latitude of 66 degree and 45 minute , and be at the enter in of the bay of S . Nicholas . aboard this land there be 20 or 30 fathom water , and sundry ground good to anchor in . the then current current at this cape run Southwest and Northeast . at £ atezrace ' from this cape we proceed along until we come to cross island , which be seven league from the say cape Southwest : and from this island , we set over to the other side of the bay , and go Southwest , and fall two 417 2d with a headland call Foxenose , which be from the the enter say island 25 league . the enter of this bay from cross island to the near land on the other side be seven league seven league over . from Boxenose proceed forward broad at they the twelve day of the say month of July , all our least . four ship arrive in safety at the road of saint Nicholas in the land of Russia , where we anchor , and have sail from London unto the say road seven hundred and fifty league . the russian ambassador and his com - fl . 312 . ] pany with great joy get to shore , and our ship here forthwith discharge themselves : and be lade again , and have a fair wind , depart towards England the August . first of August . the three of the say month i with other of my company come unto the city of Colmogro , be a hundred verstes from the bay of saint Nicholas , and in the latitude of 64 degree 25 minute . 1 tarry at the say colmogro until the fifteen day : and then i depart in a little boat up the great river of Dwina , which run very swift , and the self same day pineg river , pass by the mouth of the river call pinego , leave it on our left hand fifteen verstes from Colmogro . on both side of the mouth of this river pinego be high land , great rock of alabaster , great wood , and pineapple tree lie along within the ground , which by report have lie there since Noes flood . and thus proceed forward the nineteenth day in the morning , the town of i come into a town call yemp , a hundred verstes temps . from Colmogro . all this way along they make much tar , pitch and ash of aspen tree . from thence i come to a place call ustiug , a ancient city the last day of August . at this city meet two river : the one call Jug , and the other Sucana , both which fall into the aforesaid river of Dwina . the river Jug have his spring in the land of the Tartar call chere - mizzi , join to the country of Permia : and Succana have his head from a lake not far from the city of ustiug . Vologda . thus depart from ustiug , and pass by the river Succana , we come to a town call Totma . 418 about this place the water be very shallow , and stony , and troublesome for bark and boat of that country , which they call nassade , and dosnecke , to pass that way : wherein merchandise be transport from the aforesaid colmogro to the city of Vologhda . Theise descripvessel call nassade , be very long build , broad make , and close above , flat bottomed , and draw not above four foot water , and will carry two hundred ton : they have none iron appertain to they but all of timber , and