the voyage , wherein Osep Napea the Moscovite ambassador return home into his country , with his entertainment at his arrival , at colmogro : and a large description of the manner of the country . he twelve of Maye , in the year of our lord 1557 there depart from Gravesend , four good ship well appoint for merchant , which be present bind into the bay of saint Nicholas in Russia : with which ship be transport , or carry home , one Osep gre - goriwich Napea , who be send messenger from the emperor and great duke of Moscovia . the four ship be these , who name follow , viz . the primerose admiral . the John Evangelist vice - admiral . the anne and the Trinity attendant . [ I . 315 - 1 the 13 of July , the foresay four ship come to a anchor in the bay of saint Nicholas , before a abbey , call 425 present use in Russia be all for the most part of victual . the city of Boghar . the abbey of S . Nicholas , whereas the say messenger , Osep Gregoriwich Napea go a shore , and as many english man as come to serve the emperor remain with he at the abbey for the space of six day , until he have get all his thing a shore , and lade the same in bark , to go up the river Dwina , unto Vologhda , which be by water 1000 verstes , and every verste be about three quarter of a english mile . the 20 of July , we depart from saint Nicholas , and the 24 of the same , we come to Colmogro , where we remain eight day : and the say messenger be there of all his acquaintance welcome home , and have present innumerable send unto he , but it be nothing but meat and drink .. some send white bread , some rye bread , and some butter bread and pancake , beef , mutton , bacon , egg , butter , fish , swan , goose , duck , hen , and all manner of victual , both fish and flesh , in the best manner , that the rude people can devise : for among they , these present be high esteem . the 29 of July , we depart from Colmogro , and the 14 of August we come to ustiug , where we remain one day , and change our bark or boat . the 27 of August , we come to Vologhda , where we remain 4 day unlade the bark , and lade our chest and thing in small wagon , with one horse in a piece , which in their tongue be call Telegos , and with these telegoe they carry our stuff from Vologhda unto the Moscow , which be 500 verstes : and we be upon the same way 14 day : for we go no fast than the telegoe . there be three great town between the Moscow and Vologhda , that be to say , yeraslave , rostave , and pereslave . upon one side of yeraslave run a famous river , which be call Volga . it run into the caspian sea , and it divide it self before it come into the mare Caspium , in 50 part or more , and near unto the same sea there stand a great city , call Boghar , the inhabitant of the which be call by the same name . 426 the people of the say city do traffic unto the city of Moscow : their commodity be spice , musk , ambergreese , rhubarb , with other drug . they bring also many fur which they buy in Siberia come towards the Moscow : the say people be of the sect of Mahomet . the 12 of September we come unto the ci tie of Moscow , where we be bring by Napea , and two of the emperor gentleman unto a large house , where every one of we have his chamber appoint . the 14 of September we be command to come they arrive unto the emperor , and immediate after our come at Masco . we be bring into his presence , unto who each of we do his duty accord , and kiss his right hand , his majesty sit in his chair of estate , with his crown on his head , and a staff of goldsmith work in his left hand well garnish with rich and costly stone : and when we have all kiss his hand and do our duty , his majesty do declare by his interpreter that we be all welcome unto he , and into his country , and thereupon will we to dine with he : that day we give thank unto his majesty , and so depart until the dinner be ready . when dinner time approach , we be bring again into the emperor dine chamber , where we be set on one side of a table that stand over against the emperor table , to the end that he may well behold we all : and when we come into the foresay chamber , we find there ready set these table follow . first at the upper end of one table be set the emperor his majesty , his brother , and the emperor of Cazan , which be prisoner . about two yard low sit the emperor of Cazan his son , be a child of five year of age , and beneath he sit the most part of the emperor noble man . and at another table near unto the emperor table , there be set a monk all alone , which be in all point as well serve as the emperor . at another table sit another kind of people call chirkass , which the emperor entertain for man of war to serve against 427 his enemy . of which people and of their country , i will hereafter make mention .. all the table aforesay be cover only with salt and bread , and after that we have sit a while , the emperor send unto every one of we a piece of bread , which be give and deliver unto every man several by these word : the emperor and great duke give the bread this day , and in like manner three or four time before dinner be end , he send unto every man drink , which be give by these word , the emperor and great duke give thou to drink . all the table aforesaid be serve in vessel of pure and fine gold , as well bason and ewer , platter , dish and saucer , as also of great pot , with a innumerable sort of small drink pot of diverse fashion , whereof a great number be set with stone . as for costly meat i have many time see better : but for change of wine