we in our way . and the sultan himself return back again , take the four thief with he . Theise soldier travail with we two day , consume much of our victual . and the 3 . day in the morning very early they set out before our Caravan , and have range the wilderness for the space of four hour , they meet we , come towards we as fast as their horse can run , and declare that they have find the tract of horse not far from we , perceive well that we shall meet with enemy , and therefore will we to appoint our self for they , and ask we what we will give they to conduct we further , or else they will return . to who we offer as we think good , but they refuse our offer , and will have more , and so we not agree they depart from we , and go back to their sultan , who ( as we conjecture ) be privy to the conspiracy . divination by but they be go , certain Tartar of our company sorcene . call holy man , ( because they have be at Mecha ) cause the whole Caravan to stay , and will make their prayer , and divine how we shall prosper in our journey and whether we shall meet with any ill company or no ? to which , our whole Caravan do agree . and they take certain sheep and kill they , and take the blade bone of the same , and first sod they , and then burn they , and take of the blood of the say sheep , and mingle it with the powder of the say bone , and write certain character with the say blood , use many other ceremony and word , and by the same divine and find , that we shall meet with enemy and thief ( to our great trouble ) but shall overcome they , to which sorcery , i and my company give no credit , but we find it true : for within 3 . hour after that the soldier depart from we , which be the 15 . day of December , in the morning , we escry far off diverse horseman which make towards we , and we ( per - 466 ceive they to be rover ) gather our self together , be 40 . of we well appoint , and able to fight , and we make our prayer together every one after his law , profess to live and die one with another , and so prepare our self . when the thief be nigh unto we , we perceive they to be in number 37 . man well arm , and appoint with bow , arrow and sword , and the captain a prince banish from his country . they will we to yield our self , or else to be slay , but we defy they , wherewith they shoot at we all at once , and we at they very hot , and so continue our fight from morning until two hour within night , diverse man , horse and camel be wound and slay on both part : and have it not be for 4 . handgunne which i and my company have and use , we have be overcome and destroy : for the thief be better arm , and be also better archer than we ; but after we have slay diverse of their man and horse with our gun , they dare not approach so nigh , which cause they to come to a truce with we until the next morning , which we accept , and encamp our self upon a hill , and make the fashion of a castle , wall it about with pack of ware , and lay our horse and camel within the same to save they from the shot of arrow : and the thief also encamp within a arrow shot of we , but they be betwixt we and the water , which be to our great discomfort , because neither we nor our camel have drink in 2 . day before . thus keep good watch , when half the night be spend , the prince of the thief send a messenger half way unto we , require to talk with our captain , in their tongue , the Caravan bassa , who answer the messenger , i will not depart from my company to go into the half way to talk with thou : but if that thy prince with all his company will swear by our law to keep the truce , then will i send a man to talk with thou , or else not . which the prince understand as well himself as his company , swear so loud that 467 handgun very profitable . we may all hear . and then we send one of our company ( repute a holy man ) to talk with the same messenger . the message be pronounce aloud in this order , our prince demand of the Caravan bassa , Bussarmans . and of all you that be bussarmans , ( that be to say cir - cumcise ) not desire your blood , that you deliver Caphar . into his hand as many Caphars , that be , unbeliever ( mean we the Christians ) as be among you with their good , and in so do , he will suffer you to depart with your good in quietness , and on the contrary , you shall be handle with no less cruelty than the Caphars , if he overcome you , as he doubt not . to the which our Caravan bassa answer , that he have not Christians in his company , nor other stranger , but two turk which be of their law , and although he have , he will rather die than deliver they , and that we be not afraid of his threaten , and that shall he know when day appear . and so pass in talk , the thief ( contrary to their oath ) carry our holy man away to their prince , cry with a loud voice in token of victory , olio , olio . wherewith we be much discomfort , fear that that holy man will betray we : but he be cruel handle and much examine , will not to death confess any thing which be to we prejudicial ! , neither touch we , nor yet what man they have slay and wound of we the day before . when the night be spend , in the morning we prepare our self to battle again : which the thief perceive , require to fall to agreement 8c ask much of we : and to be brief , the most