, and diverse sort of mead , it be wonderful : for there be not leave at any time so much void room on the table , that one cup more may have be set , and as far as i can perceive , all the rest be in the like manner serve . in the dinner time there come in six singer which stand in the midst of the chamber , and their face towards the emperor , who sing there before dinner be end three several time , who song or voice delight our ear little or nothing . the emperor never put morsel of meat in his mouth , but he first bless it himself , 8c in like manner as often as he drink : for after his manner he be very religious , 8c he esteem his religious man above his noble man . this dinner continue about the space of five hour , which be end , and the table take up , we come into the midst of the chamber , where we do reverence unto the emperor majesty , and then he deliver unto every one of we with his own hand a cup of mead , which when every man have receive and drink a 428 quantity thereof , we be licence to depart , and so end that dinner . and because the emperor will have we to be merry , he send to our lodging the same evening three barrel of mead of sundry sort , of the quantity in all of one hogshead . the 16 day of September the emperor send home unto our lodging for every of we a Tartary horse to ride from place to place as we have occasion , for that the street of Moscow be very foul and miry in the summer . the 18 of September there be give unto master Standish doctor in physic , and the rest of our man of our occupation , certain fur gown of branch velvet and gold , and some of red damask , of which master doctor gown be fur with sable , and the rest be fur some with white ermine , and some with grey Squirel , and all face and edge round about with black beaver . the i of October in the morning we be command to come unto the emperor court , and when we come thither , we be bring unto the emperor unto who we do our duty accord : whereupon he will we to dine with he that day , and so with thank unto his majesty , we depart until dinner time , at which time we come and find the table cover with bread and salt as at the first : and after that we be all set upon one side of the table , the emperor majesty accord to his accustom manner send unto every man a piece of bread by some of the duke which attend on his highness . and whereas the 14 of September we be serve in vessel of gold , we be now serve in vessel of silver , and yet not so abundant as be the first of gold : they bring drink unto the table in silver bole which contain at the least six gallon a piece , and every man have a small silver cup to drink in , and another to dip or to take his drink out of the great bowl withal : the dinner be end , the emperor 429 m . Standish doctor of physic . a yearly triumph . give unto every one of we a cup with mead , which when we have receive , we give thank and depart . moreover , whensoever the emperor pleasure be that any stranger shall dine with he , he do send for they in the morning , and when they come before he , he with his own mouth bid they to dinner , and this order he always observe . the io of October the emperor give unto m . Standish 70 ruble in money , and to the rest of our man of occupation 30 ruble apiece . the 3 of November we dine again with the emperor , where we be serve as before .. the 6 of December be saint Nicholas day , we dine again at the emperor , for that be one of the principali feast which the moscovite hold : we be serve in silver vessel and order in all point as before , and it be past 7 of the clock at night before dinner be end . the emperor majesty use every year in the month of December , to have all his ordinance that be in the city of Moscow carry into the field which be without the suburb of the city , and there to have it plant and bend upon two house of wood fill within with earth : against which two house there be two fair white mark set up , at which mark they discharge all their ordinance , to the end the emperor may see what his gunner can do . they have fair ordinance of brass of all sort , base , falcon , minion , saker , culvering , cannon double and royal , basilisk long and large , they have six great piece who shot be a yard of height , which shoot a man may easy discern as they flee : they have also a great many of mortar piece or potgun , out of which piece they shoot wild fire . the 12 of December the emperor majesty and all his nobility come into the field on horseback , in most goodly order , have very fine jennet and turquoise horse garnish with gold and silver abundant . the emperor 430 majesty have on he a gown of rich tissue , and a cap of scarlet on his head , set not only with pearl , but also with a great number of rich and costly stone : his noble man be all in gown of cloth of gold , which do ride before he in good order by 3 . and 3 . and before they there go 5000 harquebusier , which go by 5 and 5 in a rank in very good order , every of they carry his gun upon his left shoulder , and his match in his right hand , and in this order they march into the field where as the foresay ordinance be plant . and before the emperor majesty come into the field , there be a certain stage make of small pole which be a quarter of a mile long , and about threescore yard off from the stage of pole be certain piece of ice of two foot thick , and six foot high set up , which rank of ice be as long as the stage of pole , and as soon as the emperor majesty come into the field , the harquebusier go upon the stage of pole where