when the wind serve , they be make to sail . otherwise they have many man , some to hale and draw by the neck with long small rope make fast to the say boat , and some set with long pole . there be many of these bark upon the river of Dwina : and the most part of they belong unto the ci tie of Vologhda : for there dwell many merchant , and they occupy the say boat with carry of salt from the sea side unto the say Vologhda . the twenty of September i come unto Vologhda , which be a great city , and the river pass through the midst of the same . the house be build with wood of fir tree , join one with another , and round without : the house be four square without any iron or stone work , cover with birch bark , and wood over the same : their church be all of wood , two for every parish , one to be heat for winter , and the other for summer . on the top of their house they lie much earth , for fear of burn : for they be sore plague with fire . This Vologhda be in 59 degree , eleven minute , and be from colmogro , 1000 verstes . all the way i never come in house , but lodge in the wilderness , by the river side , and carry provision for the way . and he that will travel those way , must good counsel ! carry with he a hatchet , a tinder box , and a kettle , for it ™ ™ 116 ™ ' to make fire and seethe meat , when he have it : for there be small succour in those part , unless it be in town . 419 the first day of December , i depart from Vologhda in post in a sled , as the manner be in winter . and the way to Moscua be as follow . from Vologhda to Commelski , 27 verstes , so to Olmor 25 verstes , so to teloytske 20 verstes , so to ure 30 verstes , so to voshan - sko 30 verstes , then to yeraslave 30 verstes , which stand upon the great river Volga , so to rostove , 50 verstes , then to Rogarin 30 verstes , so to peraslave 10 verstes , which be a great town , stand hard by a fair lake . from thence to dowbnay 30 verstes , so to godo - roke 30 verstes , so to Owchay 30 verstes , and last to the Moscow 25 verstes , where i arrive the sixth day of December . December . there be 14 post call yanne between Vologhda and Moscow , which be account 500 verstes asunder . the 10 day of December i be send for to the emperor castle by the say emperor , and deliver my letter unto the secretary , who talk with i of diverse matter , by the commandment of the emperor . and after that my letter be translate , i be answer that i be welcome , and that the emperor will give i that i desire . the 25 day , be the day of the nativity , i come into the emperor presence , and kiss his hand , who sit aloft in a goodly chair of estate , have on his head a crown most rich deck , and a staff of gold in his hand , all apparel with gold , and garnish with precious stone . there sit distant from he about two yard his brother , and next unto he a boy of twelve year of age , who be inheritor to you emperor of Casan , conquer by this emperor 8 year past . then sit his nobility round about he , rich apparel with gold and stone . and after i have do obeisance to the emperor , he with his own mouth call i by my name , bid i to dinner , and so i depart to my lodging till dinner time , which be at six of the clock , by candle light . the emperor dine in a fair great hall , in the midst 420 whereof be a pillar four square , very artificial make , about which be diverse table set , and at the uppermost part of the hall , sit the emperor himself , and at his table sit his brother , his uncle son , the metropolitan , the young emperor of Casan , and diverse of his noble man , all of one side . there be diverse ambassador , and other stranger , as well Christians as heathen , diverse apparel , to the number of 600 man , which dine in the say hall , beside 2000 Tartar , man of war , which be new come to render themselves to the emperor , and be appoint to serve he in his war against the lieflander , but they dine in other hals . i be set at a little table , have no stranger with i , direct before the emperor face . be thus set and place , the emperor send i diverse bowl of wine , and mead , and many dish of meat from his own hand , which be bring i by a duke , and my table serve all in gold and silver , and so likewise on other table , there be set bowl of gold , set with stone , worth by estimation 400 pound sterling one cup , beside the plate which serve the table . there be also a cupboard of plate , most sumptuous and rich , which be not use : among the which , be a piece of gold of two yard long , wrought in the top with tower , and dragon head , also diverse barrel of gold and silver , with castle on the bung , rich and artificial make . the emperor and all the hall throughout be serve with duke : and when dinner be end , the emperor call i by name , and give i drink with his own hand , and so i depart to my lodging . note , that when the emperor drink , all the company stand up , and at every time he drink or taste of a dish of meat he bless himself . many other thing i see that day , not here note . the 4 of January , which be twelftide with they , the emperor , with his brother and all his noble , all most rich apparel with gold , pearl , precious stone , and 421 A . D . i558 - costly fur , with a crown upon his head , of the tartarian fashion , go to the church in procession , with the metropolitan , and diverse bishop and priest . that day i be before the emperor again in Russe apparel , and the emperor ask if that be not i , and his chancellor answer yea . than he bid i to dinner : then come he out of the church , and go with the procession upon the river , be all freeze , and there stand bare head , with all his noble , there be a hole make in the ice , and the metropolitan hallow the water with great solemnity and service , and do cast of the say water upon the emperor son and the nobility . that do , the people with great throng fill pot of the say water to carry