go to bed , the bridegroom put certain money both gold and silver , if he have it , into one of his boot , and then sit down in the chamber , cross his leg , and then the bride must pluck off one of his boot , which she will , and if she happen on the boot wherein the money be , she have not only the money for her labour , but be also at such choice , as she need not ever from that day forth to pull off his boot , but if she miss the boot wherein the money be , she do not only loose the money , but be also bind from that day forward to pull off his boot continual . then they continue in drink and make good cheer three day follow , be accompany with certain of their friend , and during the same three day he be call a duke , and she a duchess , although they be very poor person , and this be as much as i have learn of their matrimony : but one common rule be among they , if the woman be not beat with the whip once a week , she will not be good , and therefore they look for it orderly , and the woman say , that if their husband do not beat they , they shall not love they . they use to marry there very young , their son at 16 . and 18 . year old , and the daughter at 12 . or 13 . year or young : they use to keep their wife very close , i mean those that be of any reputation , so that a man shall not see one of they but at a chance , 446 a large description of Russia a . d . 1558 . when she go to church at Christmas or at easter , or else go to visit some of her friend . the most part of the woman use to ride a stride in saddle with styrrop , as man do , and some of they on sled , which in summer be not commendable . the husband be bind to find the wife colour to the woman oj paint she withal , for they use ordinary to paint Russia paint themselves : it be such a common practice among they , faces - that it be count for no shame : they grease their face with such colour , that a man may discern they hang on their face almost a flight shoot off : i can so well liken they as to a miller wife , for they look as though they be beat about the face with a bag of meal , but their eye brow they colour as black as jet . the best property that the woman have , be that they can sow well , and imbrode with silk and gold excellent . of their burial . when any man or woman die , they stretch he out , and put a new pair of shoe on his foot , because he have a great journey to go : then do they wind he in a sheet , as we do , but they forget not to put a testimony in his right hand , which the priest give he , to testify unto saint Nicholas that he die a christian man or woman . and they put the coarse always in a coffin of wood , although the party be very poor : and when they go towards the church , the friend and kinsman of the party depart carry in their hand small wax candle , and they weep and howl , and make much lamentation . they that be hang or behead , or such like , have no testimony with they : how they be receive into heaven , it be a wonder , without their passport . there be a great number of poor people among they which die daily for lack of sustenance , which be a pitiful case to behold : for there have be bury 447 in a small time , within these two year , above 80 . person young and old , which have die only for lack of sustenance : for if they have have straw and water enough , they will make shift to live : for a great many be force in the winter to dry straw and bread make stamp it , and to make bread thereof , or at the least of straw . they eat - t jn steaj of bread . in the summer they make good shift with grass , herb and root : bark the unmerd - of tree be good meat with they at all time . there finesse of the nQ people jn the world , as i suppose , that live so the poor . miserable as do the poverty in those part : and the most part of they that have sufficient for themselves , and also to relieve other that need , be so unmerciful that they care not how many they see die of famine or hunger in the street . stow or it be a country full of disease , diverse , and evil , bath usual and the best remedy be for any of they , as they hold with the opinion , to go often unto the hot house , as in a manner every man have one or his own , which he heat common twice every week , and all the household sweat , and wash themselves therein . report by Thomas bulky . the name of certain sort of drink use in Russia , and common drink in the emperor court . the first and principali mead be make of the juice or liccour take from a berry call in Russia , Malieno , which be of a marvelous sweet taste , and of a carmosant colour , which berry i have see in Paris . the second mead be call Visnova , because it be make of a berry so call , and be like a black gooseberry : but it be like in colour and taste to the red wine of France . the three mead be call Amarodina or Smorodina , short , of a small berry much like to the small rezin , and grow in great plenty in Russia . the four mead be call Cherevnikyna , which be make of the wild black cherry . 448 the five mead be make of honey and water , with other mixture . there be also a delicate drink draw from the root of the birch tree , call in the ruff tongue Berozevites , which drink the noble man and other use in April , may , and June , which be the three month of the spring time : for after those month , the sap of the tree dry , and then they can have it .