sable , worth by report 40 . roble . we see all his majesty robe which be very rich set with stone , they show we many other great stone of diverse kind , but the most part of they be uneven , in manner as they come out of the work , for they do more esteem the greatness of stone , than the proportion of they . we see two goodly gown which be as heavy as a man can easy carry , all set with pearl over and over : the guard or border round about they be garnish with saphire and other good stone abundant . one of the same gown be very rich , for the pearl be very large , round and orient : as for the rest of his gown and garment , they be of rich tissue and cloth of gold and all fur with very black sable . when we have sufficient peruse all these thing , they will master grey at his arrival in England , to provide if he can , such jewel and rich clothes as he have see there , and better if he can , declare that the emperor will glad bestow his money upon such thing . so we take our leave the same time , and depart towards Vologda immediate . 437 the emper - ourswardrobe . the manner , usage , and ceremony of the russes . of the emperor . he emperor name in their tongue be Ivan Vasilivich , that be as much to say , as John the son of “ vasilie and by his princely state he be call Otesara , as his predecessor have be before , which to interpret , be a king , that give not tribute to any man . and this word Otesara his majesty interpreter have of late day interpret to be emperor , so that now he be call emperor and great duke of all Russia , etc before his father they be neither call emperor nor king but only Ruese velike , that be to say , great duke . and as this emperor which now be Ivan Vasilivich , do exceed his predecessor in name , that be , from a duke to a emperor , even so much by report he do exceed they in stoutness of courage and valiantness , and a great deal more : for he be no more afraid of his enemy which be not few , than the hobby of the lark . he enemy with who he have war for the most part be these : Litto , Poland , Sweden , Denmark , Lifland , the crimme , nagaians , and the whole nation of the tartarian , which be a stout and a hardy people as any under the sun . this emperor use great familiarity , as well unto all his noble and subject , as also unto stranger which serve he either in his war , or in occupation : for his pleasure be that they shall dine oftentimes in the year in his presence , and beside that he be oftentimes abroad , either at one church or another , and walk with his noble man abroad . and by this mean he be not only belove of his noble and commons , but also have in great dread and fear through all his dominion , 438 a large description of Russia a . d . ..... 15581 so that i think no prince in Christendom be more fear of his own then he be , nor yet better belove . for if he bid any of his duke go , they will run , if he give any evil or angry word to any of they , the party will not come into his majesty presence again of a long time if he be not send for , but will feign he to be very sick , and will let the hair of his head grow very long , without either cut or shave , which be a evident token that he be in the emperor displeasure : for when they be in their prosperity , they account it a shame to wear long hair , in consideration whereof , they use to have their head shave . he majesty hear all complaint himself , and with note . his owqe mouth give sentence , and judgement of all matter , and that with expedition : but religious matter he meddle not withal , but refer they whole unto the metropolitan . he majesty retain and well reward all stranger that come to serve he , and especial man of war . he delight not great in hawk , hunt , or any other pastime , nor in hear instrument or music , but set all his whole delight upon two thing : first , to serve God , as undoubted he be very devout in his religion , and the second , how to subdue and conquer his enemy . he have abundance of gold and silver in his own hand or treasury : but the most part of his know not a crown from a counter , nor gold from copper , they be so much cumber therewithal ! , and he that be worth 2 . 3 . or 4 . groat , be a rich man . of their religious man . the metropolitan be next unto God , our lady and s . Nicholas except : for the emperor majesty judge and affirm he to be of high dignity than himself ; for that , say he , he be god spiritual officer , and i the emperor be his temporali officer , and therefore his majesty submit himself unto he in many 439 thing concern religious matter , as in lead the metropolitans horse upon palm Sunday , and give he leave to sit on a chair upon the 12 . day , when the river Moscow be in blessing , his majesty stand on the ice . all matter of religion be reform by the metropolitan , he hear the cause and give sentence as himself list , and be authorize so to do , whether it be to whip , hang or burn , his will must needs be fulfil . they have both monk , friar and nun , with a great number of great and rich monastery : they keep great hospitality , and do relieve much poor people day by day . i have be in one of the monastery call Troietes , which be wall about with brick very strong like a castle , and much ordinance of brass upon the wall of the same . they tell i themselves that there be seven hundred brethren of they which belong unto that house . the most part of the land , town , and village which be within 40 . mile of it , belong unto the same . they show i the church , wherein be as many image as can hang about ,