the first voyage make by master Anthony Jenkinson , from the city of London towards the land of Russia , begin the twelve of May , in the year 1557 . irst by the grace of God , the day and year above mention , i depart from the say city , and the same day at Gravesend embark my self in a good ship , name the primerose , be appoint , although unworthy , chief captain of the same , and also of the other 3 good ship , to say , the John Evangelist , the anne , and the Trinity , have also the conduct of the emperor of Russia his ambassador name Osep Nepea Gregoriwich , who pass with his company in the say primerose . and thus our four tall ship be well appoint , aswell for man as victual as other necessary furniture , the say twelve day of the month of May , we weigh our anchor , and depart from the say Gravesend , in the after noon , and ply down the Thames , the wind be easterly , and fair weather , the 13 day we come a ground with the primerose , upon a sand call the black tail , where we sit fast until the 14 day in the morning , and then God be praise , she come off : and that day we ply down as far as our lady of holland , and there come to a anchor , the wind be easterly , and there remain until the 20 day : than we weigh and go out at Goldmore gate , and from thence in at balsey slade , and so into orwel wand , where we come to a anchor : but as we come out at the say Goldemore gate , the Trinity come on ground on certain rock , that lie to the northward of the say gate , and be like to be bilge and lose . but by the aid of God , at the last she come off again , be very leak : and the 21 day the primerose remain at a anchor in the wand , the 413 other three ship bear into orwel haven , where i cause the say Trinity to be ground , search , and repair . so we remain in the say haven , until the 28 day : and then the wind be westerly , the three ship that be in the haven , weigh and come forth , and in come forth the John Evangelist come on ground upon a sand , call the Andros , where she remain one tide , and the next full sea she come off again without any great hurt , God be praise . the 29 day in the morning all four ship weigh in the wand , and that tide go as far as qrfordnesse , where we come to a anchor , because the wind be northerly : and about six of the clock at night , the wind vex to the southwest , and we weigh anchor , and bear clear of the ness , and then set our course Northeast and by north until midnight , be then clear of Yarmouth sand . than we wind north and by west , June , and northnorthwest , until the first of June at noon , than it wax calm , and continue so until the second day at noon : then the wind come at northwest , with a tempest , and much rain , and we lay close by , and cape Northnortheast , and Northeast and by north , as . the wind shift , and so continue until the three day at noon : then the wind vex Westerly again , and we go north our right course , and so continue our way until the four day , at three of the clock in the afternoon , at which time the wind vex to the northwest again and blow a fresh gale , and so continue until the seven day in the morning , we lie with all our ship close by , and cape to the northward : and then the wind vere more northerly , we be force to put roomer with the coast of England again , and fall overthwart Newcastle , but go not into the haven , 8c so ply upon the coast the eight day 8c the nine . the ten day the wind come to the northnorthwest , 8c we be force to bear roomer with Flamborow head , where we come to a anchor , and there 414 remain until the seventeenth day . then the wind come fair , and we weigh , and set our course north and by east , and so continue the same with a merry wind until the 21 at noon , at which time we take the sun , and have the latitude in sixty degree . than we shift our course , and go Northnorth east , and Northeast and by north , until the 25 day . than we discover certain island , call Heilick island , lie heilickls - from we Northeast , be in the latitude of sixty six land in 66 degree , 40 minute . than we go north and by ^ 8 ™ 4 ° west , because we will not come too nigh the land , “ s ' and run that course four hour , we discover , and have sight of roast island , join to the main roast island . land of Finmarke . thus continue our course along the coast of Norway and Finmark , the 27 day we take the sun , be as far shoot as Lofoot , and have the latitude in 69 degree . and the same day in the afternoon appear over our head a rainbow , like a semicircle , with both end upward . note that there be between the say roast island and Lofoot , a whirl Malestrand a pool call Malestrand , which from half ebb until half flood , make such a terrible noise , that it shake it the ring in the door of the inhabitant house of the say island ten mile oflf . also if there comes any whale within the current of the samej they make a pitiful cry . Moreover , if great tree be carry into it by force of stream , and after with the ebb be cast out again , the end and bough of they have be so beat , that they be like the stalk of hemp that be bruise . note , that all the coast of Finmarke be high mountain and hill , be cover all the year with snow . and hard aboard the shore of this coast , there be 100 or 150 fathom of water in depth . thus proceed and sail forward , we fall with a island call zenam , be in the latitude of 70 degree . Zenam island . about this island we see many whale , very monstrous , about our ship , some by estimation of 60 foot long : and be the engender time they roar and 415 cry terrible . from thence we fall with a island , Kettelwike call Kettelwicke . island . this coast from roast unto Lofoot lie north and south , and from Lofoot to Zenam Northeast and southwest , and from Zenam to Kettelwike Eastnortheast and Westsouthwest . from the say Kettelwike we sail east and by north io league , and fall with a Inger sound , land call Inger sound , where we fish , be becalm , and take great