Permia into the river of Volga , and be from Cazan 15 . league : and the country lie betwixt the say Cazan and the say river Cama on the left hand of Volga be call Vachen , and the inhabitant be Gentiles , and live in the wilderness without house or habitation : and the country on the other side of Volga over against the say river Cama be call the land of cheremize , half Gentiles , half Tartars , and all the land on the left hand of the say Volga from the say river unto astracan , and so follow the north and Northeast side of the caspian sea , to a land of the Tartar call turkeman , be call the country of Mangat or Nagay , who inhabitant be of the law of Mahomet , and be all destroy in the year 1558 , at my be at astracan , through civil war among they , accompany with famine , pestilence , and such plague , in such sort that in the say year there be consume of the people , in one sort and another , above one hundred thousand : the like plague be never see in those part , so that the say country of Nagay be a country of great pasture , remain now unreplenish to the great contentation of the russes , who have have cruel war a long time together . the nagayans when they flourish , live in this manner : they be divide into diverse company call horde , and every Hord have a ruler , who they obey as their king , and be call a murse . town or house they have none , but live in the open field , every murse or king have his horde or people about he , with their wife , child and cattle , who have consume the pasture in one place , remove unto another : and when they remove they have house like tent set upon wagon or cart , which be draw 45 2 from place to place with camel , and therein their wife , child , and all their riches , which be very little , be carry about , and every man have at the least four or five wife beside concubine . use of money they have none , but doe barter their cattle for apparel and other necessary . they delight in no art nor science , except the war , wherein they be expert , but for the most part they be pasture people , and have great store of cattle , which be all their riches . they eat much flesh , and especial the horse , and they drink mare milk , wherewith they be oftentimes drink : they be seditious and incline to theft and murder . corn they sow not , neither do eat any bread , mock the christian for the same , and disable our strength , say we live by eat the top of a weed , and drink a drink make of the same , allow their great devour of flesh , and drink of milk to be the increase of their strength . but now to proceed forward to my journey . all the country upon our right hand the river Volga , from over against the river Cama unto the town of astracan , be the land of Crimme , who inhabitant be the Crimme also of the law of Mahomet , and live for the most part Tartar . accord to the fashion of the nagaye , have continual war with the emperor of Russia , and be valiant in the field , have countenance , and support from the great Turk . the 16 . day of June we pass by certain fishermen house call Petowse twenty league from the river Cama , where be great fish for sturgeon , so continue our way until the 22 . day , and pass by another great river call Samar , which fall out of the afore - the river of say country , and run through Nagay , and enter samar - into the say river of Volga . the 28 . day we come unto a great hill , where be in time past a castle make by the crimme , but now it be ruin , be the just midway between the say Cazan and Astrachan , which be 200 . league or thereabouts , in the latitude of 51 . 453 astracan . degree 47 . minute . upon all this shore grow abundance of Licoris , who root run within the ground like a vine . thus go forward the sixth day of July we come to a place call Perovolog , so name because in time past the Tartar carry their boat from Volga unto the river Tanais , otherwise call don , by land , when they will rob such as pass down the say Volga to astracan , and also such as pass down by the river Tanais , to asou , Caffa , or any other town situate upon mare Euxinum , into which sea Tanais fall , who have his spring in the country of rezan , out of a plain ground . it be at this strait of perovolog from the one river to the other two league by land , and be a dangerous place for thief and robber , but now it be not so evil ! as it have be , by reason of the emperor of Russia his conquest . depart from perovolog , have the wilderness on both side , we see a great hear of Nagayans , pasture , as be abovesaid , by estimation above a thousand camel draw of cart with house upon they like tent , of a strange fashion , seem to be a far off a town : that Hord be belong to a great murse call Smille , the great prince in all nagay , who have slay and drive away all the rest , not spare his own brethren and child , and have peace with this emperor of Russia he have what he need , and rule alone : so that now the russes live in peace with the nagayans , who be wont to have mortali war together . the 14 . day of July pass by a old castle , which be old astracan , and leave it upon our right hand , we arrive at new astracan , which this emperor of Russia conquer six year past , in the year 1552 . it be from the Moscow unto astracan six hundred league , or thereabouts . the town of astracan be situate in a island upon a hill side , have a castle within the same , wall about with earth and timber , 454 neither fair nor strong : the town be also