voze ponuloi nash . mother tongue . that be to say , oh lord Jesus Christ , son of God have mercy upon we : and this be their prayer , so that the most part of the unlearned know neither pater noster , nor the belief , nor ten commandment , nor scarce understand the one half of their service which be read in their church . of their baptism . when any child be bear , it be not baptize until the next Sunday , and if it chance that it be not baptize then , it must tarry until the second Sunday after the birth , and it be lawful for they to take as many godfather and godmother as they will , the more the better . when they go to the church , the midwife go foremost , carry the child , and the godfather and godmother follow into the midst of the church , where there be a small table ready set , and on it a earthen pot full of warm water , about the which the godfather and godmother , with the child , settle themselves : than the clerk give unto every of they a small wax candle burn , then come the priest , and begin to say certain word , which the godfather and godmother 443 must answer word for word , among which one be , that the child shall forsake the devil , and as that name be pronounce , they must all spit at the word as often as it be repeat . than he bless the water which be in the pot , and do breathe over it : than he take all the candle which the gossip have , and hold they all in one hand let part of they drop into the water , and then give every one his candle again , and when the water be sanctify , he take the child and hold it in a small tub , and one of the godfather take the pot with warm water , and pour it all upon the child head . [ i . 322 . i after this he have many more ceremony , as anoint ear and eye with spittle , and make certain cross with oil upon the back , head , and breast of the child : then take the child in his arm , carry it to the image of saint Nicholas , and our lady , 8cc . and speak unto the image , desire they to take charge of the child , that he may live , and believe as a christian man or woman ought to do , with many other word . then come back from the image , he take a pair of shears and clip the young and tender hair of the child head , in three or four place , and then deliver the child , whereunto every of the godfather and godmother lay a hand : then the priest charge they , that the child be bring up in the faith and fear of God or Christ , and that it be instruct to clinege and bow to the image , and so they make a end : then one of the godfather must hang a cross about the neck of the child , which he must always wear , for that Russe which have not a cross about his neck they esteem as no christian man , and thereupon they say that we be not Christians , because we do not wear cross as they do . of their matrimony . their matrimony be nothing solemnize , but rather in most point abominable , and as near as i can learn , in this wise follow . 444 first , when there be love between the party , the man send unto the woman a small chest or box , wherein be a whip , needle , thread , silk , linen cloth , shears , and such necessary as she shall occupy when she be a wife , and perhaps send therewithal raisin , fig or some such thing , give she to understand , that if she do offend , she must be beat with the whip , and by the needle , thread , cloth , etc that she shall apply her self diligent to sow , and do such thing as she can best do , and by the raisin or fruit he mean if she do well , no good thing shall | be withdraw from she , nor be too dear for she : and she send unto he a shirt , handkerchief , and some such thing of her own make . and now to the effect . when they be agree , and the day of marriage appoint , when they shall go towards the church , the bride will in no wise consent to go out of the house , but resist and strive with they that will have she out , and feign her self to weep , yet in the end , two woman get she out , and lead she towards the church , her face be cover close , because of her dissimulation , that it shall not be open perceive : for she make a great noise , as though she be sob and weep , until she come at the church , and then her face be uncover . the man come after among other of his friend , and they carry with they to the church a great pot with wine or mead : then the priest couple they together much after our order , one promise to love and serve the other during their life together , etc which be do , they begin to drink , and first the woman drink to the man , and when he have drink he let the cup fall to the ground , haste immediately to tread upon it , and so do she , and whether of they tread first upon it must have the victory and be master at all time after , which common happen to the man , for he be ready to set his foot on it , because he let it fall himself , than they go home again , the woman face be uncover . the boy 445 in the street cry out and make a noise in the mean time , with very dishonest word . when they come home , the wife be set at the upper end of the table , and the husband next unto she : they fall then to drink till they be all drink , they perchance have a minstrel or two , and two naked man , which lead she from the church dance naked a long time before all the company . when they be weary of drink , the bride and the bridegroom get they to bed , for it be in the evening always when any of they be marry : and when they be