great store of Alom , be there sell this town batman , for one bist and a half . i have make reckon , all charge bear from hence to Colmogro , and from thence fraught into England at three pound the ton , all charge account , will not stand you in above 18 . and 20 . shilling the hundred . you have year by report two or three hundred ton lade . other commodity there for England i hear not of . as for Gals . gal here to be buy , there be no profit to be do by they . they be bring from Aleppo , and sell here not under 3 . or 4 . shaugh their batman , be grain , six pound English weight . grain that you die scarlet withal be worth the batman ready money , 200 . shaugh , reckon the shaugh for 6 . penny Russe , it may be 6 . rubble their batman . your worship may send some portion of money , if you may buy , as i think you may , for 12 . and 13 . S . a pound the berry , so you shall gain both in the price and weight . if one Englishman moor have be here with i , to who i may have deliver our bill of debt and other thing , whatsoever shall have chance of i , i will then have become servant ormus . to my interpreter , and so have go to ormus and Aleppo . Aleppo , which both join on the border of this country , be the chief mart town , whereunto from all place merchant resort . and thus will i have spend 4 . or 5 . month in travel for further knowledge of thing for to have certify your worship of . i hope in God to use thing in such order , that year you shall have return of your good from hence , as you have forth of Russeland , and in those ship . for if we may , as i doubt not with diligence , provide to make sale in time , and with speed receive silk at the shaugh hand , and other man , that it may be send from hence to be in astracan at the begin of April , from whence it may be send to Colmogro in three month and less , and there to be ready with the rest of your good by the end of June for your ship to receive , that will be time enough . this i doubt not to bring to pass within a year or two , when we be thorough settle in these 62 part , and better know . Moreover you shall stand , that at my last be in the presence of they it be say to i that m . Anthony Jenkin . , ^ proffer to take all the raw silk in those party , de - pefsian ‘ liver cloth and other commodity for the same . i assure you there be in those part to be have three or four thousand horse lade , every horse load be 50 . or 60 . batman , beside silk of grosin . great abundance of silk at time be send out of these part , to wit , 4 . or 5 . hundred horse load at a time by the Turk , who bring great store of silver to be coin , to wit , dollar at ten shaugh the piece . the Hungary Ducket be at 12 . shaugh . and have money in readiness at the time of the year , they buy silk the better cheap , when the country man bring it first to be sell . if your worship may bargain with the venetian to take silk at your hand , or otherwise deal with they , i do not mistrust but to have at the shaugh hand six batman of silk for two piece and a half of karsy . your good advice herein , and in other matter , i trust you will write with convenient speed . master Anthony m . Anthony Jenkinson have deserve great commendation at all your Jenkinson worship hand : for the good report of his well and come e • wise do in those part , be oftentimes a comfort to i to hear thereof , and some good help to i in my proceed . to this day i never hear from any of our merchant . God grant i in health to see your worship , for i have have a careful travel , with many a sorrowful day and unquiet sleep . neither have i the company of one english person , to who sometime i may have ease my pensive heart , as God well know , who have deliver i from my enemy . thus almighty God grant you in health and wealth long to live . your humble servant at commandment during life , Arthur Edward . 63 under - shaugh , m . Anthony / 4 « / 4 Jenkinsons the shaugh letter to the Moscovy company . another letter of Arthur Edwards write in astracan the 16 . of June , 1567 . at his return in his first voyage out of Persia , to the right worshipful company trade into Russia , Persia , and other the north and Northeast part . it may please your worship that herein i have write not only certain article of your privilege , but also the governor name , with the consul , assistant and generality . also such commodity as the prince or emperor of the country have write in one of his letter direct to your worship to be send he , with other note which i think good to be remember , as may appear hereafter follow . your privilege be write , grant , and give in the name of these six person follow : to wit , sir William Garrard , sir William Chester , governor , sir Thomas lodge , master Anthony Jenkinson , master Thomas Nicols and Arthur Edward . 1 first , it be grant that you shall pay no manner of custom or tol , any kind of way , now , nor in time come , unto his heir after he . and that all english merchant , such as you shall appoint now and hereafter , shall and may pass and repass into all place of his dominion and other country adjoin in the trade of merchandise , to buy and sell all manner of commodity , with all manner of person . 2 item , that in all place where any of our merchant shall have their resort , or abide , his chief governor , ruler and justice shall take heed unto we , be our aid and defence against