be past hope of recovery , which have not be lose if the king have live . we trust in the place of he , God will send as friendly a king towards we : who by report ( and as we be credible inform , ) shall be his son name the mursay : who since the death of his father , at our being with he , promise to show we more friendship than ever we find : God grant the same . great trouble have chance in these part . of those which be of the old king counsel or bare any rule about he in these quarter , some be in prison , some be pinch by the purse , and other send for unto the shaugh . Theise trouble have partly be the let that ware be not sell as they may , to more profit . your agent Richard Johnson buy four horse , mind to have 47 a house give our man in Zhamaki by the king . the death of Abdollocan the 2 . of October 1565 . mursay the new king of Media . the death of Alexander kitchen the 23 . of October 1565 . the caspian sea veryshoald in diverse place . send to Casbin Alexander kitchen , who God take to his mercy the 23 . of October last : and before he depart Richard Davis one of your mariner , who soul i trust the lord have receive to his mercy . we be now destitute of other to supply their room . four mariner be few enough to sail your bark , whereof at this present we have but one , who name be William smith , a honest young man , and one that do good service here . for want and lack of mariner that shall know their labour , we all be like to be cast away in a storm . for all the broad side of our bark lie in the water , and we have much ado to recover it , but God of his mercy deliver we . mariner here may do you good service all the winter otherways : and merchant here will be glad to ship their good in we give good fraught . one merchant at this present be content to pay 20 . rubble for twenty camel lade fraught to astracan . such bark as must pass these sea , may not draw above five foot of water , because that in many place be very shallow water . we mind hereafter to make the russian boat more strong , and they shall serve our turn very well . and whereas some in time past take great pain , travel and care , and can not have their desire in the get of the shaugh letter or privilege : now , i trust ( with God help ) they may be obtain : which be have , will be beneficial to the company , and great quietness to those that shall remain here , although heretofore thing have chance ill , as the like in other country have be . but i doubt not , this privilege once get and obtain , we shall live in quietness and rest , and shall short grow into a great trade for silk both raw and wrought , with all kind of spice and drug , and other commodity here , as to m . Anthony Jenkinson be well know , who ( i doubt not ) have long ago thorough advertise the company thereof . the truth of the slaughter of Thomas Alcock your the murther - servant , be not certain know . some think it be ing < f Thomas by the mean of a noble man , with who your say Alcock it servant be earnest in demand of your debt : upon who word he be so offend , that he procure his death . but other do think very , that in ride from the court without company , false knave lay in wait , think he have much about he , and so slay he . i doubt not though this misfortune have chance , that thing shall come well to pass , and that we shall be better belove when we shall be more know . honest merchant be glad of our be here , and seek to grow in acquaintance with we , be glad to further we in that they may , and have speak in our favour to the chief of this country : one be a noble man , with who your agent and i be enter into friendship , who be at this time in great favour with the shaugh . he have here and in other place of these part set a good stay in thing since the king death : he be well know to m . Jenkinson , his name Cozamomet a be Cozamomet . also another duke name ameddin - beck be our great friend : and his sister be the shaughes wife . Theise two have promise your agent by their law , not only to procure to get the shaughes privilege , but also that i shall have the debt pay i of those that go from hence to Casbin , if we will send one with they . in consideration whereof , i be upon short warning ( for want of a better ) appoint by your agent m . Richard Johnson , all excuse lay apart , present to put my self in readiness , and to depart in company with these nobleman : with charge , when God shall send i to Casbin , to use my discretion with their advice , for the recover of your debt and privilege . i shall have with i one interpreter and two buy servant : one of which partly understand this tongue , and may be put in trust whatsoever shall become of i . i have receive 6 . the value of tumen in ready money , 200 . shaugh be a tumen , atumen - in 49 d reckon every shaugh for six penny Russe . i have further receive two timber of sable , one to be sell , the other to be give to Thomas the shaugh : and have order further to give as i shall see good to those that shall further my suit , and as occasion serve . and forasmuch as i be command to go , i shall willing do my best , put my trust in God that he will send i well to speed in this journey . for all kind of ware buy or sell , you shall thorough be advertise by your agent Richard Johnson , who reckon or account at no hand i may see or be privy unto . your karsei be good and well sort , they be and will be sell from 150 . shaugh , to 160 . the piece . two hundred piece be sell under , that need not : one 100 piece at 146 . and 147 . the piece but more will have be give , if circumspection have be use . they be sell to those noble man aforesaid , when as yet it be not know that i shall have go with they . they may stand we much in stead , as they have promise we their good will in that they may do . here be at this time buy for England 11 . pack of raw silk , 25 . and 26 . batman be in every pack : the batman be 7 . pound , which may be 6 . pound and a half of english weight , be buy here from 66 . to 70 . shaughes the batman . it be fine and good , little course at this time be to be have . and where course silk may be have be at grosin , we can not send thither : for that time be neglect at