curse and chide daily three other disciple that Mahomet have call Ovear , Usiran , and Abebeck , the difference and these three do slay the say Murtezalli , for which tfreli ^ m . cause and other difference of holy man and law , they have have and have with the Turk and Tartar mortali war . to entreat of their religion at large , be moor or less Mahomet law and the Alcoran , i shall not need at this present . Theise person be comely and of good complexion , proud and of good courage , esteem themselves to be best of all nation , both for their religion and holiness , which be most erroneous , and also for all other their fashion . they be martial , delight in fair horse and good harness , soon angry , crafty and hard people . thus much i have think good to treat of this nation , and now i return to discourse the proceed of the rest of my voyage . my bark be ready at the caspian sea as aforesaid , have a fair wind , and commit our self the 30 . off unto God the 30 . day of May 1563 . we arrive at 21 / 1563 . astracan , have pass no less danger upon the sea in our return , than we sustain in our go forth , and remain at the say astracan , until the ten day of June , one hundred gunner be there admit unto i for my safeguard up the river Volga , the fifteen of July i arrive at the city of Cazan , where the captain entertain i well , and so dismiss i , i be conduct from place to place unto the city of Moscow , where i arrive the twenty day of August 1563 . inn safety , thanks be to God , with all such good , merchandize , and jewel , as i have provide as well for the emperor stock and account , as also of you , all which good i be command to bring into the emperor treasury before it be open , which i do , and deliver those parcel of ware which be for his majesty account , videlicet , precious stone , and wrought silk of sundry colour and sort , much to his high - 36 ... i564 " ness contentation , and the residue belong to you , viz . Crasko , and raw silk , with other merchandize , ( as by account appear ) be bring unto your house , whereof part there remain , and the rest be lade in your ship late return . short after my come to the Moscow , i come before the emperor majesty , and present unto he the apparel give unto i by the sophy , who highness confer with i touch the prince affair which he have commit to my charge : and my proceed therein it please he so to accept , that they be much to his contentation , say unto i , i have perceive your good service , for the which i do thank you , and will recompense you for the same , wish that i will travel again in such his other affair , wherein he be mind to employ i : to who i answer , that it be to my hearty rejoice that my service be so acceptable unto his highness , acknowledge all that i have do to be but of duty , humble beseech his grace to continue his goodness unto your worship , and even at that instant i humble request his majesty to vouchsafe to grant unto you a new privilege more ample than the first , which imme - newfrivi - diately be grant , and so 1 depart . and afterward ^ es have pen a brief note how i mean to have the iow ^ g i same privilege make , i repair daily to the secretary for the perfect of the same , and obtain it under his majesty broad seal , which at my departure from thence , i deliver unto the custody of Thomas Glover your agent there . the copy whereof , and also of the other privilege grant and give by the king of hircan , i have already deliver unto you . sojourn all that winter at Moscow , and in the mean time have bargain with the emperor majesty , i send away your servant Edward Clarke hither overland with advice , and also make preparation for send again into Persia in meet time of the year . And commit the charge thereof unto your servant Thomas Alcocke , George wren , and Richard cheinie , the 28 . of June last , i depart in post from the say Moscow , and come to Colmogro and so down to the sea side , i find your ship lade and ready to depart , where i embark my self in your good ship call the swallow , the 9 of July , one thousand five hundred sixty four , and have pass the sea with great and extreme danger of loss 28 . Septemb . of ship , good and life , the 28 . day of September G6 ! - last ( God be praise ) we arrive here at London in safety . thus know that the courageous and valiant soldier , which adventure both fame , member and life , to serve faithful his sovereign , esteem not the peril and danger pass ( the victory once obtain ) neither for his guerdon desire any thing more , than that his service be well take of he for who he enterprise it : so i perceive your favourable benevolence to i extend in accept my travel in good part to your contentation , do think my self therewith in great part recompense : beseech almighty God so to prosper your adventure , from time to time hereafter to be make for reap the fruit of my travel ( at your great charge , and to my no small danger ) that you may plentiful gather in and enjoy the same , to the illustrate of the queen most excellent majesty , the honour and commodity of this her highness realm , and to the ample benefit and abundant enrich of you and your succession , and posterity for ever .