all evil person , punish those that shall do we any wrong . 3 item , that for all such debt as shall be owe by any manner of person , justice shall be do on the party , and we pay at the day . 4 item , that no manner of person of whatsoever estate 64 or degree they be of , shall be so hardy as to take any kind of ware , or any gift , without any leave and good will . 5 item , if by chance medley any of our merchant or servant , as God forbid , shall kill any of his subject , that no part of your good shall be touch or meddle withal , neither any party but the offendor , and true justice to be minister , and be any of we , not to suffer without the prince knowledge and advise . 6 item , that all such debt as be now owe , or hereafter shall be , be to be pay unto any of we , in the absence of the other , be the party dead or alive . 7 item , that no person return any kind of ware back again , be once buy or sell . 8 item , that when God shall send your good to shore , present his people shall help we on land with they . these article before write , i trust in God will content your mind , until your far letter be hitherto write unto the prince , who i be assure will grant your far reasonable request , which his majesty have promise . for i move the question , declare unto he that i think your worship will write your letter of request , to crave his far good will , as shall be think meet for your better assurance in the trade of merchandise : you will hardly believe what long and gracious talk he have with i , which i assure you continue two hour , which be strange unto the people and other merchant stranger . for betwixt every question that his majesty move , when i have answer he , he will talk with his noble and other his servant , have some knowledge of our western part and commodity , and then again will demand other question . he cause his secretary to write the article before name , in all of his four letter give i ( whereof two as i require , be in the turkish tongue to be send you . ) on the back side of the one , hi 65 e * by the word Karanff . es , i think they meanekarsy . he have write what ware his majesty will have you to send he . he hold i one hour within night before i depart from he . these be the name of the ware or commodity , which on the back side of one of his letter the shaugh have write to you to be send he . first , some cloth of gold , with cloth of tissue , and cloth of Botky , as velvet wrought with gold . item , good velvet , to wit , crimosin , purple , red , green and black . Theise colour his majesty requires , for they be most wear . and though there be some of these ware make in his city of Cassan , yet nothing like in goodness , to those that you may procure for he . small profit i think will be in these ware : yet for diverse consideration , as also to satisfy the prince mind , i wish you to send some , and those that be especial good . item , good damask and satin of all sort , with a hundred piece of good chamlet , which be worth here 80 . shaugh the piece , at six penny the shaugh , and those silk to be of those colour above write , to wit , crimosin , purple , red , green , black , with some light watchet colour . item , three or four complete harness that will abide the shot of a handgun with 10 . or 12 . target of steel , be good . item , ten or twelve good shirt of mail be very good or else none , that may abide the shot of a arrow , and two buff jerkin . item , ten or twelve piece of western karsy , be thick well and close shut in the weave , and die into scarlet and fine red . i think there will be no such cloth for noblemen cap . the prince name they * karangy , say , that maiden do make they , and be desirous of they . item , six piece of fine holland cloth for the prince , with some other for nobleman , of a low price . item , twenty handgun be good , some of they with fire lock , and also six good dag , with lock to travel withal . item ioo . brush for garment ( none make of swine hair , ) for gift , and otherwise to be sell . item , six stone bow that shoot lead pellet . item , a mill to grind corn in the field as they go , fine devise : for Cozomomet will i to write for one to be send , to give the prince . item , the prince require of all sort and colour of London clothes . i wish you to send no less than 40 . or 50 . for i know they will be sell to profit , especial such cloth as may be affbord for 20 . shaugh the arshine , which be long by two of my inch then Russia arshine be . let there be fine scarlet , violet in grain , fine red , black , brown blow , four or five of every sort , for the prince and other lord : the rest of other colour lively to the sight , as London russet , tawny , lion colour , good lively green , with other , as you shall think good : for the prince desire to see of all sort , which will be a occasion that the venetian and Turk shall be in less estimation than they be : for they themselves do fear , and secret say the same . and true the prince subject intend to enter into trade with we for spice and other commodity that they be wont to sell unto the venetian and Turk . thus i commit you all to God , who send you health with increase of worship . write in astracan the 16 . of June , 1567 . by your servant during life to command , Arthur Edwards . 67