a kinsman to one of the sophy , who mount the say hill , and combat with the say giant , do bind not only he in chain , but also his woman call lami - sache with his son name after : for which victory they of that country have this holy man in great reputation , and the hill at this day ( as it be bruit ) savour so ill , that no person may come nigh unto it : but whether it be true or not , i refer it to further knowledge . now to return to the discourse of the proceed in my voyage towards the great sophy . the 6 of October in the year aforesaid , i with my company depart from Shamachi aforesaid , and have journey threescore mile , come to a town call yavate , wherein the town of the king have a fair house , with orchard and garden yavate . well replenish with fruit of all sort . by this town pass a great river call Cor , which spring in the mountain of the Georgians , and pass through the country of Hyrcania aforesaid , fall into the case - pian or hircan sea , at a place between two ancient town call Shabran and Bachu , situate within the realm of hircane , and from thence issue further , pass through a fruitful country , inhabit with pasture people , which dwell in the summer season upon mountain , and in winter they remove into the valley without resort to town or any other habitation : and when they remove , they do journey in caravans or troop of people and cattle , carry all their wife , child and baggage upon bullock . now pass this wild people ten day journey , come into no town or house , the sixteenth day of October we arrive the city of at a city call Ardouill , where we be lodge in a Ardouil . hospitali build with fair stone , and erect by this sophy father name Ishmael , only for the succour and lodging of stranger and other traveller , wherein all man have victual and feed for man and horse , for three day and no long . this foresay late prince Ishmael lie bury in a fair Meskit , with a sumptuous sepulchre in the same , which he cause to be make in his life time . this town Ardouill be in the latitude of eight and thirty degree , a ancient city in the province of Aderravgan , wherein the prince of Persia be common bury : and there Alexander the great do keep his court when he invade the persian . the city four day journey to the westward be the city tebris ^ aur ' ° 1 ' * n °^ e t ’ me ca ^ e < ^ Tauris , the great ci tie in Persia , auns ' but not of such trade of merchandise as it have be , or as other be at this time , by mean of the great invasion of the Turk , who have conquer from the sophy almost to the say city of Tauris , which the say Turk once sack , and thereby cause the sophy to forsake the same , and to keep his court ten day journey from thence , at the say city of Casbin . the 21 day we depart from Ordowil aforesaid , travel for the most part over mountain all in the night season , and rest in the day , be destitute of wood , and therefore be force to use for fuel the dung of horse and camel , which we buy dear of the pasture people . thus pass ten day journey the m . Jenkinsons year aforesaid , the second day of November we arrive arrival at they at the foresay city of Casbin , where the say sophy number , keep his court , and be appoint to a lodging not 1562 . far from the king palace , and within two day after the sophy command a prince call Shalli Murzey , son to obdolowcan king of Shirvan aforesaid , to send for i to his house , who ask i in the name of the say sophy how i do , and whether i be in health , and after do welcome i , and invite i to dinner , whereat i have great entertainment , and so from thence i return to my lodging . the next day after i send my interpreter unto the sophy secretary , declare that i have letter direct from our most gracious sovereign lady the queen most excellent majesty of the realm of England , unto the say sophy , and that the cause of my come be express in the same letter , desire that at convenient time i may come into his majesty presence , who advertise the sophy thereof , short after answer i that there be great affair in hand : which be finish , i shall come before his presence , will i in the mean time to make ready my present if i have any to deliver . at this time , the great Turk ambassador arrive the Turk four day before my come , who be send thither ardour to conclude a perpetuali peace betwixt the same great t0 f e you Turk and the sophy , and bring with he a present in gold , and fair horse with rich furniture , and other gift , esteem to be worth forty thousand pound . and thereupon a peace be conclude with joyful feast , triumph and solemnity , corroborate with strong oath , by their law of Alcoran , for either to observe the same , and to live always after as swear brethren , aid the one the other against all prince that shall war against they , or either of they . and upon this conclusion the sophy cause the great Turk son name baiset sultan , a valiant prince ( who be flee from his father unto the sophy , have remain in his court the space of four year ) to be put to death . in which time the say Turk son have cause mortal ! war betwixt the say prince , and much prevail therein : the Turk demand therefore his son to be send unto he , and