the third voyage into Persia , begin in the year 1565 - l5f > 5 - by Richard Johnson , Alexander kitchen , and Arthur Edward . a letter of Arthur Edward to m . Thomas Nicols , secretary to the worshipful company trade into Russia and other the north part , concern the preparation of their voyage into Persia . jeraslave a town upon the riverofVolga . Richard Johnson chief of the three voyage into Persia . after Nicols , my bind duty remembered , with desire of God for the preservation of you and you : you shall understand that the second of march i be send by m . Thomas Glover ( your agent ) unto jeraslave , appoint to receive such good as shall come from Vologhda , as also such kind of ware as shall be buy and send from Moscow by your agent , and m . Edward Clarke , think meet for your voyage of Persia . and further , i be to provide for biscuit , beer , and beef , and other victual , and thing otherways needful accord to advise . thus i remain here until the come of your agent , which be the 12 . of may , who tarry here three day , to see we set forward on our voyage , and then he depart towards Colmogro , have appoint ( as chief for your voyage of Persia ) Richard Johnson . for my part i be willing , as also have be and shall | be content to submit my self under he , who the agent shall appoint , although he be 44 such a one as you shall think in some respect unmeet . thirty two pack of carsei be all of that kind of cloth that we shall have with we . the other 18 . pack that shall have go , be sell in Moscow . what other good be ship for our voyage , you shall understand by your agent letter . whereas Edward Clarke ( be a honest man ) be appoint agent for Persia , as one for those part more fit than any i do know here , God have take he unto his mercy , who depart this present life the 16 . of march last pass . i wish of God for my part he have live : for my desire be in his company to have travel into Persia . your bark or craer make here for the river of Volga and the caspian sea be very little , of the burden of 30 . ton at the most . it be handsome make after the english fashion : but i think it too little for your good and provision of victual . if the worshipful company will send hither a shipwright , be skilful to make one of the burden of 60 . ton or more , draw but six foot water at the most when it be lade , i think it shall be profitable . for if your own good will not lade the same , here be merchant that will be glad and fain to give great fraught to lade their good with we , whereby your charge will be much lessen : and so it may happen , the wage of your man hire here may be save , and your servant and good in far great assurance : for their boat here be dangerous to sail with and to pass the caspian sea . there be carpenter here that will do well enough have one to instruct they . your ware buy here , and order take for those that go for your voyage of Persia be yet unknown unto i : wherefore i can ( as i will at this present ) write to you thereof . yet , ( as you do know ) it be the governor mind i shall be acquaint with great affair than these . howbeit i doubt not but i shall be inform of they a bark of thy . ton make at jeraslave to pass the caspian sea . that be appoint , and all thing shall be buy when they shall see time and have more laisure . thus in haste ( as appear ) i commit you and you into the hand of almighty God ; who preserve you in perfect health with increase of worship . from jeraslave the 15 . of May 1565 . by you to command here or elsewhere during life . Arthur Edward . another letter of the say m . Arthur Edward , 1566 . write they 26 . of April 1566 . inn Shamaki in media , to the right worshipful sir Thomas lodge knight and Aiderman : and in his absence to m . Thomas Nicols , secretary to the right worshipful company trade into Russia , Persia , and other the north and east part , touch the success of Richard Johnson in the three voyage into Persia . worshipful sir , my bind duty remember , with hearty prayer unto God for the preservation of you and you in perfect health with increase of worship . it may please you that my last letter i send they depart you be from astracan the 26 of July 1565 . from from astracan whence Richard Johnson , my self , and Alexander Khchin , depart as the 30 of the same . and by mean of contrary wind , it be the 23 of August before we come to our desire port name Nazavoe . there , after we have get your good on land , with much labour and strength of man , as also windless devise and make , we hale your bark over a bar of beach or peeble stone into a small river , send your ship apparel with other thing to a house hire in a village thereby . and as soon as we may get camel , September . be the five of September we depart thence , and come to this town of Shamaki the 11 . of the same : and the present to they . day follow , we present unto Abdollocan the king k ^ qidolow of this country , one timber of sable , one ton or nest ‘ of silver cup parsill gilt , three morse tooth , 4 . arshine of scarlet , 3 . piece of karsei , with 40 . red fox . he receive our present with give we thank for our good will , demand if m . Jenkinson be in good health , and whether he will return into these part again . he will we also himself to sit down before he the distance of a quoit cast from his tent , where he sit with diverse of his counsel and nobility , send we from his table such meat as be before he : and after certain talk have with we , he say , if he may perceive or know any manner of person to do we any wrong , he will punish they in example of other , whereby we shall live in quietness , and have no cause to complain , give we a little house for the time , until a better may be provide in such place as we shall think most meet , never will we to rise or depart , until such time as we of our self think it convenient . at the take of our leave , he will we to put our whole mind and request in writing , that he may further understand our desire . but while we be about to do so , God take this good king our friend out of this present life the 2 . of October past . the want of he have be the cause that as yet we can receive certain debt . howbeit , we doubt not but we shall recover all such sum of money as be owe we for this voyage . as for Thomas alcocks debt they