i be content , and within three day after send for i , he declare that the emperor pleasure be , that i shall in 17 b request to pass into Persia through Moscovie . Osep Napea ambassador from the emperor of Russia to Q . mary . not only pass through his dominion into Persia , but also have his grace letter of commendation to foreign prince , with certain his affair commit to my charge , too long here to rehearse : whereupon i appoint my self for the voyage , and the 15 day of march , the year aforesaid , i dine again in his majesty presence in a ambassa - company of a ambassador of Persia and other , and dor of Persia , receive a cup of drink at his majesty hand , i take my leave of his highness , who do not only give i letter , as aforesaid , but also commit matter of importance and charge unto i , to be do when i shall arrive in those country whither i intend to go , and have all thing in readiness for the same voyage , i depart from the city of Moscow the 27 day of April 1562 , down by the great river of Volga , in company of the say ambassador of Persia , with who i have great friendship and conference all the way down the same astracan . river unto astracan , where we arrive all in health the 10 day of June . and as touch the situation of the city , town , castle and country , aswell of Mahometans as also of gentile adjoin to the same , whereby i pass from Moscow unto astracan , i omit in this breviate to rehearse , for that i heretofore have declare the same most ample m . Jenkinsons unto you in my voyage to Boghar . thus be arrive voyage to bog - at astracan , as be aforesaid , i repair unto the captain ’ there , unto who i be commend from the emperor majesty , with great charge that he not only shall aid and succour i with all thing needful during my abode there , but also to safeconduct i with 50 gunner well appoint in two stroog or brigantine into the caspian sea , until i have pass certain dangerous place which pirate and rover do accustom to haunt , and have prepare my bark for the sea , the ambassador of Persia be before depart in a bark of his own the 15 day of July , the year aforesaid , i and my company take hepass then our voyage from the say astracan , and the next day Caspian sea . at a west sun , pass the mouth of the say river 18 be twenty mile distant , lie next southeast . the 18 at a southwest sun , we pass by three island be distant nine mile from the say mouth of Volga , and southsouthwest from thence , sail south southwest the next day , at a west 8c by north sun we fall with the land call Challica Ostriva , be four round island together , distant from the say three island forty mile . from thence sail the say course the next day , we have sight of a land call take , in the country of the country Tumen , where pirate and rover do use : for fear of who we hale off into the sea due east forty mile , and fall upon shallows out of the sight of land , and there be like to have perish , escape most hardly : than the 22 day we have sight of a goodly island call the island of Chatalet , distant from the say Challica Ostriva a hundred chatakt . mile , the wind be contrary , and a stiff gale , we be not able to seize it : but be force to come to a anchor to the leeward of the same six mile off in three or four fathom water , be distant from the main land to the westward of we , which be call skafcayl or Connyk a country of Mahometans , about mile , and so ride at two anchor a head , have no other provision , we lose one of they , the storm and sea be grow very sore , and thereby our bark be so full of leak , that with continual pump we have much ado to keep she above water , although we throw much of our good overboard , with loss of our boat , and our self thereby in great danger like to have perish either in the sea or else upon the lee shore , where we shall have fall into the hand of those wicked infidel , who attend our shipwreck : and sure it be very unlike that we shall have escape both the extremity , but only by the power and mercy of God , for the storm continue seven day , to wit , until the thirty day of the same month : and then the wind come up at the west with fair weather , our anchor weigh , and our sail display , lie south , the next day hale to the shore with a west sun , we be nigh a land a mighty wall . or tiphlis . forty one degree . Shabran . Alcan Murcy the gpvemour . call by the inhabitant Shyrvansha , and there we come again to a anchor , have the wind contrary , be distant from the say Chatalet 150 mile , and there we continue until the three day of August , then have a fair wind , wind southsoutheast , and sail threescore mile , the next day at a southeast sun we arrive at a city call derbent in the king of hircans dominion , where come to land , and salute the captain there with a present , he make to i and my company a dinner , and there take fresh water i depart . this city of Derbent be a ancient town have a old castle therein , be situate upon a hill call Castow , build all of free stone much after our building , the wall very high and thick , and be first erect by king Alexander the great , when he war against the persian and