the first . when we shall have lidger here to remain in summer , we may buy it at the first hand of the country people that bring it to sell hither , and to other place . i will to God the company can find the mean to have a vent to make sale for the one half that we may buy here . the company may have for 30 . or 40 . thousand pound yearly . and as appear by your agent word be at Varas , he and other see there so great abundance , that by report of diverse , 5 ° Johnson , kitchen and Edward a . d . 1566 . you may bestow ( if it be not for the Turk ) for a two hundred thousand pound : beside silk of all colour die in grain , bind up in pound weight , i think 15 . of our ounce to their pound weight , and here sell for 23 . shaugh , at 6 . d . then shaugh , may be two . s . 6 . penny . from astracan in 7 . or 8 . day , we may sail with Gilan i - daye our bark to a place name Gilan : the which place in time to come , ( i think ) shall serve our purpose best ’ to go unto . atom be there good cheap , be bring atom . from thence hither to Shamaki , and sell here for two bist their batman , which may be 5 . penny in our money : and so i have buy to be send home 223 . batman for example . and at Gilan there be raw silk enough for the company stock . i believe , if any great store of ware be send from you , that must be the place : and from thence a man may travel in 4 . Gilan day day to Casbin , and there make quick and better sale , at which place your commodity be to be sell . for there be the chief and best merchant , and diverse other city round about , to wit , teveris , Ardouil , and Caishan , be the heart of the country , where there be more civility and merchant be better use . concern this point i have inquire of diverse merchant both russes and other that have be in those part , and find they all agree in one tale , and perceive the same to be true , and that all kind of ware come from thence into these part . and from Casbin to ormus , be about Gasbin 30 . day travel with camel . i have write the price of ware in my letter to the governor both for ajM camel . spice and some drug which i do know . also you shall understand here be plenty of yew for bowstave . i cause three horse load to be buy we for to know the truth : but they be cut out of season this month of April , the sap be in they . three month i never leave speak to the country man to bring some . your agent will send some home for example . this day be the 26 . of Aprili i depart towards Casbin : God give i a good hour and well to speed , with a merry heart in return again , as my hope be i shall . i have write my mind to m . Glover your agent , what russian ware i think best to be buy for this country , and to send some one hither that have the ruff tongue , for we have need . and the company shall do well hereafter in take of servant to be send hither , to see that they be such as have discretion , and be something break in the world , and see in the trade of merchandise , and one ( if they can get some such ) as can speak the Portugal tongue , may do they as good service , as those that shall be here two year before he : for than we may buy a slave that can speak this language and the portingal tongue the secret do - also , which shall then interpret unto we in all your secret do , not make the russes privy : for they pany be sorry that we ^ oe trade into these part , for we be better belove than they be : because they be give to be drunkard , they be much hate of these people . it be to be wish that none shall serve your worship in these part that be give to that kind of vice : and that your chief agent and factor shall be able to rule and govern himself , that no dishonesty shall be impute to he and we . by his evil usage he pay here 24 rubble , be in this country 4 . tumen for a boy , that he be charge to have convey away from a tesicke one of this country man , who will he to swear that he know not where the boy be become , and he shall not pay it . if he be honest he may do your worship good service because of his russian tongue . your London red be not to be send hither , for they will not give above 18 . shaughes their arshine . orient red of here be red of more orient colour , be Venice die . temce die . the people be give much to wear cloth : the common people special wear karsei , and the merchant of more wealth wear broad cloth . you shall do well to send five or six broad clothes , some black , puke , or other 52 sad colour , that may be afford at 20 . shaughes the arshine , and not above . it be here report that king Philip have give the Turk a great overthrow at Malta , and take 70 . or 80 . of his chiere captain . thus wish i have more time to write , i pray you to bear with this my scribble letter , and after you have read it , that m . Nicols may have a sight thereof . by your servant to command , Arthur Edward . commodity to be carry out of England into Persia , with their prize there . ' 1 1 ^ " arsei be sell there for 180 . shaughes : so AX . that a karsey be sell there in Persia for four pound ten shilling : for every shaugh be six shaugh be penny english , and every bist be two penny halfpenny English , and in Russe money three penny . - 2 tin be sell in Persia for 14 . and 18 . shaughes the batman . the batman contain as i have mention before . 3 Brasil be at 10 . and 12 . shaughes the batman . 4 red cloth fine , at 25 . and 30 . shaughes the yard . 5 copper at 20 . and 25 . shaughes the batman . commodity to be bring out of Persia for t1 - 3 5 8 - ] England . i ta awe silk at 60 . shaugh you batman . 2 axe pepper at 32 . shaugh you batman . 3 ginger at 18 . and 20 . shaugh you batman . 4 nutmeg at 30 . shaugh the batman . 5 brimstone at 4 shaugh the great batman . the 5 great batman be 12 . livre . English . 6 Allom at 2 . bist and a half the batman and less . 7 rice at half a bist the batman . 8 Gals at half a bist the batman . 9 clove at 40 . shaugh the batman . 0 10 yew for bow staff , at