his arrival at Casbin the 25 . of May . conference and demand of they shaugh . a letter of m . Arthur Edward , write the 8 . of August 1566 . from the town of Shamaki in Media , to the right worshipful the governors , consul , assistant , and generality of the company of Russia , etc show his access unto the emperor of Persia , his conference with he , his obtain of a privilege , with diverse other good observation . right worshipful sir , my bind duty remember , with most humble commendation and like request to God for the preservation of your good health , with the rest of the company , etc it may please you to understand , that the last letter which i send you from hence be of the 26 . of April of this present year by Richard Johnson at my departure towards Casbin : to which ci tie i come the 25 . of May follow , not slack any day , hour , nor moment , to procure and make friend for the speedy bring i before the presence of they shaugh , be the 29 . day of the same month bring before he , with who majesty i be in talk ( as i think ) two hour . he will i twice to come near he , demand what be my request : and have hear they , he promise i his gracious letter . afterwards he call i twice again to come near he , and talk with i of our queen majesty and country , and what commodity we have , and what other commodity we desire : and then of other country adjoin to we and their commodity , as also of king Philip , what overthrow he give the turk at the siege of Malta . and how long we have trade into Russeland and Moscovia , and in what space we may sail out of England into Russeland , and how many week travel it be from colmogro to astracan : and then come to discourse of Russeland , and what town the emperor have win , declare unto i himself most of our commodity . in the end he will that your worship 54 1566 . shall send he of all sort of clothes , but of one all sort of especial which maiden do make ( as he say : ) he do to be send , name it Karengi , i think it be western dozen die specta ^ be into scarlet . lime will not permit i to write at die into large the conference which i have with his majesty . it scarlet . be strange to his people ( know our religion ) to see i so long in talk with he , will his secretary before i to write what he be desirous of : to wit , of London clothes , three or four of all sort for example , be well shear and dress . violet in grain and fine red be most wear , but other good colour will away , when they shall see they . i wear a garment of London russet , be much esteem . you shall do well to send such sort as be lively to the sight , and some black for woman garment , with some orange colour and tawnei . here be much broad cloth wear . they talk much of London London c ^ s clothes , and they that know the wear , be desirous of they before the cloth of the woman make , for they much Venice find it nothing durable . for when it come to wear cloth wear in on the thread , it rent like paper . here be much Persia . Venice cloth wear , be cromplist a yard and a half broad , and sell here from 24 . to 30 . shaughes their arshine , be long by two inch then the ruff arshine be . i wish also that you send some good chamlet and velvet die in grain , with purple colour and fine red : because these be most wear . also some black with other colour : some cloth of gold , tissue and bocky , some velvet wrought with gold , with satin and damask , most purple , and red of all sort . you may not forget to send some western karsei , to wit , dozen , which be thick well , and close shut in the weave , be die into fine red , and some scarlet : for i think there be no such cloth for their cap . your worship shall understand , that after my first departure from the presence of the prince , i neglect no time in daily attendance on they , who have my privilege in write , that i may have it in readiness at such time as i shall again be call before the the second admission to the shaugh presence , the 29 . of June 1566 . at which Arne he receive the privilege . the shaugh promise to increase the privilege . presence of they shaugh , which be the 29 . of June last . i be in apparel that he give unto i , with other garment to my interpreter , and one of your servant , and then i receive your letter or privilege , accord to my desire , seal and firm with the shaugh own hand . praise be God who have wrought with i , and for i , in all my do . the 29 . of June be one of their chief festi vail day , so that all his nobility be there present , with two ambassador in company with his majesty , who say unto i that if my letter be not to my mind , in time to come they shall be mend . whereupon i make my reverence , and give his highness most humble and hearty thank , say , that with as much speed as may be , our queen majesty shall understand of his goodness towards her merchant , which i think will write their letter of request unto his highness , in such form and order as by they shall be think meet and requisite for their good assurance in the trade of merchandize : who reply with these word : when we shall see their reasonable request , we will show they our far good will , and so i depart . since the receive of the shaugh letter , i have eat in company of good duke and other , who before will not come near i . and every day some will come to my shop , and eat and drink with i out of my own dish . likewise in ride from Casbin hither , on the