, affirm he to be the son of God , and the great prophet . do thou believe so , say the sophy unto i ? yea that i do , say i : oh thou unbeliever , say he , we have no need to have friendship with the unbeliever , and so will i to depart . i be glad thereof do reverence and go my way , be accompany with many of his gentleman and other , and after i follow a man with a basanet of 1562 . sand , sift all the way that i have go within the say palace , even from the say sophy sight unto the court gate ..... thus i repair again unto my lodging , and the say thecurtesieof night Shally Murzey son to the king of hircan afore - mur ~ say , who favour i very much for that i be come - z ^ ' mend unto he from his father , will i not to doubt of any thing , put i in hope that i shall have good success with the sophy , and good entertainment . thus i continue for a time , daily resort unto i diverse gentleman send by the sophy to confer with i , especial touch the affair of the emperor of Russia , and to know by what way i intend to return into my country , either by the way that i come , or by the way of ormus , and so with the Portugal ship . unto who i answer , that i dare not return by the way of ormus , the Portugal and we not be friend , full perceive their meaning : for i be advertise that the say sophy war inmeant to have war with the Portugal , and will have tend against charge i that i have be come for a spy to pass * e 01ttn ^ a • through his dominion unto the say Portugal , think they and we to be all one people , and call all by the name of Franks , but by the providence of God this be prevent . after this the say sophy confer with his nobility and counsel concern i , who persuade that he shall not entertain i well , neither dismiss i with letter or gift , consider that i be a Frank , and of that nation that be enemy to the great Turk his brother , persuading that if he do otherwise , and that the news thereof shall come to the knowledge of the Turk , it shall be a mean to break their new league and friendship late conclude : dissuade further because he have no need , neither that it be requisite for he to have friendship with unbeliever , who country lay far from he , and that it be best for he to send i with my letter unto the say great Turk for a present , which he be the king of hircans second letter in m . Jenkinsons behalf . conference with indian merchant . m . Jenkinsons return . full determine to have do at some meet time , mean to send his ambassador unto the say great Turk very short after . but the king of Hircanes son aforesaid , understand this deliberation , send a man in post unto his father , for to declare and impart the purpose unto he , who as a gracious prince , consider that i have pass through his dominion , and that i have journey for a good intent , do write to the sophy all that which he understand of his say determination , and that it shall not stand with his majesty honour to do i any harm or displeasure , but rather to give i good entertainment , see i be come into his land of my free will , and not by constraint , and that if he use i evil , there will few stranger resort into his country , which will be great unto his hindrance , with many other persuasion : which after that the say sophy have well and thorough ponder and digest ( much esteem the same king of hircane , be one of the valiant prince under he and his nigh kinsman ) change his determine purpose , and the twenty of march 1562 . he send to i a rich garment of cloth of gold , and so dismiss i without any harm . during the time that i sojourn at the say city of Casbin , diverse merchant out of India come thither unto i , with who i confer for a trade of spice : whereunto they answer that they will bring of all sort so much as we will have , if they be sure of vent , whereof i do promise to assure they , so that i doubt not but that great abundance thereof may from time to time be there provide and have . the same twenty day of march i return from the say city of Casbin where i remain all the winter , have send away all my camel before , and the thirty day i come to the say city of Ardouil , and the fifteen of April unto Zavat aforesaid , where king Obdolowcan be at that present , who immediate send for i , and demand of i many question , declare that if it have 32 not be for he , i have be utter cast away , and send to the great Turk for a present by the sophy , through the evil persuasion of his wicked counsel ! , that the ziety and holy man be the chief and principal procurer and mover thereof : but the sophy himself mean i much good at the first , and think to have give i good entertainment , and so have do , have not the peace and league fortune to have be conclude between they and the great Turk . nevertheless , say he , the sophy have write unto i to entertain you well , and you be welcome into my country , and so he entreat i very gentle , in who court i remain seven day , and obtain of he letter of safe conduct privilege and privilege in your name to be free from pay custom , which i deliver unto your servant Thomas be ’ Alcocke