after you come to the presence of the sophy , likewise to make they some present , as you see cause , accord to their estate and dignity , and withal to procure letter of privilege or safeconduct of the say sophy or other prince in as large and ample manner as you can , for the sure establish of further trade in merchandise by we hereafter to be make , frequent and continue in those part , not only that we may free sell in all place within his dominion such ware as we carry thither , but also buy and bring away any manner of ware or merchandise whatsoever it be , that be for our purpose and commodity within his dominion , with free passage also for we at all time , to pass as often as we will with our good and merchandise into any part of India or other country thereunto adjoin , and in like manner to return through his dominion into Russia or elsewhere . and for the sale of our kersy or other ware that you shall have with you , as our trust be that you will do for our most profit and commodity : even so we refer all unto your good discretion , aswell in the sale of our say good , as to make our return in such thing as you shall find there , and think best for our profit . but if passage can be have into Persia by astracan , or otherwise , the next summer , which shall | be in the year 1562 , than our mind be , that you procure to sell our kersy , and other such ware as be appoint for Persia , in the Moscow , or other the emperor dominion , if you may sell they for any reasonable price , and then to employ your self with such other of your servant , as you shall think the passage of meet for the search of the passage by Nova Zembla , or NovaZembla . e ] s you to return for England as you think good . provide always , that if you do perceive or understand , that passage be like to be have into Persia the summer follow , which shall | be in the year 1563 , and that you can not sell our kersy in the emperor dominion , as aforesaid , at a reasonable price : than we will rather they may be keep till the say summer in the year 1563 » and than you to proceed forward upon your journey towards Persia as aforesaid . if passage into Persia can be obtain the next year , neither good hope of passage in the year 1563 , neither yet in the mean time good sale of our kersy in the emperor dominion , than we think good for you to see if you can practise to carry your say ware by safe conduct through Polonia , or any other way unto Constantinople , or else where you think better sale may be have , then in Russia . thus have we give you to understand our meaning in this intend adventure : but forasmuch as we do consider and know , that if we shall prescribe unto you any certain way , or direct order what you shall do , we may so work clean contrary to our purpose and intent : therefore know your approve wisdom with your experience , and also your careful and diligent mind in the achieve and bring to good success ( by the help of almighty God ) all thing that you take in hand , we do commit our whole affair concern the say adventure whole unto your good discretion , pray God so to prosper you , as may be first for his glory , second for the honour and commodity of this realm , and next for our profit , with the increase of your good name for ever . and yet further desire , and also most earnest require you , as you tender the state of our company , that you will have a speciali regard unto the order of our house and our servant , aswell at colmogro and Vologda , as at Moscow , and to see and consider if any misorder be among our servant or apprentice , whereby you think we may hereafter be put to hindrance or loss of any part of our good or privilege there , that you do not only see the same reform , but also to certify we thereof by your letter at large , as our trust be in you . and for the better knowledge to be have in the price and goodness of such thing as we do partly suppose you shall find in the part of Russia , we do herewith deliver you a quantity of certain drug , whereby you may perceive how to know the best , and also there be note the price of such ware and drug as be here most vendible : also we deliver you herewith one pound and one ounce weight in 13 weight and drug deliver to m . Jenkinson . the main sea within thirty day eastward of Colmogro . brass , to the end , that you may thereby , and with the bill of price of ware , know what thing be worth here . as for the knowledge of silk , we need not to give you any instruction thereof , other then you know . and if you understand that any commodity in Russia be profitable for we to have with you into Persia or other place , our mind be that our agent shall either provide it for you , or deliver you money to make provision your self . and because the russes say that in travel eastwardes from Colmogro thirty or forty day journey , there be the main sea to be find , we think that Richard Johnson may employ his time that way by land , and to be at Moscow time enough to go with you into Persia : for if it be true that he may travel to the sea that way , and that he may know how many mile it be towards the east from Colmogro , it will be a great help for we to find out the straight and passage that way , if any be there to be have . William Gerard . ) f William merike . t j r governor . < e , Thomas lodge , j ( blaze sander .