he depart and come to this town the 29 . of you same . and fr ° m as ^ n the four of August i find mean to arrest the false knave in this country , to for 22 . tumen , and too . shaugh , tumen . ) i have cause he to put forthcoming at all time , what with he , God know , the debt wit , the customer ( 200 . shaugh be a in surety for his end i shall have will be recover , but not yet , for he must pay the shaugh 1000 rubble . Theise part as yet be in no stay for lack of a governor or head to rule , which i think shall be the mursey . within 5 . or 6 . day we shall know , for it be time , because man be in fear to travel for be rob . if there be a prince place , i shall soon get in your debt , for they dare not disobey the shaugh letter or privilege : wherein he have not only write that our debt shall be pay , but also that we shall be take heed to , so as we need not to doubt ( God will ) in time to come , to be here as well use as we be in Russeland . the bill of debt that Richard Richard Johnsons Johnson leave with i , have neither the party name and eat ne ^ 1 ' nor sum of money in two of they , and in other bill sence ‘ Cozomomet be Arthur Edward friend to the shaugh . but his own name . if i have not use discretion in cause to be write in our privilege , that such debt as be owe , shall be pay any or we in the absence of the other , some man will not have pay one penny , but only to Richard Johnson , who have write but his own name only in the bill . i receive in Casbin of Forackan in part of 29 . tumen , 300 . shaugh in money : the rest he will deliver i here in silk , and this be all that i have receive to this day . and as for hawrambeck twelve tumen , i make account , that if i can ride to speak with he , i shall be pay in money and ware . touch ackon money , by mean of duke Ameddinbeck , who first owe the debt , because they mean not to pay a penny , he do rather seek to hinder my suit then to further i , but i find out a present remedy : for God send i friend that be always about the shaugh , and daily put on his apparel , who open all my suit , and bring i to the presence of they shaugh before that Cozomomet see the shaugh eye . but Cozomomet in the end be my friend : for he be send for , and declare unto the shaugh what good merchant we be , use truth in all our do , and how we be in great favour with the emperor of Russia , and what good commodity we may bring into his country , with other talk . and daily he be send for to the shaugh about the affair in those part , for no man be able to advise the shaugh of the state and affair of those country so much as he be . he owe your worship seven tumens and 48 . shaugh , which be not all this time to be get at his hand : for he be at great charge in ride to Casbin , and give great gift since his come , which he twice declare unto i . i feel his grief become physician to ease his pain , and forgive he his debt abovesaid , in recompense of ten piece of karsy , that be promise he by Richard Johnson and i , to give he at the cam of our good , in consideration that he shall with speed do what lie in he , to dispatch i away : for i perceive he procure other that do help i in my suit to delay i of , till time he have his purpose . i never be in quiet , till i have the prince privilege , and have get i out of Casbin : for victual , and all other thing victual and be very dear there , because they be bring thither dl thing dear from far off . as for all other small debt ( which may at as my be about 7 . tumen ) when our merchant be come hither , we shall seek to get they in as we may . i wish your worship to send some bullion to be coin here , it will please the prince there , and be profitable to you . silk be better cheap by two or three shaugh the batman , than it be the last year . you shall understand that i have write two letter of all my proceed , which i send from Casbin long since : to wit , the 24 . and 29 . of June last , by one of your servant to Gilan , there to take ship and to go to astracan , and to deliver the same unto your factor , which may have be to their quietness and i , long ago . but i be right sorry to hear since my come hither , that he have play the loiter merchant in Gilan , not go in those boat that go first , but tarry for the last boat . but 1 will teach he , to the example of other , how he shall make haste hereafter in such affair . the karsy which you send last , be buy of m . Quarles , be good and full length and well sort . the prince theambatsa - ambassador of Gilan be in Casbin , at my be there . i hope in God , if i remain here , and may go to Gilan , quan 0 to obtain for your worship the like privilege at the king hand there also . for i have something move the matter , be put in such comfort , that i doubt not the get thereof with small charge , which i have do at this time if i have have other here with i to put in trust : for from Casbin to Gilan be but 5 . Gilan but five day ride , which country may be profitable to your worship . there be in that province good store of silk , ' better cheap , and better in goodness than this country silk be . also