of Shamaki thirty day journey , up into the land of Persia , at a castle call Casbin : so depart from the king at that time , within Casbin . three day after , be the four and twenty day of August the year aforesaid , he send for i again : unto who i repair in the morning , and the king not be rise out of his bed ( for his manner be , that multitude of watch in the night , and then banquete with his ctncu ^ ines - women , be a hundred and forty in number , he sleep most in the day ) do give one commandment that i shall ride on hawk with many gentleman of his court , and that they shall show i so much game and pastime as may be : which be do , and many crane kill . we return from hawk about three of the clock at the afternoon : the king then rise , and ready to dinner , i be invite thereunto , and approaching nigh to the enter in of his tent , and be in his sight , two gentleman encounter i with two garment of that country fashion , side , down to the ground , the one of silk , and the other of silk and gold , send unto i from the king , and after that they cause i to put off my upper garment , be a gown of black velvet fur with sable , they put the say two garment upon my back , and so conduct i unto the king , before who do reverence , and kiss his hand , he command i to sit not far from he , and so i dine in his presence , he at that time be very merry , and demand of i many question , and among other , how i like the manner of their hawk . dinner so end , i require his highness safeconduct for to depart towards the sophy , who dismiss i with great favour , and appoint his ambassador ( which return out of Russia ) and other , to safeconduct i , he give i at my departure a fair horse with all furniture , and custom free from thence with all my good . so i return to Shamaki again , where i remain until the sixth of October , to provide camel , horse , and other necessary for my say intend journey . danger by diversity in religion . barbarous cruelty . the ci tie of arrash or erex . the commodity of this country . but now before i proceed further , i purpose to write something of this country of hircan , now call Shirvan , with the town and commodity of the same . this country of hircan in time past be of great renown , have many city , town , and castle in it : and the king thereof in time of antiquity be of great power , able to make war with the sophy of Persia : but now it be not only otherwise ( for that the city , town , and castle be decay ) but also the king be subject to the say sophy ( although they have their proper king ) and be at the commandment of the say sophy , who conquer they not many year pass , for their diversity in religion , and cause not only all the nobility and gentleman of that country to be put to death , but also over and beside , raze the wall of the city , town , and castle of the say realm , to the intent that there shall be no rebellion , and for their great terror , cause a turret of free stone and flint to be erect in the say city call Shamaki , and in a rank of flint of the say turret , do set the head of the say nobility and gentleman , then execute . this city be distant from the sea side , with camel , seven day journey , but now the same be much decay , and chief inhabit with Armenians , another city call arrash , border upon the Georgians , be the chief and most opulent in the trade of merchandise , and thereabouts be nourish the most abundant growth of raw silk , and thither the turk , Syrians , and other stranger do resort and traffic . there be also diverse good and necessary commodity to be provide and have in this say realm : viz . gall rough and smooth , cotton wool , allome , and raw silk of the natural growth of that country : beside , near all kind of spice and drug , and some other commodity , which be bring thither from out of east India , but in the less quantity , for that they be not assure to have vent or utterance of the same : but the chief commodity be there , raw silk of all sort , whereof there be great plenty . not far from the say 1562 . city of Shamaki , there be a old castle call Gulli - the strong stone , now beat down by this sophy , which be c “ stle esteem to be one of the strong castle in the world , u e ^ ace ’ and be besiege by Alexander the great , long time before he can win it . and not far from the say castle be a nunnery of sumptuous build , wherein be bury a king daughter , name Ameleck Channa , who slay herself with a knife , for that her father will have force she ( she profess chastity ) to have marry with a king of Tartary : upon which occasion the maiden of that country do resort thither once every year to lament her death . also in the say country there be a high hill call quiquif , upon the top whereof ( as it be common report ) do dwell a great giant , name arneoste , have upon his head two great home , and ear , and eye like a horse , and a tail like a cow . it be further say , that this monster keep a passage thereby , until there come a holy man , term Haucoir hamshe ,