way when i sit down to dinner , they will come and eat with i unbidden , when i wish they further off : for i spare they that , which glad i will have eat my self . i doubt not but we shall live here from henceforth in quietness : for now in all place where i come , i be friendly use with the best . i be ask by the shaugh if you be able to bring he year one hundred thousand piece of kersy , and clothes . and i answer he , say , your worship be able to furnish his country with two hundred thousand . whereat his highness rejoice : for the 56 armenian barterwiththe Venetians . the distance Arthur Edward a . d . 1566 . Turk ambassador the last year , as diverse have tell i , do put the shaugh in despair , say , that the Turk will not permit any cloth to be bring into his country . there be a city in Syria name Aleppo , wherein con - Aleppo a city tinual be many venetian dwell , beside other that greattwde - come yearly and there buy wool , gal , tallow , saffron , skin , cotton wool , and other ware , and great store of spice . also the armenian year receive at the venetian hand , karsy in barter for raw silk , give sometime 60 . piece of karsy for 70 . batman of silk of this country , and 40 . piece for grosin silk . and karsy sell common for ready money in Aleppo , at 11 . and 12 . ducat the piece , ( the ducat be here worth 12 . shilling ) may cost the first penny 132 . and 144 . Shaughs a kerchief . by report it be one month travel from this town of shamaky to Aleppo , and from thence to Tripoli , six day journey : and from Tripoli r ' to Venice by water , a month or five week sail . as i learn , from hence to Venice may easy be travel in less than three month . therefore i wish your worship to procure some trusty and assure friend there , to who from hence letter may be send . for i can have they here to put in surety to deliver my letter , and to bring answer . if i have any other here with i , i will nothing have doubt to have bring you the shaugh letter that way . the armenian and other be desirous to barter with Armenians we , give silk for karsy , and also will serve we of all ot ^ er ’ kind of spice , we give they sufficient warn to an / spice fetch it in the Indies , and will deliver it we in shamaky for karsy . at these prize . pepper this town batman for 18 . Shaughs , every shaugh be sixpence . mace large for 40 . Shaughs , and 45 . the batman . clove for 40 . Shaughs the batman . nutmeg for 16 . and 18 . Shaughs the batman . cinnamon for 40 . Shaughs the batman . i doubt not the shaugh desirous tobar - gaine fir our commodity . 2000 piece of karsy to be send into Persia . but there will be profit and good do in spice , with drug and other like in time . from Casbin to ormus be six week travel , and from hence to Casbin be 16 . day with camel lade : but if one travel with a good mule unlade , it may be go in seven or eight day . and i think to ormus and other place , may be travel in like order and proportion , with cattle unlade . but here in all place as man travel , they must carry their own provision on horse , which they be to buy , and thus they travel but a footepase . the shaugh himself be desirous to bargain with you who will give money , silk , and other ware as we will , and take our ware as we may afford they , will i himself to bring such ware as we may gain by he . the armenian by report , and as i perceive , bring from Aleppo yearly , four , five , and six thousand piece of karsy , and clothes , beside those which other man bring . if your worship may procure and find vent or sale for raw silk , and silk die in grain , beside other silk wrought and make here , by which , profit may be make : than you may send a great substance of ware hither . but i fear you shall be hinder by the venetian if they may : for i know it will grieve they that you do trade into these part : for in short time it shall clean alter their trade , and hinder the sale of their clothes in Aleppo and other place adjoin . you shall understand that 60 . batman of silk be a mule lade : and as it be report , one village of the armenian yearly carry 400 . and 500 mule lade of silk to Aleppo , and bring thence 800 . or a thousand mule lade with karsy 8c Venice clothes . and 18 . piece of karsy be a mule lade . but i wish you not to send above 2000 piece of karsy , although i have be will to write for more . if i may have have any understanding what your worship have write for in your letter send this year , i shall 58 in this my letter have be better able to have answer you . they which be now in astracan , may have write some thing unto i hither , if it have please they , or else have send i such letter of i , as i hope some of my friend have write to i : for here be arrive eight week past , two boat with ware and russes , by who they may have write , have it be but 3 . or 4 . line . they promise the russes to write , but promise be not keep . i will be sorry that any boat shall depart out of these part , and not write unto they , weigh how all thing stand . i hear they have buy a boat , which cost 40 . rubble , and ship certain ware to come hither . God send they in safety . i do tarry their come , or else i have think to have come to astracan in those boat which depart hence late . the fifteen of July last , i depart from Casbin ,