and George wren , at their departure towards hereafter an - Persia for your affair : and his highness do give i nex . two garment of silk , ' and so dismiss i with great favour , send with i his ambassador again unto the emperor of Russia , and commit the chief secret of his affair unto i , to declare the same unto the emperor majesty at my return : and thus depart the ten day of April , i come to the city of Shamachi , and there remain certain day for provision of camel down to the sea side , i send from thence before man to repair my bark , and to make she in a readiness . and during my abode in Shammachi , a armenian there come unto i a armenian send from the king of MfuM . Jen - Georgia , who declare the lamentable estate of the same oj king , that be enclose betwixt those two cruel tyrant Georgia . and mighty prince , the say great Turk and the sophy , he have continual war with they , require for the love of Christ and as i be a christian , that i will send he comfort by the say armenian , and advise how he may send his ambassador to the say emperor of Russia , and whether i think that he will support he or not : and with many other word require i to declare his necessity unto the same emperor at my in 33 c return : add further that the say king will have write unto i his mind , but that he doubt the safe passage of his messenger . unto who i do likewise answer by word of mouth , not only persuade he to send his ambassador to Russia , not doubt but that he shall find he most honourable and incline to help he , but also i direct he his way how the say king may send by the country of Chircassi , through teneruk king the favour of teneruk king of the say country , who of Chircassi . daughter the say king have late marry . and thus dismiss the say armenian , within two day after i send Edward clerk your servant unto the city of arrash , where the most store of silk be to be have , give he commission to have pass further into the say country of Georgia , and there to have repair unto the say king . and after my commendation premise , and my mind declare to have pursue for safeconduct of the same prince for our merchant to trade into his dominion , and that obtain to have return again with speed . the same your servant journey to the say city of arrash , and there find certain merchant Armenians , which promise to go to the say city of Georgia , come to the border thereof , be perceive by a captain there , that he be a christian , and thereupon demand whither he go , and understand that he can not pass further without great suspicion , answer that he come thither to buy silk , and show the king of Hircanes letter which he have with he , and so return back again , and the fifteen of April come to Shamachi : from whence i depart the sixteen of the same month , and the one and twenty thereof come to the seaside , and find my bark in a readiness , i cause your good to be lade , and there attend a fair wind . lk 35 ’• ] but before i proceed any further to speak of my return , i intend with your favour somewhat to treat of the country of Persia , of the great sophy , and of his country , law and religion . this land of Persia be great and ample , divide into the descrip - many kingdom and province , as Gillan , Corasan , cion of Persia . Shirvan , and many other have diverse city , town and castle in the same . Every province have his several king , or sultan , all in obedience to the great sophy . the name of the chief city be these : teveris , the chief ci - casbin , Keshan , yesse , Meskit , Heirin , ardovill , Sham - tie ° f Persia . achi , arrash with many other . the country for the most part towards the sea side be plain and full of pasture , but into the land , high , full of mountain , and sharp . to the south it border upon Arabia and the east ocean . to the north upon the caspian sea and the land of Tartary . to the east upon the province of India , and to the west upon the confine of Chaldea , Syria , and other the Turk land . all within these dominion be of the sophy , name Shaw Thamas , son to Ishmael Sophie . this sophy that now reign be nothing valiant , although his power be great , and his people martial : and through his pusillanimity the Turk have much invade his country , even nigh unto the city of Teveris , wherein he be wont to keep his chief court . and now have forsake the same , be chief resident at Casbin aforesaid , and always as the say Turk pursue he , he not be able to withstand the Turk in the field , trust rather to the mountain for his safeguard , then to his fort and castle , have cause the same to be raze within his dominion , and his ordinance to be melt , to the intent that his enemy pursue he , they shall not strengthen themselves with the same . this prince be of the age of fifty year , and of a reasonable stature , have five child . his elder son he keep captive in prison , for that he fear he for his valiantness and activity : he profess a kind of holiness , and say that he be descend of the blood of Mahomet and Murtezalli : and although these persian be Mahometans , as the Turk and Tartar bee , yet honour they this false feign Murtezalli , 35 say that he be the chief disciple that Mahomet have ,