. man to row , and set the foresay boat up the river of Owiga , which we hire . we go this day 7 . mile to a place call ostrove , where we lay all night , but in the way 4 . mile from the fall of a Soroka , at a place where the water fall from the rock , river . as if it come steep down from a mountain , we be constrain to take out our good and ware out of the say boat , and cause they to be carry a mile over land , and afterward also have our boat in like sort carry or draw over land by force of man which there dwell , be tenant to the monastery aforesaid . and when our boat be come to the place where our ware be lay , we launch our boat and jade our ware again , and go to the place before name , where we continue and remain that night . we depart from ostrove in the morning before sun rise , row and set up the river 5 . mile , where we come to a place whereas we be again constrain to take out our ware , and to carry they 76 1566 . and our boat three mile over land , so that with row , draw and set , we go this day 7 . mile more to a place call sloboday , where we lay all night . 5 we depart from sloboday in the morning at sun rise , and at six of the clock in the afternoon , we come to a village call Paranda , which be from sloboday 30 . mile , where we remain all that night . 6 we depart from Paranda at 6 . of the clock in the morning , and all that day what with set and draw our boat , we go but 11 . mile , for we twice unlade our ware , and draw our boat overland , in one place a mile and a half , in another place as it be the eight part of a mile , and so we come to a place call voyet , where we tarry all that night . 7 we depart from voyet at 4 . of the clock in the morning , and so come to a Ozera or lake , call after the name of the river , and unto a place call quequenich , we row all this day , and come thither by one of the clock in the afternoon , which be 25 . mile from voyet , and there we remain all night to hire man and boat to carry we forward on our journey . here depart back from we the servant which we have at the monastery , be send by the monk to go thus far with we . and after that he have hire the boat and take the man name that shall conduct we , and give they charge to deliver we with all thing in safety , at a place be a little town call povensa , than he depart from we without take any reward for his pain , for so he be charge and command by the monk . 8 we depart from Quequenich at sun rise , and all that day row upon the lake among many island , the inhabitant do there report that there be as many five san ' island in their lake , as there be day in the year . in the evening we come to a village name Tellekina , which be 60 . mile from Quequenich . 9 we depart from Tellekina in the morning at 5 . of the clock , and so enter into a river , we go that day 13 . mile . in one place we carry our boat and good overland 3 . mile . at evening we come to a place call Oreiche na maelay , where we lay all night . 10 we depart thence at 5 . of the clock in the morning , and so row , come to a place where the river end , be 20 . mile distant from the place where we lay all night , at which place we forsake our boat and unlade our ware , and send a man to the town of povensa , which be seven mile off , for horse to carry we and our ware to the say place . the horse come , and we jade our good , and at six of the clock in the afternoon we arrive at the town of povensa , with all thing in safety . this town of povensa stand within one mile of the famous lake or Ozera of Onega , which be 320 . mile long , and in some place 70 . mile over . but where it be narrow it be 25 . mile over , be feed with many goodly river which fall into it . Hard aboard the shore within 6 . mile , you shall have 40 . and 45 . fathom of depth . here it be to be note that from this place of povensa unto the village of Soroka down those dangerous river which we come through , at no time of the year can or may any man carry or transport any good that come from Novogrod , or the narve , and such other place : for in the summer it be impossible to carry down any ware by reason of the great false of water that do descend from the rock . likewise in the winter by reason of the great force and fall of water which make so terrible raise , that in those ' place it never freeze , but all such ware as come from Novogrod to povensa , be transport by land to a place call some in the winter , which some stand on the sea side , as do Soroka . the ready way from povensa by land to this place of some , with the distance of mile i will show hereafter . 12 we depart from povensa at 9 of the clock in the morning , with 2 . small boat which we hire to carry we to a place call Toivo upon the lake of Onega , be 50 mile from povensa , where we arrive the 13 . day in the morning , where we buy a boat that carry we and all our ware from thence to the city of Novogrod . 14 we depart from Toivo at 3 . of the clock in the afternoon , and at the evening arrive at a certain island name Salasalma , upon the say lake 7 . mile from Toivo , and by reason of contrary wind we there tarry until the 16 . day of this month . 16 we depart from Salasalma , at 8 . of the clock in the morning , and come to a island the 17 . day in the morning , name Vorronia , where we continue by reason of contrary wind , until the 21 . day of the say month , and it be 60 . mile from Salasalma . 21 we depart from Vorronia island two hour saint Clement he before day , and arrive at saint Clement monastery at monastery . 1 . of the clock in the after noon , be from Vorronia 48 . mile . 22 we depart from saint Clement monastery at the break of the day , have a fair wind all a long the lake : we sail without strike of sail until two hour within night , and then enter into a river call Swire , at a monastery call Vosnessino Christo , five mile from the entrance of the river , where we tarry all night . it be from saint Clement monastery 160 . mile : the stream of that river go with we . 23 we depart from Vosnessino Christo before sun rise , and vale down the river sometime sail , and sometime row , so that this day we go 90 . mile and lay at night at a place call Vassian . 24 we depart from Vassian at the break of the day , and come to