25 we likewise of our goodness , have license the english merchant in our town of Moscow , Novogorod the great , and Plesko , that the coiner of the say town shall melt dollar , and coin money for they , without custom , allow for coal , and other necessary , with the workmanship . 26 also of our goodness , we have grant to the say english merchant , to take post horse at needful time , leave with our officer a note how many they take , and not else , in no case hinder or diminish our treasury . 27 also for our sister queen Elizabeth sake , we of our goodness have grant to the merchant within write , this our letter , and to their successor , that no Englishman , nor any other stranger , come without the queen leave to colmogorode , the river of Vob , Vasiagy , Pechora , Cola , Mezena , Pechingo , zelevetskye island , the river of shame , nor to no other haven of Dwina , nor to any part of the northside of Dwina 116 by hitherward of Wardhouse , to any haven , with ship , buss , or any other vessel ! , nor to occupy in any kind of way , but only the say english company , and their successor , to who we of our goodness have grant this privilege . 28 also that no english merchant , without the queen leave , shall come with any ware , to the narve , or Uriogorod . 29 and whatsoever english merchant , stranger , or other , of whatsoever country he be , shall come with any ship , buss , or any other vessel , to any of the say haven , of the north side , to any part of Dwina , by north the narve , or Uriogorod , without the queen leave or knowledge , not be of the company above write , we to apprehend and take the same vessel from those stranger and merchant , the one half to we the emperor , and great duke , and the other half to the company of english merchant . 30 also of our goodness we have grant the say company of english merchant , that no english mere chant or stranger shall pass through our dominion , to Boghar , Persia , Casbin , charday , or other country , save only the company of english merchant , and our own messenger . 31 also whatsoever Englishman , come out of England or any other country , into our dominion , without the queen leave , and knowledge , not be of the say company , write within those our letter , mind , and purpose , to abide in our realm , contrary to the queen will and pleasure , or any way abuse himself , the agent shall free send he home , to the queen his sovereign : which if the agent of himself be unable to do , let he pray for aid of the captain and officer of our town there be , and so send he to prison , and will the say captain not to hinder the say agent from send home such evil person into England . 32 and if any man within our country run away to any other town or place , the english merchant and 117 factor , to have free liberty to apprehend he , and take their good from he again . 33 and as for our privilege give to Thomas Glover , Ralph Rutter , Christopher Bennet , John chapel , and their adherent , we have command the same privilege to be take from they . 34 also we of our goodness have grant the say company of english merchant , their successor , servant and deputy , that do or shall remain at Moscow , or elsewhere within our dominion free to keep their own law : and in any wise none of we to force they to our law or faith against their will . moreover , beside and with the company of english merchant , we permit all stranger , to trade to our town of Narve , Ivanogorod , and other our town of Liefland , as they have do beforetime . give from the begin of the world 7077 , in the month of June 20 , indiction 12 , the year of our lordship and reign 35 , and of our empire of Rusland 23 , Cazan 17 , astracan 15 . other speciali grant by his majesty private letter at the suit of m . Randolfe ambassador . releasement out of prison of Fitzherbert , that be accuse for write of letter against the emperor . liberty give to Thomas Greene that be accuse and trouble upon suspicion of his deal with the ambassador , and licence give to he to traffic as he be accustom . Andrew Atherton and his surety release at the narve and his servant at the Moscow , that be in trouble for send the merchant letter into England . a letter grant to Thomas Southam to the council , for justice against they that steal the pearl . he majesty favour promise to the artificer , and live to be appoint they as they can best deserve . a letter to the merchant that go into Persia , to pass free without impeachment in his dominion , as also letter of favour to the great shaugh of Persia . 118 a grant unto the company that at what time soever they send to the discovery of Cataya , they shall | be licence to repair unto this country , and have such conduct and guide , mariner , vessel , man and victual as they shall stand in need of . it be also promise by knez Alfanas , and Peter Gregoriwich in the emperor name , that if Benet butler or any english man complain , deface , hinder in way of traffic or otherwise go about to discredit the worshipful company , and their do , that therein they shall not be hear , and the doer to be punish , as in such case they shall | be judge to have deserve . certain person grant to be send home into England that serve the company , and be practiser against they in that country .