a place call two selucax , where we lay all \\ or , sermaxe . night , and be 10 . mile from Vassian . 25 we depart from selucaxe at 4 of the clock in the morning , and enter upon the lake of ladiskaie , the wind be calm all that day save 3 . hour , and then it be with we , so that we sail and row that day the monastery of Gosnopoli . the city of Novogrod . 10 . mile , along upon the say lake , and enter into the river of Volhuski , which river have his beginning 20 . mile above Novogrod , and run through the midst of the city , and so fall into this lake , which be far long than the lake of Onega , but it be not so broad . this lake fall into the sea that come from the sound : where any vessel or boat , have a good pilot , may go through the sound into England . as soon as we be enter into the river , we come to a monastery call S . Nicholas Medved , where we lay all that night . 26 we depart from saint Nicholas Medved , at five of the clock in the morning , row and draw our boat all day , and come at night to another monastery call Gosnopoli , which be 30 mile from saint Nicholas Medved , where we lay all that night . 27 we depart from Gosnopoli at 6 . of the clock in the morning , and at evening come to a place call moislave , where we lay all night , be 46 . mile from the monastery of Gosnopoli . 28 we depart from moislave , and the say day at night come to a place call Grussina , 35 . mile from moislave where we lodge . 29 we depart from Grussina in the morning , and the same day at evening come to a place call Petroe Svetoe , where we lay all night , be 40 mile from Grussina . 30 we depart from Petroe Svetoe in the morning , and at two of the clock in the afternoon we arrive at the city of Novogrod , be twenty mile from Petroe Svetoe . here we find William Rowlie agent to the company , who be there stay with all his company , and be not licence to depart thence for the Moscow , by reason that the plague be then in the city of Novogrod . unto he we deliver all the ware that we bring from Colmogro , for by the way we sell not a penny worth , the people of the country every where be so miserable . the right way to bring and transport ware from Novogrod to rose island into S . Nicholas bay , where our ship yearly lade , with the distance of mile from place to place , be as follow : 20 mile from Novogrod to Petroe Svetoe . 40 mile from thence to Grusina . 3 5 mile from thence to moislave . 46 mile from thence to the monastery Gosnopoli . 15 mile from thence to Ladega town . 15 mile from thence to Selvnaz over the lake of Ladega , albeit there be many village all along the lake . 180 mile from Ladega town up the river of Swire , unto the monastery of Vosnessino Christo , albeit there be many village upon the river : for within every five or six mile you shall have village or small town . 160 mile from Vosnessino Christo to saint Clement monastery , albeit there be many village all along the lake of Onega . 48 mile from thence to Voronia . 67 mile from thence to Toivo town : and there be diverse village all along the lake where the carrier may lie , and have meat for man and horse . 50 mile from thence to povensa , where Onega lake end . the way from povensa to some town be this : 30 mile from povensa to Mastelina . 10 mile from thence to Tellekina . 30 mile from thence to Tolvich . 35 mile from thence to Carraich . 20 mile from thence to Varnich . 10 mile from thence to Ostrovo . 15 mile from thence to Lapina . 20 mile from thence to some it self . note , that from the city of Novogrod unto the town of some be 936 . mile , and from the town of some unto the monastery of saint Nicholas or rise island , over and against where our ship do ride , be just as many mile as in 81 f 2000 sleds belong to one town . a good caveat for seasonable travel . be Soroka village from saint Nicholas , as the russes do account it , as also we do judge it , namely 325 . mile . so that from Novogrod to saint Nicholas road , be by our account 1261 . mile or verst . furthermore it be to be note that all such ware as shall be buy at Novogrod , and send to some town , must be send by sled way in the winter : for if any ware shall be send from Novogrod by water in the spring of the year after the ice be go , then must the say ware remain at povensa town all that summer , by reason that in the summer there be no way to go from povensa unto some town . at povensa there be many warehouse to be hire , so that if there be as much good as ten ship can carry away , you may have warehouse to put it in : but if there shall remain much ware all the summer , to be carry in the winter to some town , than horse be not easy to be get at that place to carry it thither : so that your ware once buy at Novogrod , you must have carrier there to carry it to the town of some by sled , whereof you may there have 2000 if you will , by the report of the russes . for from Novogrod yearly there go many sled in the winter to fetch salt from some , with carrier and empty sled there to buy it , and to bring it to Novogrod to sell it in the market or otherwise . from Novogrod unto some town you may have a pood of ware carry for eight penny or nine penny : but in any wise your ware must be send from Novogrod by the sixth of January , so that the ware may be at some by Candlemas , or soon after : for if your ware shall tarry by the way until the 15 . of February when the sun be of some power , then be it dangerous : for the heat of the sun in the day cause the deep lake of Ladega , and special of Onega to cleave : and if there shall come then a sudden thaw , as oftentimes in that time of the year do , then do . these lake open and break , whereby many man be lose , and both man and 82 1566 . horse drown , although other river do remain freeze a long time after . in the town of some also there be many warehouse , whereof we can be destitute for the repose of our ware , as also as many bark as you will to transport your ware from thence to saint Nicholas road , and that for three penny a poods carriage : so that from the ci tie of Novogrod unto saint Nicholas road you may have ware carry for two all tine . the pood come unto 23 . all tine the ton . provide always , that you buy your ware there your novgorod self , and send it thence : for there be no hope that the native will bring their ware from Novogrod to some , in hope to sell unto we , consider the great trade that they have at the narve , which be within 180 mile off they . write by Thomas Southam a servant to the company .