the way discover by water by we Thomas Southam and John spark , from the town of Colmogro , by the western bottom of the bay of S . Nicholas , unto the city of novgorod in Russia , contain many particular of the way , and distance of mile , as hereafter follow . anno 1566 . e depart from Colmogro about 10 . of the clock afore noon in a lodia or bark , which we hire to bring we along the coast to a place call Soroka , and in the say bark we hire 6 . mariner , and a boy to conduct we to the place before rehearse . the lodia or bark be of the burden of 25 . ton or thereabouts , wherewith we vale down the river of Dwina , the wind be then calm , unto a monastery call S . Michael where we be constrain to anchor because of a contrary wind which there meet we . from Colmogro to this monastery be 50 . verst or a verse be but mile of Russia , at which place we tarry till the 21 . 3 - liters of day in the morning , and then have the wind some - a ^^ ts what fair , we set sail and depart thence . 21 we depart from the monastery of saint Michael , have the wind somewhat fair , and arrive at rose island , over and against the monastery of saint Nicholas , the 22 . day at 2 . of the clock in the morning , which be 35 . mile distant from the monastery of saint Michael . by reason of contrary wind and tide we be constrain to tarry there all that day . 23 we depart from the monastery of saint Nicholas at 7 . of the clock in the evening , and come to a anchor at the beacon , and continue there until half a hour past 10 . of the clock , and then set from thence , the wind be south : our course be west until 5 . of the clock in the morning , when as we come to a anchor at this town Newnox Richard chancellor in his first voyage , with his company aship - board be relieve . against newnox town , where we continue until the 25 . day . the say town of Newnox be from the monastery of saint Nicholas 35 . mile . 25 we depart from Newnox haven at one of the clock in the after noon , the wind at south and southeast , and our course northwest and by west . the point of tolstick which be the headland before the entrance of Newnox haven , and the headland of Sevsemski lie next southeast and by south , northwest and by north . we come to a anchor there this day at 4 . of the clock in you afternoon , be from Newnox haven 15 . mile , where we continue in harbour till the 27 . day of the month , by reason of contrary wind . 27 we depart from Sevsemski in the morning at 5 . of the clock , the wind next at east and by north , and our course northwest and by west . the say land of Sevsemski and the headland go into Owna river lie east and by south , west and by north , and between they be 25 . mile . this day at sun set we come to a island call Sogisney pass betwixt it and the main , with the wind at south and by east , our course be west and by south , be 85 . mile from Owna river . be past the say island 10 . mile , the wind come contrary , whereupon we return to the island of Sogisney , where we remain until the 29 . day . 29 the 29 . day we depart from Sogisney aforesaid , at 5 . of the clock in the afternoon , the wind at east north - east , and our course be Southwest and by west , pass by a island call anger , be 30 . mile from Sogisney , and keep on our course , we come by the headland of a island call Abdon , be from the island of anger 15 . mile , where we find many rock : and if the great providence of God have not preserve we , we have there perish , be fall among they in the night time , and our pilot none of the perfect , which be contrary to his profession as we find it . but whosoever will travel that way must either keep hard aboard the shore , for that there be a channel which go along the coast within the rock , or else give the headland a birth of 6 . mile at the least , and so go a seaboord all : for there be ledge of rock that lie five mile from the headland . we give the headland a birth of 3 . mile , notwithstanding there lay two rock two mile to sea board of [ i . we , so that we be enclose with they , and sit upon the high of they : but it please God to make it calm , and give we the day also , or else we have miscarry . 30 we depart from the headland of the island of Abdon , at 4 . of the clock in the morning , direct our course west , and at 10 . of the clock before noon , we arrive at a monastery name solofky , which be 15 . mile from Abdon . at this monastery we continue until the 31 . day of this month . we have here deliver we by the chief monk of the monastery , their letter and house seal , and a servant of they to conduct we safe through the dangerous river of Owiga . the people of all those part be wild , and speak another kind of language , and be for the most part all tenant to the monastery . the effect of the letter be , that they shall be ready to help and assist we in all dangerous place , and carry our boat and good over land in place needful , as in deed they do , as hereafter shall appear . note , that at our being at the monastery , there be no abbot for the place as then choose : for 15 . day before our arrival there , the abbot be send for by the emperor , and make metropolitan of the realm , as he now be . the number of monk belong to the monastery be at the least 200 . 31 we depart from the monastery of solofky , as be aforesaid , to a fair stone house of they , which be 5 . mile from the monastery , lie from it south and by west . 75 366 . ] August . i we depart from the stone house at 3 . of the clock in the morning : our course be west for 60 . verst , and then pass betwixt diverse and sundry rock , with many small island round about we for the space of 20 mile , keep most common the same course still , we then shape a new course , and yet sundry time shift , but we always keep the southwest , and near of all south southwest , until we come within two mile of the entrance of the river Owiga where we be to bear in , west and by north . the river from the river Owiga , to the island and rock before Owiga . mention , be 20 . mile . we arrive about 4 . of the clock in the after noon within the river of Owiga , at a place name Soroka , at which place we forsake our bark or lodia , and continue there in make provision for small boat to carry we up the river until the 3 . day of the same . 3 we depart from Soroka at two of the clock in the afternoon , with 3 . boat and 12