u - 376 - ] the ambassage of the right worshipful master Thomas Randolfe , esquire , to the emperor of Russia , in the year 1568 , brief write by himself . in this voyage go Thomas Bannister , wonderful Geoffrey Ducket , for their voyage into Persia . he 22 day of June , in the year of our lord 1568 , i go aboard the Harry , lie in the road at Harwich with my company , be to the number of forty person or thereabouts : of which the one half be gentleman , desirous to see the world . within one day sail , we be out of the sight of land , and follow our course direct north , till we come to the north cape , we sail for the space of twelve day with a prosperous wind , without tempest or outrage of sea : have compass the north cape we direct our course flat southeast , have upon our right hand Norway , Wardhouse , Lapland , all out of sight till we come to cape gallant : and so sail between two bay , the two and thirty day after our departure from Harwich , we cast anchor at saint Nicholas road . in all the time of our voyage , more than the great number of whale engender together , which we may plain behold , and the sperma Cetae , which we may see swim upon the sea , there be no great thing to be wonder at . sometime we have calm , wherein our mariner fish , and take good the abbey of store of diverse sort . at saint Nicholas we land the saint Nicholas of 23 of July , where there stand a abbey of monk 20 monk . ( t £ ) number of twenty ) build all of wood : the apparel of the monk be superstitious , in black hood , as we have be . their church be fair , but full of paint image , taper , and candle . their own house be low , and small room . they lie apart , they eat together , and be much give to drunkenness , unlearned , write they can , preach they do 102 1568 . never , ceremonious in their church , and long in their prayer . at my first arrival i be present from their prior with two great rye loaf , fish both salt and fresh of diverse sort , both sea fish and fresh water , one sheep alive , black , with a white face , to be the more grateful unto i , and so with many solemn word invite i to see their house , they take their leave . town or habitation at saint Nicholas there be none the English more than about four house near the abbey , and house at 8 . another build by the english company for their own king 0 ‘ use . this part of the country be most part wood , save here and there pasture and arable ground , many river and diverse island unhabit , as the most part of the country be , for the coldness in winter . s . Nicholas stand Northeast : the elevation of the the river of pole 64 degree . the river that run there into the ^ wina . sea be call Dwina , very large , but shallow . this river take his beginning about 700 mile within the country , and upon this river stand colmogro , and many pretty village , well situate for pasture , arable land , wood , and water . the river pleasant between high hill of either side inward inhabit , and in a manner a wilderness of high fir tree , and other wood . at Colmogro be 100 verst , which we account for Colmogro . three quarter of a mile every verse , we tarry three week , not be suffer to depart before the emperor have word of our come , who send to meet we a gentleman of his house , to convey we , and to see we furnish of victual , and all thing needful , upon his own charge . the allowance of meat and drink be for every day two rubble , beside the charge of boat by water , and four score post horse by land , with above 100 cart to carry my wine , and other carriage . Colmogro be a great town build all of wood , not wall , but scatter house from house . the people be 103 a english house with land at colmogro . [ i - 377 - j the description of the inland of Moscovie . rude in manner , and in apparel homely , save upon their festival ! , and marriage day . the people of this town find commodity by the english man traffic with they be much at their commandment , give much to drunkenness , and all other kind of abominable vice . in this town the english man have land of their own , give they by the emperor , and fair house , with office for their commodity , very many . of other town until i come to Vologda , i write not , because they be much like to this , and the inhabitant not differ from they . i be five whole week upon the river of Dwina till i come to Vologda , be draw with man against the stream , for other passage there be none . vologda stand upon the river of Vologda , which come into Dwina . the town be great and long , build all of wood , as all their town be . in this town the emperor have build a castle environed with a wall of stone , and brick , the wall fair and high , round about . here ( as in all other their town ) be many church , some build of brick , the rest of wood , many monk and nun in it : a town also of great traffic , and many rich merchant there dwell . from hence we pass by land towards Moscow in post , be 500 verst great , which be equal with our mile . in their town we bait or lie , be post town . the country be very fair , plain and pleasant , well inhabit , corn , pasture , meadow enough , river , and wood , fair and goodly . at yeraslave we pass the river of Volga , more than a mile over . this river take his beginning at Beal Ozera , and descend into mare Caspium , portable thorough of very great vessel with flat bottom , which far pass any that our country use . to sail by this river into mare Caspium the english company cause a bark to be build of 27 tunn , which 104 there be never see before : this bark build , and ready rig to the sea with her whole furniture cost not the company above one hundred mark there . to Moscow we come about the end of