September , his arrival receive by no man , not so much as our own country - at mosco - man suffer to meet we , which breed suspicion in i of some other course intend , than we have hitherto find . we be bring to a house build of purpose by the special emperor for ambassador , fair and large , after the ^ u ^ atMosco it fashion of that country . bassadour . two gentleman be appoint to attend upon i , the one to see we furnish of victual , and that we lack nothing of the emperor allowance : the other to see that we shall not go out of the house , nor suffer any man to come unto we , in which they leave nothing undo that belong to their charge . but special he that look to our person so straight handle we , that we have no small cause to doubt that some evil have be intend unto we . no supplication , suit , or request can take place for our liberty , nor yet to come to his presence . have pass over 17 week in this sort , the emperor send word that we shall be ready against Tuesday the 20 of February , at eight a clock in the morning . the hour be come that i shall go to the court , two the two gentleman pristave ( as they call they ) come pristave . unto i apparel more princely than before i have ever see they . they press we to depart , and mount upon their own horse , and the ambassador upon such a one as he have borrow , his man march on foot , to their great grief . the ambassador ( be my self ) be convey into a office where one of the chancellor do use to sit , be there accompany with the two foresay gentleman : i tarry two long hour before i be send for to the emperor . in the end message be bring that the emperor be set , i be convey by my gentleman up a pair of stair through a large room , where sit by 105 he admission to the emperor presence . the queen present . the emperor speech to the ambassador . my estimation 300 person , all in rich attire , take out of the emperor wardrobe for that day , upon three rank of bench , set round about the place , rather to present a majesty , then that they be either of quality or honour . at the first entry into the chamber i with my cap give they the reverence , such as i judge their stately sit , grave countenance , and sumptuous apparel require , and see that it be not answer again of any of they i cover my head , and so pass to a chamber where the emperor be , there receive i at the door from my two gentleman or governor , two of the emperor counsellor , and show i to the emperor , and bring i to the middle of the chamber , where i be will to stand still , and to say that which i have to say . i by my interpretor open my message as i receive it from the queen my mistress , from who i come , at who name the emperor stand up , and demand diverse question of her health and state : whereunto answer be make , he give i his hand in token of my welcome , and cause i to sit down , and further ask i diverse question . this do , i deliver her majesty present , which be a notable great cup of silver curious wrought , with verse grave in it , express the history workmanly set out in the same . all be say and do ( as appear ) to his contentment , he licence i and my whole company to depart , who be all in his presence , and be salute by he with a nod of his head , and say unto i : i dine not this day open for great affair i have , but i will send thou my dinner , and give leave to thou and thou to go at liberty , and augment our allowance to thou , in token of our love and favour to our sister the queen of England . i with reverence take my leave , be convey by two other of great calling than those that bring i to the emperor sight , who deliver i to the two 106 first gentleman , who conduct i to the office where i first be , where come unto i one call the long duke , with who i confer a while , and so return to my lodging . within one hour after in come to my lodging a duke rich apparel , accompany with fifty person , each of they carry a silver dish with meat , and cover with silver . the duke first deliver twenty loaf of bread of the emperor own eat , have taste the same , and deliver every dish into my hand , and taste of every kind of drink that he bring . this be do , the duke and his company sit down with i , and take part of the emperor meat , and fill themselves well of all sort , and go not away from i unrewarded . within few night after the emperor have will to speak secret with i , and send for i in the night by the long duke : the place be far off , and the night cold , and i have change my apparel into such as the russes do wear , find great incommodity thereby . have talk with he above three hour , towards the morning i be dismiss , and so come home to my lodging , where i remain above six week after , before i hear again from the emperor , who go the next day to Slovoda , the house of his solace . after the end of which six week , which be about the begin of April , the emperor return from Slovoda aforesaid , and send for i again to make repair unto he . And be come , i deal effectual with he in the behalf of our english merchant , and find he so gracious incline towards they , that i obtain at his hand my whole demand for large privilege in general , together with all the rest my particular request . and then he commend to my conduct into England , a noble man of he , call Andrew Savin , as his ambassador , for the better confirmation of his privilege grant , and other negotiation with her majesty . and thus be dispatch with full contentment , the say ambassador a second conference with the emperor . Andrew Savin ambassador to the queen . 107 and my self depart , and embark at saint Nicholas about the end of July , and arrive safe at London in the month of September follow .