when they go into Persia . neither shall the english merchant receive or colour any of our people good , nor barter nor sell it in any wise : likewise our people not to barter for the say english merchant or occupy for they . 3 and when they shall come into our empire of Casan and astracan , and other place of our dominion , than our captain of Casan and astracan , and our authorise people , quiet to let they pass , not take any toll or custom of their ware , nor once to make search thereof . and when we shall send no adventure with they , yet to suffer they free to pass , not view their ware , nor take any kind of custom . and whatsoever english merchant will bargain with our merchant or factor wear for ware to barter the same at their pleasure . and whatsoever their merchant or factor will sell their ware at their house at Moscow , which house i grant they at saint maxim at the Moscow , they to sei the ware to our people , either stranger as they may best utter it , keep within their house , arshine , measure , and weight under seal . 4 we have grant they the say house at saint maxim in the half free , and without stand rent , as heretofore we do grant it the say english merchant , sir Wil . Garrard , and the company , maintain in the say house one housekeeper a ruff , and two Russe servant , or some of their own country man , and none other russes beside the aforesaid . and the say housekeeper that shall live at their house with the english merchant , neither to buy nor sei any ware for they , but that the say merchant themselves or their factor , shall buy , sell , and barter their own ware : and our Moscovie merchant not to take the say Englishman ware to sell they in our town , nor to buy any ware for they , neither the english merchant to colour any russes ware at any town . 5 and whatsoever english merchant will sell his ware at Colmogorod , Dwyna , Vologda , yeraslave , Castran , Novogorod the low , Casan , astracan , novgorod the great , vopsko , the narve , Vriagorod , or at any other town , they to sei their ware there at their pleasure : and of all ware aswell of other country as of Russia , no officer or other to take any custom , neither in any place to stay they in any wise , neither take any kind of toll of they for their ware whatsoever . 6 and whatsoever merchant shall bargain or buy any ware of english merchant : the say ruff not to return those ware upon the merchant hand again , but to give ready money for the say ware , otherwise they to crave the justice to give right , and to execute the law upon the same with all expedition . and when the english merchant or factor shall travail from Moscovie after the dispatch of their ware and business , than to show themselves unto our chancellor , whatsoever ware of they shall go from Moscow , they not to show the same ware to any our officer , nor pay no custom nor toll in any place . 7 if it so happen the english merchant have any wrack , and the ship be bring to any port of our dominion , we to command the say good to be inquire and seek out , and to be give to the english merchant , be here abide at that time in our country , the factor , servant , or deputy , of the company aforesaid , to who we have grant this our gracious letter . and if there happen none of the english merchant , factor , servant , or deputy to be in our country at such time , than we will all the say good to be seek out and bestow in some convenient place , and when any of the company aforewritten , bring these our letter , shall come for their good , we to command their good to be restore unto they . 8 likewise we have grant leave to the english merchant , their governor , consul , and assistant , 112 namely , sir William Garrard knight , Rowland Hayward , and to the company , to build house at Vologda , Colmogro , and the seaside , at Ivangorod , at Cherell , and in all other place of our dominion , as shall be needful for their trade . and they to keep at the say house one housekeeper , a ruff , and two or three man to keep their ware at the say house , make sale thereof to who they will , they , their factor or deputy : the say housekeeper not to buy or sell for they . 9 also we have give and grant to the english merchant , their house which they have by our goodness at saint maxim in the zenopski , and other their house in the town of Zenopski , make for the better assurance of their good , and all such as they shall set up hereafter shall be of the two Opressini , and will make they know to all they of Opressini . io and whereas by our goodness we have grant they a Ropehouse at Vologda , be far from the english merchant house , now we have give they to build a house for that use by the say english house , and have give and grant they ( of our goodness ) ground , one hundred and fourscore fathom long , and fifty fathom in breadth , accord to their own request . 11 also , we have of our goodness give and grant to the english merchant , leave to buy they a house at Wichida , and there to search out mine of iron . and where they shall happy find it , there to set up house for the make of the same iron : and to make the same , of our goodness have grant they wood , five or six mile compass about the say house , to the make