of the say iron , and not to exceed these bound and limit : and where they shall cut the say wood , not to set up any village or farm there , bring the artificer for make of their iron , out of their own country , and to learn our people that art , and so free occupy the say iron in these our dominion , transport also of the same home into England , allow for every pound one dingo , or half penny . hi 113 h | | or , choose side . 12 and if any of the say iron shall | be needful for our work , than we to take of the say iron to our work , upon agreement of price , pay money out of our treasury for the same : and when the say english merchant or factor shall send their own people out of our realm into their country , over land through any country whatsoever , free to send the same with our word . 13 also , we of our goodness have grant , that if any man misuse the say english , the factor or servant , or the say english merchant , their factor or servant abuse any other at Moscovie , or any other out town whatsoever within our dominion in trade of merchandise or otherwise , than they to have upright justice in all such matter of our counsel the Opressini without all let or delay : but if our justice may not agree the party , than lot to be make , and to who lot it shall fall , to he the right to be give , and that only our counsel at Moscovie , and none of our captain , or authorise people , or officer in any other our town , give judgement upon the say english merchant for any thing . 14 also , if any stranger shall have matter of controversy with any english merchant , factor or servant , abide within these our realm , or contrariwise any english merchant , factor or servant , against any other stranger , in all those cause our counsel of the Opressini , to give they justice , and to make a agreement and end between the party , without all delay : and none to deal therein , save our counsel of the Opressini . 15 and if any man have action against any english merchant be absent , that then in his absence it shall | be lawful for any other Englishman at his assignation to answer his cause . 16 if any Englishman happen to be wound or beat to death , or any ruff or stranger slay or beat , 17 or any steal good to be find in the say english house , than our counselor to cause the 114 1569 . guilty person to be seek out , and to do right and justice in the cause , and the party that be guilty , if he deserve punishment , to be correct accord after his offence : that the say english merchant , factor and servant , sustain thereby no hindrance or damage . 18 and whatsoever english merchant , factor , servant , or deputy , shall | be guilty of any fault , deserve our displeasure , than our counseller to cause the guilty party to go under surety , and their good to be seal and keep , until our pleasure be further know , and our counsel to examine their offence , and so to report it unto we , that we may command what shall be do therein , and none other to be arrest or have their good seal , which be not guilty of that offence , nor to stay or apprehend they in any of our dominion for the same . 19 if any english merchant , factor or servant shall offend , it shall | be lawful for their agent to do justice upon the say party , or to send he home into England at his pleasure . 20 if any english merchant , factor or servant , have lend or hereafter shall lend money to any of our people , or credit they with ware , and so depart into any foreign country , or die before the debt be due to be pay , than our people and merchant to pay the say debt , to who soever shall be appoint to the say room or charge , and the say english merchant , factor , or servant , to bring his bill of debt to our counsel , to show they what be due , and what money be owe they for any ware : and thus to do true , not add any whit to the debt , and our counsel to command the debt to be discharge unto the english merchant , factor , or servant , without delay . 21 and whatsoever english merchant shall be arrest for debt , than our counsel to command the party under arrest to be deliver to the agent : and if he have no surety , to bind the agent with he , for the better force of the bond . and if any Englishman be indebt , we will the creditor not to cast he in prison , or to deliver he to the sergeant , lest the officer lose - he , but to take ware in pawn of the debt . 22 also of our goodness , we have grant the english merchant to send our commission to all our town , captain , and authorise man , to defend and guard the say merchant from all thief , robber , and evil dispose person . 23 if in come or go to and from our dominion , the merchant , the factor , or servant be spoil on the sea , our counsel shall send our letter , and will they to be seek out , and where they shall find the good , cause it to be restore again , and the offender to be punish , accord to our commandment . 24 also of our goodness , we have grant the say merchant to take up broker , packer , wayer , and such like labourer , as shall be needful for they , pay for their hire as the labourer and they shall agree .