, action of detinue , bill , plaint , information , or otherwise : in which suit no essoine , protection , wager of law , or injunction shall be allow , for , or on the behalf of the party or party defendant . provide always , that whereas diverse subject of this realm be not of the fellowship aforesaid , have heretofore make adventure to and from some of the place prohibit by the say letter patent , that the say subject , their heir , executor , administrator and assign , or any of they shall not be impeach , implead , trouble , sue , nor molest for the same in their good or person in any manner of wise , either by our say sovereign lady , her heir or successor , or the say fellowship , or their successor . provide also , that it shall be lawful for any subject of this realm , have present any ship , good , ware , or ready money , remain at or in any place , of or within the dominion of the say mighty prince of Russia , or in any other of the place prohibit to be visit or traffic unto by this statute or the say letter patent , to fetch , bring , and convey the same , or cause the same to be bring or convey from thence by sea or otherwise , before the feast of saint John Baptist , which shall | be in the year of our lord God 1568 . any thing contain in this statute , or in the say letter patent to the contrary notwithstanding . provide also , that it shall be lawful for any of the subject of this realm , to sail to the port , town , territory , or castle of Wardhouse , or to any of the coast , town , haven , creek , river , island , and land of Norway for trade of fish , or any other trade there use by the subject of this realm , any thing in this statute to the contrary notwithstanding . and for the better maintenance of the navy and mariner of this realm , be it provide and enact , 89 that it shall not be lawful to the say fellowship and company , nor to any of they to carry and transport , or cause to be carry and transport any commodie of this realm to their new trade , but only in english ship , and to be sail for the most part with english mariner , nor also to bring into this realm nor into Flanders from their say new trade , any merchandize , or other commodity but in english ship , and sail for the most part by the english mariner , on pain to forfeit for every such offence two hundred pound , whereof the one moiety shall be to the queen majesty , her heir and successor , the other moiety to the head officer of any port town , have any haven or harbour decay , by what name soever they be incorporate , to the reparation of such harbour , that will sue for the same in any court of record , by action , bill , plaint or information , wherein no essoine , protection , or wager of law for the defendant shall be admit or allow . provide also , and be it enact , that no manner of person or person shall from henceforth carry or transport , or cause to be carry or transport out of this realm of England , any manner of clothes or karsy into any of the part where the say fellowship and society be privilege to trade by this act , before the same clothes and karsy shall be all dress , and for the most part die within this realm , upon pain of forfeiture for every such cloth and kerchief , otherwise carry and transport , five pound : the one half thereof to the queen majesty , her heir and successor , the other half to the master and warden of the clothworker in the city of London for the time be , by what name soever they be incorporate that will sue for the same . provide also that whensoever the say society or company shall willing withdraw , and discontinue whole by the space of three year in time of peace , the discharge of their merchandize at the road of saint Nicholas bay in Russia , and do not discharge their say merchandize at some other port or road lie on that north coast of Russia , or other territory now subject to the say mighty prince of Russia , etc hitherto by the subject of this realm not common frequent , that then during the time of any such discontinuance and withdraw , as be aforesaid , it shall | be lawful to all the subject of this realm to trade to the narve only in english bottom , any thing in this act to the contrary notwithstanding . provide also , that every of the queen majesty subject inhabit within the city of York , the town of Newcastle upon Tine , Hull and of Boston , have continual trade the course of merchandise by the space of ten year , and which before the 25 . of December that shall in anno D . 1567 . shall contribute , join , and put in stock , to , with , and among the say company , such sum and sum of money , as any of the say company , which have thorough continue and contribute to the say new trade , from the year 1552 . have do , and before the say 25 . of December 1567 . shall do for the furniture of one ordinary , full and entire portion , or share , and do in all thing behave himself as other of the say society be bind to do , and hereafter shall be bind to do by the privilege , ordinance and statute of the say company , shall from the same 25 . day of December 1567 . be , and be account free , and as one of the say society and company , and subject to the privilege , ordinance and statute of the say company , reasonable make and to be make , any thing in this present act to the contrary notwithstanding .