and on the sleeve with colour silk , two inch good and more . aloft their shirt they wear a garment jacket wise height Onoriadka , and about his burly waste he tie [ i . 388 . i his portky , which in stead of better breech be : of linen cloth that garment be , no codpiece be to see . a pair of yarnen stock to keep the cold away , within his boot the Russie wear , the heal they underlie with clout clamp of steel , sharp point at the toe , and over all a Shuba fur , and thus the Russie go . well butn be the shube , accord to his state , some silk , of silver other some : but those of poor rate do be not shubs at all , but gross gown to sight , that reach down beneath the calf , and that Armacha hight : these be the russy robe . the rich use to ride from place to place , his servant run , and follow by his side . the cassacke bear his felt , to force away the rain : their bridle be not very brave , their saddle be but plain . no bit but snaffle all , of birch their saddle be , much fashion like the scottish seat , broad flake to keep the knee from sweat of the horse , the pannei large far and broad be then we , they use short stirrup for the war : for when the Russie be pursue by cruel foe , he ride away , and sudden betake he to his boe , 132 and bend i but about in saddle as he sit , and therewithal ! amid his race his follow foe he hit . their bow be very short , like turquoise bow outright , of sinew make with birchen bark , in cunning manner dight . small arrow , cruel head , that fall and fork be , which be shoot from out those bow , a cruel way will flee . they seidome use to shoe their horse , unless they ride in post upon the freeze flood , then cause they shall not slide , he set a slender calk , and so he ride his way . the horse of the country go good fourscore verst a day , and all without the spur , once prick they and they skip , but go not forward on their way , the Russie have his whip to rap he on the rib , for though all boot bee , yet shall you not a pair of spur in all the country see . the common game be chess , almost the simple will both give a check and eke a mate , by practice come their skill . again they dice as fast , the poor rogue of all will sit they down in open field , and there to game fall . their dice be very small , in fashion like to those which we do use , he take they up , and over thumb he throw not shake they a whit , they cast suspicious , and yet i deem they void of art that dice most apply . at play when silver lack , go saddle , horse and all , and each thing else worth silver walk , although the price be small . because thou love to play friend Parker other while , 133 i wish thou there the weary day with dice to beguile . but thou be better far at home , i wit it well , and will be loath among such lowt so long a time to dwell . then judge of we thy friend , what kind of life we have , that near the freeze pole to waste our weary day be glad . in such a savage soil , where law do bear no sway , but all be at the king his will , to save or else to slay . and that sans cause , God wot , if so his mind be such . but what mean i with king to deal ? we ought no saint to touch . conceive the rest your self , and deem what life they lead , where lust be law , and subject live continual in dread . and where the best estate have none assurance good of land , of life , nor nothing fall unto the next of blood . but all of custom do unto the prince redound , and all the whole revenue come unto the king his crown . good faith i see thou muse at what i tell thou now , but true it be , no choice , but all at prince pleasure bow . so Tarquin rule Rome as thou remember well , and what his fortune be at last , i know thy self can tell . where will in common weal do bear the only sway , and lust be law , the prince and realm must needs in time decay . the strangeness of the place be such for sundry thing 1 see , as if i will i can write each private point to thou . the cold be rare , the people rude , the prince so full of pride , the realm so store with monk and nun , and priest on every side : t34 the manner be so turquoise like , the man so full of guile , the woman wanton , temple stuff with idol that defile the seat that sacred aught to be , the custom be so quaint , as if i will describe the whole , i fear my pen will feint . in sum , i say i never see a prince that so do reign , nor people so beset with saint , yet all but vile and vain . wild irish be as civil as the russy in their kind , hard choice which be the best of both , each bloody , rude and blind . if thou be wise , as wise thou be , and will be rule by i , live still at home , and covet not those barbarous coast to see . no good befall a man that seek , and find no better place , no civil custom to be learn , where God bestow no grace . and true ill they do deserve to be belov ’ d of God , that neither love nor stand in awe of his assure rod : which though be long , yet plague at last the vile and beastly sort of sinful wight , that all in vice do place their chief sport . a dieu friend Parker , if thou listen , to know the russes well , to Sigismundus book repair , who all the truth can tell : for he long erst in message go unto that savage king , send by the pole , and true report in each respect do bring , to he i recommend my self , to ease my pen of pain , and now at last do wish thou well , and bid farewell again .