a thousand of his man , which be call he pursuivant . cursh , who be they that he use to send into the country about his great affair . when he send any of they ( if it be to the great of any of his nobility ) he will obey they , although the messenger shall beat any of they to death . the king company with his wife and concubine . the shaugh occupi himself always two day in the week in his bathstove , and when he be dispose to go thither , he take with he five or six of his concubine , more or less , and one day they consume in wash , rub , and bathe he , and the other day in pare he nail , and other matter . the great part of his life he spend among his wife and concubine . he have now reign about fifty and four year , and be therefore count a very holy man , as they ever esteem their king , if they have reign fifty year or more : for they measure the favour of God by a man prosperity , or his displeasure by a man misfortune or adversity . the great Turk have this shaugh in great reverence , because he have reign king so long time . the succession of the kingdom . i have say before that he have four wife , and as many concubine as he list : and if he chance to have any child by any of his concubine , and be mind that any of those child shall inherit after he , then when one of his wife die , the concubine who he so favour , he make one of his wife , and the child who he so love best , he ordain to be king after he . what i hear of the manner of their manage , for offend of honest conscience and chaste ear , i may not commit to writing : their fast i have declare circumcision . before . they use circumcision unto child of seven year of age , as do the Turk . their house ( as i have say ) be for the most part make of brick , not burn but only dry in the sun : in their house they have but little furniture of household 164 stuff , except it be their carpet and some copper work : their house for all their kettle and dish wherein they eat , be off and . manner copper . they eat on the ground , sit on carpet eatin ^- crosse legged as do tailor . there be no man so simple but he sit on a carpet better or worse , and the whole house or room wherein he sit be whole cover with carpet . their house be all with flat roof cover with earth : and in the summer time they lie upon they all night . they have many bond servant both man and woman . bondman and bondman and bondwoman , be one of the best kind of bondwoman . merchandise that any man may bring . when they buy any maid or young woman , they use to feel they in all part , as with we man do horse : when one have buy a young woman , if he like she , he will keep she for his own use as long as he list , and then sell she to a other , who do the like with she . so that one woman be sometime sell in the space of four or five year , twelve , or twenty time . if a woman buy man keep a bondwoman for his own use , and if he and find she to be false to he , and give her body to any 11110 hire ' other , he may kill she if he will . when a merchant or traveller come to any town where he intend to tarry any time , he hire a woman , or sometime 2 . or 3 . during his abode there . and when he come to a other town , he do the like in the same also : for there they use to put out their woman to hire , as we do here hackney horse . there be a very great river which run through the plain of Javat , which fall into the caspian sea , by a town call Bachu , near unto which town be a strange thing to behold . for there issue out of the abundance of ground a marvelous quantity of oil , which oil they " sue fetch from the uttermost bound of all Persia : it serve out all the country to burn in their house . this oil be black , and be call nefte : they use to carry it throughout all the country upon cow and ass , of which you shall oftentimes meet with four or five i65 hundred in a company . there be also by the say town of Bachu another kind of oil which be white and very precious : and be suppose to be the same that here be Oleum Petro - call Petroleum . there be also not far from Shamaky , k * 1 ™ - a thing like unto tar , and issue out of the ground , whereof we have make the proof , that in our ship it serve well in the stead of tar . two sort of in Persia be cow of two sort : the one like unto tne - we in these part : the other be marvelous evil favour , with great bone and very lean , and but little hair upon they : their milk be walowish sweet : they be like unto they which be speak of in the scripture , which in the dream of Pharaoh signify the seven dear year : for a lean or more evil favour beast can no man see . in the country of Shirvan ( sometime call Media ) if you chance to lie in the field near unto any village , fox in great as the twilight begin , you shall have about you plenty - two or three hundred fox , which make a marvelous wawl or howl : and if you look not well to your victual , it shall escape they hardly but they will have part with you . the caspian sea do neither ebb nor flow , except sometime by rage of wind it swell up very high : the water be very salt . howbeit , the quantity of water that fall out of the great river of Volga make the water fresh at the least twenty league into the sea . the caspian sea be marvelous full of fish , but no kind of monstrous fish , as far as i can understand , yet have it sundry sort of fish which be not in these part of the world . the mutton there be good , and the sheep great , have very great rump with much fat upon they . rice and mutton be their chief victuali .