, how this may stand with reason , that body dead can uncorrupt abide so long a season . take this for certain troth , as soon as heat be go , the force of cold the body bind as hard as any stone , without offence at all to any live thing : and so they lie in perfect state , till next return of spring . their beast be like to we , as far as i can see for shape , and show , but somewhat less of bulk , and bone they be . of waterish taste , the flesh not firm , like english beef , and yet it serv ’ s they very well , and be a good relief : their sheep be very small , sharp single , handful long , great store of foul on sea and land , the moorish reed among . the greatness of the store do make the price less , beside in all the land they know not how good meat to dress . they use neither broach nor spit , but when the stove they heat , 128 George TURBERVILE ’ S letter a . d . .. i 5 ^ 8 . they put their victual in a pan , and so they bake their meat . no pewter to be have , no dish but of wood , no use of trencher , cup cut out of birche be very good . they use but wooden spoon , which hang in a case each mowsike at his girdle tie , and think it no disgrace . with whitle two or three , the better man the more , the chief russy in the land , with spoon and knife do go . their house be not huge of building , but they say , they plant they in the lofty ground , to shift the snow away , which in the winter time , each where full thick do lie : which make they have the more desire , to set their house hie . no stone work be in use , their roof of rafter be , one link in another fast , their wall be all of tree . of mast both long , and large , with moss put in between , to keep the force of weather out , i never erst have see a gross devise so good , and on the roof they lie the burden bark , to rid the rain , and sudden shower away . in every room a stove , to serve the winter turn , of wood they have sufficient store , as much as they can burn . they have no english glass , of slice of a rock hight Sluda they their window make , that english glass do mock . they cut it very thin , and sow it with a thread in pretty order like to pane , to serve their present need . no other glass , good faith do give a better light : and sure the rock be nothing rich , the cost be very [ i . 3 8 7 . i slight , in 129 i the chief place be that , where hang the god by it , the owner of the house himself do never sit , unless his better come , to who he yeald the seat : the stranger bend to the god , the ground with brow must beat . and in that very place which they most sacred deem , the stranger lie : a token that his guest he do esteem . where he be wont to have a bear skin for his bed , and must , in stead of pillow , clap his saddle to his head . in Russia other shift there be not to be have , for where the bed be not good , the boalster be but bad . i muse very much , what make they so to lie , sith in their country down be rife , and feather out of cry : unless it be because the country be so hard , they fear by niceness of a bed their body will be mar , i wish thou oft with we , save that i stand in fear thou will have loathe to have lay thy limb upon a bear , as i and Stafford do , that be my mate in bed : and yet ( we thank the god of heaven ) we both right well have speed . lo thus i make a end : none other news to thou , but that the country be too cold , the people beastly be . i write not all i know , i touch but here and there , for if i shall , my pen will pinch , and eke offend i fear . who so shall read this verse , conjecture of the rest , and think by reason of our trade , that i do think the best . but if no traffic be , then can i bold pen the hardness of the soil , and eke the manner of the man . 130 they say the lion paw give judgement of the beast : and so may you deem of the great , by read of the least . to Parker . my Parker , paper , pen , and ink be make to write , and idle head , that little do , have leisure to indite : wherefore , respect these , and thy assure love , if i will write no news to thou , thou might ’ st my pen reprove . and sithence fortune thus have shov ’ d my ship on shore : and make i seek another realm unseen of i before : the manner of the man i purpose to declare , and other private point beside , which strange and geazon be . the Russie man be round of body , full fac ’ d , the great part with belly big that overhang the waste , flat head for the most , with face nothing fair , but brown , by reason of the stove , and closeness of the air : it be their common use to shave or else to shear their head , for none in all the land long loll lock do wear , unless perhaps he have his sovereign prince displeas ’ d , for than he never cut his hair , until he be appeas ’ d . a certain sign to know who in displeasure be , for every man that view his head , will say , lo this be he . and during all the time he let his lock to grow , dare no man for his life to he a face of friendship show . their garment be not gay , nor handsome to the eye , 131 a cap aloft their head they have , that stand very high , which Colpack they do term . they wear no ruff at all : the best have collar set with pearl , which they Rubasca call . their shirt in Russie long , they work they down before ,