Notes concern this four voyage into Persia , begin in the month of July 1568 . gather by m . Richard will from the mouth of master Arthur Edward , which be agent in the same . hen he come first to the sophy presence , at his court in Casbin , bring his interpreter with he , and stand far off , the sophy ( sit in a seat royal with a great number of his noble man about he ) bid he come near , and that thrice , until he come so near he that he may have touch he with his hand . then the first demand that he ask he be , from what country he come : he answer , that he come from England . then ask he of his noble man , who know any such country ? but when Edwards see that none of they have any intelligence of that name , he name it inghil - terra , as the italian call England . than one of the noble man say Londro , mean thereby London , Londro . which name be better know in far country out of Lon ( lon - Christendom , then be the name of England . when Edwards hear he name Londro , he say that that be the name of the chief city of England , as be Teveris of the chief city of Persia . he ask he many thing more , as of the realm of England , marvel that it shall be a island of so great riches and power , as Edward declare unto he : of the riches and abundance of our merchandise he further understand by our traffic in Moscovia and other country . he demand also many thing of the queen majesty , and of the custom and law of the realm : say oftentimes in his own language , Bara colla , ( that be to say ) well say . he ask also many thing of king Philip , and of his war against the Turk at Malta . than he demand of he what be the chief cause of his resort into his realm . And be certify that it be for the trade of merchandise , he ask what kind of merchandise he can bring thither . such ( say he ) as the venetian merchant do , which dwell in our country in the city of Londro send to Venice , and from thence into turquoise by Halepo and Tripoli in Syria , from whence , as by the second and three hand , with great charge of many custom and other thing thereunto pertain , they be at the length bring into your country and city of Persia . what merchandise be those ? say the sophy . Edwards answer , that they be great abundance of fine karsy , of broad clothes of all sort and colour , as scarlet , violet , and other of the fine cloth of all the world . the venetian also that the venetian bring out of England not traffic in only such clothes ready make , but furthermore great n ^ an * plenty of fine wool to mingle with their wool , of which they can not otherwise make fine cloth : affirm that there go out of England year that way , above two hundred thousand karsy , and as many broad clothes , beside fine wool and other merchandise , beside also the great abundance of like clothes , the which be carry into Spain , Barbary , and diverse other country . the sophy then ask he by what mean such merchandise may be bring into Persia . right well sir ( say he ) by the way of Moscovia , with more safety and in much short time ' then the venetian can bring they : first from England to Venice , and from thence into Persia by the way of turquoise . and therefore if it shall please your majesty to grant we free passage into all your dominion , with such privilege as may appertain to the safeguard of our life , good and merchandise , we will furnish your country with all such merchandise and other commodity , in short time , and better cheap than you may have the same at the turk hand . this talk and much more be between the sophy and Edward for the space of two hour : all which thing like he so well , that short after he grant to the say Arthur Edward other privilege for the trade of merchandise into Persia , 144 all write in azure and gold letter , and deliver unto the lord keeper of the sophy his great seal . the lord keeper be name coach Califay , who say that when the shaugh ( that be the king or prince ) do sit to seal any letter , that last privilege shall be seal and deliver to Laurence chapman . in this privilege be one principali article for servant or merchant : that if the agent do perceive that upon their naughty do , they will become busorman , that than the agent wheresoever he shall find any such servant or servant , to take they and put they in prison , and no person to keep they or maintain they . this article be grant in respect of a custom among the persian , be Mahumetans , who manner be friendly to receive and well entertain , both with gift and live , all such Christians , as forsake their religion , will become of the religion of the persian . insomuch that before this privilege be grant , there be great occasion of naughty servant to deceive and rob their master , that under the colour of profess that religion , they may live among they in such safety , that you may have no law against they , either to punish they or to recover your good at their hand , or elsewhere . for before the sophy ( who they say to be a marvelous wise and gracious prince ) seem to favour our nation , and to grant they such privilege , the people abuse they very much , and so hate they , that they will not touch they , but revile they , call they cafar and gawar , which be , infidel or misbeliever . but after they see how great the prince favour they , they have they afterward in great reverence , and will kiss their hand and use they very friendly . for before they take it for no wrong to rob they , defraud they , bear false witness against they , and such merchandize as they have buy or sell , make they take it again , and change it as often as they list . and if any stranger by chance have kill one of they , they will have the life of two for one slay , and for the debt of any stranger will take the good of any other of the in t4s king same nation , with many other such like abuse , in manner unknown to the prince , before the complaint of our man make unto he for reformation of such abuse : which be the cause that no merchant stranger of contrary religion dare come into his dominion with their commodity , which may be great to the profit of he and his subject . the article of the second privilege deliver to Laurence chapman , which be to be annex unto the former privilege . 10 item , that the merchant have free liberty , as in their first privilege , to go unto Gilan , and all other place of his dominion , now or hereafter when occasion shall be give . 11 item , if by misfortune any of their ship shall break , or fall upon any part of his dominion on the sea coast , his subject to help with all speed to save the good and