as many as will be put away yearly in this country , so far as yet i can perceive . to break the trade betwixt the venetian and the whole company of the armenian it be not possible , unless the worshipful will find some mean to receive of they yearly to the number of 100 catter or mule lade , and deliver they for the same one three part money , the rest cloth and karsy fit in color meet for this country : the example , as abovesaid , be send unto you . at Amadia six day journey from Teveris , grow abundance of gall , which be bring up yearly by the venetian , and be sell there for two biste the teveris bateman , which as your agent here say , make six pound english weight , but i doubt it will not so be prove . nevertheless it be suppose much good will be do by buy of they : which may at this present have partly be prove , if so be that some can do but half that which have be write . 139 the trade between the venetian and the armenian not easy to be break . A . D . 1568 . Babylon 15 . day journey from Casbin . touch drug , i find many as well at Teveris , as also in Casbin , but the goodness nothing like to such as be bring into England out of other place : and the price be so high that small gain will be have in buy of they : albeit , if i have be furnish with money , as i may have be , if some will , i will have buy some , to the end the goodness of they may have be see in England . at my come to Casbin i find no manner of sale of any commodity make , but all lie there whole , and news give out ( as your agent say ) that you shaugh will buy all such commodity as he have , and give he silk and spice for the same : but by report the shaugh never take cloth into his treasury all the day of his life , and will not now begin : he whole trade be in raw silk , which he sell always for money to the armenian and Turk , and such other as use to buy it : thus hope of that which be not like to be have , he have drive off the time , not send to any other place : by mean whereof the worshipful good lie unsold to this day to their great hindrance , which i for my part be not a little sorry to see . Babylon be from hence fifteen day journey , whereas by true report be great store of date , and sell for a bisse the batman , the commodity fit for England , and the place so near unto we might easy have be know , if he , who deed and say differ much , have be willing to the same . Cassan also be but seven day journey from hence , and a place by report where most store of spice be at all time to be have , over and above any place in this country : it can not be grant by he to be see and prove at this time : if this be loss to the worshipful , refer it to the want of one which can do that which he speak in word . to travel in this country be not only miserable and uncomfortable for lack of town and village to harbour in when night come , and to refresh man with wholesome victual in time of need , but also such scarcity 140 Edward , spark and chapman a . d 1568 . of water , that sometime in three day journey together , be not to be find any drop fit for man or beast to drink , beside the great danger we stand in for rob by these infidel , who do account it remission of sin to wash their hand in the blood of one of we . better it be therefore in my opinion to continue a beggar in England during life , than to remain a rich merchant seven year in this country , as some shall well find at their come hither . by commandment of the agent also i go to Gilan , his voyage to as well to see what harbour be there for your ship , as gilan - also to understand what commodity be there best sell , and for what quantity . i find the way from hence so dangerous and troublesome , that with my pen i be not able to note it unto you : no man travel from hence thither , but such poor people as need constrain to buy rice for their relief to live upon , and they lie not above twenty batman upon a catter , and it lie no low than the skirt of the saddle , and he escape very hardly that come there with the same . the town of Laighon , which be the chief place in all that land , have i see , and Langro and Rosar also , which be now overrun by the shaugh and his power , and be so spoil , and the people so rob , that not one of they be able to buy one kerchief . the best commodity there to be buy , be raw silk , and be sell in the summer time for 38 . shaugh the Laighon batman , which be little above 40 . livre . weight , and for ready money : also there be to be have what store of Alom you will , and sell there for one bisse the teveris batman . in these part be many turquoise merchant resident , the malice of which give a outward show , as though they be glad of our come hither , but secret they be our mortali enemy , search by all mean to hinder our sale , because we shall the soon give over our trade thither , which in process of time i hope will grow to better perfection . they wish we to go to Hallape with the 141 rest of our commodity unsold , where they say we shall have good entertainment in spite of the great number of Venetians which be there resident , and the custom but two in the hundred , and our karsy to be sell present , have we never so many , for twelve ducat , which make of this money 165 . shaugh : but by such as know the place , market and custom , it be report to we credible to the contrary , and that such karsy as we be , be not sell for above 8 . ducat there : the custom thirty in the hundred and moor , that no place in the world be so well furnish with good cloth and karsy , and of so brave colour as that place be , suppose it to be crafty purpose of they , to bring we into trouble , which God defend we from . the price of spice be these , at this present enhance by reason you way be shut to ormus , which when God shall send open , i purpose ( God will ) to see , and at my return to advertise the worshipful what benefit be there to be have in all point , so near as i can learn : Pepper 25 . shaugh the teveris batman : clove 50 . shaugh , long pepper 25 . shaugh , mace large 50 . shaugh , ginger 24 . shaugh , ready money all , or else look not upon they . and the best sort of raw silk be sell for 60 . shaugh the teveris batman . thus for want of further matter to enlarge , i end for this time , beseech God to preserve you in continual ! health . by your obedient servant , Laurence chapman .