think , that our princely affair be set aside , and little regard , wherewith we be at that time much grieve : for the which cause , and for the evil behaviour of your merchant , resident in our dominion ( who have diverse way transgress and break our law , live wilful in all their do ) we do lay our heavy displeasure upon they , and do take away from they their privilege , command that the same throughout all our dominion , shall be void , and of none effect : and thereupon do write to the queen our sister , touch our grief . and now her highness have send unto we again , you her ambassador , with her love letter , and full mind , which we do thankful receive , and be thereby full satisfy . and for that our princely , and secret affair be not finish to our contentation at our time appoint , accord to our expectation , we do now leave of all those matter , and set they aside for the time , because our mind be now otherwise change , but hereafter when occasion shall move we to the like , we will then talk of those matter again . and for that it have please the queen our love sister , to send unto we at this present , and do desire to continue in friendship with we for ever ( which we do grateful accept , and willing agree to the same ) we of our goodness for her highness sake , will not only from henceforth put away , and forget all our displeasure towards the same sir William Garrard and his company ( as though they have never offend we ) but also will restore they to their privilege , and liberty , in , and throughout all our dominion , and will signify the same by our letter , in all town and city , where the say merchant do traffic , and we will show they favour as aforetime , if they deserve not the contrary . and if the queen our sister have not send thou Anthony unto we at this present , God know what we shall have do to the say 187 A . D . 1572 . the cause of the emperor displeasure . merchant , or whether we will have call back our indignation . then i humble beseech his majesty , to let i know the particular offence commit by the say merchant , and the offender name , to the intent i may make report thereof , unto the queen majesty , my mistress , accord , that the say offender may receive just punishment for their desert : but he say , i shall not know they , because he have clear remit all offence : and further , that it be not princely to forgive , and after to accuse the party , whereby her majesty displeasure may fall upon they at home . notwithstanding i do after understand some part thereof , by other mean . then his majesty proceed in talk , say : as touch the article of request , concern the merchant affair , which you do yesterday deliver unto our secretary , we have not only read the same our self , but also have appoint our say secretary to declare unto you our mind , and answer to the same . and for that we be now upon our journey towards our border , and will depart from hence short , we will dismiss you to the queen our love sister , your mistress , with our letter , and full mind by word of mouth , touch all your request , and will send a gentleman one of our household with you to safe conduct you to your ship : and of our goodness will give you victual , boat , man , and post horse , so many as you shall need . and therewith his majesty stand up , and put off his cap , say unto i these word . do our hearty commendation unto our love sister , queen Elizabeth , unto who we wish long life , with happy success : and therewith his highness extend his hand to i to kiss , and command his son , sit by he , to send the like commendation , which he do , who hand likewise i kiss . and then his majesty cause i to sit down , and command wine and drink of diverse sort to be bring , whereof he give i to drink with his own hand , and so after 1 depart . 188 then the next day , be the 14 of may aforesaid , i be send for to come to the chief secretary , and one other of the counsel with he , who at our meeting say unto i these word : we be appoint by the emperor his majesty , to give you answer from his highness , touch your request deliver in writing , which his majesty himself have peruse , and answer as follow . 1 to the first request it be answer , that all his majesty grief and displeasure ( now put away from the merchant ) do grow , because the queen majesty do not accomplish and end with his ambassador , his secret and weighty affair , accord to his expectation , and the promise make by Thomas Randolph , at his be here : and also of the ill behaviour of your merchant resident here in our country , as his majesty do himself yesterday declare unto you . 2 to the second , his majesty will you to understand , that he have not , nor will not hereafter be move to break friendship with the queen majesty , without good and just cause . 3 to the three , you be answer by the emperor majesty himself , that his great goodness and favour again unto the merchant shall be restore , and the same to be know by his gracious letter of privilege now again grant . 4 to the four , his majesty have command , that your merchant here resident shall exhibit , and put in write unto i his majesty secretary , all their grief , and complaint ,