certain letter in verse , write by master George turbervile out of Moscovia , which go as secretary thither with master Tho . Randolph , her majesty ambassador to the emperor 1568 , to certain friend of he in London , describe the manner of the country and people . to his especial friend master Edward Dancie . my Dancie dear , when i recount within my breast , my London friend , and wont mate , and thou above the rest : i feel a thousand fit of deep and deadly woe , to think that i from land to sea , from bliss to bale do go . i leave my native soil , full like a reckless man , and unacquainted of the coast , among the russes run : a people pass rude , to vice vile incline , folk fit to be of Bacchus train , so quaff be their kind . drink be their whole desire , the pot be all their pride , the sober head do once a day stand needful of a guide . if he to banquet bid his friend , he will not shrink on they at dinner to bestow a dozen kind of drink : 124 such liquour as they have , and as the country give , but chief two , one call kva , whereby the mousike live . small wear and waterlike , but somewhat tart in taste , the rest be mead of honey make , wherewith their lip they baste . and if he go unto his neighbour as a guest , he care for title meat , if so his drink be of the best . no wonder though they use such vile and beastly trade , sith with the hatchet and the hand , their chief god be make . their idol have their heart , on God they never call , unless it be ( Nichola bough ) that hang against the wall . the house that have no god , or paint saint within , be not to be resort to , that roof be full of sin . beside their private god , in open place stand their cross unto which they crooche , and bless themselves with hand . devout down they duck , with forehead to the ground , be never more deceit in rag , and greasy garment find . almost the mean man in all the country ride , the woman eke , against our use , her trot horse bestride . ' in sundry colour they both man and woman go , in buskin all , that money have on buskin to bestoe . each woman hanging have a ring within her ear , which all of ancient use , and some of very pride do [ i - 385j wear . their gate be very brave , their countenance wise and sad , and yet they follow fleshly lust , their trade of live bid . it be no shame at all account to defile another bed , they make no care their folly to concile , i25 be not the mean man in all the land but he , to buy her paint colour do allow his wife a fee , wherewith she deck her self , and die her tawny skin , she prank and paint her smoky face , both brow , lip , cheek , and chin . yea those that honest be , if any such there be within the land , do use the like : a man may plain see upon some woman cheek the paint how it lie , in plaster sort , for that too thick her face the harlot die . but such as skilful be , and cunning dame indeed , by daily practise do it well , yea sure they do exceed . they lie their colour so , as he that be full wise , may easy be deceiv ’ d therein , if he do trust his eye . i not a little muse , what madness make they paint their face , weigh how they keep the stoove by mere constraint . for seidome when , unless on church or marriage day a man shall see the dame abroad , that be of best array . the Russie mean to reap the profit of her pride , and so he mew she to be sure , she lie by no man side . thus much , friend Dancie , i do mean to write to thou , to let thou weet in Russia land , what man and woman be . hereafter i perhaps of other thing will write to thou , and other of my friend , which i shall see with sight : and other stuff beside , which true report shall tell , mean while i end my love line , and bid thou now farewell . 126 if i shall now forget , or not remember thou , thou Spencer might ’ st a foul rebuke , and shame impute to i . for i to open show do love thou pass well , and thou be he at parture , who i loathe to bid farewell . and as i go thy friend , so i continue still , no better proof thou can then this desire of true good will . i do remember well when needs i shall away , and that the post will licence we , no long time to stay : thou wrong i by the fist , and hold fast my hand , do crave of i to send thou news , and how i like the land . it be a sandy soil , no very fruitful vain , more waste and woody ground there be , then close fit for grain . yet grain there grow be , which they untimely take , and cut or ear the corn be ripe , they mow it on a stack . and lay sheaf by sheaf , their harvest so they dry , they make the great haste , for fear the frost the corn destroy . for in the winter time , so glary be the ground , as neither grass , nor other grain , in pasture may be find . in come the cattle then , the sheep , the colt , the cow , fast by his bed the mowsike then a lodging do allow , who he with fodder feed , and hold as dear as life : and thus they wear the winter with the mowsike and his wife . 127 seven month the winter dure , the glare it be so great , as it be May before ' he turn , his ground to sow his wheat . the body eke that die unburied lie they then , lay up in coffin make of fir , as well the poor man , as those of great state : the cause be light find , for that in winter time , they can come to break the ground . and will so plenteous be , quite throughout all the land , as rich , and poor , at time of death assure of coffin stand . perhaps thou muse much