further observation concern the state of Persia , take in the foresay five voyage into those part , and write by m . Geffrey Ducket , one of the agent employ in the same . hamaky be the fair town in all media , and the chief commodity of that country be raw silk , and the great plenty thereof be at a town three day journey from shamaky call arash : and within 3 . day journey of arash be a country name grosin , who inhabit ant be Christians , and be think to be they which be otherwise call Georgians : there be also much silk to be sell . the chief town of that country be call Zegham , from whence be carry yearly into Persia , a incredible quantity of Hasell nut , all of one sort and goodness , and as good and thin shale as be our filbert . of these be carry yearly the quantity of 4000 camel lade . of the name of the sophy of Persia , and why he be call the shaugh , and of other custom . the king of Persia ( who here we call the great sophy ) be not there so call , but be call the shaugh . it be there dangerous to call he by the name of sophy , because that sophy in the persian tongue , be a beggar , and it be as much as to call he , the great beggar . he lie at a town call Casbin , which be situate in a goodly fertile valley of 3 . or 4 . day journey in length . the town be but evil build , and for the most part all of brick , not harden with fire , but only dry at the sun , as be the most part of the build of all Persia . the king have not come out of the compass of his own house in 33 . or 34 . year , whereof the cause be not know , but as they say , it be upon a superstition of certain prophecy to which they be great addict : he be now about 80 . year of age , and very lusty . and to keep he the more lusty , he have 4 . wife always , and about 300 . concubine , and once in the year he have all the fair maiden and wife that may be find a great way about bring unto he , who he diligent peruse , feel they in all part , take such as he like , and put away some of they which he have keep before , and with they that he put away , he gratifi some such as have do he the best service . and if he chance to take any man wife , her husband be very glad thereof , and in recompense of she , oftentimes he give the husband one of his old store , who he thankful receive . if any stranger be a christian shall come before how stranger he , he must put on a new pair of shoe make in be used - that country , and from the place where he enter , there be dig as it be a causey all the way , until he come to the place where he shall talk with the king , who stand always above in a gallery , when he talk with any stranger : and when the stranger be depart , then be the causey cast down , and the ground make even again . of the religion of the persian . their religion be all one with the Turk , save that they differ who be the right successor of Mahumet . the Turk say that it be one Homer and his son Usman . but the persian say that it be one Mortus Ali , which they will prove in this manner . they say there be a counsel call to decide the matter who shall be the successor : and after they have call upon Mahumet to reveal unto they his will and pleasure therein , there come among they a little a goodly and lizard , who declare that it be mahumet pleasure well ground that Mortus Ali shall be his successor . This Mortus re Ali be a valiant man and slay Homer the Turk prophet . he have a sword that he fight withal , with 159 the which he conquer all his enemy , and kill as many as he strike . when Mortus Ali die , there come a holy prophet , who give they warning that short there will come a white Carnell , upon the which he charge they to lay the body and sword of Mortus Ali , and to suffer the camel to carry it whither he will . the which be perform , the say white camel carry the sword and body of Mortus Ali unto the sea side , and the camel go a good way into the sea , be with the body and sword of Mortus Ali take up into heaven , for who return they have long look in Persia . and for this cause the king always keep a horse ready saddle for he , and also of late keep for he one of his own daughter to be his wife , but she die in the year of our lord , 1573 . and they say furthermore , y ‘ if he come not short , they shall of our belief : much like the Jew , look for their Messiah to come and reign among they like a worldly king for ever , and deliver they from the captivity which they be now in among the christian , Turk , and gentile . the shaugh or king of Persia be nothing in strength and power comparable unto the Turk : for although he have a great dominion , yet be it nothing to be compare with the turk : neither have he any great ordinance or gun , or harquebuss . notwithstanding his old son Ishmael about 25 . year past , fight a great battle with the Turk , and slay of his army about a hundred thousand man : who after his return , be by his father cast into prison , and there continue until this day : for his father the shaugh have he in suspicion that he will have put he down , and have take the regiment unto himself . their opinion of Christ be , that he be a holy man and a great prophet , but not like unto Mahumet : say , that Mahumet be the last prophet by who all thing be finish , and be therefore the great . to prove that Christ be not God son , they say that God have never wife , and therefore can have no son 160 or child . they go on pilgrimage from the further part of Persia unto Mecha in Arabia , and by the way they visit also the sepulchre of Christ at Jerusalem , which they now call couch kaly . the most part of spice which come into