to be deliver to any of the say merchant that live : or otherwise to be keep in safety until any of they come to demand they . 12 item , if any of the say merchant depart this life in any city or town , or on the high way , his governor there to see their good safe keep , and to be deliver to any other of they that shall demand they . 13 item , the say merchant to take such camel - man as they themselves will , be country people , and that no Kissell Bash do let or hinder they . and the say owner of the camel to be bind to answer they such good as they shall receive at their hand , and the camel - man to stand to the loss of their camel or horse . 14 item more , that the say carrier do demand no more of they , than their agreement be to pay they . 15 item more , if they be at a price with any carrier , and have give earnest , the camel - man to see they keep their promise . 16 item , if any of the say merchant be in fear to travel , to give they one or more to go with they and see 146 they in safety with their good , to the place they will go unto . 17 item , in all place , to say , in all city , town or village on the high way , his subject to give they honest room , and victual for their money . 18 item , the say merchant may in any place , where they shall think best , build or buy any house or house to their own use . and no person to molest or trouble they , and to stand in any Caravan where they will , or shall think good . the commodity which the merchant may have by this trade into Persia be think to be great , and may in time perhaps be great than the Portugal trade into you east Indies , forasmuch as by the way of Persia into England , the return may be make every year once : whereas the Portugal make the return from Calecut but once in two year , by a long and dangerous voyage all by sea : for where as the city and island of ormus , lie in the gulf of Persia , be the most famous mart town of all east India , whither all you merchandise of India be bring , the same may in short time and more safe be bring by land and river through Persia , even unto the caspian sea , and from thence by the country of Russia or Moscovia by river , even unto the city of yeraslave , and from thence by land 180 . mile to Vologda , and from thence again all by water even unto England . the merchandise which be have out of Persia for the return of ware be silk of all sort of colour , both raw and wrought . also all manner of spice and drug , pearl and precious stone , likewise carpet of diverse sort , with diverse other rich merchandise . it be tell i of they that come last from Persia , that there be more silk bring into some one city of Persia , then be of cloth bring into the city of London . also that one village of Armenia name Gilgat do carry yearly five hundred , and sometime a thousand mule lade with 147 silk to Halepo in Soria of turquoise , be 4 . day journey from Tripoli , where the venetian have their continual ! abide , and send from thence silk which they return for english karsy and other clothes into all part of Christendom . [ i - 394 - 1 the manner how the Christians become busorman , and forsake their religion . i have note here before that if any Christian will become a busorman , that be , one that have forsake his faith , and be a mahometan of their religion , they give he many gift , and sometime also a live . the manner be , that when the devil be enter into his heart to forsake his faith , he resort to the sultan or governor of the town , to who he make protestation of his devilish purpose . the governor appoint he a horse , and one to ride before he on another horse , bear a sword in his hand , and the busorman bear a arrow in his hand , and ride in the city , curse his father and mother : and if ever after he return to his own religion , he be guilty of death , as be signify by the sword bear before he . a young man , a servant of one of our merchant , because he will not abide the correction of his master for his fault , be mind to forsake his faith . but ( as God will ) he fall sudden sick and die , before he give himself to the devil . if he have become a busorman , he have great trouble the merchant : for if he will then have say that half their good have be his , they will have give credit unto he . for the avoid of which inconvenience , it be grant in the privilege , that no busorman , etc as there appear . in Persia in diverse place ox and cow bear the tent and household stuff of the poor man of the country , which have neither camel nor horse . 148 of the tree which bear bombasin cotton , or Gossampine . in Persia be great abundance of bombasin cotton , and very fine : this grow on a certain little tree or brier , not past the height of a man waste or little moor : the tree have a slender stalk like unto a brier , or to a carnation gillifloure , with very many branch , bear on every branch a fruit or rather a cod , grow in round form , contain in it the cotton : and when this bud or cod come to the bigness of a walnut , it open and show forth the cotton , which grow still in bigness until it be like a fleece of wool as big as a man fist , and begin to be loose , and then they gather it as it be the ripe fruit . the seed of these tree be as big as peason , and be black , and somewhat flat , and not round ; they sow they in plow ground , where they grow in the field in great abundance in many country in Persia , and diverse other region . the write of the persian . ARthur Edwards show i a letter of the sophy , write in their letter backward , subsign with the hand both of the sophy and his secretary . the sophy subscription be only one word ( his name i suppose be shaugh ) write in golden letter upon red paper . the whole letter be also write on the same piece of red paper , be long and narrow , about the length of a foot , and not past three inch broad . the private signet of the sophy be a round print mark about the bigness of a royal , only print upon the same paper without any wax or other seal , the letter seem so mishapen and disorder , that a man will think it be somewhat scribble in manner at adventure . yet they say that almost every letter with his prick or circunflexe signify a whole word . insomuch that in a piece of paper as big as a man hand their writing do contain as much as do we almost in a sheet of paper .