gentleman which have charge of i , to return back again with i to the say peraslave , and to remain there until his majesty further pleasure , wherewith i be much dismay , and marveil what that sudden change mean , and the rather , because it be a troublesome time , and his majesty much disquiet through the ill success of his affair , ( as i do understand . ) and the twenty of the same , i be send for again to the court , and the 23 . i come before his majesty , who cause i to kiss his hand , and give gracious audience unto my oration , grateful receive and accept the queen majesty princely letter , and her present , in the presence of all his nobility . after i have finish my oration , too long here to rehearse , and deliver her highness letter , and present ( as aforesaid ) the emperor sit in royal estate stand up and say , how do queen Elizabeth my sister , be she in health ? to who i answer , God do bless her majesty with health , and peace , and do wish the like unto thou lord , her love brother . than his majesty sit down again , command all his nobility and other to depart , and avoid the chamber , save the chief secretary , and one other of the counsel , and will i to approach near unto he with my interpretor , say unto i these word . Anthony , the last time thou be with we here , we do commit unto thou our trusty and secret message , to be declare unto the queen majesty herself thy mistress at thy come home , and do expect thy come unto we again at the time we appoint , with a full answer of the same from her highness . 173 and in the mean time there come unto we at several ! time three messenger , the one call manly , the other George Middleton , and Edward goodman , by the way of the narve about the merchant affair : to who we send our messenger to know whether thou Anthony , be return home in safety , and when thou shall return unto we again : but those messenger can tell we nothing , and do miscall , and abuse with evil word , both our messenger and thou , wherewith we be much offend . And understand that the say goodman have letter about he , we cause he to be search , with who be find many letter , wherein be write much against our princely estate , and that in our empire be many unlawful thing do , whereat we be much grieve , and will suffer none of those rude messenger to have access unto we : and short after we be inform that one Thomas Randolfe be come into our dominion by the way of Dwina , ambassador from the queen , and we send a gentleman to meet and conduct he to our city of Moscow , at which time we look that thou shall have return unto we again . and the say Thomas be arrive at our say city , we send unto he diverse time , that he shall come and confer with our counsel ! , whereby we may understand the cause of his come , look for answer of those our princely affair commit unto thou . but he refuse to come to our say counsel : wherefore , and for that our say city be visit with plague , the say Thomas be the long keep from our presence . which be cease , forthwith we give he access and audience , but all his talk with we be about merchant affair , and nothing touch we . we know that merchant matter be to be hear , for that they be the stay of our princely treasure : but first prince affair be to be establish , and then merchant . after this the say Thomas Randolfe be with we at our city of Vologda , and we deal with he about our princely affair , 174 whereby amity betwixt the queen majesty and we may be establish for ever , and matter be agree and conclude betwixt your ambassador and we , and thereupon we send our ambassador into England with he to end the same : but our ambassador return unto we again , without finish our say affair , contrary to our expectation , and the agreement betwixt we , and your say ambassador . thus when his majesty have make a long discourse , i humble beseech his highness to hear i gracious , and to give i leave to speak without offence , and to believe those word to be true which i shall speak . which he grant , and these be my word . most noble and famous prince , the message which thy highness do send by i unto the queen her most excellent majesty touch thy princely and secret affair , immediate , and so soon as i come home , i do declare both secret and true unto the queen majesty her self , word for word , as thou lord do command i . which her highness do willing hear and accept , and be mindful thereof , and willing to answer the same , the next ship after , her majesty do send unto thou , lord , her highness ambassador Thomas Randolfe , who approve wisdom and fidelity be unto her majesty well know , and therefore think meet to be send to so worthy a prince , who have commission not only to treat with thy majesty of merchant affair , but also of those thy princely and secret affair commit unto i . and the cause ( most gracious prince ) that i be not send again , be , for that i be employ in service upon the sea against the queen majesty enemy , and be not return home at such time as master Thomas Randolfe depart with the ship , to come into thy majesty country , otherwise i have be send . and whereas thy majesty say , that Thomas Randolfe will not treat with thy counsel of the matter of