the english bark assault near astracan by the Nagaian Tartars . [ i . 395 - j astracan besiege by 70000 . Turks and Tartar . the five voyage into Persia make by m . Thomas Banister , and master Geoffrey Ducket , agent for the Moscovie company , begin from England in the year 1568 . and continue to the year 1574 . follow . write by P . i from the mouth of m . Lionel Plumtree . Pon the 3 . day of July 1568 . they embark themselves at yeraslave , be accompany with Lionel Plumtree , and some 12 . English man moor , in a bark call the Thomas Bonaventure of the burden of 70 . ton , take also along with they of russes to the number of 40 . for their use and employment . it fall out in the way , before they come to astracan by 40 . mile , that the Nagaian Tartars , be a kind of thievish and cruel people , make a assault upon they with 18 . boat of they , each of they be arm , some with sword , some with spear , and some other with bow and arrow , and the whole number of they they discover to be about 300 . man . they for their part , although they can have wish a quiet voyage and journey without blow and violence , yet not willing to be spoil with such barbarian as they be , begin to defend themselves against their assault , by mean whereof a very terrible and fierce fight follow and continue hot and sharp for two hour , wherein our man so well play their part with their caliver , that they force the Tartar to flee with the loss of 120 . of they , as they be afterward inform by a ruff prisoner , which escape from the nagaians , and come to they to astracan , at which town they arrive the 20 . of August . in this town of astracan they be somewhat hinder of their journey , and stay the space of six week 150 by reason of a great army of 70000 . Turk and Tartar which come thither upon the instigation of the great Turk , hope either to have surprise it sudden or by continuance of siege to win the same . but in the end by reason that the winter approach , as also , because they have receive news of a great expedition , which the emperor of Russia be in provide for the defence of the say place , they be constrain to raise their siege , 8c to leave the town as they find it . upon their departure our man have opportunity to proceed on their voyage , and use the occasion , they leave astracan , and come to Bilbil towards the end of October : from whence they go to Shavaran , where ( as they lodge in their tent ) they be great molest with strange troop of sholcave or fox , which be so busy with they that they take their meat and victual out of their lodging , and devour to the bare bone in one night a mighty wild boar that be send unto they for a present from the governor of the country . have stay here some three or four day in provide of carriage and other necessary for their journey , they depart thence and come to shamaky , which be four day journey from the aforesaid Shavaran . in this town of shamaky their whole company spend out the winter , and from thence in April follow they take their journey towards Ardouil a place of great account and much esteem , by reason of the sepulchre of the emperor of Persia , which for the most part lie there bury , and so be grow to be a place of their superstitious devotion . in this town of Ardouil they sojourn the space of 5 . or 6 . month , find some traffic and sale , but to no purpose , the town be more inhabit and frequent with gentleman and nobleman than merchant . the difference of religion breed great broil in this town while they remain there : for the brother seek the destruction of the brother , and the near kinsman 151 A . D . I569 . rise up one against another , insomuch that one of their company Lionel Plumtree have see in one day sometime 14 . slay in a garboil . and he be further desirous to see their manner of fight , or rather somewhat more curious to behold , then mistrustful of their blow , be like to have bear a share in their bloody tragedy , be twice wound with their shot and arrow , although not to the death . at this town the shaw Thamas send a messenger for our man to come to his presence at Casbin , to who Thomas Banister fail not to go , although master Ducket lie very sick at Ardouil , and in such case that they almost despair of his recovery . he be come to the shaugh be receive and entertain of he with great favour and speciali countenance , and have the most part of all his request grant he , this only except , that whereas he entreat a privilege or sufferance to transport and carry through his dominion certain horse into India , the shaugh seem loath to yield thereunto , and yet do not altogether deny it , but refer it to some further time . as for the point of traffic , he can not make that motion or request that be not so soon grant as it be prefer : and the shaugh himself buy there of he many karsy , and make he as good payment as any man can wish , and oftentimes will send his money for the ware before the ware be deliver , that he may be the sure of this honourable intend deal . one thing somewhat strange i think good in this place to remember , that whereas he purpose to send a great sum of money to Mecca in Arabia , for a offering to Mahomet their prophet , he will not send any money or coin of his own , but send to the english merchant to exchange his coin for they , accord to the value of it , yield this reason for the same , that the money of the merchant be get by good mean , and with good conscience , and be therefore worthy to be make for a oblation to their holy prophet , 152 but his own money be rather get by fraud , oppression and unhonest mean , and therefore be not fit to serve for so holy a use . after six month spend in Casbin the say Thomas Banister depart towards the great city of Tauris , where be arrive , he find m . Ducket well recover of his sickness , who he have leave ill at Ardouil . at this city the foresay master Ducket make sale of the english commodity , remain there to that purpose the space of two year and a half . and beside other kind of merchandise of that country , he buy great store of gal which grow in great abundance at a place within one day journey of the aforesaid Tauris . after this Thomas Banister depart from Tauris , and go to shamaky to give order for the transport of those commodity which be buy for England . and have dispatch they away , he go there hence to arrash , a town four day journey with camel from shamaky for the buy of raw silk . but there by reason of the unwholesomeness of the air , and corruption of the water in the hot time of the year , he with Laurence chapman and some other english man unhappy die : which be know of m . Ducket , he immediate come from Tauris to arrash , to take possession of the good , for otherwise by the custom of the country , if there have be no merchant or other friend of he to enter upon that which he leave , all have fall into the shaugh hand , which good notwithstanding can not be recover from the officer which have seize and seal up the same , until m . Ducket have be in person with the shaugh , and have procure his order for the delivery thereof . Lionel Plumtree , in the mean time that m . Ducket be at Casbin in suit for good , upon the persuasion of certain bogharians , make provision for a journey