their arrival at Bilbil the 14 - of August 1568 . prince Erasbec . the four voyage into Persia , make by m . Arthur Edward agent , John spark , Laurence chapman , Christopher faucet , and Richard pingle , in the year 1568 . declare in this letter write from Casbin in Persia by the foresay Laurence chapman to a worshipful merchant of the company of Russia in London . anno domini 1569 . April 28 . orshipfull sir , my duty always remembered , and your prosperous health , and good success in all your affair wish , to the glory of God , and your own heart desire , etc may it please you to understand that your agent m . Arthur Edward and we depart from yera - slave in July 1568 . and the 14 . of August arrive at our port call Bilbil , with your ship the grace of God , and the good in she in good safety , God be thank for it , find there neither the people so ready to aid we for the bring of she in , and unlade of the good , nor yet so obedient to the shaugh privilege , as the worshipful company have be inform . our good bring upon land , we be compel to open and sei as they will set the price , or otherwise it will have be worse for we . be so satisfy to their contentment , we be speedy aid with camel by the prince Erasbec sultan his appointment , to carry our good to Shamaki , to which place we attain the first of September , find it so thorough furnish with all manner of commodity by occasion of our late come , and by such as come before we , that no man will ask to buy any one piece of kerchief of we , and lie then the space of one whole month before your agent Arthur Edwards will disperse we abroad with the good , such as come out of Russia afterwards , have 136 bring their good to that and other place , and spoil those sale we may have make , be send abroad in time convenient , be no little hindrance to the worshipful , as also great grief unto we to see . to conclude , through our daily call upon he , he bend himself for Casbin , take with he the great sum of the good , and two of the worshipful servant , to wit , John spark and my self , to help and procure the better sale for the same : and leave at Shamaki Christopher faucet and Richard pingle with three hundred and fifty piece of karsy in their hand , suppose to be sell there or in arrash before he shall be able to make his return from Casbin , pingle . which , so far forth as i can understand , lie for the great part unsold . And be upon our way , at a certain town call Ardouil , we chance to barter nine piece of karsy with those merchant for fourscore and four bateman of cinnamon , sell the karsy at one hundred and fifty shawgh the piece . and be at that present not far from Teveris , call the principal place in this country for utter of cloth or karsy , by much intreaty i persuade your agent to send thither to prove what may be do , and receive from he four and fifty piece of karsy , as also his commission for the sale of the same , i proceed on that voyage my self , and one tolmach in company with i , find in that place great store of broad cloth and karsy bring thither , some part by the Turk who be resident there , some by the armenian , who fetch they at Aleppo , and some by the townsman , who travel unto Venice and there buy they , so that no man offer i one penny more than a hundred and fourty shawgh for a kerchief : and have speciali commission and charge from your agent not to stay there above the space of seven day after my arrival there , but to repair to Casbin with all speed , and furthermore , have regard to keep up the price of the worshipful commodity , accord to 137 war against the Portugal at Ormuz . the gpvemour of grozin his merchant . their desire , i find mean to barter they away for spice , such as be there to be have , neither in goodness nor yet in price to my content : nevertheless , consider the cold sale which be there , as well for your karsy , as also the hot news , that Ormuz way be shut up by occasion that the Indians do war against they , which be true in deed : and again the desire that the worshipful have to have such commodity buy , i think it necessary to buy they , the price and weight whereof appear at large by my account send to the worshipful , and be , as i think , the whole sum of spice buy at this time . it chance i in that place to meet with the governors merchant of grozin , who be not a little desirous to barge with i for a hundred piece of karsy for his master call Levontie , and offer i so good band for the payment of the money or silk to the merchant contentment upon the delivery of they , as in any place within all this country be to be have : and offer i beside his own letter in the behalf of his master , that no custom shall be demand for the same , and the obtain also at his master hand as large a privilege for the worshipful to travel into all part of his dominion , as the shaugh have give they , and hear good report make of he by the armenian also , and that he be a christian , i be much more the willing to barge with he , and sell he a hundred piece for a hundred and threescore shawgh a piece , to be pay to the merchant in grozin either in money or silk to his contentment , within three day after the delivery of the karsy there , have a band of he make by the metropolitanes own hand , for the performance of the same , which be as sure as any here be to be devise : and upon the same i send my tolmach from i back to Shamaki , with such good as i buy at Teveris , and to the end he may cause the worshipful servant there to see this barge accomplish . at who arrival there , as i do 138 1568 . perceive , the captain will not accomplish his barge to take they , but say , he have no need of they : such be the constancy of all man in this country , with whosoever you shall barge . if the ware be buy , and they do mislike it afterward , they will bring it again , and compel you to deliver the money for it the generail again , regard the shawgh letter , which manifest inconstancy tn the contrary , as a straw in the wxnde : by mean and aier of whereof , the worshipful may know whether all be true these part . that have be write of this country people or not . i be inform by all the broker in Teveris , that the way once open to ormuz , from whence come no such store of spice as the worshipful do look for , that here will be put a way in Teveris , some for money , and other some for barter , to the number of three hundred or four hundred piece of karsy , be in color and goodness to the example here send you , the rest of the karsy to make they up a thousand , and broad clothes to the sum of a hundred , be