Persia be bring from the island of ormus , situate in the gulf of Persia call Sinus Persicus , between the main land of Persia and Arabia , etc the Portugal touch at ormus both in their voyage to east India and homeward again , and from thence bring all such spice as be occupy in Persia and the region thereabouts : for of pepper they bring very small quantity , and that at a very dear price . the Turk oftentimes bring pepper from Mecha in Arabia , which they sell as good cheap as that which be bring from ormus . silk be bring from no place , but be wrought all in their own country . ormus be within two mile of the main land of Persia , and the Portugal fetch their fresh water there , for the which they pay tribute to the shaugh or king of Persia . within Persia they have neither gold nor silver mine , yet have they coin money both of gold and silver , and also other small money of copper . there be bring into Persia a incredible sum of dutch dollar , which for the most part be there employ in raw silk . they have few book and less learning , and be for the most part very brutish in all kind of good science , save in some kind of silk work , and in such thing as pertain to the furniture of horse , in the which they be pass good . their law be as in their religion , wicked and detestable . and if any man offend the prince , he punish it extreme , not only in the person that offend , but also in his child , and in as many as be of his kin . theft and murder be often punish , yet none otherwise then please he that be ruler in the place where the offence be commit , and as the party offend in 161 l their money . their book and learning . such be the law of the macedonian for treason . be able to make friend , or with money to redeem his offence . dissension fir there be oftentimes great mutiny among the people great town which of Mortus Ali his son be great : insomuch that sometime in the town two or three thousand people be together by the ear for the same , as i have see in the town of shamaky and Ardouil , and also in the great city of Teveris , where i have see a man come from fight , in a bravery bring in his hand four or five man head , carry they by the hair of the head : for although they shave their head most common twice a week , yet leave they a tuft of hair upon their head about 2 . foot long . i have inquire why they leave the tuft of hair upon their head . they answer , that thereby they may easiler be carry up into heaven when they be dead . for their religion they have certain priest who be apparel like unto other man . they use every morning and afternoon to go up to the top of their church , and tell there a great tale of Mahumet and Mortus Ali : and other preach have they none . their lent be after Christmas , not in abstinence from flesh only , but from all meat and drink , until the day be off the sky , but than they eat sometime the whole night their priest and although it be against their religion to drink wine , at n ’^ t the7 wi ^ take excess thereof and en ' be drunken . their lent begin at the new moon , and they do not enter into it until they have see the same : neither yet do their lent end , until they have see the next new moon , although the same ( through close weather ) shall not be see in long time . their saint they have among they certain holy man who they and holy man . gete , count holy for that they or any of their ancestor have be on pilgrimage at Mecha in Arabia , pilgrimage . for whosoever go thither on pilgrimage to visit the sepulchre of Mahumet , both he and all his posterity be ever after call set , and count for holy man , and have no less opinion of themselves . and if a man 162 contrary one of these , he will say that he be a saint , and therefore ought to be believe , and that he can lie , although he lie never so shameful . thus a man may be too holy , and no pride be great than spirituali pride of a mind puff up with his own opinion of holiness . Theise set do use to shave their head all over , save on the side a little above the temple , the which they leave unshaven , and use to braid the same as woman do their hair , and to wear it as long as it will grow . every morning they use to worship God , Mahumet , their prater and Mortus Ali , 8c in pray turn themselves towards and w ° r - the south , because Mecha lie that way from they , when they be in travel on the way , many of they will Mahumet . ( as soon as the sun rise ) light from their horse , turn themselves to the south , and will lay their gown before they , with their sword and bead , and so stand upright worship to the south : and many time in their prayer kneel down and kiss their bead , or somewhat else that lie before they . the man or woman do never go to make water , wash and but they use to take with they a pot with a spout , outward clen - and after they have make water , they flash some water linesse - upon their privy part , and thus do the woman as well as the man : and this be a matter of great religion among they , and in make of water the man do cower down as well as the woman . when they earnest affirm a matter , they will swear their . by God , Mahumet , or Mortus Ali , and sometime by swearin &- all at one : as thus in their own language , say , olla , Mahumet , Ali . but if he will swear by the shaugh head , in say Shaugham bash , you may then believe he if you will . the shaugh keep a great magnificence in his court : the king and although sometime in a month or six week none of his nobility or counsel can see he , yet go they daily to the court , and tarry there a certain time until they have know his pleasure whether he will come - 163 I57 + - maund they any thing or not . he be watch every night with