any service at all : the queen highness request be , that it will please thy majesty to command that such person may be deliver unto i to be carry home , lest by their remain here , and have practise and friendship with such as be not thy highness friend , their evil do may be a cause hereafter to withdraw thy goodness from sir William garret and his company , who have true meaning in all their do , and be ready to serve thy highness at all time , use many other word to the advancement of your credit , 178 and the disgrace of your enemy , and so i end for that time . then say his majesty , we have hear you , and will consider of all thing further , when we have read the queen our sister letter : to who i answer , that i suppose his majesty shall by those letter understand her highness full mind to his contentation , and what want in writing , i have credit to accomplish in word . wherewith his majesty seem to be well please , and command i to sit down . and after pause a while , his majesty say these word unto i , it be now a time which we spend in fast , and pray , be the week before easter , and for that we will short depart from hence , towards our border of novgorod , we can not give you answer , nor your dispatch here , but you shall go from hence , and tarry we upon the way , where we will short come , and than you shall know our pleasure , and have your dispatch . and so i be dismiss to my lodging , and the same day i have a dinner ready dress send i from his majesty , with great store of drink , of diverse sort , and the next day follow , be the four and twenty of march aforesaid , the chief secretary to his majesty , send unto i a gentleman , to signify unto i , that the emperor majesty pleasure be , i shall immediate depart towards a city , call otwer , three hundred mile from the aforesaid Sloboda , and there to tarry his highness come unto a place call staryt , three score mile from the say otwer . then i send my interpretor to the chief secretary , request he to further , and show his favour unto our say merchant in their suit , which they shall have occasion to move in my absence : who send i word again , that they shall be well assure of his friendship , and furtherance in all their suit . and forthwith post horse be send i , with a gentleman to conduct i . and so depart from the say Sloboda , i arrive at the say otwer , the 28 . of march aforesaid , 179 where i remain till the eight of May follow . than i be send for to come unto his majesty , to the say staryt , where i arrive the ten of the same , and the twelve of the same i be appoint to come to the chief secretary , who at our meeting say unto i these word . our lord emperor , and great duke , have not only peruse the queen her highness letter send by you , and thereby do perceive her mind , as well touch their princely affair , as also her earnest request in the merchant behalf , but also have well ponder your word . and therefore his majesty pleasure be , that you let i understand what suit you have to move in the merchant behalf , or otherwise , for that to morrow you shall have access again unto his highness , and shall have full answer in all thing , with your dispatch away . then after long conference have with he of diverse matter i give he in write certain brief article of request , which i have draw out ready , as follow : i first the queen majesty her request be , that it will please the emperor highness to let i know the just cause of his great displeasure fall upon sir William Garrard , and his company , who never deserve the same , to their knowledge . 2 also that it will please his highness not to give credit unto false and untrue report , by such as seek to sow dissension , and break friendship betwixt the queen highness , and his majesty . 3 also that it will please his majesty to receive the say sir William Garrard , with his company into his favour again , and to restore they to their former privileges and liberty , for free traffic in , and through , and out of all his majesty dominion , in as ample manner as aforetime , accord to his princely letter of privilege , and accustom goodness . 4 also it will please his highness to grant , that the say company of merchant may have justice of all 180 his subject , as well for money owe unto they , as other their grief and injury , throughout all his dominion suffer since the time of his displeasure , during which time , the merchant be force by severe justice to answer to all man demand , but they can not be hear . 5 also that his majesty will understand , that much debt be owe to the say merchant , by diverse of his nobility , whereof part be in durance , and some execute , and the say merchant know not how to be pay , and answer the same , except his highness pity their case , and command some order to be take therein . 6 also it will please his highness to command that the say merchant may be pay all such sum or sum of money as be owe , and due unto they by his majesty , for ware , as well english , as Shamaki , take into his highness treasury by his officer in sundry place , the long forbear whereof have be , and be great hindrance to the say company of merchant . 7 also it