a note of the proceed of m . Anthony Jenkinson , ambassador from the queen most excellent majesty , to the emperor of Russia , from the time of his arrival there , be the 26 . of July 1571 , until his departure from thence the 23 . of July 1572 . he say 26 . day i arrive with the two good ship call the swallow and the Harry in safety , at the bay of S . Nicholas in Russia aforesaid , and land at rose island , from whence immediate i send away my interpreter Daniel Silvester in post towards the court , be then at the Moscow , whereby his majesty may as well be advertise of my arrival in his dominion , as also to know his highness pleasure for my further access . And remain at the say island two or three day , to have conference with your agent about your affair , i do well perceive by the word of the say agent and other your servant , that i be enter into 170 great peril and danger of my life : for they report to i that they hear say at the Moscow , that the prince displeasure be such against i , that if ever i come into his country again , i shall loose my head , with other word of discouragement . whereat i be not a little dismayed , not know whether it be best for i to proceed forward , or to return home again with the ship for the safeguard of my life . but call to mind my innocence and good meaning , and know my self not to have offend his majesty any manner of way either in word or deed , or by make former promise not perform , heretofore by my enemy false surmise : and be desirous to come to the trial thereof , whereby to justify my true deal , and to reprove my say enemy as well here as there , who have not cease of late by untrue report to impute the cause of the say emperor displeasure towards you to proceed of my deal , and promise make to he at my last be with he ( although by his letter to the queen majesty , and by his own word to i the contrary do appear ) i determine with my self rather to put my life into his hand , and by the providence of God to prosecute the charge commit unto i , than to return home in vain , discourage with the word of such , who have rather that i have tarry at home , than to be send over with such credit , whereby i may sift out their evil do , the only cause of your loss . wherefore , leave the say ship the nine and twenty day of the month , i depart from the seaside , and the first of August arrive at Colmogro , where i remain attend the return of my say messenger with order from his majesty . but all the country be sore visit by the hand of God with the plague , passage in every place be shut up , that none may pass in pain of death : my messenger be eight hundred mile upon his way , be stay , and keep at a town call Shasko , and may not be suffer to go any further , neither yet to return 171 back again , or send unto i : by mean wnereof in the space of four month , i can neither hear nor know what be become of he , in which time my say messenger find mean to advertise the governor of the ci tie of Vologda , as well of his stay , as of the cause of his come thither , who send he word that it be not possible to pass any near than prince without further order from his majesty , who be go to the war against the Swethens , and that he will advertise his highness as soon as he may convenient : and so my say messenger be force to remain there still without answer . during which time of his stay through the great death ( as aforesaid , ) i find mean to send another messenger , with a guide by a unknown way through wilderness , a thousand mile about , think that way he shall pass without let : but it prove contrary , for likewise he be pass a great part of his journey , fall into the hand of a watch , and escape very hardly , that he and his guide with their horse have not be burn , accord to the law provide for such as will seek to pass by indirect way , and many have feel the smart thereof which have not wherewith to buy out the pain : neither can that messenger return back unto i . and thus be i keep without answer or order from his majesty , and remain at the say colmogro , until the 18 . of January follow , neither have a gentleman to safeguard i , nor lodging appoint i , nor allowance of victual accord to the country fashion for ambassador , which argue his grievous displeasure towards our nation . and the people of the country perceive the same , use towards i and my company some discourtesy : but about the 28 . day aforesaid , the plague cease , and the passage be open , there come order from his majesty that i shall have post horse , and be suffer to depart from Colmogro to go to a city call peraslave near to the court , his majesty be new return from the say war . 172 and i arrive at the say peraslave the 3 . of February , where i remain under the charge of a gentleman , have then a house appoint i , and allowance of victual , but so strait keep , that none of our nation or other may come or send unto i , nor i to they . and the 14 . of march follow , i be send for to the court , and be within three mile of the same , a post be send to the