weigh anchor , the wind westnorthwest , and sail from thence till six of the clock at night north 4 league , than they anchor in 2 fathom and a half soft oz , the wind at west a small breath . the 23 day about 7 of the clock in the morning , they weigh anchor , and set sail , be little wind Easterly , and sail till 2 of the clock after noon northwest in with the shore about six league , and then anchor in 6 foot water , have perfect sight of the low land ( sand hill ) be about 3 mile from the near land . this place of the land that they be against , they perceive to be to the westwards of the 4 island ( call in the ruff tongue chetera Bougori ) and they find it afterward by due proof , to be about 50 verst , or 30 english mile to the southwest , or southwest by south , from the say Chetera Bougori . the 24 day the wind at east , and by south , a sea wind call Gillavar , cause they to ride still . the 2 5 day they think good to send in their skiff Robert Golding , and certain russes , to row he alongst northwards by the shore , to seek the four island , and so to pass unto the uchooge , and there to land the say Robert Golding to proceed to astracan , to deliver Amos Riall a letter , wherein he be require to provide pavose to meet the ship at the say island , and the skiff with the russes be appoint to return from the uchooge with victual to the ship , which skiff depart from the ship about nine of the clock in the forenoon . the 26 , 27 , 28 , and 29 day , the wind easterly and Northeast , they ride still with their ship . the 30 day the wind southeast , they weigh , and set sail to the northeastwards : but the ship fall so on the side to the 239 a strange accident of provision for their relief . November . shoreward , that they be force eftsoon to take in their sail , and anchor again , from whence they never remove she . that day they share their bread : but in their want God send they two covy of partridge , that come from the shore , and light in and about their ship , whereby they be comfort , and one that lie sick , of who life be small hope , recover his health . the 4 of November the skiff return to the ship with some victual , and certify that the four island be about 60 verst from they to the northeastwards . when Robert Golding come to astracan , and deliver there the factor letter to Amos rial , the duke , captain of that place , be do to understand of the ship arrival , and of the state they be in , and their request for pavose , who be very glad to hear of their safe return , and appoint to be send with all speed two pavose and a stroog , with gunner to guard and to defend they . with the which Stroog and pavose , Amos Riall go down to the chetera Bougori , or 4 . Islands aforesaid , where he stay with those bark , accord to the factor appointment . the 5 day they purpose to send from the ship their skiff with the carpenter , and 4 russes to row he to the 4 bougory , to request Amos Riall to come from thence with the pavose to the ship with all possible speed . the skiff with those man depart from the ship in the morning , and within one hour they meet with a small boat with russes , row towards the ship , which come from the ouchooge with a wild swine and other victual to sell : with the same boat the skiff return back to the ship after the russes have receive and be satisfy for the victual they bring : the same day they return with their boat back towards the ouchooge , and with they in the same boat be send the carpenter of the ship to the chetera Bougori , which be in their way , to declare unto Amos Riall the message before appoint he . from the 5 until the 9 day the ship ride still with contrary wind easterly . the same 9 day come to the ship certain russes in a small boat , which bring 240 with they some victual send by Amos Riall , and declare that he with the pavose and Stroog have remain at the chetera Bougori five day , expect the come thither of the ship . the 10 day be doubtful of the pavose come , they send Thomas Hudson master of the ship in the skiff ( and with she go the foresay skiff boat ) towards the chetera Bougori to the pavose to bring word whether they will come to the ship or not , the wind then at Northeast with fog . the 11 day the wind northerly with fog , the ship ride still . the 12 day Amos Riall , Christopher faucet , and a new gunner come to the ship , and with they the m . Thomas Hudson return ; but the Stroog with the gunner remain at the chetera Bougori ; and from thence ( when it begin to freeze ) return to astracan . Amos Riall declare that he send the carpenter back from the chetera Boogori in a small boat on the 10 day , and marveil that he be not come to the ship ( but in the fog the day before as afterward they learn ) miss the ship , and overshoot she , and afterward return back , he find the ship at anchor , and nothing in she but the russes that be leave to keep she , and then he depart thence , and go to the uchooge , and there stay . present upon the come of the pavose to the ship they use as much speed as may be , to get the good out of the ship into they , and after the good be lade in , they take in also of the ship ordinance , furniture and provision , as much as they can . the 13 day in the morning Amos Riall be send away ice the 13 of in a small boat towards astracan , to provide victual and carriage to relieve and help they , who can