unto they in what sort they have find the say good . the 3 day early in the morning they depart all from the 4 Babbas towards the say good , and the same day do lade all the good they can find upon the say sled , and with all convenient speed return back towards astracan . and when they come to the chetera Bougori , where they rest the night , in the morning very early before the break of day , they be assault by a great company of the nagay Tartar horseman , which come shout and hallow with a great noise , but our people be so environ with the sled , that they dare not enter upon they , but run by , and shoot their arrow among they , and hurt but one man in the head , who be a ruff , and so depart present . yet 244 1581 . when it be day , they show themselves a good distance off from our man , be a very great troop of they , but do not assault they any more . the same day our their return man with those carriage , depart from thence towards t0 astracan - astracan , where they arrive in safety the 4 of December , about 3 of the clock in the afternoon , where our people great rejoice of their great good hap to have escape so many hard event , trouble and misery , as they do in that voyage , and have great cause therefore to praise the almighty , who have so merciful preserve and deliver they . they remain the winter at astracan , where they find great favour and friendship of the duke , captain , and other chief officer of that place : but that winter there happen no great matter worth the note . in the spring of the year 1581 , about the mid of the break march , the ice be break up , and clear go before astracan , and the nine of April , have all the good that be return from the part of Media , lade into a Stroog , the factor , William Turnbull , Matthew taile - boye , Giles crow , Christopher Burrough , Michael lane , Laurence Prouse gunner , Randolfe fox , Tho . Hudson , Tobias Paris , Morgan Hubblethorne the dier , Richard Morgan hub - the surgeon , Rob . Golding , Joh . smith , Edw . Reding carpenter , and William Perrin gunner , have also 40 persia . russes , whereof 36 be cassock to row , the rest merchant passenger , depart from astracan with the say Stroog and good up the Volga towards yeraslave . they leave behind they at astracan , with the english good and merchandise there remain , Amos Riall , W . Wincoll , and Richard relfe , and appoint they to sell and barter the same , or so much thereof as they can to the tisik , if there come any thither that spring , and to other as they may , and the rest with such as they shall take in exchange to return up to yeraslave that summer , when the emperor carriage shall pass up the Volga . the 21 day they come with their stroog to the Peravolok , but make no stay at that place : for they have be much 245 trouble with ice in their come from astracan . the 3 of may about noon they come to oveak , and from thence proceed up the river , on the 17 day William Turnbull depart from the Stroog in a small boat , and go before towards Tetusha to provide victual , and send down to the Stroog , from which place they be then about 230 verst . the 23 day they meet a boat with victual , which William Turnbull send from Tetusha , and the same day they arrive with their stroog at Tetusha , where they stay all night , and the next morning betimes depart thence , but W . Turnbull be go in the small boat before to Cazan , to provide necessary from thence , and to make way for their dispatch . the 26 day they arrive with their stroog at Cazan , where they remain till the four of June : the factor send Giles crow from Cazan to the Moscow , with their letter the 30 of May . the 4 day of June they depart from Cazan with their stroog , and arrive at yeraslave the 22 day about 5 of the clock in the morning . the 23 day they provide Telegos , to carry the good to Vologda . the 24 day have the good lade upon Telegos , they depart with the same towards Vologda , and remain there five verst from yeraslave . the 29 day they come to Vologda , with all their good in safety , and good order . the same 29 , William Turnbull and Peter Garrard depart from Vologda post by water towards Colmogro , the three of July , have their good lade in a small doshnik , they depart with the same from Vologda towards rose island by S . Nicholas , where they arrive in safety the 16 of July , and find there the agent of Russia , and in the ride the ship send out of England , almost lade ready to depart . the 25 day depart for England ( out of the road of saint Nicholas ) the ship Elizabeth . the 26 day depart thence the Thomas Allen and Mary Susan , and in the Thomas Allen go William turnbul , Matthew Tailboys , Thomas Hudson , and 246 other . the good return of the Persia voyage be lade into the ship , William and John , whereof be master , William bigat , and in she with the same good come Peter Garrard and Tobias Paris . the two of August , the same ship be lade and dispatch depart from the road of saint Nicholas , and with she in company another of the company freight ship , call the Tomasin , whereof be m . Christopher hall . in their return homeward they have some foul weather , and be separate at the sea , the William and John put into Newcastle the 24 of September : from whence the say Peter Garrard and Tobias Paris come to London by land , and bring news of the arrival of the ship . the 25 of September both the say ship arrive at the port of London in safety , and anchor before limehouse and Wapping , where they be discharge , 1581 .