their 219 the variation of the comp as in astracan be 13 . deg . 40 , minute . may . bondman that be run from they : whereupon their bondman be deliver to they : which favour the say captain common show if they be not russy , and they be set at liberty . the 13 . day they break up their camp , and march to the northward into the country of Nagay . the 17 . of April the variation ot the compass observe in astracan be 13 . deg . 40 . min . from north to west . this spring there come news to astracan hat the queen of Persia ( the king be blind ) have be with a great army against the turk that be leave to possess Media , and have give they a great overthrow : yet notwithstanding derbent , and the great part of Media be still possess and keep by the turk . the factor of the company consult upon their affair , determine to leave at astracan the one half of their good with Arthur Edward , and with the other half the other three factor will proceed in the ship on their purpose voyage to the coast of Media , to see what may be do there : where , if they can not find safe traffic , they determine to proceed to the coast of Gilan , which be a province near the caspian sea border upon Persia : and thereupon appoint the say good to be lade aboard the ship , and take into she also some merchandise of tisik or persian merchant . the 29 . of April Amos Riall , and Anthony marsh , the company servant be send from astracan by the say factor , up the river Volga to yeraslave , with letter of advice to be send for England , and have order for stay the good in Russia that shall come that year out of England for maintain the trade purpose for Persia , until further trial be make what may be do in those part . the first day of may in the morning , have the ship in readiness to depart , the factor invite the duke Pheodor Micalovich proiocoorow , and the principali secretary Vasili Pheodorovich Shelepin , with other of 220 the chief about the duke to a banquet aboard the ship , where they be entertain to their good like , and at their departure be shoot off all the ordinance of the ship , and about nine of the clock at night the same day they weigh anchor , and depart with their ship from astracan , and be but little wind , tow she with the boat about three verst , and then anchor , have with they a pavo or light to help they at the flat . the second day at four of the clock in you morning they weigh and ply down the river Volga towards the caspian sea . the seven of May in the morning they pass by a tree that stand on the left hand of the river as they go down , which be call Mahomet agatch , or Mahomet tree , and about three verst further , that be to say , to the southward of the say tree be a place call Uchoog , that be to say , the ruff wear : uchwg . ( but Ochoog be the name of a wear in the tartar tongue ) where be certain cottage , and the emperor have lie at that place certain gunner to guard his fisherman that keep the wear . This Uchoog be count from astracan 60 . verst : they proceed down the say river without stay at the Uchoog . the nine shall water . and ten day they meet with shall water , and be force to lighten their ship by the pavo : the 11 . day they send back to the Uchoog for a other pavo : this day by mischance the ship be bilge on the grapnell of the pavo , whereby the company have sustain great loss , if the chief part of their good have not be lay into the pavo : for notwithstanding their pump with 3 . pump , heave out water with bucket , and all the best shift they can make , the ship be half full of water ere the leak can be find and stop . the 12 . day the pavo come to they from the Uchoog , whereby they light the ship of all the good . the 13 . day in the morning there come to they a small boat , send by the captain of astracan , to learn whether the ship be at sea clear of the flat . the 15 . Flats . day by great industry and travel they get their ship 221 45 degree 20 . minute . the first observation in the caspian sea . brackish water far re within the sea . clear off the shoal and flat , wherewith they have be trouble from the nine day until then : they be force to pass their ship in three foot water or less . the 16 . day they come to the chetera Bougori , or island of four hillock , which be count forty verst from Uchoog , and be the further land towards the sea . the 17 . day they bear off into the sea , and be about twelve verst from the four hillock , ride in five foot and a half water about eleven of the clock in the forenoon , they take their good out of the pavose into the ship , and fill their ship with all thing necessary . the 18 . day in the morning about seven of the clock , the pavose be discharge depart away towards astracan , the wind then at southeast , they ride still with the ship , and observe the elevation of the pole at that place , find it to be 45 . degree 20 . minute . the 19 day , the wind southeast , they ride still . the 20 . day the wind at northwest they set sail about one of the clock in the morning , and steere thence south by west , and southsouthwest about 3 . league , and then anchor in 6 . foot and a half water , about nine of you clock before noon , at which time it fall calm : the elevation of the pole at that place 45 . degree 13 . minute . the 21 . have the wind at northwest , they set sail , and steere thence south by west , and south until eleven