advertisement and report of the 6 . voyage into the part of Persia and Media , for the company of english merchant for the discovery of new trade , in the year 1579 . 1580 . and 1581 . gather out of sundry letter write by Christopher Burrough , servant to the say company , and send to his uncle master William Burrough . first it be to be understand , that the ship for the voyage to saint Nicholas in Russia , in which the factor and merchandise for the persian voyage be transport , depart from Gravesend the 19 of June , 1579 . which arrive at saint Nicholas in Russia the 22 . of July , where the factor and merchant land , and the merchandise be discharge and lade into doshnike , that be , bark of the country , to be carry from thence up by river unto Vologda . and the 25 . day of you say Julie , the doshnike depart from rose island by S . Nicholas up the river Dwina , Peremene , that be to say , in post , by continual sail , row , set with pole , or draw of man , which come to 214 Colmogro the 27 . day , and depart thence the 29 . of Julie up the say river Dwyna , and come to Ustyoug ( which be at the head of the river Dwina , and mouth of Sughano ) the 9 of August , where they stay but a small time , provide some victual , and shift certain of their cassock or barkman , and so depart thence the same day up the river Sughano , and come to Totma ( which be count somewhat more than half the way from Ustioug ) the 15 . day , where they shift some of their cassak , and depart thence the same day , and come to the city Vologda the 19 of August , where they land their good , and stay at that place till the 30 . of the same . have provide at Vologda , Telegas , or wagon , whereupon they jade their good , they depart thence with the same by land towards yeraslave the say 30 . of August at eight of the clock yeraslave . in the morning , and come to the east side of the river Volga over against yeraslave , with 25 . Telegas lade with the say good the seven of September at five of the clock afternoon . then the three stroog or bark provide to transport the say good to astracan ( where they shall meet the ship that shall carry the same from thence into Persia ) come over from yeraslave unto the same side of the river Volga , and there take in the say good . and have prepare the say bark ready with all necessary furniture they depart with they from yeraslave down the river of Volga on the 14 day of September at nine of the clock in the morning , and they arrive at Niznovogrod the 17 day at three of the clock afternoon , where they show the emperor letter to pass free without pay any custom , and tarry there about three hour to provide necessary , and then depart , arrive at Cazan ( or near the same town ) on the 22 . of September at five of the clock afternoon , where ( through contrary wind , and for provide new cassak in the place of some that there go from they ) they remain till the 26 . day , at what time they depart thence about two of the clock after 215 nobody , and arrive at Tetushagorod , which be on the Crim side of Volga , and in latitude 55 . degree 22 . minute , the 28 . day at ten in the forenoon , where they anchor , and remain about 3 . hour , and depart thence come to oveak , which be on the crims side ( on the western side of Volga ) the five of October about five of the clock in the morning . this place be account half the way between Cazan and astracan : great store of and here there grow great store of Licoris : the soil Licoris . js very fru . itfu . ll : they find there apple tree , and cherry tree . the latitude of oveak be 51 . degree 30 . minute . at this place have be a very fair stone castle call by the name oveak , and adjoin to the same be a town call by you russes , Sodom : this town and part of the castle ( by report of the russes ) be swallow into the earth by the justice of God , for the wickedness of the people that inhabit the same . there remain at this day to be see a part of the ruin of the castle , and certain tomb , wherein as it seem have be lay noble personage : for upon a tomb stone may be perceive the form of a horse and a man sit on it with a bow in his hand , and arrow gird to his side : there be a piece of a scutcheon also upon one of the stone , which have character grave on it , whereof some part have be consume with the weather , and the rest leave unperfect : but by the form of they that remain , we judge they to be character of Armenia : and other character be grave also upon another tomb stone . now they depart from oveak the say five of October at five of the clock after noon , Peravolok . and come to Peravolok the 10 . day about eleven or twelve of the clock that night , make no abode at that place , but pass alongst by it . this word Peravolok in the ruff tongue do signify a narrow straight or neck of land between two water , and it be so call by they , because from the river Volga , at that place , to the river don or Tanais , be count thirty verst , or as much as a man may well travel on foot 216 in one day . and seven verst beneath , upon a island call Tsaritsna the emperor of Russia have fifty gunner all the summer time to keep watch , call by the tartar name Carawool . between this place and astracan be five other carawool or watch . i the first be name Kameni Carawool , and be distant from Peravolok 120 , verst . 2 the second name Stupino Carowool , distant from