Bachu his letter to the bassa of Derbent , very friendly write in their behalf . in their journey to Derbent they forsake the ordinary way , be very dangerous , and travel through wood till they come almost to the town of Derbent : and then the gentleman ride before with the captain letter to the bassa , to certify he of the english merchant come , who receive the letter , and understand the matter , be very glad of the news , and send forth to receive they certain soldier gunner , who meet they about two mile out of the town , salute they with great reverence , and afterwards ride before they : then again meet they other soldier , somewhat near the castle , which likewise have do their salutation ride before they , and then come forth noble man , captain , and gentleman , to receive they into the castle and town . as they enter the castle , there be a shot of twenty piece of great ordinance , and the bassa send m . Turnbull a very fair horse with furniture to mount on , esteem to be worth a hundred mark , and so they be convey to his presence : who after he have talk with they , send for a coat of cloth of gold , and cause it to be put on m . turnbulles back , and then will they all to depart , and take their ease , for that they be weary of their journey , and on the morrow he will talk further with they . the next day when you factor come again to the presence of the bassa , accord to his appointment , they request he that he will grant they his privilege , whereby they may traffic safe in any part and place of his country , offer he , that if it please his majesty to have any of the commodity that they have bring , and to write his mind thereof to the captain of Bachu , it shall be deliver he accord . the bashaes answer be , that he will willing give they his privilege : yet for that he regard their safety , have 228 come so far , and know the state of his country to be troublesome , he will have they to bring their commodity thither , and there to make sale of it , promise he will provide such commodity as they need , and that he will be a defence unto they , so that they shall not be injure by any : whereupon the factor send Thomas Hudson back for you ship to bring she to Derbent , and the bassa send a gentleman with he to the captain of Bachu , to certify he what be determine , which message be do , the captain of Bachu , and the Bashaes messenger , accompany with a dozen soldier , go from Bachu with Thomas Hudson , 8c come to the ship at Bildih the 11 day of June . after the captain and his man have be aboard and see the ship , they all depart present , but the gentleman , messenger from you bassa , with three other turk , remain aboard , and continue in the ship till she come to Derbent : the latitude of Bildih by diverse the latitude observation be 40 . degree 2 5 . minute : the variation of ^'^ h 40 . of the compass 10 . degree 40 . minute from north to rfe variation west . after the return of Thomas Hudson back the compass to Bildih , they be constrain to remain there 10 . deg . 40 . with the ship through contrary wind until the 16 . mtnday of June four of the clock in the morning , at which time they weigh anchor , set sail and depart thence towards Derbent , and arrive at anchor against derbent east and by south from the say castle in four fathom and a half water , the 22 . day of June at ten of the clock in the morning : than they take up their ordinance , which before they have stow in hold for ease the ship in her roll . in the afternoon the bassa come down to the waterside against the ship , and have the say ordinance place , and charge , it be all shot off to gratify he : and present after his departure back , he permit the factor to come aboard the ship . the 29 . day their good be unlade and carry to the bashaes garden , where he make choice of such thing as he like , take 229 for custom of every five and twenty karsy , or whatsoever , one , or after the rate of four for the hundred . the factor after his choice make , determine to send a part of the rest of the good to Bachu , for the speedy make sale thereof , for which cause they obtain the bashaes letter to the captain of Bachu , write very favourable in their behoof : and thereupon be lade and send in a small boat of that country in merchandise , to the value ( very near ) of one thousand pound sterling : videlicet , one hundred piece of karsy , seven broad clothes , two barrel of cochenelio , two barrel of tin , four barrel of shaffe . there go with the same of the company servant William winckle , Robert Golding , and Richard relfe , with two russy , whereof one be a interpretor , beside four barkman . they depart from Derbent with the say bark the 19 of July , and arrive at Bildih the 2 5 . day : their passage and carriage of their good to Bachu be chargeable , although their sale when they come thither be small : they have great friendship show they of the captain of Bachu , as well for the bashaes letter , as also for the factor sake , who have deal friendly with he , as before be declare . Robert Golding desirous to understand what may be do at shamaky , which be a day journey from Bachu , go thither , from whence return , he be set on by thief , and be shoot into the knee with a arrow , who have very hardly escape with his life and good , but that by good hap he kill one of the thief horse with his caliver , and shoot a Turk through both cheek with a dag . on the sixth day of August the factor be advertise at Derbent that their ship be