wind south southeast , the ship ride still : this day Christopher Burrow be send to shore to derbent to provide some necessary for the voyage , and with he a tisike or two , which shall go in the ship passenger to astracan . And be on shore he see there the come in of the Turk treasure , be accompany with 200 . soldier , and one hundred pioner , beside captain and gentleman : the bassa with his captain and soldier very gallant apparel and furnish go out from Derbent about three or four mile , to meet the say treasure , and receive the same with great joy and triumph . treasure the Turk his be the chief thing they need , for not long before the soldier be ready to break into the court against ’ the bassa for their pay : there be a great mutiny among they , because he have long differ and not 233 pay they their due . the treasure come in seven wagon , and with it be bring ten piece of brass . in the part of Media where they be , there be no commodity to be buy of any value , but raw silk , neither be that to be have but at the bashaes hand : who short after their come thither tax the country for that commodity . his deal with our merchant as it be not with equity in all point accord to his bargain , so it be not extreme ill . of the commodity they carry he take the chief part , for which he give but a small price in respect of the value it be there worth , and because he have provide such quantity of commodity for they , which otherwise they can not have have , the country be so troublesome , and travail by land so dangerous , he use they at his pleasure . the news that be report unto they at astracan touch the war between the Turk and persian differ little from the truth : for the Turk army with aid of the crim , ( be in number by you information of two Spaniard that serve in those war , about 200000 ) invade and conquer the country of Media in anno 1577 . when the great Turk underOsman bassa , stand of the conquest , he appoint Osman bassa ( the say bassa , and now captain of Derbent ) governor of the whole country , who settle himself in shamaky the chief city of Media , and principali place of traffic , unto who be send from the great Turk , in signification of the grateful acceptation of his service and the great conquest , a sword of great value . after the say bassa have bring the country in order to his like , and place garrison where he think convenient , the army be dissolve and send back : when the persian understand that the Turk army be dissolve and return , they gather a power together , and with the queen of their country as chief , they enter the country of Media , and overrun the same with fire and sword , destroy 234 whatsoever they find , as well people , cattle , as whatsoever else , that may be commodious to the Turk . and after they have so overrun the country , they come to shamaky , where the say bassa lieutenant generail of the great Turk be settle , and besiege it : whereupon the bassa see he can not long endure to withstand they , flee thence to Derbent where he now remain . derbent be a strong castle which be build by Alexander the great , the situation whereof be such , that the persian be without ordinance , be not able to win it but by famine . when the Turk be flee from Shamaky , the persian enter the same and spoil it , leave therein neither live creature nor any commodity , and so return back into Persia , and settle themselves about Teveris , where there grow some question among they for the kingdom . afterwards the persian have intelligence of a army from the Turk come into Media , gather themselves together in a great army and encounter the say Turk , set upon they on the sudden , and vanquish they , put they all to the sword . this overthrow of the Turk grieve the bassa of Derbent , and make he to have the more care for his own safety . Moreover , news be bring unto he that the kisel Bashaes , ( that be to say the noble and gentleman of Persia ) be mind to set upon he , and that near unto Bachu there lay a army ready to besiege it . whereupon the bassa oftentimes will ride about the castle of Derbent view the same , and the spring that do come to it , and where he see any cause of reformation , it be amend . the latitude of Derbent ( by diverse observation exact there make ) be 41 . deg 52 . min . the variation of the compass at that place about 11 . degree from north to west . from Derbent to Bildih by land 46 . league . from Derbent to shamaky by land 45 . league . from shamaky to Bachu about 10 . league , which may be 30 . 235 derbent build by Alexander the great . the latitude of Derbent 41 , deg . 52 . min . the variation of the compass . mile . from Bachu to Bildih five or six league by land , but by water about 12 . league . from the castle derbent eastwards , there reach two stone wall to the border of the caspian sea , which be distant one English mile . those wall be 9 foot thick , and 28 . or 30 . foot high , and the space between they be 160 . Geometricali pace , that be 800 . foot . there be yet to be perceive of the ruin of those wall , which do now extend into the sea about half a mile : also from the case westward into the land , they do perceive the ruin of a stone wall to extend , which wall , as it be report , do pass from thence to Pontus Euxinus , and be build by Alexander the great when the case Derbent be make . the 5 of October about noon the wind Northnortheast they weigh anchor , and set sail from Derbent , be alongst the coast to the southward to seek their man : but as they have sail about