pass no further than the four island , but be there over - Volga . take with ice , and force to leave his boat , and from thence pass post to astracan , find at the uchooge the carpenter return from his ill journey , very ill handle with the extremity of the cold . the same day they depart also in those lighter with the good in 241 q towards the chetera Bougori , leave the ship at anchor , and in her two russes , which with three more that go in the pavose , to provide victual for themselves and the rest , and therewith promise to return back to the ship with all speed , have offer to undertake for twenty rubble in money to carry the ship into some harbour , where she may safe winter , or else to keep she where she ride all winter , which be promise to be give they if they do it : and the same day when with those lighter they have get sight of the four island be about eight verst southwest from they , the wind then at Northeast , do freeze the sea so as they can not row , guide , stir or remove the say lighter , but as the wind and ice do force they . and so they continue drive with the ice , southeast into the sea by the 16 day . the space of forty hour , and then be the sixteenth day the ice stand . while they drive with the ice , the danger which they incur be great : for oftentimes when the ice with the force of wind and sea do break , piece of it be toss and drive one upon another with great force , terrible to behold , and the same happen at sometime so near unto the lighter , that they expect it will have overwhelm they to their utter destruction : but God who have preserve they from many peril before , do also save and deliver they then . within three or four day after the first stand of the ice , when it be firm and strong , they take out all their good , be forty and eight bale or pack of raw silk , etc lay it on the ice , and cover the same with such provision as they have . then for want of victual , etc they agree to leave all the good there upon the ice , and to go to the shore : and thereupon break up their chest and Corobias , wherewith , and with travail upon such other thing as they can get , they make sled the ice . for every of they to draw upon the ice , whereon they lay their clothes to keep they warm , and such victual as they have , and such other thing as they may convenient carry , and so they depart from the say 242 1580 . good and pavose very early about one of the clock in the morning , and travail on the ice , direct their way north , as near as they can judge , and the same day about two of the clock in the afternoon , they have sight of the chetera Babbas ( fourp hillock of island chetera bab - so call ) unto the same they direct themselves , and as ' it | be remain that night . the good and pavose which they leave on the ice they judge to be from those chetera Babbas about 20 verst . and the next morning depart thence eastwards , and come to the chetera bougory ( or four island before speak of ) before noon ( the distance between those place be about 15 verst ) where they remain all that night , depart thence towards astracan : the next morning very early they lose their way through the persuasion of the russes which be with they , take too much towards the left hand ( contrary to the opinion of m . Hudson ) whereby wander upon the ice four or five day , not know whether they be enter into the Crimme Tartar land or not , at length it fortune they meet with a way that have be travail , which cross backward towards the sea : that way they take , and follow the same , within two day travail it bring they to a place call the Crasnoyare ( that be to say in the english tongue ) red cliff , which diverse of the company know . there they remain that night , have nothing to eat but one loaf of bread , which they happen to find with the two russes that be leave in the ship to keep she all the winter ( as be aforesaid ) who they chance to meet go towards astracan , about five mile before they come to the say Crasnoyare , who certify they that the ship be cut in piece with the english ice , and that they have hard escape with their life . ship cut in in the morning they depart early from Crasnoyare sm ce ‘ towards the ouchooge , and about 9 of the clock before noon , be within 10 verst of the uchooge , they meet 243 Amos Riall , with the carpenter , which he find at Ouchooge , and a gunner new come out of England , and also 65 horse with so many cassock to guide they , and 50 gunner for guard , which bring provision of victual , etc and be send by the duke to fetch the good to astracan . the meeting of that company be much joy unto they . the factor send back with Amos Riall and the say company to fetch the good , Thomas Hudson the master , Tobias Paris his mate , and so they the say factor and their company march on to the uchooge , where they refresh themselves that day , and the night follow . and from thence proceed on towards astracan , where they arrive the last day of November . Theise that go for the good after their departure from the factor travail the same day until they come within 10 verst of the chetera Babbas , where they rest that night . the next morning by the break of the day they depart thence , and before noon be at the chetera Babas , where they stay all night ; but present depart thence Thomas Hudson with the carpenter and gunner to seek where the good lay : who find the same , and the next day they return back to their company at the chetera Babbas , and declare