the first 50 . verst . 3 the three call Polooy Carowool , be 120 . verst distant from the second . 4 the four name keezeyur Carawool , be 50 . verst distant from the three . 5 the five name Ichkebre , be 30 . verse distant from the four , and Ichkebre to astracan be 30 . verst . the 16 . of October they arrive at astracan , with astracan . their three stroog in safety about nine of the clock in the morning , where they find the ship provide for the Persia voyage in good order and readiness . the 17 . day the four principal factor of the company , Arthur Edwards , William Turnbull , Matthew Talbois , and Peter Pete ^ gar Garrard , be invite to dine with the chief diake or rar ' secretary of astracan ( Vasili Pheodorovich Shelepin ) who declare then unto they the trouble that be in Media and Persia : and how the Turk with help of the crim have conquer , and do possess the great part of Media : also he lay before they that winter be at hand , and if they shall put out with their ship to the sea , they shall be constrain to take what hazard may happen they by winter in the part of Media , or else where , for back again to that place there be no hope for they to return : whereupon the say factor determine to stay there all winter to learn further of the state of those country . the 19 of November the wind be northerly , at a stra - there be a great frost , and much ice in the river : the next day be the 20 . of November the ice stand in ' the river , and so continue until Easter day . 217 the 22 . of December depart this life John Moore the gunner of the ship . Thursday the 7 . of January between 8 . and 9 of the clock at night there appear a cross proceed from the moon , with two gall at the south and north end thereof . the 6 . of January be twelve day ( which they call Chreshenia ) the russes of astracan brake a hole in the ice upon the river Volga , and hallow the water with great solemnity accord to the manner of their country , at which time all the soldier of the town shoot off their small piece upon the ice , and likewise to gratify the captain of the castle be a duke , who name be Pheodor Michalovich Troiocouria , who stand hard by the ship , behold they as they be on the river , be shoot off all the ordinance of our ship be 15 piece , viz . 2 . falcon , 2 . falconet , 4 . fowler , 4 . fowler chamber , and 3 . other small piece make for the stroog to shoot hailstone , and afterward the great ordinance of the castle be shoot off . on the 31 . of January there happen a great eclipse of the moon , which begin about 12 . of the clock at night , and continue before she be clear a hour and a half by estimation , which end the first of February about half a hour past one in the morning : she be whole darken by the space of half a hour . the 26 . of February the town of nagay Tartar , call the yourt , which be within 3 . quarter of a mile of the castle of astracan , by casualty be set on fire about 10 . of the clock at night , and continue burn till midnight , whereby one half of it be burn , and much cattle destroy . the nagaye that inhabit that town , be the emperor of Russia his vassal : it be suppose there be of they inhabit that place of man , woman , and child , the number of seven thousand . that night the alarm be make in the castle and town of astracan . the captain thereof have all his soldier in very good order and readiness , be 218 1580 . of they in number two thousand gunner and cassak , that be to say , a thousand gunner , which be account mere soldier , and be not put to any other service then the use of their piece , watch , etc as soldier which always keep the castle , and the cassak also use their piece , do keep the town , and be common set to all kind of labour . the 7 . of march 1580 . the nagaye and crim come before astracan to the number of one thousand four hundred horseman , which encamp round about , but the near of they be two ruff verst and a half off from the castle and town : some of they lie on the crims side of Volga , and some on the nagay side , but none of they come upon the island that astracan astracan situ - standeth on . it be say that two of the prince of u ? m an the crim his son be among they . they send a ' a messenger on the eight day to the captain of astracan , to signify that they will come and visit he : who answer , he be ready to receive they : and take a great shot or bullet in his hand , will the messenger to tell they that they shall not want of that gear , so long as it will last . the nine day news be bring that the crim determine to assault the town or castle , and be make of faggot of reed , to bring with they for that purpose . the ten day two russes that be captive , and two of the Tartar bondman run away from the nagaye , and come into astracan . the same day word be bring to the duke of two nagaye which be see at gostine house , suppose to be spy , but be go again from thence before they be suspect . this gostine house be a place a little without the town where the tisik ( or persian merchant ) do usual remain with their merchandise . the 11 . day the say nagaye , and one more with they , come again to that house early in the morning , where they be take by the russes , and bring to the captain of the castle , and be examine , confess that their come be only to seek two of