so rot and weak , that it be doubtful she will not carry they back to astracan , do thereupon agree and barge at that place with a armenian , who name be Jacob , for a bark call a buss , be of burden about 35 . ton , which come that year from astracan , Zere island , and be at that instant ride at a island call Zere , about three or four league beyond or to the eastwardes 230 of bildih , which bark for their moor safety , they mean to have with they in their return to astracan , and thereupon write unto Wincoll and the rest at Bachu , that they shall receive the same buss , and lade in she their good at Bildih to be return to Derbent , and to discharge their first boat , which be observe by they accord . when all their good be lade aboard the say buss at Bildih , and be ready to have depart thence for Derbent , there arise a great storm with the wind out of the sea , by force whereof the cable and halser be break , and their vessel put a shore , and break to piece against the rock : every of they that be in she save their life , and part of the good . but there be a carobia or chest , wherein be dollar , and gold , which they have receive for the commodity of the company , which they sell at Bachu , which at the take out of the buss , fall by the bark side into the water among the rock , and so iwa ' lose . the pack of cloth which they can not well take out of the buss be also lose , other thihg that be more profitable they save . the 18 . of August , the factor receive from the bassa 500 batmans of raw silk , parcel of the bargain make with he , who bid they come the next day for the rest of the bargain . the 19 day the factor go to the bassa accord to his appointment , but that day they can not speak with he , but it be deliver they as from he , that they shall look and consider whether any thing be due unto he or not , which grieve the factor : and thereupon m . Turnbull answer , that their head and all that they have be at the bashaes pleasure : but than it be answer there be no such matter in it : but that they shall cast up their reckon , to see how it stand between they . the 20 . day they cast up their reckon . the 21 . they go to have speak with the bassa , but be deny audience . the 22 . day they hear news by a buss that come 231 the english suffer shipwreck . Arthur Edwards die at astracan . from astracan , that Arthur Edwards ( who the factor leave at astracan with the moiety of the good ) be dead , who depart this life then of the 23 . day the factor receive more from the bassa 500 batmans of silk . the 4 . of September news be bring to Derbent , that Golding come from Shamaky be set on by thief ( turk ) and have hurt one of they . the 5 . Tobias Atkins the gunner boy die of the flux , who be bury the 6 . day 2 . mile to the southward of the castle of Derbent , where the armenian Christians do usual bury their dead . about the 20 . of September news come to Derbent , that the buss which they have buy of Jacob the armenian as before , be cast away at Bildih , but they receive no certain news in write from any of our people . the 26 . of September be lade aboard the ship 40 . bale of silk . from the 26 . till the 2 . of October , they take into the ship , bread , water , and other necessary provision for their sea store : the say 2 . day of October , the factor be command upon the sudden to avoid their house , and get they with their provision out of the town : whereupon they be constrain to remove and carry their thing to the sea side against the ship , and remain there all the night . the cause of this sudden avoid they out of the town ( as afterward they perceive ) be for that the bassa have receive news of a supply with treasure that the Turk have send , which be then near at hand come towards he . the 3 . day of October all thing be bring from the shore aboard the ship : and that day the factor go to the bassa to take their leave of he , unto who they recommend those the company servant , etc which they have send to Bachu , make account to leave they behind in the country : who cause their name to be write , and promise they shall want nothing , nor be injury of any . after this leave take , 232 the factor go aboard purpose present to have set sail and depart towards astracan , the wind serve well for that purpose at south southeast : and as they be ready to set sail , there come against the ship a man , who weve : whereupon the boat be send a shore to he , who be a armenian send from William wincoil , with his write table , wherein the say wincoil have write brief , the mishap of the loss of the buss , and that they be come from Bildih towards Derbent , they , and such thing as they save with a small boat , force to put a shore in a place by the sea side call the armenian village : whereupon the drmen - factor cause the ship to stay , hope that with the tan southerly wind that then blow , they will come from the place they be at to the ship , but if they can not come with that wind , they mean to sail with the ship , with the next wind that will serve they , against the place where they be , and take they in , if they can : which stay and loss of those southerly wind , be a cause of great trouble , that they afterward sustain through ice , etc enter the Volga as shall declare . the 4 . day the