same grateful . after they have talk together by their interpreter , as well of the state of the voyage and cause of their come thither , as also learned of the say captain the state of that country , the factor make request unto he , that he will help they to the speech of the bassa , who answer that their demand be reasonable , and that he will willing show they therein what pleasure he can , and say , because the way to Derbent , where the bassa remain , be dangerous , he will send thither , and certify he of their arrival , and what commodity they have bring , and such commodity as they will desire to exchange or barter the same for he will procure the say bassa to provide for they : and therefore will the factor to consult together , and certify he what they most desire , and what quantity they will have provide : so while the factor be consult together thereupon , the captain talk with a tisike merchant that come over in the ship with they from astracan , which tisike , among other matter in talk , certify the captain , that the night before , the factor and their company be determine to have return back again to astracan , and that they be about to weigh their anchor , which Thomas hud - in deed be true , but the master of the bark Thomas son tfLlme - Hudson of Limehouse persuade they that the wind English be not good for they to depart , etc when the factor bark . in 225 p come again to talk with the captain , they desire to go to the bassa , and that he will safe conduct they thither : he grant their request willing , desire they to go with he to a village hard by , and there to abide with he that night , and the next day they shall go to Bachu , and from thence proceed on their journey to Derbent . they be unwilling to go that night with he , because their provision for the way be not in readiness , but request that they may stay till the morning . thereupon the captain say it be report unto he , that they mean the night before to have go away : and if it shall so happen , he be in great danger of loose his head : for which cause he request to have some one for a pledge : wherefore m . Garrard one of the factor offer himself to go , who , because he can not speak the ruff tongue , take with he Christopher Burrough , and a ruff interpretor : that night they ride from the seaside , to a village about ten mile off , where at supper time the captain have much talk with m . Garrard of our country , demand where about it do lie , what country be near unto it , and with who we have traffic , for by the ruff name of our country he can not conjecture who we shall be : but when by the situation he perceive we be Englishman , he demand if our prince be a maiden queen : which when he be certify of , then ( quoth he ) your land be call enghilterra , be it not ? answer be make , it be so : whereof he be very glad when he know the certainty . he make very much of they , place m . Garrard next to himself , and Christopher Burrough , with the Russie interpretor for the turquoise tongue hard by . there be a Gillan merchant with he at that present , of who he seem to make great account : he he place next to himself on the other side , and his gentleman sit round about he talk together . their sit be upon the heal , or cross legged . supper be bring in , he request they to eat . 226 after their pottage ( which be make of rice ) be do , and likewise their boil meat , there come in platter of rice sodden thick , and honey mingle withal : after all which , come a sheep rest whole , which be bring in a trey , and set before the captain : he call one of his servitor , who cut it in piece , and lay thereof upon diverse platter , set the same before the captain : then the captain give to m . Garrard and his company one platter , and to his gentleman another , and to they which can not well reach he cast meat from the platter which be before he . diverse question he have with m . Garrard and Christopher Burrough at supper time , about their diet , inquire whether they eat fish or flesh voluntary , or by order . their drink in those part be nothing but water . after supper ( walk in the garden ) the captain demand of m . Garrard , whether the use be in England to lie in the house or in the garden , and which he have best like of : he answer , where it please he , but their use be to lie in house : whereupon the captain cause bed to be send into the house for they , and cause his kinsman to attend on they in the night , if they chance to want any thing : he himself with his gentleman and soldier lie in the garden . in the morning very early he send horse for the rest of the company which shall go to Derbent , send by they that go ten sheep for the ship . in that village there be a stove , into which the captain go in the morning , request m . Garrard to go also to the same to wash himself , which he do . Shortly after their come out of the stove , while they be at breakfast , m . Turnbull , m . tailboye , and Thomas Hudson the m . of the ship , come thither , and when they have all break their fast , they go to Bachu : but Christopher Burrough return to the ship , for that he have hurt his leg , and can not well endure that travel . and from Bachu they proceed towards Derbent , as it be by the captain 227 the receive of the english into Derbent . promise , be accompany on their way for their safe conduct , with a gentleman , and certain soldier , which have the captain of