of the clock , and have then nine foot water : and at noon they observe the latitude , and find it to be 44 . degree 47 minute : then have they three fathom and a half water , be clear of the flat . it be count from the four hillock to the sea about fifty verst . from the say noontide until four of the clock they sail south by east five league and a half : then have they five fathom and a half and brackish water : from that till twelve at night they sail south by east half a league , east ten league : then have they eleven fathom , and the water salt . from that till the 22 . day three of the clock in the morning they sail three and fifty league , then have they sixteen 222 fathom water : from thence they sail until noon south and by west seven league and a half , the latitude then observe 43 . degree 15 . minute , the depth then 43 - degree eight and twenty fathom , and shallow ground : from ’ 5 - that until eight of the clock at night , they sail south by east five league and a half , then have they three and forty fathom shallow ground . from thence till the 23 . four a clock in the morning , they sail Southsouthwest three league and a half : then can they get no ground in two and fifty fathom deep . from thence until noon they sail south nine league , than the latitude observe be 42 . degree 20 . minute . from that till the 24 . day at noon they sail south by west seventeen league and a half , than the latitude observe be 41 . degree 32 . minute . from noon till seven of 41 - degree the clock at night , they sail Southsouth west four 32 - minuts - league , then have they perfect sight of high land or hill , which be almost cover with snow , and the mid of they be west from the ship , be then about twelve league from the near land : they sound but can find no ground in two hundred fathom . from thence they sail Southwest until midnight : about three league from thence till the 25 . day four of the clock in the morning , they sail west three league , be then little wind , and near the land , they take in their sail , and lay hull : at noon the latitude observe , be 40 . degree 54 . minute : they sound but can get 4 ° degree no ground in two hundred fathom . at four of the 54 - minute . clock in the afternoon , the wind northwest , they set their sail , and from thence till the 26 . day at noon they sail east southeast four league . from thence they sail till eight of the clock at night Southwest three league , the wind then at north . from thence they sail until the 27 . day two of the clock in the morning , Westsouthwest eight league , the wind blow at north very much . from the say two till four of the clock they sail south by west one league : then be day light , they see the land plain , which be 223 not past three league from they , be very high ragged land . there be certain rock that lie far off into the sea , about five league from the same land , ( which be call barmake Tash ) they sail between those rock and the land , and about five of the clock they pass bilbili . by the port Bilbili , where they shall have put in but can not : and bear long the shore about two of the clock afternoon , they come to Bildih in the country of Media or Shervan , against which place they anchor in 9 foot water . present after they be at anchor , there come aboard of they a boat , wherein be seven or eight person , two turk , the rest Persians , the Turk vassal , which bid they welcome , and seem to be glad of their arrival , who tell the factor that the Turk have conquer all Media , or the country Shervan , and how that the turk bassa remain in Derbent with a garrison of Turk , and that Shamaky be whole spoil , and have few or no inhabitant leave in it . the factor then be desirous to come to the speech of the bassa , send one of the tisike ( or merchant that go over with they from astracan , passenger ) and one of the company servant Robert Bachu port . Golding , with those soldier , to the captain of Bachu , which place stand hard by the sea , to certify he of their arrival , and what commodity they have bring , and to desire friendship to have quiet and safe traffic for the same . Bachu be from Bildih , the place where they ride , about a day journey , on foot easy to be travel , which may be six league the next way over land : it be a wall town , and strong fortify . when the say messenger come to the captain of Bachu , the say captain give he very friendly entertainment , and after he understand what they be that be come in the ship , and what they have bring , he seem to rejoice much thereat : who give the say Golding licence to depart back the next day , be the eight and twenty day : and promise that he will himself come to the ship the next day follow : with which 224 answer the say Golding return and come to the ship the say eight and twenty day about nine of the clock at night . the nine and twenty day in the morning the factor cause a tent to be set up at shore near the ship , against the come of the say captain : who come thither about three of the clock after noon , and bring about thirty soldier , that attend on he , in shirt of male , and some of they have gauntlet of silver , other of steel , and very fair . the factor meet he at their tent , and after very friendly salutation pass between they , they give he for a present a garment of cloth of velvet , and another of scarlet , who accept the