four league the wind scant Easterly , so that they be force to anchor in three fathom water . the 6 day they weigh anchor , and bear further off into the sea , where they anchor in seven fathom water , the ship be very leak , and so rot abaft the main mast , that a man with his nail may scrape through her side . the 7 day about 7 of the clock in the morning , they set sail , the wind Southwest . they consider the time of the year be far spend , the ship weak , leak and rot , and therefore determine not to tarry any long for Wincoll and his fellow , but to leave they behind , bend themselves direcdy towards astracan : and sail northnortheast until midnight about 16 league , the wind then come to the northnorthwest , and blow much , a very storm , which cause they to take in all their sail , save the fore corpse , with which they be force to steer before the sea , south by west , and southsouthwest . and on the 8 day about two of the clock in the morning their great boat sink at the ship stern , which 236 they be force to cut from the ship to their great grief and discomfort : for in she they hope to save their life if the ship shall have miscarry . about 10 of the clock before noon they have sight of the land about 5 league to the south of Derbent , and bare long the coast to the southeastwards unto Nezavoo , where they Nezavoo . come at anchor in three fathom , and black oz , good anchor hold , whereof they be glad , as also that the wind be shift to the northwest , and but a mean gale . Wincoll and the rest of his fellow be in the armenian village , which be about 18 verst to the westwards of Nezavoo , the place whereagainst they ride at anchor , see the ship as she pass by that place , and send a man in the night follow alongst the coast after she , who come against the ship where she ride , and with a firebrand in the top of a tree make sign , which be perceive by they in the ship , whereupon they hoist out their skiff , and send she ashore to learn what be mean by the fire : which return a letter from Wincoll , wherein he write that they be with such good as they have at the armenian village , and pray that there they may with the same good be take into the ship . the 9 day it be little wind , they weigh and bear a little further off " into the sea towards the say village , and anchor . the 10 day they send their skiff to the armenian village to fetch those man and the good they have , with order that if the wind serve , that they can not return to fetch the ship , they of the ship promise to come for they , against the say village . this day it be calm . the 11 day the wind northwest they ride still . the 12 day the wind southeast they weigh anchor , and bear against and near to the armenian village where they anchor , and then the skiff come aboard and tell they that our people at shore be like to be spoil of the Tartar , be it not that the gunner defend they : then be the skiff send back again to charge they at any hand they shall hasten aboard the ship whatsoever it cost they . whereupon , all the company come aboard the 237 two Spaniard deliver by our english man . same day save Richard relfe and two russes , but assoon as the skiff be return aboard the ship , the wind blow at southeast , and the sea be grow , so as they be force to take in their skiff into the ship , and ride still till the 13 day , and then be fair weather , early in the morning the skiff be hoist out of the ship , and send to shore to fetch the say relfe and the two russes , which be ready at the shore side , and with they two Spaniards that be take captive at the Goletta in Barbary , which serve the Turk as soldier . those Spaniard ( of christian charity ) they bring also aboard the ship to redeem they from their captivity , which be bring over into England , and set free and at liberty here in London , in September 1381 . the wind this day at Northnortheast , fair weather . the 14 day they send the skiff to shore , and fill fresh water . the 15 day they ride still , be little wind and fog . the 16 day the wind eastsoutheast , they weigh anchor and set sail , bear northwards towards astracan , and the same night they anchor in ten fathom water , about five mile from the shore of the shalkaule country , which place be eight league northnorthwest from Derbent . the 17 day the wind at north very stormy , they ride still all that day and night . the 18 the wind all southeast about one of the clock afternoon , they weigh anchor , and sail thence till four of the clock Northnortheast six league , than they may see the land northwest about ten league from the wind southeast : from thence they sail till midnight Northnortheast twelve league . from thence till the 19 day seven of clock in the morning they sail Northnortheast eight league : the wind then eastsoutheast , a fair gale , they sound and have 17 fathom , and sand , be ( as the master judge ) about the head of Shetly : from thence till 12 of the clock at noon they sail north 5 league , the wind then at east a fair gale , they sound and have 5 fathom . from thence till 8 of the clock at night , they sail north 7 league , the wind then at Northeast with small 238 rain , they take in their sail , and anchor in 3 fathom water and soft oz , where they ride still all night , and the 20 day and night the wind Northeast , as before with small rain . the 21 day the wind northwest , they likewise ride still . the 22 day about 3 of the clock in the afternoon , they