a letter of James Alday to the worshipful m . Michael lock , agent in London for the Moscovie company , touch a trade to be establish in Lappia , write 157 5 . he marvel the company do not confer with he open Lappia . have in remembrance ( worshipful sir ) the talk we have when i be with you , as touch the trade in Lappia : and certain i have something marveil that in all this time the right wor . your society have not give order that some little conference ( by you , or with some other ) may have be have with i touch those part , consider they know ( as i think ) that i remain there one whole year and more , by which mean reason will that i shall have learn something . but the cause why they have not desire to confer with i ( as i judge ) rest only in one of these 4 case , that be to say , either they think themselves so thorough certify of that trade , as more need not be speak thereof , or that they have no lust more to deal that way , or that they hold i so untrusty to they that they dare not open their mind , for fear or doubt , i shall bear more affection to other then to they , and so discover their secret : or else they think i of so simple understanding , that i be not worthy to be speak with in these matter . to which 4 case i answer as follow : first , if they think themselves so thorough certify as more need not to be speak : certain i something marvel by who it shall be : for in you winter past there lay but 5 english person there , viz . Christopher colt , Roger Leche , Adam Tunstal cooper , one lad , and i : for Henry cocknedge be the whole winter at Moscow . and of these person , as touch colt , i think he ( if i may without offence speak my conscience ) the most simple person that be there , ( as touch the understanding of a merchant ) although indeed he take upon he very much to his own harm 197 > 5 74 - 5 english man winter in Lappia . Christopher colt a simple merchant . Henry cocknedge honest , but ignorant . Roger leech expert of Lappia . 8c other i doubt , for he use himself not like a merchant , neither show diligence like a worthy servant or factor , but lie still in a den all you whole winter , have ware lie upon his hand , which he will not employ to any use : although sundry way there be that he may have put his ware in ready money with gain , and no great adventure , which money will have be more acceptable to the poor lap 8c fisherman at the spring , than any kind of ware : but his fond head do as he that have the talon in the gospel , 8c yet he have counsel to the contrary which he disdain , so that man perceive his captious head , leave not only to counsel he , but also some , in as much as they may , keep he from knowledge of the trade that may be in that country , the winter time , which be better peradventure than most man think of . wherefore if colt have write or say any thing touch those country , it be doubtful whether it touch the effect or not , consider he lie still all the winter without trial of any matter . and for Henry cocknedge assure speak so much as i do perfect know , i must needs say , that he be a very honest young man , 8c right careful of his business , and in that respect worthy to be praise . but yet he be absent in the winter other then by hearsay he can not learn , so that his instruction may be something doubtful . and like as of the lad nothing can be learn , so be i sure that Tunstal the Cooper have not yet be speak with , so that of those part certain knowledge can as yet be learn , except by Roger Leche , of who i confess knowledge may be have , for indeed there be no english man live that have like knowledge in those country as he have , nor that be able to do so much with the people as he may : he in the winter travail one way 8c other near 300 mile : he of a little make something , and learn not only the manner , condition 8c custom of the people , but also he learn of all kind of commodity in those region how they may be buy at the most advantage , that gain may 198 be make of they : so that i confess , if he have give intelligence to the right worship company , then have they no need to speak with i or any other for to learn of those country ( except it be to hear my opinion ) which in truth i will always open unto they . but the effect of you beneficial secret of that country be to be inquire of he , and in my opinion worthy to be learn , except , as in the second case , they listen no more to deal that way . to which i answer , that if they deal not that way , and that with speed they seek not to prevent other y ‘ mean to deal there , although not English man , let they then not think long to have any profitable trade in Russia : for the com - great part of that benefit will be wipe from they , or $ year to a end , as 1 will show good reason , it encage be tra ^ e of demand the question . therefore if they will maintain Lappia , other then Russia trade with advantage , then ought they to toil prevent look to this in time , and so may they keep the Russia trade as it be , and likewise make a trade in Lappia more profitable than that , and therefore this be to be consider , rather than to prohibit Englishman from the trade of the trade of Vedagoba . for if they look not to this , Vedagba . and that in time , they may be liken ( if it may be without offence speak ) to two dog that strive for the bone while the three run away with it : and yet mean i not otherwise , but in such order , as not Englishmen only , but also Hollanders , Brabanders , and other may be just and utter put from the trade in Lappia , and the company to keep the whole trade to themselves without interruption of any , to their great benefit , which i wish to they from the bottom of my heart , as ever i wish wealth to my own person : and thereby hold i excuse in the three case i write of . and for the four as touch my judgement , as i he can say confess it be not very deep , so i thank God i be s ° ™ what not utter without understanding ( although 1 be poor ) much 0 and therefore peradventure hold out of reputation , yet God do distribute his gift as it please he . i 199 have see wise man poor in my time , and foolish man rich , and some man have more knowledge than they can utter by speech , which fault be once object against i by a great learned man of this realm : but sure how weak soever my utterance be , my meaning be faithful and true , and i wish in my heart to your laudable company all the gain that may be , or else i pray the lord God to confound i as a false dissembler . it grieve i to see how of late they have be bring to great charge , beat the bush , as the old term be , and other man take the bird : this last year have in Lappia 2 ship , as i be partly inform , they both bring not much above 300 barrel of train oil , yet be i sure there be buy beside they of the russes , 1183 corel , and lap , 1183 barrel , beside 27 barrel tf oil buy quoth SQjj t Jacob the Hollander , at two barrel for Golt sell zy one wortherne dozen . and yet there be a great barrel to a inconvenience spring , which if it take a little deep Hollander . root it will be ( i fear ) too hard to be pull up , which for love and good will ( God be my witness ) i write of , wish as to my dear friend that they shall look to it in time , if they mean to keep the trade of Russia or Lappia . and thus love have compel i to write this advertisement , which i wish to be accept in as good part , as i with good will have write it .