to be ice of the bay of saint Nicholas , but it be not i sight of as we f ° und afterward . perfect land . the seven day we meet with more ice , at the east 284 Arthur pet and Charles Jackman a . d . 1580 . part of the other ice : we halde along a weather the ice to find some end thereof by east north - east . this day there appear more land north from we be perfect land : the ice be between we and it , so that we can not come near to it . the same morning at six of the clock we put into the ice to find some way through it , we continue in it all the same day and all the night follow , the wind by the north northwest . we be constrain to go many point of our compass , but we go most a easterly course . the eight day the wind at north northwest , we continue our course , and at five in the morning we sound , and have 90 . fathom red oz . this day at four in the afternoon we sound again , and have . 84 . fathom oz , as before . at six in the after noon we clear our self of the ice , and hold along southeast by south : we sound again at 10 . a clock at night , and have 43 . fathom sandy oz . the 9 day at 2 . in the morning , we sound again , and have 45 . fathom , then there appear a shadow of land to we east Northeast , and so we run with it the space of 2 . hour , and then perceive that it be but fog , we hold along southeast . this day at 2 . in the afternoon we sound and 7 ^ - 3 - have fifty fathom black oz . our latitude be 70 . mtn ' degree three minute . at ten a clock at night we sound again , and have fifty fathom black oz . the ten day the wind be at north northwest , we hale east and by north , which course we set , because at ten of the clock afore noon we do see land , and then we sound have 35 . fathom black oz . all this day there be a great fog , so that we dare not bear with the land to make it , and so we keep a outward course . this day at 6 . in the afternoon we espy land , wherewith we hail , and then it grow calm : we sound and have 120 . fathom black oz : and then we send our boat a land to sound and prove the land . 285 the same night we come with our ship within a a island . island , where we ride all the same night . the same night we go into a bay to ride near the land for wood and water . the malne the 11 . day the wind come to the east southeast : land - this day about a league from we to the eastwards , we see a very fair sound or river that pass very far into the country with 2 . or 3 . branch with a island in the midst . the 12 . of July the wind be east southeast . this day about 11 . a clock in the morning , there come a great white bear down to the water side , and take the water of his own accord , we chase he with our boat , but for all that we can do , he goat to land Bearebay . and escape from we , where we name the bay Bearebay . this day at 7 . in the after noon we set sail , for we have good hope that the wind will come Westerly , and with sail and oar we gate the sea . all the night it be calm with fog . the 13 . day in the morning the wind be very variable with fog , and as it clear up we meet with great store of ice , which at the first show like land . this ice do we much trouble , and the more because of the fog , which continue until the 14 . day , 12 . of the clock . the 14 . day in the morning we be so imbay with ice , y * we be constrain to come out as we go in , which be by great good fortune , or rather by the goodness of God , otherwise it have be impossible , and at 12 . of the clock we be clear of it , the wind be at south and south by west . the same day 70 . deg . 26 . we found the pole to be elevate 70 . degree , 26 . mtn - minute : we lay along the coast northwest , think it to be a island , but find no end in row so long , the suppose we suppose it to be the main of Nova Zembla . about embia ^ 0 ™ 2 ‘ * n afternoon we lay it to the southward to ' double the ice , which we can not do upon that board , so that we cast about again and lay west along under the ice . about seven in the afternoon 286 Arthur pet and Charles Jackman a . d . 1580 . we goat about the great part thereof . about 11 . a clock at night we bring the ice southeast of we , and thus we be rid of this trouble at this time . the 15 . day about 3 . in the morning , the wind be at south southwest : we cast about and lay to the eastwards : the wind do Wester , so that we lay south southwest with a flawne sheet , and so we run all the same day . about 8 . in the after noon we sound , and have 23 . fathom small grey sand . this night at twelve of the clock we sound again , and have 29 . fathom sand , as afore . the 16 . day unto 3 . in the morning we hold along east southeast , where we find 18 . fathom red sand , than we hold along Northeast . in these sounding we have many overfal . this day at 10 . of the clock we many overmet with more ice , which be very great , so that we fab . can not tell which way to get clear of it . then the wind come to the south southeast , so that we lay to the northward .