the discovery make by m . Arthur Pet , and m . Charles Jackman , of the north - east part , beyond the island of Vaigatz , with two bark : the one call the George , the other the William , in the year 1580 . write by huge smith . Pon Monday the 30 . of may , we depart from Harwich in the afternoon , the wind be at south , and to the eastward . the ebb be spend we can not double the pole , and therefore be constrain to put in again until the next day in the morning , be the last of may : which day we weigh our anchor about 3 . a clock in the morning , the wind be west southwest . the same day we pass orfordnesse at a east sun , and Stamford at a west sun , and Yarmouth at a west northwest sun , and so to Winterton , where we do anchor all night : it be then calm , and the flood be come . the next day be the first of June , we set sail at 3 . a clock in the morning , and set our course north , the wind at the southwest , and at southsouthwest . the 10 . day about one of the clock in the afternoon , we put into Norway to a place where one of the headland of the sound be call bottle : the other headland be call moil . there be also a island call keen . here i do find the pole to be elevate 62 . deg . it do flow there south , and it hi 7 . or 8 . foot , not above . the 11 . day in the morning the wind come to the south and to the southeast : the same day at six in 282 Arthur pet and Charles Jackman a . d . 1580 . the afternoon we set sail , and bear along the coast : it be very foul weather with rain and fog . the 22 . day the wind be at west , we do hall the the north coast east north - east , and east . the same day at 6 . in double . the morning we do double the north cape . about 3 . in the afternoon we pass skite bear ness , and hold along the coast east , and east southeast , and all the same night we hail southeast , and southeast by east . the 23 . day about 3 . in the morning we come to Wardhouse . Wardhouse , the wind at the northwest . the cause of our come in be to seek the William , who company we lose the 6 . day of this month , and to send letter into England . about one of the clock in the after noon the William also come into Wardhouse to we in good safety , and all her company in good health . the 24 . the wind come to the east Northeast . this day the William be hold a ground , because she be somewhat leak , and to mend her steerage . this night about 12 . of the clock she do hale a float again . the 25 . day the wind be at east north - east . the 26 . day the Toby of Harwich depart from Wardhouse for London , Thomas Greene be master , to who we deliver our letter . the 27 . day the wind be at south southeast , and the 28 . also . the 29 . day about 6 . in the afternoon , the wind come to the west northwest for the space of one hour , and present to the east again , and so be variable all the same night . the 30 . about six in the morning , the wind come to east southeast , and continue so all the same day . the first of July about 5 . in the afternoon , the wind July . be at northnorthwest : and about 7 . of the clock we set sail from Wardhouse east and by south . the second day about 5 . in the morning , the wind be east , and east southeast , and we do lie to the shoreward . and about 10 . in morning the wind come to south southeast , and we lay it to the eastward : some - 283 time we lay east by south , sometime east southeast , and sometime east by north . about 5 . in the afternoon we bear with the William , who be willing to go with Kegor , because we think she to be out of try , and sail very ill , where we may mend her steerage : whereupon master Pet not willing to go into harbour say to master Jackman , that if he think himself not able to keep the sea , he shall do as he think best , and that he in the mean time will bear with willoughbies willoughbies land , for that it be a parcel of our land . direction , and will meet he at verove ostrove , or vaigat , and so we set our course east north - east , the wind be at southeast . the 3 . day the wind at southeast we find the pole to be elevate 70 . degree , 46 . minute . the same night at 12 . of the clock we sound , but have no ground , 50 . league in i2o . fathom , be fifty league from the one side from Kegor . our reckon east north - east from Kegor . the 4 . day all the morning be calm . this day we find the pole to be elevate 71 . degree 38 . minute . this day at 9 in the afternoon the wind at Northeast with a gentle gale , we hold along southeast by east . the 5 . day the wind at northwest , we hold east and east by south : this day we see land , but we can not make it , the wind be northerly , so that we can not come near to it . the 6 . day about 2 . in the afternoon , the wind at north northwest , we halde east southeast with a fair and gentle gale : this day we meet with ice . about 6 . in the afternoon it become calm : we with sail and oar lay it to the north - east part , hope that way to clear we of it : for that way we do see the head part of it , as we think . which do , about 12 . of the clock at night we gate clear of it . we do think it