the same people have need of cloth , then be you to devise what commodity they have to purchase the same withal . if they be poor , then be you to consider of the soil , and how by any possibility the same may be make to enrich they , that hereafter they may have something to purchase the cloth withal . if you enter into any main by portable river , and shall find any great wood , you be to note what kind of timber they be of , that we may know whether they be for pitch , tar , mast , dealeboord , clapboord , or for building of ship or house , for so , if the people have no use of they , they may be bring perhaps to use . not to venture the loss of any one man . you must have great care to preserve your people , since your number be so small , and not to venture any one man in any wise . 267 to bring home beside merchandise certain trifle . bring home with you ( if you may ) from Cambalu or other civil place , one or other young man , although you leave one for he . also the fruit of the country if they will not of themselves dure , dry they and so preserve they . and bring with you the kernel of pear and apple , and the stone of such stonefruit as you shall find there . also the seed of all strange herb and flower , for such seed of fruit and herb come from another part of the world , and so far off , will delight the fancy of many for the strangeness , and for that the same may grow , and continue the delight long time . if you arrive at Cambalu or Quinsay , to bring thence the map of that country , for so shall you have the perfect description , which be to great purpose . to bring thence some old print book , to see whether they have have print there before it be devise in Europe as some write . to ought their force by sea and by land . if you arrive in Cambalu or Quinsay , to take a speciali view of their navy , and to note the force , greatness , manner of building of they , the sail , the tackle , the anchor , the furniture of they , with ordinance , armour , and munition . also , to note the force of the wall and bulwark of their city , their ordnance , and whether they have any caliver , and what powder and shot . to note what armour they have . what sword . what pike , halberd and bill . what horse of force , and what light horse they have . and so throughout to note the force of the country both by sea and by land . 268 thing to be mark to make conjecture by . to take speciali note of their building , and of the ornament of their house within . take a speciali note of their apparel and furniture , and of the substance that the same be make of , of which a merchant may make a guess as well of their commodity , as also of their want . to ought their shop and warehouse , and with what commodity they abound , the price also . to see their shambles , and to view all such thing as be bring into the market , for so you shall soon see the commodity , and the manner of the people of the inland , and so give a guess of many thing . to ought their field of grain , and their tree of fruit , and how they abound or not abound in one and other , and what plenty or scarcity of fish they have . thing to be carry with you , whereof moor or less be to be carry for a show of our commodity to be make . karsy of all orient colour , special of stammel , broadcloth of orient colour also . frizadoe , motlies , Bristol frieze , spanish blanket , bay of all colour , special with stammel , worsted , carl , say , woadmol , flanel , rash , etc feel of diverse colour . taffata hat . deep cap for mariner colour in stammel , whereof if ample vent may be find , it will turn to a infinite commodity of the common poor people by knit . quilt cap of Levant taffata of diverse colour , for the night . knit stock of silk of orient colour . knit stock of jerzie yarn of orient colour , whereof if ample vent may follow the poor multitude shall be set in work . 260 stock of kerchief of diverse colour for man and for woman . garter of silk of several kind , and of colour diverse . girdle of buff and all other leather , with gilt and ungilt buckle , special waste girdle , waste girdle of velvet . glove of all sort knit , and of leather . glove perfume . point of all sort of silk , thread , and leather , of all manner of colour . shoe of spanish leather of diverse colour , of diverse length , cut and uncut . shoe of other leather . velvet shoe and pantofle . these shoe and pantofle to be send this time , rather for a show then for any other cause . purse knit , and of leather . nightcap knit , and other . a garnish of pewter for a show of a vent of that english commodity , bottle , flagon , spoon , etc of that mettle . glass of English make . Venice glass . look glass for woman , great and fair . small dial a few for proof , although there they will not hold the order they do here . spectacle of the common sort . other of crystal trim with silver , and otherwise . hour glass . ) i comb of box . comb of ivory . i [ comb of horn . linen of diverse sort . handkerchief with silk of several colour wrought . Glazen eye to ride with against dust . knife in sheath both single and double , of good edge . needle great and small of every kind . button great and small , with mould of leather 270 1580 . and not of wood , and such as be durable of double silk , and that of sundry colour . box with weight for gold , and of every kind of the coin of gold , good and bad , to show that the people here use weight and measure , which be a certain show of wisdom , and of certain government settle here . all the several silver coin of our english money , to be carry with you to be show to the governor at Cambalu , which be a thing that shall in silence speak to wise man more than you imagine . lock and key , hinge , bolt , hasp , etc great and small of excellent workmanship , whereof if vent may be , hereafter we shall set our subject in work , which you must have in great regard . for in find ample vent of any thing that be to be wrought in this realm , be more worth to our people beside the gain of the merchant , than Christchurch , Bridewell , the Savoy , and all the hospital of England . for banquete on shipboard person