of credit . first , the sweet perfume to set under hatch to make you place sweet against their come aboard , if you arrive at Cambalu , Quinsey , or in any such great city , and not among savage . Marmelade . i i fig barrel . [ I . 441 . i sucket . i ( raisin of the sun . comfet of diverse kind make of purpose by he that be most excellent , that shall not dissolve . prune damask . ) ( walnut . dry pear . j ( almond . smalnut . olive to make they taste their wine . the apple John that dure two year to make show of our fruit . hullock . } { sack . vial of good sweet water , and cast bottle of glass to besprinkle the guest withal , after their come aboard . 271 sugar to use with their wine if they will . the sweet oil of Zante , and excellent french vinegar , and a fine kind of biscuit stiep in the same do make a banquete dish , and a little sugar cast in it cool and comfort , and refresh the spirit of man . cinnamon water be to be have with you to make a i show of by taste , and also to comfort imperiali water i your sick in the voyage . with these and such like , you may banquet where you arrive the great and best person . or with the gift of these Marmelades in small box , or small vial of sweet water you may gratify by way of gift , or you may make a merchandise of they . the map of England and of London . take with you the map of England set out in fair colour , one of the big sort i mean , to make show of your country from whence you come . and also the large map of London to make show of your city . and let the river be draw full of ship of all sort , to make the more show of your great trade and traffic in trade of merchandise . Ortelius book of map . if you take Ortelius book of map with you to mark all these region , it be not amiss : and if need be , to present the same to the great can , for it will be to a prince of marvellous account . the book of the attire of all nation . such a book carry with you and bestow in gift will be much esteem , as i persuade my self . book . if any man will lend you the new herbal and such book as make show of herb , plant , tree , fish , fowl and beast of these region , it may much delight 272 timdum dedit Ortons inortald ^ rGan Orbi / ^ vbtanfumcjaic ’ iis oitdium . e ^ Abraham ORTELIUS the great can , and the nobility , and also their merchant to have the view of they : for all thing in these part so much differ from the thing of those region , since they may not be here to see they , by mean of the distance , yet to see those thing in a shadow , by this mean will delight they . the book of rate . take with you the book of rate , to the end you may prick all those commodity there specify , that you shall chance to find in Cambalu , in quinsey , or in any part of the east , where you shall chance to be . parchment . roll of parchment , for that we may vent much without hurt to the realm , and it lie in small room . glue . to carry glue , for that we have plenty and want vent . Red ochre for painter . to seek vent because we have great mine of it , and have no vent . soap of both kind . to try what vent it may have , for that we make of both kind , and may perhaps make more . saffron . to try what vent you may have of saffron , because this realm yield the best of the world , and for the e and other labour may set the poor great in work to their relief . aquavitae . by new devise wonderful quantity may be make here , and therefore to seek the vent . black cony skin . to try the vent at Cambalu , for that it lie towards the north , and for that we abound with the commodity , and may spare it . thread of all colour . the vent thereof may set our people in work . in 273 s to see the vent for it may set our people in work . a note and caveat for the merchant . that before you offer your commodity to sale , you endeavour to learn what commodity the country there have . for if you bring thither velvet , taffata , spice , or any such commodity that you your self desire to lade your self home with , you must not sell your deer , lest hereafter you purchase they not so cheap as you will . seed for sale . carry with you for that purpose all sort of garden seed , as well of sweet straw herb and of flower , as also of pot herb and all sort for root , etc lead of the first melt . lead of the second melt of the slag . to make trial of the vent of lead of all kind . english iron , and wire of iron and copper . to try the sale of the same . Brimston . to try the vent of the same , because we abound with it make in the realm . antimony a Minerali . to see whether they have any ample use there for it , for that we may lade whole navy of it and have no use of it unless it be for some small portion in sound of bell , or a little that the alchemist use : of this you may have two sort at the apothecary . tinder box with steel , flint and match and Tinder , the match to be make of juniper to avoid the offence of brimstone . to try and make the better sale of brimstone by show the use . candle of wax to light . a paint bellows . for that perhaps they have not the use of they . 274 to try the sale , for that it be a natural commodity of this realm . all manner of edge tool . to be sell there or to the less civil people by the way where you shall touch . what i will have you there to remember . to note special what excellent die they use in these region , and therefore to note their garment and ornament of house : and to see their die house and the material and simple that they use about the same , and to bring muster and show of the colour and of the material , for that it may serve this clothing realm to great purpose . to take with you for your own use . all manner of engine to take fish and foul . to take with you those thing that be in perfection of goodness . for as the goodness now at the first may make your commodity in credit in time to come : so false and sophisticate commodity shall draw you and all your commodity into contempt and ill opinion .