we think that way to clear our self of it , but that way we have more ice . about 6 . in the afternoon , the wind come to the east . than we lay to the southward that we have 30 . fathom black oz . this day we find the pole to be elevate 69 . deg . 40 . minute , and this night at 12 . a clock we have 41 . fathom red sand . the 17 . day at 3 . in the morning , we have 12 . fathom . at 9 we have 8 . and 7 . all this day we run south and south by west , at the depth aforesaid , red sand , be but shallow water . at eight in the afternoon , the wind with a shower and thunder come to the southwest , and then we run east Northeast . at 12 . at night it come to the south and by east , and all this be in the bay of Pechora . the bay of the 18 . day at 7 . in the morning we bear with the w * 0 ™ - headland of the bay , where we find two island . there be also overfal of water or tide . we go between the main and the island , next to the head , where we have about 2 . fathom and a half . we find 287 they have sight the pole elevate 69 . deg . 13 minute . this day we of Vaygatz . sight of Vaigatz : the land of the main of Pechora do trend southeast , we hold east southeast , and have 10 . fathom oz all the same day until 4 . in the after noon , then be calm , we anchor in 10 . fathom all the same night . the 19 day at two in the morning we set sail , and run south and south southwest all the same day at 8 . 7 . and 6 . fathom , this be off the south part of Vaigatz , this part of the land lie north and south . this day at 4 . in the afternoon we find shallow water sometime 4 . fathom , sometime 3 . and 2 . and a half , and one fathom and a half : there we anchor and send our boat away to sound , and all to leeward we have 4 . foot and 3 . foot , and 2 . foot , there be not water for the boat between Vaigatz and the other side : find no more water , there be no other way but to go back as we come in , have the wind northwest , so at twelve at night we set sail . the 20 . day we ply to the northward , and get deep water again 6 . and 7 . fathom . the 21 . day the wind by the northwest , we hold along the coast north and north northwest , we have 8 . and 9 and 10 . fathom . the 22 . day the wind come to the southwest , we bear along the coast of Vaygatz , as we find it to lie north and by west , and north northwest , and north . the wind blow very much with great fog , we lack a island water and wood bear within a island where we find have store of great store of wood and water , there be three or wood t water . 9 j tt 1 • 1 roure goodly sound . under two point there be a cross set up , and a man bury at the foot of it . upon the say cross master Pet do grave his name with the date of our lord , and likewise upon a stone at the foot of the cross , and so do i also , to the end that if the William do chance to come thither , they may have knowledge that we have be there . at eight in the afternoon the wind come to the north north - 288 Arthur pet and Charles Jackman a . d . 1580 . west , we set sail and turn out of the bay the same night the wind come to the west , so that we lay north along the land . the 23 . day at five in the morning , the wind come to the southwest , a sea board we see a great number of fair island , to the number of six : a sea board fair of these island , there be many great overfal , as great islands - streame or tide : we halde north - east and east north - east as the land do trend . at eight aforenoon the wind come to the southeast with very much wind , rain and fog , and very great store of ice a sea board : so we lay to the southwest to attain to one of the island to harbour we if the weather do so extreme continue , and to take in our boat , think it meet so to do , and not to tow she in such weather . about twelve of the clock it become very calm upon the sudden , and come up to the west northwest , and northwest by west , and then we take in our boat , and this do , there come down so much wind , as we be not able to steer afore it , with corpse and bonnet of each , we hold south with the land , for so the land do trend . this day all the afternoon we sail under a great land of ice , we sail between the land and it , be not able to cross it . about twelve at night we find the ice to stretch into the land , that we can not get clear to the eastward , so we lay it to the shore , and there we find it clear hard aboard the shore , and we find also a very fair island which make a very good harbour , and within be 12 . fathom . this island be to you eastwards of Vaigatz , 4 or 5 . - a island to league . this land of the main do trend southeast , gr and southeast by east . it be a very fair coast , and ° r even and plain , and not full of mountain nor rock : you have but shallow water of 6 . or 7 . fathom , about a league from the shore , all this morning we hail east southeast . this day we find the pole to be elevate 69 . degree 14 . minute . about 12 . a clock we be constrain to put into the