be at the south , very much wind , with rain and fog . the 28 day in the morning the wind be at eastnortheast we set sail at 8 of the clock , and hale out of the bay Westsouthwest , and Southwest , have a goodly gale until one of the clock , and then the wind come to southeast , and to the south with rain and fog , and very much wind : at six of the clock we come into a very good road , where we do ride all the same night in good safety . the 29 day we put into a good sound , the wind by the southwest : at three in the afternoon there come down very much wind by the south , and all night with vehement waste , and rain . the 30 day all day the wind be at Westsouth west . and in this sound the pole be elevate 63 deg . 10 min . 300 Arthur pet and Charles Jackman ad . 1580 . the first day of October the wind be at south with October . very much wind , and vehement blast . the 7 day we set sail : for from the first of this month until this 7 day , we have very foul weather , but special the four day when the wind be so great , that our cable break with the very storm , and i do not think that it be possible that any more wind than that be shall blow : for after the break of our cable , we do drive a league , before our anchor will take any hold : but God be thank the storm begin to slack , otherwise we have be in ill case . the 7 . day at night we come to a anchor until the next day , which be the 8 day of the month , when as the wind grow great again , with rain , whereupon we set sail and return into the sound again : and at our first come to a anchor , present there blow so much wind , that although our best anchor be out , yet the extremity of the storm drive we upon a ledge of rock , and do bruise our ship in such sort , that we be constrain to lighten she to save she , and by this mean ( by the help of God ) we get off our ship and stop our leak , and moar she in good safety abide for a wind . we rid from this day by reason of contrary wind , with fog and rain until the 24 day , which day in the morning the wind come to the north - east , and at 8 of the clock we set sail . this sound be call moor Moore sound . sound , where it high about 5 foot water , and flow southsoutheast . the next day be the 2 5 day we put into a sound which be call ultar sound , where be a ship of the king of Denmark put into another sound there by , be 2 league to the southward of we , that come out of island : you wind be contrary for we at southsouthwest . the 12 day of November we set sail the wind be at the east southeast , and pass through the sound where the king ship do lie : which sound be call sloure sound . but as we do open the sound , we find the wind at the southwest , so that we can do no good , so 301 that we moar our ship between 2 . Islands until the 18 day , and then the weather be fair and calm , we set sail , 8c go to sea hope to find a fair wind , but in the sea we find the wind at the southwest , and southsouthwest , so that we be constrain to return into the same sound . the next day be the 19 the king ship come out also , because she see we put to sea , 8c come as far out as we , and moar where we do moare afore : and at our return back again , we moar our ship in a utter sound call Scorpe sound , because the king ship be without victual , and we do not great desire her company , although they desire we . in this sound the pole be elevate 62 deg . 47 min . thus we lay still for a wind until the 1 of December , which day we set sail at 6 a clock in the morning , 8c at 4 in the afternoon we lay it to the inward . the 9 day we have sight of the coast of Scotland which be buquhamnesse . the 10 day we be open off the Frith . the 11 day at 4 in the morning we be thwart of Barwike : at 6 we be thwart of bamburch : the same day at 10 at night we be shoot as far as Hollyfoote . then the wind come to the south and southeast , so that we lay still until the next day in the morning , and then we be constrain to put with Tinmouth . the same day at night we hale aground to stop a leak , which we find to be in the scarf afore . the wind continue by the southeast 8c southsoutheast until the 20 day , and then we set sail about 12 at night , bear along the coast . the 22 day by reason of a southeast wind , we think we shall have be put into Humber , but the wind come to the west , so that we hale southeast : and at 3 in the afternoon we hale a sea board the sand , and have shoal water off Lymery and owry , and be in 4 fathom off they . the next day we hale as we may to seize orfordnesse . 302 instruction for russian fleet a . d . 1582 . the 24 day we come thwart of the Nase , about 8 in the morning . the 25 day be the nativity of Christ , we come to a anchor between Oldhaven , and tilberie hope . the same day we turn as high as Porshet . the 26 day we turn as high as Ratcliff , and praise God for our safe return . and thus i end , 1580 . the William with Charles Jackman arrive at a port in Norway between Tronden and Rostock in October 1580 . and there do winter : and from thence depart again in February follow , and go in company of a ship of the king of Denmark towards island : and since that time he be never hear of .