very dark with snow and fog . at 6 . in the afternoon we set sail the wind be at the north Northeast : all this night we bear away southwest , and southsouthwest , as well and as near as the ice will give we leave : all this night we find the ice somewhat favourable to we , more than it be before , whereupon we stand in good hope to get out of it . the 13 . day at 7 . in the morning , the wind be at the north - east , and Northeast and by east : all this day we be much trouble with the ice , for with a blow against a piece of ice we break the stock of our anchor , and many other great blow we have against the ice , that it be marvelous that the ship be able to abide they : the side of our boat be break with our ship which do recoil back , the boat be betwixt a great piece of ice , and the ship , and it perish the head of our rudder . this day be a very hard day with we : at night we find much break ice , and all this night it blow very much wind , so that we lay in drift with the ice , and our drift be south , for the wind be at north all this night , and we have great store of snow . the 14 . day in the morning we make our ship fist to a piece of ice , and let she drive with it . in the mean time we mend our boat and our steerage : all this day the wind continue northerly , and here 295 great store of snow . they be thwart against vaigat . sand . we have threescore and two fathom . thus we lay a drift all the same night . the 15 . day we set sail at 6 . in the morning , the wind be at Northeast . at 9 aforenoon we enter into a clear sea without ice , whereof we be most glad , and not without great cause , and give God the praise . we have 19 fathom water , and run in Southwest all the morning until we come to 14 . fathom , and thence we hail west , till we come to 10 . fathom , and then we go northwest , for so the land do trend . at 12 . of the clock we have sight of the land , which we may have have soon , but it be dark and foggy all the same day : for when we have sight of the land , we be not pass three league from it . this day we have the pole elevate 69 degree 49 minute . all day we run along the coast in ten and nine fathom , peper sand . it be a very goodly coast and a bold , and fair sounding off it , without sand or rock . the 16 day the wind be at east : this day we be trouble again with ice , but we make great shift with it : for we get between the shore and it . this day at twelve of the clock we be thwart of the southeast part of vaigat , all along which part there be great store of ice , so that we stand in doubt of passage , yet by much ado we get betwixt the shore and it : about 6 in the afternoon be find a great white bear upon a piece of ice : all this day in the afternoon it be dark with fog . and all the night we hale north and north by west , and sometime north and by east , for so do the land trend . the 17 day in the morning we hale west , for so do the land lie . the wind be at southeast , and it be very dark with fog , and in run along the shore we fall a ground , but God be praise without hurt , for we come presendy off again . the William come to a anchor to stay for we , and send some of their man to help we , but before they come we be 296 Arthur pet and Charles Jackman a . d . 1580 . under sail , and as we come to the William we do stowe our boat , and make sail , we go within some of the island , and hale Westsouthwest . the island . about two of the clock in the afternoon , we set our course Southwest and by south : so we run Southwest until twelve at night , the wind come to the northnortheast , and then we hale west . the 18 day at 6 in the morning we have 16 fathom red sand : at 6 in the morning 13 fathom . at 10 , 14 fathom , and we hale westnorthwest . at 12 a clock the wind come to the east , and east by south , we hale west and by north all the same day and night . at 6 in the afternoon we have 17 fathom red sand . the 19 day the wind be at Eastnortheast : at 6 in the morning we have 19 fathom red sand : at 12 of the clock the wind blue north and north by east , we have 17 fathom of water , at 3 in the afternoon 15 . the 20 day the wind be at Northeast , and northnortheast : at 7 in the morning we have 30 fathom black oz : at twelve of the clock we be upon the sudden in shoal water , among great sand , and can find no way out . by sound and seek about , we come aground , and so do the William , but we have no hurt , for the wind be off the shore , and the same night it be calm : all night we do our best , but we can not have her aflote . Theise shoal do lie off shoal off colgoyeve : it be very flat a great way off , and it do not high above 2 or 3 foot water : it flow north - east , and Southwest . the 21 day the wind be at Southwest , and be very fair weather we do lighten our ship as much as be possible for we to do , by reason of the place . the same high water , by the help of God , we get both a float , and the wind be at the southwest do help we , for it cause it to flow the more water . this day we find the pole to be elevate 68 degree