ice to seek some in 289 t the William and the George meet again . way to get to the northward of it , hope to have some clear passage that way , but there be nothing but whole ice . about nine in the afternoon we have sight of the William , and when we see she , there be a great land of ice between she and we , so that we can not come one to the other , but as we come near to she , we sound our trumpet and shot off two musket , and she put out her flag upon her foretopmaste in token that she do see we : all this time we do shorten our sail , and go with our foresail and mainetopsaile , seek the best way through the break ice , she make away the best that she can to follow we , we put out our flag to answer she again with the like : thus we continue all the afternoon till about 12 . a clock at night , and then we moar our ship to a piece of ice to tarry for the William . the 25 . day about five in the morning , the William come to we , be both glad of our meeting . the William have her stern post break , that the rudder do hang clean beside the stern , so that she can in no wise port her helm , with all hand she do lighten her stern , and trim her head , and when we have bring she forward all that we can , we bring a cable under her stern , and with our capstaine do wind up her stern , and so we make it as well as the place will give we leave , and in the end we bring she to steer again . we acknowledge this our meeting to be a great benefit of God for our mutual comfort , and so give his majesty thank for it . all the night after we take our rest be make fast upon a piece of ice : the wind be at west northwest , but we be so enclose with ice that we can not tell which way to pass . wind we have have at will , but ice and fog too much against our will , if it have please the lord God otherwise . the 26 . day the wind be at west northwest : we set sail to the northward , to seek if we can find any way clear to pass to the eastward , but the further 290 Arthur pet and Charles Jackman a . d . 1580 . we go that way , the more and thick be the ice , so that we can go no further . so about four in the afternoon we be constrain to moare upon another piece of ice . i think we sail in all a league this day , here we have 15 . fathom oz , and this oz be all the channel over . all the same day after four of the clock , and all the night we tarry there , be without all good hope , but rather in despair . this day master jugman do see land east Northeast from we , as he do think , whether it be land or no , i can tell well , but it be very like land , but the fog have many time deceive we . the 27 . day the wind be at northwest . this day at nine in the morning we set sail to seek the shore . further into the ice we can not go , and at seven in the afternoon we moar to a piece of ice , and the William with we , here we have 14 . fathom oz . at three in the afternoon our warp from one ice to another . at nine in the afternoon we moar again to a piece of ice until the next day . all this night it do snow with much wind , be at west northwest , and at northwest , and by west . the 28 . day the wind come to the southwest , and southsouthwest : this day be a very fair day . at one in the afternoon master Pet and master Jackman do confer together what be best to be do consider that the wind be good for we , and we not able to pass for ice , they do agree to seek to the land again , and so to Vaygatz , and there to confer further . at their return . 3 . in the afternoon we do warp from one piece of ice to another to get from they if it be possible : here be piece of ice so great , that we can not see beyond they out of the top . thus we warp until 9 in the afternoon , and then we moar both our ship to a great and high piece of ice , until the next morning . the nine and twenty day the wind come to the southwest , we set sail at five in the morning to ply 291 the currant run with the wind . into the shore if it be possible , we make many turn among the ice to small purpose , for with the wind do the currant run . this day by misfortune a piece of ice stroke of our greepe afore at two afternoon , yet for all this we turn to do our best . the William be encumber with ice , and perceive that she do little good , take in all her sail , and make her self fast to a piece of ice , and about four in the afternoon she set sail to follow we . we be afraid that she have take some hurt , but she be well . at seven afore noon we take in all our sail to tarry for the William , and make our ship fast to a piece of ice : the William before she come to we take in all her sail , and moar to another piece of ice , and thus we continue until the next morning . the 30 . day the wind at southeast , and by south , and at 9 in the morning we set sail , and soon will have do if you William have be by we , but we do tarry for she to know whether all be well with she : but as soon as we make sail , she do the like . all this day we do our best to seek our way as the ice will give we leave , sometime we lay south , sometime west , and sometime east , and thus we continue until eight at night , and then be calm