, we make our ship fast to a piece of ice , and go to supper . in the mean time the wind with a fair gentle gale come up to the east , and east and by south , but there come down a shower of rain with it , which continue the space of one hour : which be do , it become calm again , so that we can do no good all that night , but take our rest until the next day . the 31 . the wind be at Southwest , we set sail to turn to windward at three a clock in the morning . in this turn we do little good , for the currant will not give we leave . for as the wind be , so be the currant . we do our best until ten of the clock , and then perceive that we do no good , and be enclose with ice , we make our ship fast to a piece of ice : 292 Arthur pet and Charles Jackman a . d . 1580 . all this day the William lie still , and do as much good as we that do labour all the fbrenoone . thus we take our rest all the same day . in the afternoon we set sail , the wind be at south and by east , we lay to the westwards , as Southwest and Southwest and by south , and sometime to the westward as we may . thus we continue until 9 at night , and then we can go no further for ice : so we with the William be constrain to make our ship fast to a piece of ice all the same night . this day we find the pole elevate 69 . degree 20 . minute , and here we have 17 . fathom oz . the first day of August be very calm in the August . morning , the wind be at west northwest . about twelve the wind come to the west , and continue so all the same night with great fog . the second day the wind be at Southwest all day with rain and fog . all this day we be enclose with ice , so that we be force to lie still . here we have one and twenty fathom oz . at six in the afternoon the wind be at west with very much foul weather , and so continue all the same night . the three day the wind be at west , and west by north , and west northwest , this day we lie still enclose with ice , the weather be dark with fog : thus abide the lord leisure , we continue with patience . And sound we find 21 . fathom . the four day we lie still enclose with ice , the wind be at west northwest , this ice do every day increase upon we , yet put our trust in God , we hope to be deliver out of it in good time . the five day all the morning it rain with very much wind , be at south southeast : about 3 . in the after noon we set sail , and present it become calm for the space of one hour , than the wind come to the north Northeast , and here we have 33 . fathom : thus we make way among the ice Southwest , and southsouthwest , and west , as we may find our way for 293 a whole land the space of 3 . hour : than we meet with a whole ° fyce - land of ice , so that we can go no further : here we moar our ship to tarry for a further open . here we find 45 . fathom oz , and all the night be very dark with fog . the sixth day have no open of the ice we lie still , the wind be at west , and west by south : here we have sixty three fathom oz : all the same night the wind be at the west northwest . the 7 . day the wind be at west , and west and by north all day . and all this day we lie still be enclose with ice , that we can not stir , labour only to defend the ice as it come upon we . here we have 68 fathom oz . the 8 . day be very fair and calm but foggy . this day towards night there be little wind by the south Southwest : then the ice begin a little to open , and here we have 70 . fathom oz : all the night be foggy . the 9 day the wind be at northwest , and by west , all the afternoon we lie still because of the ice , which do still enclose we . this day we find 70 . degr . 4 . the pole elevate seventy degree , 4 . minute , we have mtn - 63 . fathom oz : this night be a very fair night , frost . but it freeze : in the morning we have much ado to go through the same : and we be in doubt that if it shall have freeze so much the night follow , the appear we shall hardly have pass out of it . this night j be one star that appear to we . the ten day the wind be at east Northeast with a very small gale . we with sail and oar make way through the ice : about five in the morning we set sail : sometime we lie Southwest , and sometime south , and sometime west , as we may best find the way . about three in the afternoon the gale begin to fresh : about six in the afternoon the wind be at Northeast with fog . here we have eighty eight much snow , fathom : we bear sail all the same night , and it snow very much . 294 the eleven day we be much trouble with ice , and by great force we make our way through it , which we think a thing impossible : but extremity do cause man to do much , and in the weakness of man God strength most appear . this day we have 95 . fathom . at three in the afternoon the wind come to the southwest , we be force to make our ship fast to a piece of ice , for we be enclose with it , and tarry the lord leisure . this night we have 97 . fathom . the 12 . day the wind be at the southeast not very much but in a manner calm : at a 11 . of the clock the wind come to the west Southwest : all the day be