commission give by sir Rowland Hayward [ i - 433j knight , and George bairn , aiderman and governor of the company of english merchant , for discovery of new trade , unto Arthur pet , and Charles Jackman , for a voyage by they to be make , for discovery of Cathay , 1580 . in form follow . n the name of God almighty , and everlasting , amen . This write for commission tripartite , make the twenty day of May anno Dom . 1580 . and in the 22 . year of the reign of our sovereign lady Elizabeth by the grace of God , queen of England , France and Ireland , defender of the faith , etc between sir Rowland Hayward knight , and George bairn , aiderman of the city of London , and governor of the company of english merchant , for discovery of new 251 trade , for the behoof , and in the name of the say company , on the first party , and Arthur pet of Ratcliff , in the county Middlesex , captain , master , and chief ruler of the good bark , call the George of London , of the burden of 40 . ton , or thereabouts , on the second party , and Charles Jackman of popler , in the say county of Middlesex , captain , master and ruler of the good bark , call the William of London , of the burden of 20 . ton , or thereabouts , ( which bark be now ride at anchor in the river of Thames against Limehouse ) on the three party : witness , that the say governor , and company have hire the say Arthur Pet , to serve in the say bark , call the George , with nine man and a boy : and likewise the say Charles Jackman , to serve in the say bark , call the William , with five man and a boy , for a voyage by they to be make by God grace , for search and discovery of a passage by sea from hence by borough strait , and the island vaigat , eastwards , to the country or dominion of the mighty prince , the emperor of Cathay , and in the same unto the city of Cambalu and Quinsay , or to either of they . the which passage ( upon authority of writer , and great reason ) be conceive to be from the vaigat eastwards , accord to the description in plat of spirali line , make by master William Burrough , whereof either of the say Arthur Pet , and Charles Jackman , have one deliver unto they , and also one other sail card , and a blank plat for either of they . but if it shall not be in all point , accord to that description , yet we hope that the continent or firm land of Asia do not stretch it self so far northwards , but that there may be find a sea passable by it , between the latitude of 70 . and 80 . degree . and therefore we have appoint you with these two bark to make trial of the same : wish you both to join in friendship together , as most dear friend and brother , to all purpose and effect , to the furtherance and orderly 252 perform of the same voyage . and likewise order your company , that they of the one bark may have such love and care , to help and succour they of the other , as most dear friend and brother will do : so as it may appear , that though they be two bark , and two company , ( which be so appoint for your great comfort and assurance ) yet that you be whole of one mind , and bend your self to the uttermost of your power , to perform the thing that you be both employ for . do you observe good order in your daily service , and pray unto God , so shall you prosper the better . we will have you to meet often together , to talk , confer , consult , and agree how , and by what mean you may best perform this purpose voyage , accord to our intent . and at such meeting we think it requisite , that you call unto you your mate , and also Nicholas chancellor , ( who we do appoint as merchant , to keep account of the merchandise you shall buy or sell , barter or change ) to the end that whatsoever God shall dispose of either of you , yet they may have some instruction and knowledge how to deal in your place , or place . and of all your assembly and consultation together , and the substance of matter you shall at every time agree upon , we will have you to note they in the paper book that we give you for that purpose , unto each bark one . we do appoint Arthur pet in the George , as admiral , to wear the flag in the main top , and Charles Jackman in the William , as vice - admiral . for good order to be take for your good and orderly keep of company together , which we wish may be such , as you shall never lose sight the one of the other , except by both your consent , to discover about a island , or in some river , when and where you may certain appoint to meet together again , we refer the same to your discretion . and now for your good direction in this voyage , we will have you with the next good wind and weather , 253 that God shall send thereunto meet and convenient , after the 22 . day of this present month of May , sail from this river of Thames , to the coast of Finmarke , to the north cape there , or to the Wardhouse , and from thence direct your course to have sight of willoughbies land , and from it pass alongst to the nova Zemla , keep the same land always in your sight on your larboordside ( if convenient you may ) to the end you may discover , whether the same willoughby land be continent and firm land with Nova Zembla , or not : notwithstanding we will not have you to entangle your self in any bay , or otherwise , so that it may hinder your speedy proceed to the island vaigat . and when you come to vaigat , we will have you to get sight of the main land of Samoeda , which be over against the south part of the same island , and from thence with god permission , to pass eastwards alongst the same coast , keep it always in your sight ( if convenient you may ) until you come to the mouth of the river ob , and when you come unto it , pass over the say river mouth unto the border of land , on the Eastside of the same ( without any stay to be make for search inward in the same river ) and be in sight of the same easterly land , do you in god name proceed alongst by it , from thence eastwards , keep the same always on your starboordside in sight , if you may , and follow the tract of it , whether it incline southerly or northerly ( as at time it may do both ) until you come to the country of Cathay , or the dominion of that mighty emperor . and if God prosper your voyage with such good success , that you may attain to the same , do you seek by all mean you can to arrive to the city cambalu , and quinsay , or to the one of they . but if it happen that you can convenient come to either of those place , or shall | be drive to remain and winter in some other port or place of his dominion , do you seek by all mean possible to win favour 254 commission to pet and Jackman a . d . 1580 . and like of the people , by gift and friendly demean towards they , and not to offer violence , or do wrong to any people or nation whatsoever , but therein to be innocent as dove , yet wily as serpent , to avoid mischief , and defend you from hurt . and when you shall have get friendship through your discreet order of your self , towards the people , do you learn of they