a letter of Gerardus Mercator , write to m . Richard Hakluyt of Oxford , touch the intend discovery of the north - east passage , An . 1580 . 276 277 T . H . paratissimus the same in english . sir , i receive your letter the 19 of June : it grieve i much that upon the sight of they the time be spend , i can not give any convenient instruction : i wish Arthur Pet have be inform before his departure of some speciali point . the voyage to Cathaio by the east , be doubtless very easy and short , and i have oftentimes marveil , that be so happy begin , it have be leave of , and the course change into the west , after that 278 more than half of your voyage be discover . for a great gulf beyond the island of vaigat and nova Zembla , there u beyond follow present a great bay , which on the left side be enclose with the mighty promontory Tabin . into the mighty river mid hereof there fall great river , which pass through descend . the whole country of Serica , and be as i think navigable with great vessel into you heart of the continent , may be a easy mean whereby to traffic for all manner of merchandise , and transport they out of Cathaio , Mangi , mien , and other kingdom thereabouts into England . but consider with my self that that navigation be not intermit , but upon great occasion , i think that the emperor of Russia and Moscovie have hinder the proceed thereof . if so be that with his grace and favour a further navigation may be make , i will counsel they certain not first to seek out the promontory Tabin , but to search this bay and river the best aforesaid , and in they to pick and choose out some c ^ se t0 convenient port and harbour for the english discovery . merchant , from whence afterward with more opportunity and less peril , the promontory Tabin and all the coast of Cathaio may be discover . and that there be such a huge promontory call Tabin , i be certain persuade not only out of Pliny , but also other writer , and some map ( though somewhat rude draw : ) and that the pole of the lodestone be not far beyond Tabin , i have learn by the certain observation of the lodestone : about which pole and Tabin i think there be very many rock , and very hard and dangerous sail : and yet a more hard and difficile passage i think it to be this way which be now attempt by the west , for it be near to the pole of the lodestone , to the which i think it not safe to approach . and because the lodestone have another pole than that of the world , to the which from all part it have a respect , the near you come unto it , the more the needle of the compass do vary from the north , sometime to the west , and sometime to the east , accord as a man be to the eastward or to the 279 westward of that meridian , that pass by both the pole of the Magnes and the world . this be a strange alteration and very apt to deceive the sailer , unless he know the unconstancy and variation of the compass , and take the elevation of the pole sometime with his instrument . if master Arthur be not well provide in this behalf , or of such dexterity , that perceive the error he be not able to correct the same , i fear least in wander up and down he lose his time , and be overtake with the ice in the midst of the enterprise . for that gulf , as they say , be freeze every year very hard . which if it be so , the best counsel i can give for their best safety , be to seek some harbour in that bay , and those river whereof i have speak , and by some ambassador to make friendship and acquaintance with the great can , in name of the queen majesty , which i believe will be grateful to the mighty emperor in the world , yea most excellent for the length of the traffic , and great distance of the mouth the place . i think from the mouth of the mighty river Bautisus and oechardus to cambalu the chief andoechardus c .. , „ . 300 . league seat °* the prince the can , there be not pass 300 . from cam - germane mile , and to pass by Ezina a city of the balu . kingdom of tangut , which seem to be but 100 germane mile from the mouth of the say river , and be subject to the great can . i will glad know how high the sea do flow common in the port of Moscovia where your man do harbour , and in other easterly place unto Tabin . and also whether the sea in this strait do flow always one way to the east or to the west , or whether it do ebb [ i . 445 - 1 and flow accord to the manner of the tide in the burvatims of ° ? the chanel , that be to say , whether it flow there she tide i s ' xe hour into the west , and as may back again to depend great the east , for hereupon depend other speculation of speculation , importance . i will wish m . Frobisher to observe the same westwards . concern the gulf of Merosro and Canada , and new France which be in my map , 280 they be take out of a certain sea card draw by a certain priest out of the description of a Frenchman , a pilot very skilful in those part , and present to the worthy prince George of Austria , bishop of liege : for the trending of the coast , and the elevation of the pole , i doubt not but they be very near the truth : for the chart have , beside a scale of degree of latitude pass through the midst of it , another particular annex to the coast of new France , wherewith the error of the latitude commit by reason of the variation of the compass may be correct . the history of the voyage of Jacobus cnoyen Buschoducensis throughout all Asia , afirica , and the north , be lend i in time pass by a friend of i at Antwerp . after i have use it , i restore it again : after many year i require it again of my friend , but he have forget of who he have borrow it . the write of Gulielmus Tripolitanus , and Joannes de Plano Carpini i never see : only i find certain piece of they in other write hand book . i be glad the epitome of Abilfada be translate , i will we may have it short . thus much sir i think good to answer your letter : if there be any thing else that you will require of i , i will most willing communicate it with you , crave this likewise of your courtesy , that whatsoever observation of both these voyage shall come to your hand , you will impart they to i , they shall all remain with i accord to your discretion and pleasure , and whatsoever i gather of they , i will faithful signify unto you by letter , if happy they may yield any help or light unto this most excellent enterprise of navigation , and most profitable to our Christian common wealth . fare you well most learned friend . at Duisburg in Cliveland , 28 . of Julie , the year , 1580 . at Arthur his return i pray you learn of he the thing i have request , and whether any where in his voyage , he find the sea fresh , or not very salt : for 281 i suppose the sea between Nova Zembla and Tabin to be fresh . you whole to my power to be command , Gerardus Mercator . may . June . keen a island , of Norway .