Notes in writing , beside more privy by mouth , that be give by m . Richard Hakluyt of Eiton in the county of Hereford , esquire , anno 1580 : to m . Arthur Pet , and to m . Charles Jackman , send by the merchant of the Moscovie company for the discovery of the north - east straight , not altogether unfit for some other enterprise of discovery , hereafter to be take in hand . what respect of island be to be have , and why . whereas the Portugal have in their course to their Indies in the southeast , certain port and fortification to thrust into by the way , to diverse great purpose : so you be to see what island , and what port you have need to have by the way in your course to the north - east . for which cause i wish you to enter into consideration of the matter , and to note all the island , and to set they down in plat , to two end : that be to say , that we may devise to take the benefit by they , and also foresee how by they the Savages or civil prince may in any sort annoy we in our purpose trade that way . and for that the people to the which we purpose in this voyage to go , be no Christians , it be good that the mass of our commodity be always in our own disposition , and not at the will of other . therefore it be good that we do seek out some small island in the scythian sea , where we may plant , fortify , and staple safe , from whence ( as time shall serve ) we may feed those heathen nation with our commodity without cloy they , or without venture our whole mass in the bowel of their country . and to which island ( if need be , and if we shall think so good ) we may allure the north - east navy , 264 1580 . the navy of Cambalu to resort with their commodity to we there plant , and staple there . and if such a island may be find so stand as may shorten our course , and so stand , as that the navy of Cambalu , or other those party may convenient sail unto without their dislike in respect of distance , then will it fall out well . for so , beside less danger and more safety , our ship may there unlade and lade again , and return the self same summer to the port of England or of Norway . and if such a island may be for the stapling of our commodity , to the which they of Cambalu will not sail , yet we may , have ship there , employ they in pass between Cambalu and that stapling place . respect of haven and harborowe . a nd if no such island may be find in the scythian sea towards the firm of Asia , then be you to search out the port that be about nova Zembla , all along the tract of that land , to the end you may winter there the first year , if you be let by contrary wind , and to the end that if we may in short time come unto Cambalu , and unlade and set sail again for return without venture there at Cambalu , that you may on your way come as far in return as a port about Nova Zembla : that the summer follow , you may the soon be in England for the more speedy vent of your east commodity , and for the speedy discharge of your mariner : if you can go forward and back in one self same summer . and touch the tract of the land of Nova Zembla , towards the east out of the circle arcticke in the more temperate zone , you be to have regard : for if you find the soil plant with people , it be like that in time a ample vent of our warm woollen clothes may be find . and if there be no people at all there to be a good confound , than you shall special note what plenty of sideration . whale , and of other fish be to be find there , to the 265 end we may turn our new find land fish or island fish , or our whalefish that way , for the aid and comfort of our new trade to the north - east to the coast of Asia . respect of fish and certain other thing . a nd if the air may be find upon that tract temperate , and the soil yield wood , water , land and grass , and the sea fish , than we may plant on that main the offal of our people , as the Portugal do in Brasill , and so they may in our fish in our passage , and diverse way yield commodity to England by harbour and victual we . and it may be , that the inland there may yield mast , pitch , tar , hemp , and all thing for the navy , as plentiful as Eastland do . the island to be note with their commodity and want . to note the island , whether they be high land or low land , mountain or flat , gravel , clay , chalky , or of what soil , woody or not woody , with spring and river or not , and what wild beast they have in the same . and whether there seem to be in the same apt matter to build withal , as stone free or rough , and stone to make lime withal , and wood or coal to burn the same withal . to note the goodness or the badness of the haven and harborowe in the island . if a strait be find , what be to be do , and what great importance it may be of . a nd if there be a straight in the passage into the scythian sea , the same be special and with great regard to be note , especial if the same straight be narrow and to be keep . i say it be to be note as a thing that do much import : for what prince soever shall be lord of the same , and shall possess the same , as 266 the king of Denmark do possess the strait of Denmark , he only shall have the trade out of these region into the north - east part of the world for himself , and for his private profit , or for his subject only , or to enjoy wonderful benefit of the toll of the same , like as the king of Denmark do enjoy of his straight , by suffer the merchant of other prince to pass that way . if any such straight be find , the elevation , the high or low land , the haven near , the length of the straight , and all other such circumstance be to be set down for many purpose : and all the mariner in the voyage be to be swear to keep close all such thing , that other prince prevent we not of the same , after our return upon the disclose of the mariner , if any such thing shall hap . which way the savage may be make able to [ i . 439 - 1 purchase our cloth and other their want . if you find any island or main land populous , and that