40 min . in the afternoon we both set sail to seek way to get out of these sand , our boat a 297 the bay of morzovet . head sound , have 6 , 7 , and 8 fathom all within the sand which be without we . we bear to the southward , and the William bear more to the eastwards , and night be at hand the wind come to the southeast , whereupon we lay it to the southward , lie Southwest , and south and by west , and run to 19 , and 12 and 14 fathom , and present we have but six fathom , which be off the sand head , which we be a ground upon the day before . than we cast about to the eastwards for deep water , which we present have , as 10 , 15 , and 20 and so to 23 fathom . the 22 day at 8 in the morning , we cast about to the southward , and this day in the morning we see the William under our lee as far as we can see she , and with a great fog we lose the sight of she , and since we have not see she . thus we run till we come to thirty fathom black oz , which we have at twelve of the clock , and at three in the afternoon we have twenty and three fathom , and then we run westnorthwest , and west by north , all the same night follow . the 23 day we have at 6 in the morning 27 fathom , at 8 a clock 28 fathom : at 9 the wind be at eastsoutheast , we hale westnorthwest : this day we have sight of the land of Hugri side . at twelve of the clock we have thirty two fathom sand . this day we run west and by north , and come to five fathom off the bay of morzovet . than we lay it to the northward , so that we lay northnortheast off . the wind after come to the north , and north by east , and we lay east and east by north , than we lay it to the westward again : and thus we lie till we come to forty fathom , and then we go northwest till we come to fourteen fathom , and so to ten fathom . than we cast about to the eastwards and lay east , and east by north all the same night . the 24 day at 8 in the morning we have 32 fathom . we run northwest till we come to 11 fathom , than we lay to the northward till 12 at night , and then we 298 Arthur pet and Charles Jackman a . d . 1580 . come to forty fathom , than the wind at north - east we lie to the westwards , and hale northwest along . the 25 at 4 in the morning we have 37 fathom , we run northwest , the wind at Northnortheast very much . the 26 day we run with the same wind , and find the pole to be elevate 70 deg . 40 min . the 27 at 7 in the morning we see land , which we make to be Kegor , than we hale northwest , and north by west to double the north cape . the 28 day at 3 in the morning we run northwest , and so all day . at night the wind come to the southwest , and we run northwest all that night . the 29 day we put into a sound call take , and then the town of town be call Hungon : we come to a anchor at 5 in Hungon . the afternoon , at 25 fathom very fair sand . this sound be very large and good , and the same night we get water aboard . the 30 day in the morning the wind at Northeast , and but little , we set sail , and with our boat on head we get the sea about 12 of the clock : the wind with a fair gale come to the east southeast , and all this day and night we run westnorthwest . the 31 day at 12 of the clock we double the north they double cape , the wind be at eastsoutheast , we hale west north all the same day , and at night we run westsouthwest . m the 1 day of September the wind be at Northeast with very much fog : all this day we run westsouthwest : at 2 in the afternoon the wind come north . the second day at 3 in the morning we double fowlnesse , and the wind be this day variable at all part of the compass . in the afternoon we make but little way : at 6 a clock the wind come to the southwest , and we go northwest . at 9 in the night there come down so much wind by the Westsouth west , that we be fain to lay it a hull , we hale it to northwards for the space of 2 hour , and then we lay her head to the southward , and at the break of day we see land , which be very high , and be call by the man of the 299 the sound of romesal . country foulness . it be within full of small island , and without full of rock very far out , and within the rock you have fair sand at 20 fathom . the 3 day in the morning we bear with the sound aforesaid : within it be but shoal water , 4 5 and 3 fathom , sandy ground , the land be very high , and the church that be see be call Helike Kirke . it do high here not above 8 or 9 foot . the 12 day at 3 in the afternoon , we put into a sound by Lowfoote , where it do flow Southwest , and by south , and do high 7 or 8 foot water . the 13 day much wind at west : we have a ledge of rock in the wind of we , but the road be reasonable good for all southerly and westerly wind . we have the main land in the wind of we : this day be stormy with rain . the 23 day at four of the clock in the afternoon we put into Norway , into a sound call romesal , where it flow southsoutheast , and do high 8 foot water : this place be full of low island , and many good sound without the high mountain land . here be great store of wood grow , as fir , birch , oak , and hasell : all this night the wind