special the woman , that for the great part be off far worse complexion , than the man . whereof the cause i take to be their keep within the hot house , and busy themselves about the heat , and use of their bathstove , and peach . the Russe because that he be use to both these extremity of heat and of cold , can bear they both a great deal more patient , than stranger can do . you shall see they sometime ( to season their body ) come out of their bathstove all on a froth , and fume as hot almost as a pig at a spit , and present to leap into the river stark naked , or to power cold water all over their body , and that in the cold of all the winter time . the woman to mend the bad hue of their skin , use to paint their face with white and red colour , so visible , that every man may perceive it . which be make no matter , because it be common and like well by their husband : who make their wife and daughter a ordinary allowance to buy they colour to paint their face withal , and delight themselves much to see they of foul woman to become such fair image . This parch the skin , and help to deform they when their paint be of . they apparel themselves after the greek manner . the nobleman attire be on this fashion . First a taffia , or little night cap on his head , that cover little more than his crown , common very rich wrought of silk and gold thread , and set with pearl and precious stone . his head he keep shave close to the very skin , except he be in some displeasure with the 416 emperor . than he suffer his hair to grow and hang down upon his shoulder , cover his face as ugly and deform as he can . over the taffia he wear a wide cap of black fox ( which they account for the best fur ) with a Tiara or long bonnet put within it , stand up like a persian or babylonian hat . about his neck ( which be see all bare ) be a collar set with pearl and precious stone , about three or four finger broad . next over his shirt , ( which be curious wrought , because he strip himself into it in the summer time , while he be within the house ) be a shepon , or light garment of silk , make down to the knee , button before : and then a caftan or a close coat button , and gird to he with a persian girdle , whereat he hang his knife and spoon . This common be of cloth of gold , and hang down as low as his ankle . over that he wear a lose garment of some rich silk , fur and face about with some gold lace , call a Ferris . another over that of camlet , or like stuff call a Alkaben , sleeve and hang low , and the cape common brooch , and set all with pearl . when he go abroad , he cast over all these ( which be but sleight , though they seem to be many ) a other garment call a honoratkey , like to the alkaben , save that it be make without a collar for the neck . and this be common of fine cloth , or camel hair . his buskin ( which he wear in stead of hose , with linen folle under they in stead of boot hose ) be make of a persian leather call saphian , embroider with pearl . his upper stock common be of cloth of gold . when he go abroad , he mount on horseback , though it be but to the next door : which be the manner also of the Boiarskey , or gentleman . the Boiarskey or gentleman attire be of the same fashion , but differ in stuff : and yet he will have his caftan or undercoat sometime of cloth of gold , the rest of cloth , or silk . ill 417 2 d the gentleman apparel . the noble woman ( call china Boiarshena ) wear on her head , first a caull of some soft silk ( which be common read ) and over it a fruntlet call Obrosa , of white colour . over that her cap ( make after the coif fashion of cloth of gold ) call Shapka Zempska , edge with some rich fur , and set with pearl and stone . though they have of late begin to disdain embroider with pearl above their cap , because the diack , and some merchant wife have take up the fashion . in their ear they wear earring ( which they call Sargee ) of two inch or more compass , the matter of gold set with ruby , or saphire , or some like precious stone . in summer they go often with ker - chieffes of fine white lawn , or cambric , fasten under the chin , with two long tassel pendent . the kerchief spot and set thick with rich pearl . when they ride or go abroad in rainy weather , they wear white hat with colour band , call Stapa Zemskoy . about their neck they wear collar of three or four finger broad , set with rich pearl and precious stone . their upper garment be a loose gown call Oposhen common of scarlet , with wide loose sleeve , hang down to the ground butten before with great gold button , or at least silver and guilt nigh as big as a walnut . which have hanging over it fasten under the cap , a large broad cape of some rich fur , that hang down almost to the mid of their back . next under the Oposken or upper garment , they wear another call a leitnick that be make close before with great wide sleeve , the cuff or half sleeve up to the elbow , common of cloth of gold : and under that a Ferris Zemskoy , which hang loose button throughout to the very foot . on the hand wrest they wear very fair bracelet , about two finger broad of pearl and precious stone . they go all in buskin of white , yellow , blue , or some other colour leather , embroider with pearl . this be the attire of the noblewoman of Russia , when she make the best show of her self . 418 the gentlewoman apparel may differ in the stuff , but be all one for the make or fashion . as for the poor mousick and his wife they go poor clothe . the man with his honoratkey , or loose gown to the small of the leg , tie together with a lace before , of course white or blue cloth , with some shube or long waistcoat of fur , or of sheepskin under it , and his fur cap , and buskin . the poor sort of they have their honoratkey , or upper garment , make of kowe hair . this be their winter habit . in the summer time , common they wear nothing but their shirt on their back , and buskin on their leg . the woman go in a red or blow gown , when she make the best show , and with some warm shube of fur under it in the winter time . but in the summer , nothing but her two shirt ( for so they call they ) one over the other , whether they be within door , or without . on their head , they wear cap of some colour stuff , many of velvet , or of cloth of gold : but for the most part kerchief . without earing of silver or some other mettle , and her cross about her neck , you shall see no ruff woman , be she wife , or maid . A . D . 1590 . the mousicks or common man attire .