the taste of a sea - herring . their chief town for fish be , yaruslave , Bealozera , Novogrod , astracan , and Cazan : which all yield a large custom to the emperor every year for their trade of fish , which they practise in summer , but send it freeze in the winter time into all part of the realm . the chief city of Russia . the chief city of Russia be Moscow , Novogrod , rostove , Volodomer , Plesko , smolensko , jaruslave , perislave , Nisnovogrod , Vologda , ustiug , Colmogro , Cazan , astracan , cargapolia , Columna . the city of Moscow . Moscow be suppose to be of great antiquity , though 370 the first founder be unknown to the ruff . it seem to have take the name from the river that run on the one side of the town . Berosus the chaldean in his 5 . book tell that Nimrod ( who other profane story call Saturn ) send Assyrius , Medus , Moscus , 8c Magog into Asia to plant colony there , and that Moscus plant both in Asia and Europe . which may make some probability , that the city , or rather the river whereon it be build , take the denomination from this Moscus : the rather because of the climate or situation , which be in the very far part 8c list of Europe , border upon Asia . the city be much enlarge by one Ivan or John , son to Daniel , that first change his title of duke into king : though that honour continue not to his posterity : the rather because he be invest into it by the pope legate , who at that time be Innocentius the 4 . about the year 1246 . which be very much mislike by the ruff people , be then a part of the eastern or greek church . since that time the name of this city have grow more famous , 8c better know to the world : insomuch that not only the province , but the whole country of Russia be term by some by the name of Moscovia the Metropolite city . the form of this city be in manner round with 3 . strong wall , circle the one within the other , 8c street lie between , whereof the inmost wall , and the building close within it ( lie safe as the heart within the body , fence and water with the river Moscua , that run close by it ) be all account the emperor castle . the number of house ( as i have hear ) through the whole city ( be reckon by the emperor a little before it be fire by the Crim ) be 41500 . in all . since the tartar besiege and fire the town ( which be in the year 1571 . ) there lie waste of it a great breadth of ground , which before be well set and plant with building , special that part on the south side of Moscua , build not long before by Basilius the emperor for his garrison 371 of soldier , to who he give privilege to drink mead , and beer at the dry or prohibit time , when other russes may drink nothing but water , and for that cause call this new city by the name of Naloi , that be skink or pour in . so that now the city of Moscow be not much big than the city of London . the next in greatness , and in a manner as large , be the Novograd . ci tie Novograd : where be commit ( as the ruff say ) the memorable war so much speak of in story of the scythian servant , that take arm against their master : which they report in this sort : viz . that the boiarens or gentleman of Novograd and the territory about ( which only be soldier after the discipline of those country ) have war with the Tartar . which be well perform and end by they , they return homeward . where they understand by the way that their Cholopey or bondslave who they leave at home , have in their absence possess their town , land , house , wife and all . at which news be somewhat amaze , and yet disdain the villainy of their servant , they make the more speed home : and so not far from Novograd meet they in warlike manner march against they . whereupon advise what be best to be do , they agree all to set upon they with no other show of weapon but with their horse whip ( which as their manner be every man ride withal ) to put they in remembrance of their servile condition , thereby to terrify they , and abate their courage . and so march on and lash all together with their whip in their hand they give the onset . which seem so terrible in the ear of their villain , and strike such a sense into they of the smart of the whip which they have feel before , that they flee altogether like sheep before the driver . in memory of this victory the novogradians ever since have stamp their coin ( which they call a dingoe Novogrodskoy currant through all Russia ) with the figure of a horseman shake a whip aloft in his hand . Theise 2 . city exceed you rest in greatness . for strength 372 of the chief city of Russia a . d . 1588 . their chief town be Vobsko , smolensko , Cazan and astracan , as lie upon the border . but for situation jaruslave far exceed the rest . for beside the come - jaruslave . modity that the soil yield of pasture and corn , it lie upon the famous river of Volgha , and look over it from a high bank very fair and stately to behold : whereof the town take the name . for jaraslave in that tongue signify as much as a fair or famous bank . in this town ( as may be guess by they and axo Gr ^~ name ) dwell the ruff king Viadimer surname jaruslave , that marry the daughter of Harald king of England , by mediation of Sveno the Dane , as be note in the danish story about the year 1067 . the other