a letter of m . Henry lane to the worshipful m . William Sanderson , contain a brief discourse of that which pass in the north - east discovery for the space of three and thirty year . after Sanderson , as you late request i , so have i seek , and though i can find thing that heretofore i keep in writing , and lend out to other , yet peruse at London copy of my old letter to content one that mean to pleasure many , i have brief and as true as i may , draw out as follow : the rough hew may be plane at your leisure , or as please he that shall take the pain . first the honourable attempt to discover by sea Northeast and northwest name for Cathay , be chief 33 ° procure by privilege from king Edward the sixth , and other his nobility , by and at the cost and suit of m . Sebastian Cabota , than governor for discovery with sir Andrew Judde , sir George Barnes , sir William Garrard , m . Anthony Hussie , and a company of merchant , be in the last year of his majesty reign 1553 . the generail charge whereof be commit to one sir Hugh Willoughbie knight , a goodly gentleman , accompany with sufficient number of pilot , master , merchant and mariner , have three ship well furnish , to wit , the bona speranda , the Edward bonadventure , and the Confidentia . the Edward bonadventure , Richard A . D . < 554 - anno 1553 . m . William Burrough be then young , and with his brother in this first voyage . Chanceller be pilot , and Steven Burrough master , have discover Wardhouse upon the coast of fin - mark , by storm or fog depart from the rest , find Newnox be , the bay of saint Nicholas now the chief port for Russia , - m t e rm - there winter in safety , and have aid of the people at a village call Newnox . the other two ship attempt further northwards ( as appear by pamphlet find after write by sir Hugh Willoughbie ) be in September encounter with such extreme cold , that they put back to seek a winter place : and miss the say bay fall upon a desert coast in Lappia , enter into a river immediate freeze up , since discover , name Arzina Reca , distant east from a russian monastery of monk call Pechingho , from whence they never return , but all to the number of 70 . person perish , which be for want of experience to have make cave and stove . Theise be find with the ship the next summer anno 1554 . by Russe fisherman : and in anno 1555 . the place send unto by english merchant as hereafter appear . anno 1554 . then say ship Edward bonadventure ( although rob homewards by Flemings ) return with her company to London , show and set forth their entertainment and discovery of the country even to the city of Moscow , from whence they bring a privilege write in Russe with the king or great duke of s . Nicholas Westward 35 mile . note . anno 1554 . 331 seal , the other two ship look for and unknown to they where they be . anno 1555 . An . 1555 . then say company of merchant for discovery upon a new supply , send thither again with two ship , to wit , the Edward bonadventure , and another bear the name of the king and queen , Philip and the king and Marie , who majesty by their letter to the say betters5 Moscovite , recommend sundry their subject then ' pass , whereof certain , to wit , Richard Chanceller , George Killingworth , Henry lane , and Arthur Edward , after their arrival at the bay , and pass up Dwina to Vologda , go first up to Moscow , where , upon knowledge of the say letter , they with their train have speciali entertainment , with house and diet appoint , and short permit to the prince presence , they be with gentleman bring through the city of Moscow , to the castle and palace , replenish with number of people , and some gunner . they enter sundry room , ftir - nished in show with ancient grave personage , all in long garment of sundry colour , gold , tissue , baldekin , and violet , as our vestment and cope have be in England , suitable with cap , jewel , and chain . Theise be find to be no courtier , but ancient moscovite , inhabitant , and other their merchant of credit , as the manner be , furnish thus from the wardrobe and treasury , wait and wear this apparel for the time , and so to restore it . then enter into the presence , be a large room floore with carpet , be man of more estate , and rich show , in number above a hundred set square : who after the say english man come in , do reverence , they all stand up , the prince only sit , and yet rise at any occasion , when our king and queen name be read or speak . then after speech by interpretation , our man kiss his hand , and bid to dinner , be stay in another room , and at dinner bring through , where may be see massy silver and gild plate , some like and as big as kilderkin , and washbowle , and enter 33 2 the dine place , be the great room , the prince be set bare head , his crown and rich cap stand upon a pinnacle by . not far distant sit his metropolitan , with diverse other of his kindred , and chief tartarian captain : none sit over against he , or any , at other table , their back towards he : which table all furnish with guest set , there be for the Englishman , name by the russes , Ghosti Carabelski , to wit , stranger or merchant by ship , a table in the midst of the room , where they be set direct against the prince : and then begin the service , bring in by a number of his young lord and gentleman , in such rich attire , as be above specify : and still from the prince table ( notwithstanding their own furniture ) they have his whole mess set over all in massy fine gold , deliver every time from he by name to they , by their several christian name , as they sit , viz . Richard , George , Henry , Arthur . likewise