bread and sundry drink of purify mead , make of fine white and clarify honey . at their rise , the prince call they to his table , to receive each one a cup from his hand to drink , and take into his hand master George killingworths beard , which reach over m . kilrng - the table , and pleasant deliver it the metropolitan , w ^ rths beard who seem to bless it , say in Russe , this be God gift . as in deed at that time it be not only thick , broad , and yellow colour , but in length five foot and two inch of assize . then take leave , be night , they be accompany and follow with a number , carry pot of drink , and dish of meat dress , to our lodging . this year the two ship , with the dead body of sir Hugh Willoughbie , and his people , be send unto by master Killingworth , ( which remain there in Moscow agent almost two year ) and much of the good and victual be recover and save . anno 1556 . the company send two ship for Russia , anno 1556 . with extraordinary master and sailor to bring home the two ship , which be freeze in Lappia , in the river of 333 Arzina aforesaid . the two ship send this year from England sail from Lapland to the bay of S . Nicholas , take in lade with passenger , to wit , a ruff ambassador , name Joseph Napea , and some of his man ship with Richard Chanceller in the Edward . but so it fall out that the two which come from Lappia , with all their new master and mariner , never be hear of , but in foul weather , and wrought sea , after their two year winter in Lapland , become , as be suppose , unstanch , and sink , wherein be drown also diverse russes merchant , and servant of the ambassador . a three ship the Edward aforesaid , fall on the north part of Scotland , upon a rock be also lose , and master Chanceller , with diverse other , drown . the say Russe ambassador hardly escape , with other his man , mariner , and some good save , be send for into Scotland , from the king , queen , and merchant ( the messenger be m . doctor Laurence Hussie , and other : ) and then , as in the chronicle appear , honorable entertain and receive at London . this year also the company furnish and send out a pinnace , name the serchthrift , to discover the harborowes in the north coast from Norway to Wardhouse , and so to the bay of S . Nicholas . there be in her master and pilot , Stephen Burrough , with his brother William , and eight other . their discovery be beyond the bay , toward the samoed , people dwell near the river of ob , and find a sound or sea with a island call vaigat , first by they put into the card or map . in that place they throw snow out of their say pinnace , with shovel in August , by which extremity , and lack of time , they come back to Russia , and winter at Colmogro . anno 1557 . the company with four good ship , send back the say Russe ambassador , and in company with he , send as a agent , for further discovery , master Anthony Jenkinson , who afterward anno 1558 , with great favour of the prince of Moscovia , and his letter 334 pass the river Volga to Cazan , and mean to seek Cathay by land , be by many troop and company of Boghar uncivil tartarian encounter , and in danger : but keep company with merchant of Bactria , or Boghar , and urgeme , travel with camel , he with his company , go to Boghar , and no further : who entertainment of the king be to be have of master Jenkinson , which return anno 1559 . to Moscovie . and in anno 1560 . he , with 1560 . Henry lane , come home into England : which year be the first safe return , without loss or shipwreck , or dead ffaight , and burn . and at this time be the first the first trade traffic to the narve in Livonia , which confine with t0 blarve . Lituania , and all the dominion of Russia : and the ’ ' market , fair , commodity , great town and river , be send unto by diverse servant : the report be take by Henry lane , agent , and deliver to the company , 1561 . the trade to rye , and revel , of old time have be long since frequent by our english nation , but this trade to the narve be hitherto conceal from we by the Dansker and lubecker . anno 1561 . then say master Anthony Jenkinson go agent into Russia , who the next year after , pass all the river of Volga to astracan , and over the caspian sea , arrive in Persia , and open the trade thither . also between the year of 1568 . and 1573 . sundry voyage after master Jenkinsons , be make by Thomas Alcock , Arthur Edwards , master Thomas Bannister , and master Geffrey Ducket , who return ( if spoil near Volga have not prevent by rove thief ) have altogether salve and recover the company ( call the old company ) great loss , charge , and damage : but the say be true , by unity small thing grow great , and by contention great thing become small . this may be understand best by the company . the forwardness of some few , and evil do of some unjust factor , be cause of much of the evil success . Arthur Edward be send again 1579 . and die in the voyage at astracan . about which matter , be to be 335 Alcock slay in Persia . Bannister die in Media . Edward die at astracan . remember the voyage of master Thomas Randolph esquire , ambassador , anno 1567 . and late of sir Jerome bow , anno 1583 . both tend and treat for further discovery , freedom , and privilege , wherewith i meddle not . but in conclusion , for their pain and adventure this way ( as diverse do now adays other way ) as worthy gentleman send from prince , to do their country good , i put they in your memory , with my hearty farewell . from saint magarets near Dartforth in Kent . t you Henry . lane .