the Losh , and such like . as for the story of Slata Baba , or the golden hag , ( which i have read in some map , and description of these country , to be a idol after the form of a old woman ) that be demand by the priest , give they certain oracle , concern the success , and event of thing , i find it to be a very fable . only in the province of Obdoria upon the sea side , near to the mouth of the great river Obba , there be a rock , which natural ( be somewhat help by imagination ) may seem to bear the shape of a ragged woman , with a child in her arm ( as the rock by the 402 north cape the shape of a friar ) where the obdorian samoite use much to resort , by reason of the commodity of the place for fish : and there sometime ( as their manner be ) conceive , and practise their sorcery , and ominous conjecturing about the good or bad speed of their journey , fishing , hunt , and such like . they be clad in seal skin , with the hairy side outward down as low as the knee , with their breech and netherstocke of the same , both man and woman . they be all black haired , natural beardless . and therefore , the man be hardly discern from the woman by their look : save that the woman wear a lock of hair down along both their ear . they live in a manner a wild and savage life , rove still from one place of the country to another , without any property of house or land more to one then to another . their leader or directer in every company , be their papa or priest . on the north side of Russia next to Corelia , lie the lap . the country of Lappia , which reach in length from the far point northward , ( towards the northcape ) to the far part southeast ( which the ruff call sweetness or holy nose , the english man capegrace ) about 345 . verse or mile . from sweetness to Candelox by the way of Versega ( which measure the breadth of that country ) be 90 . mile or thereabouts . the whole country in a manner be either lake , or mountain , which towards the sea side be call Tondro , because they be all of hard and craggy rock , but the inland part be well furnish with wood that grow on the hill side , the lake lie between . their diet be very bare and simple . bread they have none , but feed only upon fish and foul . they be subject to the emperor • of Russia , and the two king of Sweden and Denmark : which all exact tribute and custom of they ( as be say before ) but the emperor of Russia bear the great hand over they , and exact of they far more than the rest . the opinion be that they be 403 the samoit habit and behaviour . the people of Meta incognita such . first term lap of their brief and short speech . the ruff divide the whole nation of the lap into two sort . the one they call Nowremanskoy lapary , that be , the norvegian lap because they be of the danish religion . for the Dane and norvegians they account for one people . the other that have no religion at all but live as bruit and heathenish people , without God in the world , they call Dikoy lapary , or the wild lap . the whole nation be utter unlearned , have not so much as the use of any alphabet , or letter among they . for practice of witchcraft and sorcery they pass all nation in the world . though for enchant of ship that sail along their coast , ( as i have hear it report ) and their give of wind good to their friend , and contrary to other , who they mean to hurt by tie of certain knot upon a rope ( somewhat like to the tale of Aeolus his windbag ) be a very fable , devise ( as may seem ) by themselves , to terrify sailor for come near their coast . their weapon be the long bow , and handgunne , wherein they excel , aswell for quickness to charge and discharge , as for nearness at the mark by reason of their continual practice ( whereto they be force ) of shoot at wild fowl . their manner be in summer time to come down in great company to the sea side , to wardhuyse , Cola , Kegor , and the bay of Vedagoba , and there to fish for Codde , salmon , and but - fish , which they sei to the russes , Dane , and norvegian , and now of late to the english man that trade thither with cloth , which they exchange with the lap and corelians for their fish , oil , and fur , whereof also they have some store . they hold their mart at Cola on saint Peter day : what time the captain of Wardhuyse ( that be resiant there for the king of Denmark ) must be present , or at least send his deputy to set price upon their stockfish , train oil , fur , and other commodity : as also the ruff emperor customer , or tribute taker , to receive his custom , which 404 of the north and east region a . d . 1588 . be ever pay before any thing can be buy or sell . when their fish be do , their manner be to draw their carbass or boat on shore , and there to leave they with the keel turn upwards , till the next spring tide . their travail to and fro be upon sleds swx draw draw by the Olen deer : which they use to turn mth deere - a graze all the summer time in a island call Kildyn , ( of a very good soil compare with other part of that country ) and towards the winter time , when the snow begin to fall they fetch they home again for the use of their sled .