and Darius Hystaspis , on the east and southeast side ) have do it with very ill success : as we find in the story write of those time . for their manner be when any will invade they , to allure and draw they on by fly and recul ( as if they be afraid ) till they have draw they some good way within their country . then when they begin to want victuali and other necessary ( as needs they must where nothing be to be have ) to stop up the passage , and enclose they with multitude . by which stratagem ( as we read in Laonicus Chalcacondylas in his turkish story ) they have wellnigh surprise the great and huge army of Tamerlan , but that he retire with all speed he can towards the river Tanais or don , not without great loss of his man , and carriage . in the story of Pachymerius the greek ( which he write of the emperor of Constantinople from the begin of the reign of Michael Palaeologus to the time of Andronicus the elder ) i remember he tell to the same purpose of one Nogas a tartarian captain 397 Pachy merit . under Cazan the emperor of the east Tartars ( of who the city and kingdom of Cazan may seem to have take the denomination ) who refuse a present of pearl and other jewel send unto he from Michael Palaeologus : ask withal , for what use they serve , and whether they be good to keep away sickness , death , or other misfortune of this life , or no . so that it seem they have ever , or long time be of that mind to value thing no further , than by the use and necessity for which they serve . for person and complexion they have broad and flat visage , of a tan colour into yellow and black , fierce and cruel look , thin haired upon the upper lip , and pit of the chin , light and nimble body , with short leg , as if they be make natural for horseman : whereto they practise themselves from their childhood , seidome go afoot about any business . their speech be very sudden and loud , speak as it be out of a deep hollow throat . when they sing you will think a kowe low , or some great bandog howl . their great exercise be shoot , wherein they train up their child from their very infancy , not suffer they to eat till they have shoot near the mark within a certain scantling . they be the very same that sometime be call Scythae nomad , or the scythian shepherd , by the greek and Latines . some think that the turk take their beginning from the nation of the Crim Tartars . of which opinion be Laonicus call - Laonicus Calcocondylas the greek historiographer , in cocmdylas . £ rst book of turkish story . wherein he i follow diverse very probable conjecture . the first take from the very name it self , for that the word Turk signify a shepherd or one that follow a vagrant and wild kind of life . by which name these scythian Tartar have ever be note , be call by the greek akvqai vo / nase or the scythian shepherd . 2 he second reason because the Turk ( in his time ) that dwell in Asia the less , to wit , in Lydia , Caria , 398 Phrygia and Cappadocia , speak the very same language that these Tartars do , that dwell betwixt the river Tanais or don , and the country of Sarmatia , which ( as be well know ) be these Tartar call crim . at this time also the whole nation of the Turk differ not much in their common speech from the tartar language . third because the Turk and the Crim tartar agree so well together , as well in religion , as in matter of traffic never invade , or inury one another : save that the Turk ( since Laonicus his time ) have encroach upon some town upon the Euxin sea , that before pertain to the Crim tartar . four , because ortogules son to Oguzalpes , and father to otoman the first of name of the turkish nation make his first road out of those part of Asia , upon the next borderer , till he come towards the country about the hill Taurus , where he overcome the greek that inhabit there : and so enlarge the name and territory of the turkish nation , till he come to Eubaea and Attica , and other part of Greece . this be the opinion of Laonicus , who live among the Turk in the time of Amurat the sixth turkish emperor , about the year 1400 . when the memory of their originali be more fresh : and therefore the likely he be to hit the truth . there be diverse other Tartar that border upon Russia , as the nagaye , the cheremissen , the mordwite , the chircass , and then shalcans , which all differ in name more than in regiment , or other condition , from the Crim tartar , except the chircass that border Southwest , towards Lituania , and be far more civil than the rest of the Tartar , of a comely person , and of a stately behaviour , as apply themselves to the fashion of the polonian . some of they have subject themselves to the king of Poland , and profess Christianity . the nagay lie eastward , and be reckon for the best man of war among all the Tartar , but very savage , and cruel above all the rest . the Cheremessen tartar , that lie betwixt the ruff and the nagay , be of two 399 3 4 1400 . the nagay tartar the cruel . the Chircasce the cimll tartar . the cheremissen tartar of two sort : the Lugavoy and the Nagornay . sort , the Lugavoy ( that be of the valley ) and the Nagornay , or of the hilly country . Theise have much trouble the emperor of Russia . and therefore they be content now to buy peace of they , under pretence of give a yearly pension of Russe commodity to their Morseys , or divoymorsei , that be chief of their tribe . for which