people of Grustintzi and Serponowtzi exercise a new and strange kind of trade : for when the accustom time of their die , or rather 408 of the north and east region a . d . 1588 . of sleep , approach , they leave their ware in certain place appoint , which the Grustintzi and Serponowtzi carry away , leave other ware of equal value in their place : which if the dead man at the time of their revive perceive to be of unequal price , they require their own again : by reason whereof , much strife and fight be between they . from the river of Obi descend towards the left [ i . 494 - j hand , be the people call calami , which come thither . from Obiowa and Pogosa . beneath Obi , about Aurea aamt ' Anus ( that be , the golden old wife ) be the river Sossa , river . Berezvua , and Danadim , all which spring out of the mountain come , Bolschega , Poiassa , and the rock join to the same . all the nation that inhabit from these river to aurea anus , be subject to the prince of Moscovia . aurea Anus , call in the moscovite tongue , slata aurea anus . Baba , be a idol , at the mouth of Obi in the province of Obdora , stand on the further bank towards the Obdora . sea . along by the bank of Obi , and the river near there about , be here and there many castle and fortress : all the lord whereof be subject to the prince of Moscovia , as they say . they say also , or rather fable , that the idol call Aurea Anus , be a image like unto a old wife , have a child in her lap , and that there be now see another infant , which they say to be her nephew : also , that there be certain instrument that make a continual sound like the noise of trumpet , the which , if it so be , i think it to be by reason of the wind , blow continual into the hollow place of those instrument . the river cousin fall out of the mountain of cousin . Lucomoria : in the mouth of this be a castle , whither from the spring of the great river cousin , be two month voyage . Furthermore , from the spring of the same river , the river Cassima have his originali , which Cassima . run through Lucomoria , fall into the great river Tachnin , beyond the which ( as be say ) dwell man of great river . 409 a fish like a man . Pliny write of the like fish . the end of the journal . mountain . the great can of Cathay . Moria be the sea . Lucomoria . Tumen . prodigious shape , of who , some be overgrow with hair like wild beast , other have head like dog , and their face in their breast , without neck , and with long hand also , and without foot . there be likewise in the river Tachnin a certain fish , with head , eye , nose , mouth , hand , foot , and other member utter of humane shape , and yet without any voice , and pleasant to be eat , as be other fish . all that i have hitherto rehearse , i have translate out of the say journey which be delivered1 i in the moscovite tongue : in the which , perhaps some thing may seem fabulous , and in manner incredible , as of the dumb man , and the dead revive , the Aurea Anus also , and the monstrous shape of man , with the fish of humane form : whereof , although i have make diligent inquisition , yet can i know nothing certain of any that have see the same with their eye : nevertheless , to give further occasion to other to search the truth of these thing , i have think good to make mention hereof . Noss in the moscovite tongue signify a nose , and therefore they call all cape or point , that reach into the sea , by the same . name . the mountain about the river of Petzora be call Semnoi Poyas , or Cingulus mundi , that be , the girdle of the world , or of the earth . Kithai be a lake , of which the great can of Cathay , who the moscovians call Czar Kithaiski , have his name : for can in the Tartar a king . language signify , the place of Lucomoria , near unto the sea , be savage , full of wood , and inhabit without any house . and albeit , that the author of this journey , say , that many nation of Lucomoria be subject to the prince of Moscovia , yet for as much as the kingdom of Tumen be near thereunto , who prince be a tartar , and name in their tongue , Tumenski Czar , that be , a king in Tumen , and have of late do great damage to the 410 of the north and east region aa 1588 . prince of Moscovia : it be most like that these nation shall rather be subject unto he . near unto the river Petzora ( whereof mention be Petzora . make in this journey ) be the city and castle of Papin , Papin . or Papinowgorod , who inhabitant be name Papini , and have a private language , differ from the moscovite . beyond this river be exceed high mottn - mountaine , reach even unto the bank , who ridge or top , by reason of continual wind , be in Hyperborei , manner utter barren without grass or fruit . and andRhiphei . although in diverse place they have diverse name , yet be they common call Cingulus mundi , that be , the girdle of the world . in these mountain do jerfalcon breed , whereof i have speak before . there grow also cedar tree , among the which be find the best and black kind of sable : and only these mountain be see in all the dominion of the prince of Moscovia , which perhaps be the same that the old writer call Rhipheos , or Hyperboreos , so name of the greek word , hyper , that be , above , and Boreas , that be , the north : for by reason they be cover with continual snow and frost , they can not without great difficulty be travail , and reach so far into the north , that they make the unknown land of engron - land . the duke of Moscovia , Basilius the son of John , send on a time two of his captain , name Simeon Pheodorowich Kurbski , 8c knee Peter Uschatoi , to search the place beyond these mountain , and to subdue the nation thereabouts . Kurbski be yet alive at my be in Moscovia , 8c declare unto i that he spend xvii . day in ascend the mountain , 8c yet can not come to the top thereof , which in their tongue be call Stolp , that be , a pillar . this mountain be extend into the ocean unto the mouth of the river of Dwina and Petzora . but now have speak thus much of the say journey , i will return to the dominion of Moscovia , with other region lie eastward 8c south from the same , 411 jaroslave . Hony . la region dell cine . Confini deui ultimi tartari . towards the mighty empire of Cathay . but i will first speak somewhat brief of the province of rezan , and the famous river of Tanais . the province of rezan , situate between the river of Occa and Tanais , have a ci tie build of wood , not far from the bank of Occa : there be in it a castle name jaroslave , whereof there now remain nothing but token of the old ruin . not far from that city the river Occa make a hand name Strub , which be sometime a great dukedom , who prince be subject to none other . this province of rezan be more fruitful than any other of the province of Moscovia : insomuch that in this ( as they say ) every grain of wheat bring forth two , and sometime more ear : who stalk or straw grow so thick that horse can scarce go through they , or quail fly out of they . there be great plenty of honey , fish , fowl , bird , and wild beast . the fruit also do far exceed the fruit of Moscovia . the people be bold and warlike man .