now about 10000 pood a year . the three be their honey , whereof beside a exceed - 3 . Hony . ing great quantity spend in their ordinary drink ( which be mead of all sort ) and their other use , some good quantity be carry out of the country . the chief increase of honey be in Mordua and Cadam near to the Cheremissen tartar : much out of Severskoy , rezan , morum , Cazan , Dorogobose , and Vasma . four , of tallow they afford a great weight for 4 . tallow . transportation : not only for that their country have very much good ground apt for pasturage of cattle , but also by reason of their many Lents and other fast : and partly because their great man use much wax for their light , the poor and mean sort birch dry in their stove , and cut into long shiver , which they call 365 luchineos . of tallow there have be ship out of the realm a few year since about 100000 . pood yearly , now not past 30000 . or thereabouts . the best yield of tallow be in the part and territory of Smolensko , yaruslave , ouglit , Novogrod , and Vologda , otfer , and Gorodetskey . 5 . hide . a other principali commodity be their Losh and cow hide . their Losh or buff hide be very fair and large . their bull and cow hide ( for ox they make none , neither yet weather ) be of a small size . there have be transport by merchant stranger some year 100000 . hide . now it be decrease to 30000 . or thereabouts . beside great store of goat skin , whereof great number be ship out of the country . the large kind of Losh or buff breed about rostove , Wichida , Novogrod , morum , and perm . the lesser sort within the kingdom of Cazan . 6 . Trane oil . a other very great and principali commodity be their Trane oil , draw out of the seal fish . where it will the manner of not be impertinent to show the manner of their hunt seal fish . the seal , which they make this oil or : which be in this sort . towards the end of summer ( before the frost begin ) they go down with their boat into the bay of S . Nicholas , to a cape call Cusconesse or Foxnose , where they leave their boat till the next spring tide . when the sun wax warm towards the spring , and yet the ice not melt within the bay , they return thither again . then draw their boat over the sea ice , they use they for house to rest and lodge in . there be common about 17 . or 18 . fleet of they , of great large boat , which divide themselves into diverse company , five or six boat in a consort . they that first find the haunt , fire a beacon , which they carry with they for the nonce . which be espy by the other company , by such among they as be appoint of purpose , they come altogether and compass the seal round about in a ring , that lie sun themselves together upon the ice , common four or five 366 1588 . thousand in a shoal , and so they invade they every man with his club in his hand . if they hit they on the nose , they be soon kill . if on the side or back they bear out the blow , and many time so catch and hold down the club with their tooth by main force , that the party be force to call for help to his fellow . the manner of the seal be when they see themselves beset , to gather all close together in a throng or plump , to sway down the ice , and to break it ( if they can ) which so bend the ice that many time it take the sea water upon it , and make the hunter to wade a foot or more deep . after the slaughter when they have kill what they can , they fall to share every boat his part in equal ! portion : and so they flay they , take from the body the skin , and the lard or fat with all that cleave to the skin . this they take with they , leave the body behind , and so go to shore . where they dig pit in the ground of a fathom and a half deep , or thereabouts , and so take the fat or lard off from the skin , they throw it into the pit , and cast in among it hot burn stone to melt it withal . the uppermost and pure be sell , and use to oil wool for cloth , the gross ( that be of a red colour ) they sell to make soap . likewise of Ickary or cavery , a great quantity be make 7 . ickary . upon the river of Volgha out of the fish call bellougina , the sturgeon , the Severiga and the Sterledey . whereof the most part be ship by french and netherlandish merchant for Italy and Spain , some by english merchant . the next be of flax and hemp , whereof there have 8 . hemp be ship ( as i have hear merchant say ) at the port an flax . of narve a great part of 100 ship small and great yearly . now , not past five . the reason of this abate and decrease of this and other commodity , that be wont to be transport in a great quantity , be the shut up of the port of you narve towards the Finland sea , which now be in the hand and possession of the Sweden . 367 likewise the stop of the passage overland by the way of Smolensko , and Plotsko , by reason of their war with the polonian , which cause the people to be less provident in maintain and gather these and like commodity , for that they lack sale . for the growth of flax the province of Vobsko , and the country about be the chief and only place . for hemp Smolensko , Dorogobose and Vasma