also they be bind to serve they in their war , under certain condition . they be say to be just and true in their deal : and for that cause they hate the ruff people , who they account to be double , and false in all their deal . and therefore the common sort be very unwilling to keep agreement with they , but that they be keep in by their morsei , or duke for their pension sake . the mordwlt the most rude and barbarous be count tne iviorawit ost ^ arbar Tartar , that have many self - fashion and strange kind luso / theze . of behaviour , differ from the rest . for his religion , though he acknowledge one God , yet his manner be to worship for God , that live thing ill he first meet in the morning , and to swear by it all that whole day , whether it be horse , dog , cat , or whatsoever else it be . when his friend die , he kill his best horse , and have flay off the skin he carry it on high upon a long pole before the corpse to ' the place of burial . this he do ( as the ruff say ) that his friend may have a good horse to carry he to heaven : but it be likely to declare his love towards his dead friend , in that he will have to die with he the best thing that he have . next to the kingdom of astracan , that be the far part southeastward of the ruff dominion , lie the Shalcan , and the country of Media : whither the ruff merchant trade for raw silk , syndon , saphion , skin , and other commodity . the chief town of Media where the ruff trade , be derbent ( build by Alexander the great , as the inhabitant say ) and Zamachi where the revive the staple be keep for raw silk . their manner be in of silkworm . the spring time to revive the silkworm ( that lie dead all the winter ) by lay they in the warm 400 liberty to trade down the caspian of the Tartar a . d . 1588 . sun , and ( to hasten their quicken that they may soon go to work ) to put they into bag , and so to hang they under their child arm . as for the worm call Chrinisin ( as we call it chrymson ) Chrinisin a that make colour silk , it be breed not in Media , but kind of silkin Assyria . this trade to derbent and Samachi for raw silk , and other commodity of that country , as also into Persia , and Bougharia down the river of Volga , and through the caspian sea , be permit aswell to the english as to the ruff merchant , by the emperor last grant at my be there . which he account for a very speciali favour , and may prove indeed very beneficial ! to our english merchant , if the trade be well and orderly use . the whole nation of the Tartar be utter void of all learning , and without write law : yet certain rule they have which they hold by tradition , common to all the hoard for the practice of their life . which be of this sort . first , to obey their emperor and other 1 magistrate , whatsoever they command about the public service . 2 except for the public behoof , every 2 man to be free and out of controlment . 3 no private 3 man to possess any land , but the whole country to be as common . 4 to neglect all daintiness and 4 variety of meat , and to content themselves with that which come next to hand , for more hardness , and readiness in the execute of their affair . 5 to wear 5 any base attire , and to patch their clothes whether there be any need or not : that when there be need , it be no shame to wear a patch coat . 6 to take 6 or steal from any stranger whatsoever they can get , as be enemy to all man , save to such as will subject themselves to they . 7 towards their own hoard and nation to be true in word and deed . 8 to suffer no stranger to come within the realm . if any do , the same to be bondslave to he that first take he , except such merchant and other as have the tartar bull , or passport about they . in 401 2 c 7 8 no strange without passport admit . the samoit religion . slata Baba or the golden Hag . a fable . the sea of the permians , samoite , and lap . the permians and samoite that lie from Russia , north and Northeast , be think likewise to have take their beginning from the tartar kind . and it may partly be guess by the fashion of their countenance , as have all broad and flat face as the Tartar have , except the chircass . the permians be account for a very ancient people . they be now subject to the ruff . they live by hunt , and . trade with their fur , as also do the samoit , that dwell more towards the north sea the samoit have his name ( as the ruff say ) of eat himself : as if in time past , they live as you cannibal , eat one another . which they make more probable , because at this time they eat all kind of raw flesh , whatsoever it be , even the very carrion that lie in the ditch . but as the samoit themselves will say , they be call Samoie , that be , of themselves , as though they be Indigenae , or people breed upon that very soil , that never change their seat from one place to another , as most nation have do . they be subject at this time to the emperor of Russia . i talk with certain of they , and find that they acknowledge one God : but represent he by such thing as they have most use and good by . and therefore they worship the sun , the ollen ,