the most solemn , and magnificent coronation | | or Theodor . of | | Pheodor Ivanowich , emperor of Russia etc the ten of June , in the year 1584 . see and observe by master Jerom Horsey gentleman , and servant to her majesty , a man of great travel , and long experience in those part : wherewith be also join the course of his journey over land from Moscow to Emden . the death of Ivan vasiliwich 1584 . Apr . 18 . hen the old emperor Ivan Vasiliwich die , ( be about the eighteenth of April , 1584 . after our computation ) in the ci tie of Moscow , have reign 54 . year , there be some tumult and uproar among some of the nobility , and commonalty , which notwithstanding be quick pacify . immediate the same night , the prince Boris Pheodorowich godonova , knez Ivan Pheodorowich , L . Boris adopt as the emperor three son . Mesthis Slafsky , knez Ivan Petrowich susky , Mekita Romanowich and Bodan Jacovlewich Belskoy , be all noble man , and chief in the emperor will , especial the lord Boris , who he adopt as his three son , and be brother to the empress , who be a man very well like of all estate , as no less worthy for his valour and wisdom : all these be appoint to dispose , and settle 336 his son Pheodor Ivanowich , have one swear another , and all the nobili tie , and officer whosoever . in the morning you dead emperor be lay into the church of Michael the Archangel , into a hew sepulchre , very rich deck with vesture fit for such a purpose : and present proclamation be make , ( emperor Pheodor Ivanowich of all Russia etc ) throughout all the city of Moscow be great watch and ward , with soldier , and gunner , good order establish , and officer place to subdue the tumulter , and maintain quietness : to see what speed and policy be in this case use be a thing worth the behold . This be do in Moscow , great man of birth and account be also present send to the border town , as smolensko vobsko , Kasan , novo - gorod etc with fresh garrison , and the old send up . as upon the 4 . of May a parliament be hold , wherein be assemble , the metropolitan , archbishop , bishop , prior , and chief clergy man , and all the nobility whatsoever : where many matter be determine not pertinent to my purpose , yet all tend to a new reformation in the government : but especial the term , and time be agree upon for the solemnize of the new young son send to ouglet . emperor coronation . in the mean time you empress , Em ~ wife to the old emperor , be with her child the emperor son , Charlewich demetrie Ivanowich , of Jatier , a er one year age or there about , send with her father Pheodor Pheodorowich Nagay , and that kindred , be 5 . brother , to a town call ouglet , which be give unto she , and the young prince her son , with all the land belong to it in the shire , with officer of all sort appoint , have allowance of apparel , jewel , diet , horse etc in ample manner belong to the estate of a princess . the time of mourning after their use be expire , call Sorachyn , or forty orderly day , the day of the solemnize of this coronation , with great preparation , be come , be upon the 10 . day of June , 1584 . and that day than Sunday , he be of the age of 25 . year : at which time , master Jerom Horsey be the day of Pheodor his coronation . in 337 orderly send for , and place in a fit room to see all the solemnity . the emperor come out of his palace , there go before he , the metropolitan , archbishop , bishop , and chief monk , and clergy man , with very rich cope , and priest garment upon they , carry picture of our lady etc with the emperor angel , banner , censer , and many other such ceremonious thing , sing all the way . the emperor with his nobility in order enter the church name Blaveshina , or blessedness , where prayer , and service be use , accord to the manner of their church : that do , they go thence to the church , call Michael the Archangell , and there also use the like prayer , and service : and from thence to our lady church , Prechista , be their cathedral church . in the midst thereof be a chair of majesty place , wherein his ancestor use to sit at such extraordinary time : his robe be then change , and most rich and unvaluable garment put on he : be place in this princely seat , his nobility stand round about he in their degree , his imperiali crown be set upon his head by the metropolitan , his sceptre globe in his right hand , his sword of justice in his left of great riches : he 6 . crown also , by which he hold his kingdom be set before he , and the lord Boris Pheodorowich be place at his right hand : then the metropolitan read open a book of a small volume , with exhortation to the emperor to minister true justice , to enjoy with tranquillity the crown of his ancestor , which God have give he , and use these word follow . through the will of the almighty and without beginning God , which be before this world , who we glorify in the Trinity , one only God , the father , the son , and the holy ghost , maker of all thing , worker of all in all every where , fulfiller of all thing , by which will , and work , he both live , and give life to man : that our only God which enspire every one of we his only child with his word to discern God through our lord 338 jesus Christ , and the holy quicken spirit of life , now in these perilous time establish we to keep the right sceptre , and suffer we to reign of our self to the good profit of the land , to the subdue of the people , together with the enemy , and the maintenance of virtue . and so the metropolitan bless and lay his cross upon he . after this , he be take out of his chair of majesty , have upon he a upper robe adorn with precious stone of all sort , orient pearl of great quantity , but always augment in riches : it be in weight two hundred pound , the train , and part thereof bear up by 6 . Dukes , his chief imperiali crown upon his