country from Lituania , and fall into the Euxin sea . the three Tanais or don , ( the ancient bounder betwixt Europe and Asia ) that take his head out of rezan 362 Ozera , and so run through the country of the chrim tartar , fall into the great sea , lake , or mere , ( call Maeotis ) by the city of Azov . by this river ( as the ruff report ) you may pass from their city Moscow to Constantinople , and so into all those part of the world by water , draw your boat ( as their manner be ) over a little isthmus or narrow slip of land , a few verst overthwart . which be prove not long since by a ambassador send to Constantinople , who pass the river of Moscua , and so into another call Ocka , whence he draw his boat over into Tanais , and thence pass the whole way by water . the four be call Duyna , many hundred mile long , that fall northward into the bay of saint Nicholas , and have great alabaster rock on the bank towards the sea side . the five Duna , that empti into the baltic sea by the town Riga . the sixth Onega , that fall into the bay at Solovetsko 90 . verse from the port of saint Nicholas . this river , below the town Cargapolia , meet with the river Volock , that fall into the Finland sea by the town Yama . so that from the port of saint Nicholas into the Finland sea , and so into the sound , you may pass all by water , as have be try by the ruff . the seven Suchana , that flow into Duyna , and so into the north sea . the eight Ocka , that fetch his head from the border of the chrim , and stream into Volgha . the nine Moscua , that run through the city Moscow , and give it the name . there be Wichida also a very large and long river that rise out of Permia , and fall into Volgha . all these be river of very large stream , the least to be compare to the Thames in bigness , and in length far more , beside diverse other . the pole at Moscow be 55 . degree 10 . minute . at the port of saint Nicholas towards the north 63 . degree and 50 . minute . 363 the native commodity of the country . the fruit and tpor kind of fruit , they have apple , pear , ussia ^ plum , cherry , red and black , ( but the black ' wild ) a deene like a musk millian , but more sweet and pleasant , cucumber and goord ( which they call arbouse ) rasp , strawberry , and hurtilbery , with many other berry in great quantity in every wood and hedge . their kind of grain be wheat , rye , barley , oat , pease , buckway , psnytha , that in taste be somewhat like to rice . of all these grain the country yield very sufficient with a overplus quantity , so that wheat be sell sometime for two alteen or ten penny starling the chetfird , which make almost three english bushel . their rye be sow before the winter , all their other grain in the spring time , and for the most part in may . the permians and some other that dwell far north , and in desert place , be serve from the part that lie more southward , and be force to make bread sometime of a kind of root ( call Vaghnoy ) and of the middle rind of the fir tree . if there be any dearth ( as they account this last year anno 1588 . wheat and rye be at 13 . alteen , or 5 . shilling five penny starling the chetfird ) the fault be rather in the practice of their nobility that use to engross it , then in the country it self . the chief the native commodity of the country ( wherewith commodity of serve both their own turn , and send much abroad the country . to great enrich of the emperor , and his people ) i fur . be many and substantiali . first , fur of all sort . wherein the providence of God be to be note , that provide a natural remedy for they , to help the natural inconvenience of their country by the cold of the climate . their chief fur be these , black fox , sable , luserne , dun fox , martrones , gurnestalle or armin , laset or Miniver , Bever , wulverin , the skin these rat of a great water rat that smell natural like musk , areinCanada . Calaber or grey squirrel , red squirrel , red and white fox . 364 beside the great quantity spend within you country ( the people be clad all in fur the whole winter ) there be transport out of the country some year by the merchant of turquoise , Persia , Bougharia , Georgia , Armenia , and some other of Christendom , to the value of four or five hundred thousand rubble , as i have hear of the merchant . the best sable fur grow in the country of Pechora , Momgosorskoy and Obdorskoy , the Momgwnkoy worse sort in Siberia , perm , and other place . the perhap \ black fox and red come out of Siberia , white and dun from Pechora , whence also come the white wolf , and white bear skin . the best wulverin also thence and from perm . the best martron be from Siberia , Cadam , morum , perm , and Cazan . Lyserns , Minever , and armin , the best be out of gallet , and ouglit , many from Novogrod and perm . the beaver of the best sort breed in Murmonskey by Cola . other common fur and most of these kind grow in many , and some in all part of the country . the second commodity be of wax , whereof have be 2 . wax . ship into foreign country ( as i have hear it report by those that best know it ) the sum of 50000 . pood yearly , every pood contain 40 . pound , but