the queen of England , whereunto master Horsey will in no case agree , say , he will have his leg cut off by the knee , before he will yield to such a indignity offer to his sovereign the queen majesty of England , to bring the emperor a present , in course after the king of Spain subject , or any other whatsoever . the emperor , and the prince Boris Pheodorowich perceive the controversy , send the lord treasurer Peter Ivanowich Galavyn , and Vasili Shalkan , both of the counsel , to they , who deliver the emperor back , master Horseys speech : whereupon he be first in order ( as good reason ) admit and present the emperor in the behalf of the english merchant trade thither , a present wish he joy , and long to reign in tranquillity , and so kiss the emperor hand , he accept the present with good like , and avouch , that for his sister sake queen Elizabeth of England , he will be a gracious lord to her merchant , in as ample manner as ever his father have be : and be dismiss , he have the same day send he 70 . dish of sundry kind of meat , with 3 . cart lade with all sort of drink very bountiful . after he be the foresay subject of the spanish king admit with his present , who the emperor will to be no less faithful and serviceable unto he , than the queen of England subject be and have be , and then the king of Spain subject shall receive favour accord . 342 all these thing thus in order perform , praise be sing in all the church . the emperor and empress very devout resort on foot to many principal church in the city , and upon Trinity Sunday betake themselves to a progress in order of procession , to a famous monastery call Sergius and the Trinity , 60 . mile distant from the city of Moscow , accompany with a huge army of nobleman , gentleman and other , mount upon goodly horse with furniture accord . the empress of devotion take this journey on foot all the way , accompany with her princess and lady , no small number : her guard and gunner be in number 20000 , her chief counsellor or attendant , be a noble man of the blood royal her uncle of great authority call Demetri Ivanowich Godonova . all this progress end , both the emperor and empress return to Moscow : short after the emperor by the direction of the prince Boris Pheodorowich , send a power into the land of Siberia , where all the rich sable and fur be get . this power conquer in one year and a half , 1000 mile . in the performance of this war , there be take prisoner the emperor of the country call chare Siber - ChareSiberski sky , and with he many other duke and noble man , ^ ce . , / / , i , a i . a r u - alberta take which be bring to Mosko with a guard or soldier prism an ( i and gunner , who be receive into the city in very bring to honourable manner , and do there remain to this day . Moscow . hereupon the corrupt officer , judge , justice , captain and lieutenant through the whole kingdom be remove , and more honest man substitute in their place , with express commandment , under severe punishment to surcease their old bribe and extortion which they have use in the old emperor time , and now to execute true justice without respect of person : and to the end that this may be the better do , their land and year stipend be augment : the great task , custom , and duty , which be before lay upon the people in the old emperor time , be now abate , and some whole remit , and no punishment com - 343 sophet Keri Alli king of the crimme arrival at Moscow . mand to be use , without sufficient and due proof , although the crime be capitali , deserve death : many duke and noble man of great house , that be under displeasure , and imprison 20 . year by the old emperor , be now set at liberty and restore to their land : all prisoner be set at liberty , and their trespass forgive . in sum , a great alteration universal in the government follow , and yet all be do quiet , civil , peaceable , without trouble to the prince , or offence to the subject : and this breed great assurance and honour to the kingdom , and all be accomplish by the wisdom especial of Irenia the empress . these thing be report and carry to the ear of the king and prince that be borderer upon Russia , they grow so fearful and terrible to they , that the monarch of all the scythian call the Crimme tartar or great can himself , name sophet Keri Alli , come out of his own country to the emperor of Russia , accompany with a great number of his nobility well horse , although to they that be christian they seem rude , yet they be personable man , and valiant : their come be grateful to the emperor , and their entertainment be honourable , the tartar prince have bring with he his wife also , receive of the ruff emperor entertainment , and princely welcome accord to their estate . not long after , 1200 . polish gentleman , valiant soldier , and proper man come to Mosko offi their service to the emperor , who be all entertain : and in like sort many chirkass , and people of other nation come and offy service . and assoon as the report of this new create emperor be spread over other kingdom of Europe , there be send to he sundry ambassador to wish he joy and prosperi tie in his kingdom : thither come ambassador from the Turk , from the persian , the bogharian , the Crimme , the georgian , and many other tartar prince . there come also ambassador from the emperor of almain , the 344 pole , the swethen , the Dane , etc and since his coronation no enemy of he have prevail in his attempt . it fall out not long after , that the emperor be 2 % em - desirous to send a message to the most excellent queen perorPheodore of England , for which service he think no man fit kttmand “ then m . Jerome Horsey , suppose that one of the request to the queen own man and subject will be the more queen . acceptable to she . the sum of which message be , that the emperor desire a continuance of that league , friendship , amity and intercourse of traffic which be between his father and the queen majesty and her subject , with other private affair beside , which be not to be make common .