appoint for some other service ) whether there be war with the Tartar , or not . this may seem peradventure somewhat dangerous for some state , to have so great force under the command of nobleman to assemble every year to one certain place . but the matter be so use , as that no danger can grow to the emperor , or his state by this mean . first , because these nobleman be many , to wit , an no . in all , and change by the emperor so oft as he think 378 good . second , because they have their live of the emperor , be otherwise but of very small revenue , and receive this yearly pay of 40000 rubble , when it be present to be pay forth again to the soldier that be under they . third , because for the most part they be about the emperor person be of his counsel , either speciali , or at large . four , they be rather as paymaster , than captain to their company , themselves not go forth ordinary to the war , save when some of they be appoint by speciali order from the emperor himself . So the whole number of horseman that be ever in a readiness , and in continual pay , be 80000 , a few more or less . if he have need of a great number ( which seidome fall out ) than he entertein of those Sinaboiarskey , that be out of pay , so many as he need : and if yet he want of his number , he give charge to his nobleman , that hold land of he to bring into the field every man a proportionable number of his servant ( call kolophey , such as till his land ) with their furniture , accord to the just number that he intend to make . which the service be do , present lie in their weapon , and return to their servile occupation again . of footman that be in continual pay , he have to the number of 12000 all gunner , call Strelsey : whereof 5000 be to attend about the city of Moscow , or any other place where the emperor shall abide , and 2000 ( which be call Stremaney Strelsey , or gunner at the stirrup ) about his own person at the very court or house where himself lodge . the rest be place in his garrison town , till there be occasion to have they in the field , and receive for their salary or stipend every man seven rubble a year , beside twelve measure a piece of rye , and oat . of mercenary soldier , that be stranger ( who they call nimschoy ) they have at this time 4300 of polonians : off Chirchasses ( that be under the polonians ) about 4000 , whereof 3500 be abroad in his garrison : of doutche and Scot about 150 : 379 A . D . 1588 . horseman in continual pay 80000 . footman in continual pay 12000 . stranger mercenary in pay 4300 . 1 . the Voiavod or general . 2 . lieutenant general . 3 . Marshals of the field four . four marshal . • deputy eight . of greek , Turks , Dane and swedens , all in one band , a 100 or thereabouts . but these they use only upon the tartar side , and against the siberians : as they do the tartar soldier ( who they hire sometime , but only for the present ) on the other side against the polonian and Sweden : think it best policy to use their service upon the contrary border . the chief captain or leader of these force , accord to their name and degree , be these which follow . first , the Voyavoda Bulshaia , that be , the great captain , or lieutenant general under the emperor . This common be one of the four house of the chief nobility of the land . their great Voiavod or general at this present in their war , be common one of these four : Knez Feodor Ivanowich Methisloskey , knez Ivan Michalowich Glinskoy , Cherechaskoy , and Trowbetskoy , all of great nobility . next unto the Voiavod or general there be some other place as lieutenant general , be a man of great valour and experience in the war , who order all thing that the other countenance . at this time their principal man , and most use in their war , be one Knez demetrie Ivanowich Forestine , a ancient and expert captain , and one that have do great service ( as they say ) against the tartar and polonian . next under the Voiavod and his lieutenant general be four other that have the marshal of the whole army divide among they , and may be call the marshal of the field . every man have his quarter , or four part under he . whereof the first be call the Prava Polskoy , or right wing . the second be the Levoy Polskoy , or leave wing . the three be rusnoy Polskoy , or the break band , because out of this there be choose to send abroad upon any sudden exploit , or to make a rescue or supply , as occasion do require . the four storoshovoy Polskoy , or the ward band . every one of these four marshal have two other under they ( eight in all ) that twice every week at the least must muster and train their several wing or band , and hold and give 380 1588 . justice for all fault , and disorder commit in the camp . and these eight be common choose out of the 11 o . ( which i speak of before ) that receive and deliver the pay to the soldier . under these eight be diverse other five colonel captain , as the Gulavoy , captain of thousand five under caf " hundred and 100 the petyde Setskoy or captain of ans ' fifty , and the decetsky or captain of ten . beside the Voiavoda or general of the army ( speak of before ) they have two other that bear the name of Voiavoda , whereof one be the master of the great Ordi - six master nance ( call Naradna voiavoda ) who have diverse under officer , necessary for that