number of 6000 soldier of russes and polonians , and send many new supply thither , to plant and to inhabit , as he win ground . at this time beside he have get the king brother of Siberia , allure by certain of his the king captain , to leave his own country by offer of great entertainment , and pleasant life with the ruff emperor , ' then he have in Siberia . he be bring in this last 1588 . year , and be now with the emperor at Moscow well entertain . of the Tartar , and other borderer to the country of Russia , with who they have most to do in war , and peace . their neighbour with who they have great deal and intercourse , both in peace and war , be first the tartar . second the polonian who the ruff the polonians call Laches , note the first author or founder of the nation , who be call Laches or Leches , whereunto be e usse ' add Po , which signify ! people , and so be make polach , that be , the people or posterity of Laches : 389 the fill of Moscow by the chrim tartar , in the year 1571 . which the latin after their manner of writing call Polonos . the three be the swedens . the polonians and swedens be better know to these part of Europe then be the Tartar , that be far off from we ( as be of Asia ) and divide into many tribe , different in name , and government one from another . the great and mighty of they be the chrim tartar , ( who some call the great can ) that lie south , and southeastward from Russia , and do most annoy the country by often invasion , common once every year , sometime enter very far within the inland part . in the year 1571 he come as far as the city of Moscow , with a army of 200000 man , without any battle , or resistance at all , for that the ruff emperor ( than Ivan Vasiliwich ) lead forth his army to encounter with he , march a wrong way . the city he take not , but fire the suburb , which by reason of the building ( which be all of wood without any stone , brick , or lime , save certain out room ) kindle so quick , and go on with such rage , as that it consume the great part of the city almost within the space of four hour , be of 30 mile or more of compass . then may you have see a lamentable spectacle : beside the huge and mighty flame of the city all on light fire , the people burn in their house and street , but most of all of such as labour to pass out of the gate far from the enemy , where meet together in a mighty throng , and so press every man to prevent another , wedge themselves so fast within the gate , and street near unto it , as that three rank walk one upon the other head , the uppermost tread down those that be low : so that there perish at that time ( as be say ) by the fire and the press , the number of 800000 people or more . the principali cause of this continual quarrel betwixt the ruff and the chrim be for the right of certain border part claim by the tartar , but possess by the ruff . the tartar allege that beside astracan and Cazan 390 ( that be the ancient possession of the east Tartar ) the whole country from his bound north and Westward so far as the city of Mosko , and Mosko it self pertaineth to his right . which seem to have be true homage do by the report of the russes they self , that tell of a certain homage that be do by the ruff emperor Tartar . every year to the great chrim or can , the ruff emperor stand on foot and feed the chrims horse , ( himself sit on his back ) with oat out of his own cap , in stead of a bowl or manger , and that within the castle of Mosko . and this homage ( they say ) be do till the time of Basileus grandfather to this man . who surprise the chrim emperor by a stratagem do by one of his nobility ( call Ivan demetro - wich Belschey ) be content with this ransom , viz . with the change of this homage into a tribute of fur : which afterward also be deny to be pay by this emperor father . hereupon they continue you quarrel , the Russe defend his country , and that which he have win , you chrim tartar invade he once or twice every year , sometime about Whitsuntide , but often in harvest . what time if the great can or chrim come in his own person , he bring with he a great army of 100000 . or 200000 . man . otherwise they make short and sudden road into the country with lesser number , run about the list of the border as wild goose fly , invade and retire where they see advantage . their common practice ( be very populous ) be to the manner of make diverse army , and so draw the ruff to one Tartar or two place of the frontier , to invade at some other and place , that be leave without defence . 1 heir manner of fight , or order of their force be much after the ruff manner ( speak of before ) save that they be all horseman , and carry nothing else but a bow , a sheaf of arrow , and a falcon sword after the turkish fashion . they be very expert horseman , and use to shoot as ready backward , as forward . some will have a horsmans staff like to a 391 bear spear , beside their other weapon . the common soldier have no other armour than his ordinary apparel , viz . a black sheep skin with the wool side outward in the day time , and inward in the night time , with a cap of the same . but their Morseys or nobleman imitate the Turk