head very precious : he staff imperiali in his right hand of a unicorns horn of three foot and a half in length beset with rich stone , buy of merchant of Ausburge by the old emperor in An . 1581 , and cost he 7000 mark sterling . this jewel m . Horsey keep sometime , before the emperor have it . his sceptre globe be carry before he by the prince Boris Pheodorowich , his rich cap beset with rich stone and pearl be carry before he by a duke : he 6 . crown also be carry by Demetrius Ivanowich Godonova , the emperor uncle , Mekita Romanowich the emperor uncle , Stephan vasiliwich , Gregory Vasiliwich , Ivan Vasiliwich brother of the blood royal . thus at last the emperor come to the great church door , and the people cry , God save our emperor Pheodor Ivanowich of all Russia . his horse be there ready most rich adorn , with a cover of embroider pearl and precious stone , saddle , and all furniture agreeable to it , report to be worth 300000 . mark sterling . there be a bridge make of 150 . fathom in length , three manner of way , three foot above ground and two fathom broad , for he to go from one church to the other with his prince and noble from the press of the people , which be in number infinite , and some at that time press to death with the throng . as the emperor return out of the church , they be spread under foot 339 with cloth of gold , the porch of the church with red velvet , the bridge with scarlet , and stammell cloth from one church to another : and as soon as the emperor be pass by , the cloth of gold , velvet and scarlet be cut , and take of those that can come by it , every man desirous to have a piece , to reserve it for a monument : silver and gold coin , then mynt of purpose be cast among the people in great quantity . the lord Boris Pheodorowich be sumptuous , and rich attire , with his garment deck with great orient pearl , beset with all sort of precious stone . in like rich manner be apparel all the family of the godonovaes in their degree , with the rest of the prince , and nobili tie , whereof one name Knez Ivan Michalowich Glynsky , who robe , horse , and furniture , be in register find worth one hundred thousand mark sterling , be of great antiquity . the empress be in her palace , be place in her chair of majesty also before a great open window : most precious , and rich be her robe , and shine to behold , with rich stone , and orient pearl beset , her crown be place upon her head , accompany with her princess , and lady of estate : then cry out the people , God preserve our noble empress Irenia . after all this the emperor come into the parliament house which be rich deck : there he be place in his royal seat adorn as before : he 6 . crown be set before he upon a table : the basin , and ewer royal of gold hold by his knight of guard with his man stand two on each side in white apparel of cloth of silver , call Kindry , with sceptre , and battle axe of gold in their hand : the prince , and nobility be all place accord to their degree all in their rich robe . the emperor after a short oration , permit every man in order to kiss his hand : which be do , he remove to a princely seat prepare for he at the table : where he be serve by his noble in very princely order . the three out room be very great , and large be beset with plate of gold , and silver round , from the 340 ground up to the vaut one upon the other : among which plate be many barrel of silver and gold : this solemnity , and triumph last a whole week , wherein many royal pastime be show and use : after which the chief man of the nobility be elect to their place of office , and dignity , as the prince Boris Pheodorowich be make chief counsellor to the emperor , master of the horse , have the charge of his person , lieutenant of the empire , and warlike engine , governor or lieutenant of the empire of Cazan , and astracan and other : to this dignity be by parliament , and gift of the emperor give he many revenue , and rich land , as there be give he , and his for ever to inherit a province call Vaga , of 300 . English mile in length , and 250 . in breadth , with many town and great village populous and wealthy , his yearly revenue out of that province , be 35 . thousand mark sterling , be not the 5 . part of his yearly revenue . further , he and his house be of such authority , and power , that in 40 . day warning they be able to bring into the field 100 thousand soldier well furnish . the conclusion of the emperor coronation be a peal of ordinance , call a peal royal two mile without the city , be 170 . great piece of brass of all sort , as fair as any can be make , these piece be all discharge with shot against bulwark make of purpose : 20 . thousand hargubuser stand in 8 . rank two mile in length , apparel all in velvet , colour silk and stammel , discharge their shot also twice over in good order : and so the emperor accompany with all his prince and noble , at the least 50 . thousand horse depart through the city to his palace . this royal coronation will ask much time , and many leaf of paper to be describe particular as it be perform : it shall suffice , to understand that the like magnificence be never see in Russia . the coronation , and other triumph end , all the nobility , officer , and merchant accord to a accustom order every one in his place , and degree bring 341 A . D . i584 - rich present unto the emperor , wish he long life , and joy in his kingdom . the same time also master Jerom Horsey aforesaid , remain as servant in Russia for the queen most excellent majesty , be call for to the emperor , as he sit in his imperiali seat , and then also a famous merchant of Netherlands be new come to Moscow , ( who give he self out to be the king of Spain subject ) call John de Wale , be in like sort call for . some of the nobility will have prefer this subject of the Spaniard before master Horsey servant to