again by his son Ivan Vasiliwich , about 8 or 9 year past , upon composition with the polonian king Stephan Batore : whereunto he be force by the advantage which the pole have then of he , by reason of the foil he have give he before , and the disquietness of his own state at home . only the ruff emperor , at this time have leave he on that side his country , the city of Smolensco , vobsco , 386 1588 . Chernigo , and Bealagorod in Lituania . in Livonia , not Lituania . a town nor one foot of ground . when Basilius first conquer those country , he suffer then the native to keep their possession , and to inhabit all their town , only pay he a tribute , under the government of his ruff captain . but by their conspiracy and attempt not long after , he be teach to deal more sure with they . and so come upon they the second time , he kill and carry away with he , three part of four , which he give or sell to the Tartar that serve he in those war , and in stead of they place there his russes , so many as may overmatch the rest , with certain garrison of strength beside . wherein notwithstanding this oversight be commit , for that ( take away with he the upland , or country people that shall have till the ground , and may easy have be keep in order without any danger , by other good policy ) he be drive afterward many year together , to vitaile the country ( special the great town ) out of his own country of Russia , the soil lie there in the mean while waste , and until . the like fall out at the port of Narve in Liefland , narve . where his son Ivan Vasiliwich devise to build a town , and a castle on the other side the river , ( call Ivangorod ) to keep the town and country in subjection . the castle he cause to be so build and fortify , that it be think to be invincible . and when it be furnish , for reward to the architect ( that be a polonian ) he put out both his eye , to make he unable to build the like again . but have leave the native all within their own country , without abate their number or strength , the town and castle not long after be betray , and surrender again to the king of Sweden . on the southeast side , they have get the kingdom of Cazan , and astracan . Theise be win from the tartar , by the late emperor Ivan Vasiliwich , the one 387 conquest of a 1000 mile . Permia and Pechora . mean of hold chief town . mean of hold the country of Pechora , Permia , and Siberia . about thirty five , the other about thirty and three year ago . northward out of the country of Siberia , he have lay unto his realm a great breadth and length of ground , from Wichida to the river of Obba , about a 1000 mile space : so that he be bold to write himself now , the great commander of Siberia . the country likewise of Permia and Pechora be a diverse people and language from the ruff , overcome not long since , and that rather by threaten , and shake of the sword , then by any actuali force : as be a weak and naked people , without mean to resist . that which the ruff have in his present possession , he keep on this sort . in his four chief border town of Vobsko , smolensko , astracan , and Cazan , he have certain of his counsel not of great nobility , but of great trust , which have more authority within their precinct , ( for the countenance and strengthen of their government there ) then the other duke that be set to govern in other place , as be note before , in the manner of order their province . Theise he change sometime every year , sometime every second or three year , but exceed not that time , except upon very speciali trust , and good like of the party , and his service : lest by enlarge of their time , they may grow into some familiarity with the enemy ( as some have do ) be so far out of sight . the town beside be very strong fence with trench , castle , and store of munition , and have garrison within they , to the number of two or three thousand a piece . they be store with victual if any siege shall come upon they , for the space of two or three year before hand . the four castle of Smolensko , vobsko , Cazan and astracan , he have make very strong to bear out any siege : so that it be think that those town be impregnable . as for the country of Pechora and Permia , and that part of Siberia , which he have now under he , they be keep by as easy mean , as they be first get . vz . 388 0 1588 . rather by show , then by use of arm . first , he have store the country with as many russes as there be native , and have there some few soldier in garrison , enough to keep they under . second , his officer and magistrate there be of his own ruff people , and he change they very often , vz . every year twice or thrice : notwithstanding there be no great fear of any innovation . third , he divide they into many small government , like a staff break in many small piece : so y * they have no strength be sever , which be but iide neither when they be all in one . four , he provide that the people of the country have neither armour , nor money , be tax and peel so often as he think good : without any mean to shake off that yoke , or to relieve themselves . in Siberia ( where he go on in pursue his con - Siberia . quest ) he have diverse castle and garrison to the