wherewith the ambassador have find himself grieve , and supply he with what he want , and right he in all thing wherein he have be wrong . not long after the return of this noble man , the emperor cause to be set down in his own presence , a new and much large allowance of diet for the ambassador than he have have before , and short after send the same to the ambassador by his principali secretary Savio Frollo . this diet be so great , as the ambassador often time seek to have it lessen , but the emperor will not by any mean . the scroll of the new diet be this : one bushel of fine meal for three day . one bushel of wheat meal for a day and a half . two live goose for one day . twenty hen for the day . seven sheep for a day . one ox for three day . one side of pork for a day . seventie egg for a day . ten pound of butter . seventy penny white loaf of bread . twelve penny loaf of bread . one veather or gallon of vinegar . two veather of salt cabige . one peck of onion . ten pound of salt . on altine , or six penny worth of wax candle . two all tine of tallow candle . one four part of a veather of cherry mead . as much of Mallynovomead . half a veather of burn wine . one veather of sodden mead call obarni . three veather of sweet mead . ten veather of white mead . fifteen veather of ordinary mead . 322 1583 - foure veather of sweet beer . fifteen veather of beer . half a pound of pepper . three sollitinck or ounce of saffron . one sollitincke of maze . one sollitincke of nutmeg . two sollitinck of clove . three sollitinck of cinnamon . foe bushel of oat . provender , < one load of hay . one load of straw . now he begin so much to discover his purpose and affection towards her majesty and her country , as he send to the ambassador , entreat he that his two preacher , and m . coal . doctor Jacob his English physician , may set down the point of the religion in use in England , which the ambassador cause to be do accord , and send they unto he , who seem so well to like they , as he cause they ( with much good allowance ) to be public read before diverse of his council , and many other of his nobility . now he draw hot again in question to marry some kinswoman of her majesty , and that he will send again into England , to have some one of they to wife , and if her majesty will not upon his next ambassage send he such a one as he require , himself will then go into England , and carry his treasure with he , and marry one of they there . here you must understand that the year before this ambassage , he have send to her majesty by his ambassador to have have the lady mary Hastings in marriage , which entreaty by mean of her inability of body , by occasion of much sickness , or perhaps , of no great like either of herself or friend , or both , take no place . the ambassador be now so far grow into the emperor favour , and his affection so great to England , as those great counsellor that be the ambassador great enemy before , be now desirous of some public 323 courtesy at his hand for their advantage to the emperor : neither dare they now any more interpose themselves betwixt the emperor and he : for not long before this , the emperor for abuse the ambassador , have ( to show his favour towards he ) beat Shalkan the chancellor very grievous , and have send he word , that he will not leave one of his race alive . now while the ambassador be thus strong possess of the emperor favour , he employ himself in all he may , not only for the speedy dispatch of the negotiation he have in hand , but labour also by all the good mean he may , further to benefit his country and countryman , and so not long after win at the emperor hand not only all those thing he have in commission to treat for by his instruction , but also some other of good and great importance , for the benefit of the merchant . private suit obtain of the emperor by the ambassador . leave for Richard Fransham a english man and apothecary to the emperor , his wife , and child , to come home into England , and to bring with he all such good as he have get there . he obtain like leave for Richard Elmes a english man one of the emperor surgeon . he also get leave for Jane ricard the widow of doctor Bomelius a Dutchman , and physician to the emperor , who for treason practise with the king of pole against the say emperor , be roast to death at the city of Moscow , in the year 1579 . these follow he obtain for the behoof of the merchant . he procure for the merchant promise of recompense for certain good take from their factor . by robbery upon the Volga . 324 he obtain likewise the payment of five hundred mark , which be pay for ten year before his go into Russia ( into the emperor receit ) for a rent of a house that they have at Vologda . he also get grant for they the repayment of fifteen hundred mark , which have be exact of they the two last year before his come thither . he get also for they order for the repayment of a old and desperate debt of three thousand mark , a debt so desperate , as four year leave out of their account , and by the opinion of they all , not think fit to be deal with , for too much offend the emperor , or impeach his other business , which be think at least otherwise sufficient , and be therefore leave out of his instruction from her majesty . he obtain that all stranger be forbid to trade any more into Russia , and that the passage and trade to all the emperor northern coast and country , from the Wardhouse to the river of ob shall be only free to the english nation . last , of a great desire he have to do the merchant good , without motion either of themselves here , or their agent there , or any other of they , he obtain of the emperor the abatement of all their custom which they have long before pay , and agree still to continue , which custom the Dutchman and stranger be remove , as now it be agree , amount to two thousand pound yearly . all these be grant , some already pay before his come from Moscow , the old privilege ratify , new write , sign and seal , and be to be deliver to the ambassador at his next come to court , before when the emperor fall sick of a surfeit , and so die . after who death the case be wondrous alter with the ambassador : for whereas both in his own conceit , and in all man opinion else , he be in great forwardness to have grow a great man with the emperor