. 9 salt . the country beside make great store of salt . their best salt be make at Stararovse in very great quantity , where they have great store of salt well , about 2 50 . verse from the sea . at astracan salt be make natural by the sea water , that cast it up into great hill , and so it be dig down , and carry away by the merchant and other that will fetch it from thence . they pay to the emperor for acknowledgement or custom 3 - d . Russe upon every hundred weight . beside these two , they nonock . make salt in many other place of the realm , as in perm , Wichida , Totma , kenitsma , Solovetsky , Ocona , Bombasey , and nonock , all out of salt pit , save at Solovetsky , which lie near to the sea . 10 . Tam . likewise of tar they make a great quantity out of their fir tree in the country of Duyna and Smolensko , whereof much be send abroad . beside these ( which be all good and substantiali commodity ) they have diverse other of small account , that be natural and proper to 11 . Riba - that country : as the fish tooth ( which they call riba - zul > a - zuba ) which be use both among themselves , and the persian and bougharians that fetch it from thence for bead , knife , and sword haft of nobleman and gentleman , and for diverse other use . some use the powder of it against poison , as the unicorn horn . the fish that wear it be call a Morse , and be catch about Pechora . Theise fish tooth some of they be almost 2 . foot of length , and weigh 11 . or 12 . pound apiece . 12 . Slide . in the province of Corelia , and about the river Duyna towards the north sea , there grow a soft rock which they call slude . this they cut into piece , and so tear 368 it into thin flake , which natural it be apt for , and so use it for glass - lanthorns and such like . it give both inward and outward a clear light than glass , and for this respect be better than either glass or horn : for that it neither break like glass , nor yet will burn like the lantern . saltpetre they make in many place , as at Ouglits , yaruslave and ustiug , and some small store of 1588 . 13 . saltpetre and brimstone . brimstone upon the river Volgha , but want skill to refine it . their iron be somewhat brittle , but a great weight of 14 . iron . it be make in Corelia , Cargapolia , and ustiug Thelesna . other mine they have none grow within you realm . their beast of strange kind be the Losh , the ollen , nge the wild horse , the bear , the wolvering , or wood dog , ’ the lyserne , the beaver , the sable , the martron , the black that breed in and dun fox , the white bear towards the sea coast of Russia . Pechora , the gurnstale , the laset or Minever . they have a kind of squirrel ! that have grow on the pinion of the shoulder bone a long tuft of hair , much like unto feather with a far broad tail then have any other squirrel , which they move and shake as they leap from tree to tree , much like unto a wing . they skise a large space , and seem for to fly withal , and therefore they call they Letach Vechshe , that be , the fly squirrel . their hare and squirrel in summer be of the same colour with we , in winter the hare change her coat into milk white , the squirrel into grey , whereof come the Calaber . they have fallow dear , the roe buck , and goat very great store . their horse be but small , but very swift and hard , they travel they unshod both winter and summer , without all regard of pace . their sheep be but small and bear course and harsh wool . of fowl they have diverse of the principal kind : first , great store of hawk , the eagle , the gerfalcon , the slightfaulcon , the goshawk , the tassel , the sparhawk , etc but the principal hawk y * breed in the country , be count you gerfalcon . of other fowl their principal kind be the swan tame and wild , ( whereof they have great store ) the three 369 2 a stork , the crane , the tedder of the colour of a pheasant , but far big and live in the fir wood . of pheasant and partridge they have very great plenty . a owl there be of a very great bigness , more ugly to behold than you owl of this country , with a broad face , and ear much like unto a man . for fresh water fish , beside the common sort ( as carp , pike , perch , tench , roach , etc ) they have diverse kind very good and delicate : as the Bellouga or Bellougina of 4 . or 5 . elne long , the Ositrina or sturgeon , the Severiga and Sterledy somewhat in fashion and taste like to the sturgeon , but not so thick nor long . Theise 4 . kind of fish breed in the Volgha , and be catch in great plenty , and serve thence into the whole realm for a great food . of the roe of these four kind they make very great store of Icary or caveary as be say before . they have beside these that breed in the Volgha a fish call the Riba bela , or white salmon , which they account more delicate than they do the red salmon , whereof also they have exceed great plenty in the river northward , as in Duyna , the river of Cola , etc in the Ozera or lake near a town call perislave , not far from the Moscow , they have a small fish which they call the fresh herring , of the fashion , and somewhat of