town have nothing y ‘ be great memorable , save many ruin within their wall . the street of their city and town in stead of pave be plank with fir tree , plained and lay even close the one to the other . their house be of wood without any lime or manner stone , build very close and warm with fir tree plain and pile one upon another . they be fasten together ’ with dent or notch at every corner , and so clasp fast together . betwixt the tree or timber they thrust in moss ( whereof they gather plenty in their wood ) to keep out the air . Every house have a pair of stair that lead up into the chamber out of the yard or street after the scottish manner . this building seem far better for their country , than that of stone or brick ; as be cold and more dampish than their wooden house , special of fir , that be a dry and warm wood . whereof the providence of God have give they such store , as that you may build a fair house for 20 . or 30 . rubble or little moor , where wood be most scant . the great inconvenience of their wooden build be the aptness for fire , which happen very oft and in very fearful sort , by reason of the dryness and fatness of the fir , that be once fire , burn like a torch , and be hardly quench till all be burn up . [ of 373 of the manner of crown or inauguration of the ruff emperor . the solemnity use at you Russe emperor coronation , be on this manner . in the great church of precheste ( or our lady ) within the emperor castle be erect a stage whereon stand a serine that bear upon it the imperial cap and robe of very rich stuff . when the day of the inauguration be come , there resort thither , first the patriarch w ‘ the metropolitanes , archbishop , bishop , abbot and prior , all rich clad in their pontificalibus . then enter the deacon with the quire of singer . who so soon as the emperor set foot into you church , begin to sing : many year may live noble Theodore Ivanowich , etc : whereunto the patriarch and Metropolite with the rest of the clergy answer with a certain hymn , in form of a prayer , sing it altogether with a great noise . the hymn be end , the patriarch with the emperor mount up the stage , where stand a seat ready for the emperor . whereupon the patriarch will he to sit down , and then place himself by he upon another seat provide for y ‘ purpose , bow down his head towards you ground , and say this prayer : oh lord God king of king , lord of lord , which by thy prophet Samuel do choose thy servant David , and anoint he for king over thy people Israel , hear now our prayer , and look from thy sanctuary upon this thy servant Theodore , who thou have choose and exalt for king over these thy holy nation , anoint he with the oil of gladness , protect by thy power , put upon his head a crown of gold and precious stone , give he length of day , place he in the seat of justice , strengthen his arm , make subject unto he all the barbarous nation . let thy fear be in his whole heart , turn he from a evil faith , and all error , and show he the salvation of thy holy and universal church , that he may judge thy people with justice , and protect the child of the poor , 374 and final attain everlasting life . this prayer he speak with a low voice , and then pronounce aloud : all praise and power to God the father , the son , and the holy ghost . the prayer be end , he commands certain abbot to reach the imperiali robe and cap : which be do very decent , and with great solemnity , the patriarch withal pronounce aloud : peace be unto all . and so he begin another prayer to this effect : bow your self together with we , and pray to he that reign over all . preserve he ( oh lord ) under thy holy protection , keep he that he may do good and holy thing , let justice shine forth in his day , that we may live quiet without strife and malice . this be pronounce somewhat soft by the patriarch , whereto he add again aloud : thou be the king of the whole world , and the saviour of our soul , to thou the father , son and holy ghost be all praise for ever and ever . amen . then put on the robe and the cap , he bless the emperor with the sign of the cross , say withal : in the name of the father , the son and the holy ghost . the like be do by the metropolite , archbishop , and bishop : who all in their order come to the chair , and one after another bless the emperor with their two forefinger . then be say by the patriarch another prayer , that begin : oh most holy virgin , mother of God etc after which a deacon pronounce with a loud voice : many year to noble Theodore , good , honourable , belove of God , great duke of volodemer , of Moscow , emperor , and monarch of all Russia , etc whereto the other priest and deacon that stand somewhat far of by the altar or table , answer sing : many year , many year to the noble Theodore . the same note be take up by the priest and deacon , that be place at the right and left side of the church , and then altogether , they chant and thunder out , sing : many year to the noble Theodore , good , honourable , belove of God , great duke of Volodomer , Moscow , emperor of 375 all Russia , etc Theise solemnity be end , first come the patriarch with the metropolite , archbishop , and bishop , than the nobility , and the whole