a speciali note gather by the excellent venetian cosmographer m . John Baptista Ramusius out of the arabian geographic of Abilfada Ishmael , concern the trending of the ocean sea from China northward , along the coast of Tartaric and other unknown land , and then run westwards upon the northern coast of Russia , and so far to the northwest . descrivendo poi il predetto abilfada Ishmael i luoghi della terra habitabile , che circuendo il mar Oceano tocca , dice cosi . rivoltasi 1 ’ Oceano da levante verso la region dell cine , and v & alia volta di Tramontana , et passata final - mente la detta region , see ne giunge a Gogi and Magogi , cio and alii confini de gli ultimi tartari , and di quivi ad 412 akune terre che sono incognite : et correndo sempre per ponente , passa sopra li confini settentrionali della Rossia , et va alia volta di maestro . the same in english . the aforesaid abilfada Ishmael describe afterward the habitable place of the earth , which the ocean sea in his circuit touch , say in this manner follow . the ocean sea turn from the east towards the country of the chinaes , and stretch towards the north , and at length have pass the say country , it reach unto the Gogi and Magogi , that be , to the confine of the uttermost Tartar , and from thence , unto certain unknown country : and run still westward it pass upon the northern coast of Russia , and from thence it run towards the northwest , ( which it do indeed upon the coast of Lappia . ) by this most notable testimony it appear , that the ocean sea compass and environ all the east , Northeast , and north part of Asia and Europe . the emperor private or household officer . the chief officer of the emperor household be these which follow . the first be the office of the Boiaren Conesheva , or master of the horse . which contain no more than be express by the name , that be , to be overseer of the horse , and not Magister equitum , or master of the horseman . for he appoint other for that service , as occasion do require , as before be say . he that bear that office at this time , be Boris pheodorowich Godonoe , brother to the empress . of horse for service in his war ( beside other for his ordinary use ) he have to the number of ten thousand which be keep about Moscow . the next be the lord steward of his household at this time , one Gregory Vasilowich Godonoe . the three be his treasurer , that keep all his monei , jewel , plate , etc now call Stephan Vasilowich Godonoe . the 413 A . D . 1588 . alcune terre incognite . Confini settentrionali della Rossia . the country of China . the coast of the uttermost Tartar . certain unknown country . the northern coast of Russia . the northwest . master of the horse . the L . steward . the L . treasurer . controller . four his controller , now Andreas petrowich clesinine . chamberlame the five his chamberlain . he that attend that office at this time , be call Estoma Bisabroza Pastelnischay . taster . the sixth his taster , now theodor Alexandrowich , and harbinger . Ivan Vasilowich Godonoe . the seven his harbinger , which be three noble man , and diverse other gentleman that do the office under they . these be his ordinary officer , and office of the chief account . gentleman of of gentleman , beside they that wait about his the chamber . chamber , and person ( call Shilsey Strapsey ) there be the Gard . two hundred , all nobleman son . his ordinary guard be two thousand hagbutter ready with their piece charge , and their match light , with other necessary furniture continual day and night : which come not within the house , but wait without in the court or yard , where the emperor be abide . in the night time there lodge next to his bedchamber the chief chamberlain , with one or two more of best trust about he . a second chamber off , there lodge six other of like account for their trust and faithfulness . in the third chamber lie certain young gentleman , of these two hundred , call Shilsey Strapsey , that take their gnome . turn by forty every night . there be groom beside that watch in their course , and lie at every gate and door of the court , call Estopnick . the hagbutter or gunner , whereof there be two thousand ( as be say before ) watch about the emperors lodging , or bedchamber by course 250 . every night , and 250 . more in the court yard , and about the treasure house . his court or house at the Moscow be make case wise , wall about , with great store of fair ordinance plant upon the wall , and contain a great breadth of ground within it , with many dwell house : which be appoint for such as be know to be sure , and trusty to the emperor . 414 of the private behaviour , or quality of the ruff people . the private behaviour and quality of the ruff people , may partly be understand by that which have be say concern the public state and usage of the country . as touch the natural habit of constitution of their body , they be for the most part of a large size , thetr bo ^ es - and of very fleshly body : account it a grace to be somewhat gross and burley , and therefore they nourish and spread their beard , to have they long and broad . but for the most part they be very unwieldy and unactive withal . which may be think to come partly of the climate , and the numbness which they get by the cold in winter , and partly of their diet that stand most of root , onion , garlic , cabbage , and such like thing that breed gross humour , which they use to eat alone , and with their other meat . their diet be rather much then curious . at their their diet . meal they begin common with a Charke or small cup of aqua vitae , ( which they call Russe wine ) and then drink not till towards the end of their meal , take it in large , and all together , with kiss one another at every pledge . and therefore after dinner there be no talk with they , but every man go to his bench to take his afternoon sleep , which be as ordinary with they as their night rest . when they exceed , and have variety of dish , the first be their bake meat ( for roast meat they use little ) and then their broth or pottage . their common drink be mead , the poor sort use water , and a three drink call quasse , which be nothing else ( as we say ) but water turn out of his wit , with a little bran meash with it . this diet will breed in they many disease , but that they use bathstove , or hot house in stead of all physic , common twice or thrice every week . all the winter time , and almost the whole summer , they 415 a admirable endure of extreme heat , and cold at one and the same time . the noble man attire . heat their peach , which be make like the germane bathstove , and their Poclads like oven , that so warm the house that a stranger at the first shall hardly like of it . Theise two extremity , special in the winter of heat within their house , and of extreme cold without , together with their diet , make they of a dark , and sallow complexion , their skin be tan and parch both with cold and with heat :