service . the other be call it the Voiavoda gulavoy , or the walk captain , that have the wait allow he 1000 good horseman of principali choice , captatne - to range and spy abroad , and have the charge of the run castle , which we be to speak of in the chapter follow . all these captain , and man of charge must once every day resort to the bulsha voiavoda , or general of the army , to know his pleasure , and to inform he , if there be any requisite matter pertain to their office . of their muster , and levy of force , manner of armour , and provision of victuali for the war . when war be towards ( which they fail not of light every year with the tartar , and many time with the polonian and Sweden ) the four lord of the chetfird send forth their summons in the emperor name , to all the duke and dyack of the province , to be proclaim in the head town of every shire : that all the Sinaboiarskey , or son of gentleman make their repair to such a border where the service be to be do , at such a place , and by such a day , and there present themselves to such , and such captain . when they come to the place assign they in the summons or proclamation , their name be take by certain officer that have commission for that purpose from the roserade , or high 381 their order of muster . constable , as clerk of the band . if any make default and fade at the day , he be mulct , and punish very severe . as for the general and other chief captain , they be send thither from the emperor own hand , with such commission and charge as he think behooveful for the present service . when the soldier be assemble , they be reduce into their band , and company , under their several captain of ten , fifty , hundred , thousand , etc and these band into 4 polskei , or legion ( but of far great number than the roman legion be ) under their four great leader , which also have the authority of marshal of the field ( as be say before . ) the horse - concern their armour they be but slight appoint . man fuml - than common horseman have nothing else but his bow in ture ' he case under his right arm , and his quiver and sword hang on the left side : except some few that bear a case of dagge , or a javelin , or short staff along their horse side . the under captain will have common some piece of armour beside , as a shirt of male , or such like . the general with the other chief captain and man of nobility will have their horse very rich furnish , their saddle of cloth of gold , their bridle fair boss and tassele with gold , and silk fringe , bestud with pearl and precious stone , themselves in very fair armour , which they call bullatnoy , make of fair shine steel , yet cover common with cloth of gold , and edge round with armin fur , his steel helmet on his head of a very great price , his sword bow and arrow at his side , his spear in his hand , with another fair helmet , and Shesta pera , or horseman sceptre carry before he . their sword , bow , and arrow be of the turkish fashion . they practise like the tartar to shoot forward and backward , as they fly and retire . the footman the Strelsey or footman have nothing but his piece furniture . jn } ianjj hjs strike hatchet at his back , and his sword by his side . the stock of his piece be not make caliver - wise , but with a plain and strait stock ( somewhat like 382 a foul piece ) the barrel be rude and unartificial make , very heavy yet shoot but a very small bullet . as for their provision of victual , the emperor allow none , provision of either for captain or soldier , neither provide any for they except peradventure some corn for their money . Every man be to bring sufficient for himself , to serve his turn for four month , and if need require to give order for more to be bring unto he to the camp from his tenant that till his land , or some other place . one great help they have , that for lodging and diet every ruff be prepare to be a soldier beforehand . though the chief captain and other of account carry tent with they after the fashion of we , with some better provision of victual then the rest . they bring with they common into the camp for victuali a kind of dry bread , ( which they call Suchary ) with some store of meal , which they temper with water , and so make it into a ball , or small lump of dove , call Tollockno . and this they eat raw in stead of bread . their meat be bacon , or some other flesh or fish dry , after the dutch manner . if the ruff soldier be as hardy to execute a enterprise , as he be hard to bear out toil and travel , or be otherwise as apt and well train for the war , as he be indifferent for his lodging and diet , he will far exceed the soldier of our part . of their march , charge , and other martial discipline . the Russe trust rather to his number , then to the valour of his soldier , or good order of his force . their march or lead be without all order , save that the four Polskey or legion , ( whereinto their army be divide ) keep themselves several under their ensign , and so thrust all on together in a hurry , as they be direct by their general . their ensign be horseman the image of saint George . the bulsha Dworaney or cumme . chief horseman , have every man a small drum of brass 383 the walk castle . at his saddle bow , which he strike when he give