fur , their cap embroider with pearl and stone , who conduct he towards the emperor , till he be meet with four other of great degree than they , who guide he yet further towards the emperor , in which passage there stand along the wall , and sit upon bench and form in row , seven or eight hundred person , say to be nobleman and gentleman , all apparel in garment of colour satin and cloth of gold . these four nobleman accompany he to the emperor chamber door , where meet he the emperor 318 ambassage of sir Jerome Bowes a . d . . 1583 - herald , who office be there hold great : and with he all the great officer of the emperor chamber , who all conduct he to the place where the emperor sit in his state , have three crown stand by he , viz . of Moscovia , Cazan , and Astrakan , and also by he 4 young nobleman of about twenty year of age , of each side twain , costly apparel in white , hold upon their shoulder each of they a broad axe , much like to a gallogal axe of Ireland , thin and very sharp , the steel or handle not past half a yard long , and there sit about the chamber upon bench and other low seat , above a hundred nobleman rich apparel in cloth of gold . the ambassador be thus bring to the emperor to kiss his hand , after some compliment and inquiry of her majesty health , he will he to go sit down in a place provide for that purpose , nigh ten pase distant from he , from whence he will have have he to have send he her majesty letter and present , which the ambassador think not reasonable step forward towards the emperor : in which passage the chancellor come to meet he , and will have take his letter : to who the ambassador say , that her majesty have direct no letter to he ; and so go on , and deliver they himself to the emperor own hand . and after , have thus deliver her majesty letter and what he have else to say at that time , he be conduct to the council chamber , where have have conference with the council of matter of his ambassage , he be soon after send for again to the emperor , where he dine in his presence at a side table , near unto he , and all his company at another board by , where also dine at other table in the same place , all the chief noble man that be about the court , to the number of a hundred . and in the time of this dinner , the emperor use many favor to the ambassador and about the midst of dinner ( stand up ) drink a great carouse to the health of the queen his 319 good sister , and send he a great bowl full of rhenish wine and sugar to pledge he . the ambassador after this , be often call to court , where he have conference both with the emperor and his council of the matter in question , touch both ambassage , which diverse time raise many jar : and in the end , after sundry meeting , the emperor find himself not satisfy to his like , for that the ambassador have not power by his commission to yield to every thing that he think fit , as a man who will be seidome wont to be gainsay , let loose his passion , and with a stern and angry countenance tell he that he do not reckon the queen of England to be his fellow : for there be ( quoth he ) that be her better . the ambassador great mislike these speech , and be very unwilling ( how dangerous soever it may prove to his own person ) to give way to the emperor , to derogate aught from the honour and greatness of her majesty : and find also that to subject himself to the angry humour and disposition of the emperor be not the mean to win aught at his hand , with like courage and countenance to answer his , tell he that the queen his mistress be as great a prince as any be in Christendom , equal to he that think himself the great , well able to defend herself against his malice whosoever , and want no mean to offend any that either she have , or shall have cause to be enemy unto . yea ( quoth he ) how say thou to the french king , and the king of Spain ? Mary ( quoth the ambassador ) i hold the queen my mistress as great as any of they both . then what say thou ( quoth he ) to the emperor of Germany ? such be the greatness of the queen my mistress ( quoth the ambassador ) as the king her father have ( not long since ) the emperor in his pay , in his war against France . this answer mislike the emperor yet so much more , 320 as that he tell the ambassador , that be he not a ambassador , he will throw he out of the door . whereunto he answer that he may do his will , for he be now fast within his country : but he have a mistress who ( he doubt not ) will be revenge of any injury that shall be do unto he . whereupon the emperor in great sudden bid he get he home . and he with no more reverence than such usage require , salute the emperor , and go his way . all this notwithstanding , the ambassador be not much soon out of the chamber , and the emperor choler somewhat settle , but he deliver to his council that stand about he many commendation in the favour of the ambassador , for that he will not endure one ill word to be speak against his mistress , and therewithal ! wish himself to have such a servant . the ambassador have not be much more than one hour in his lodging , but the emperor imagine ( as it seem ) by the extraordinary behaviour of the ambassador ( for he want not wit to judge ) that he have find what be the emperor case , send his principali secretary unto he , to tell he , that notwithstanding what have pass , yet for the great love that he bear to the queen his sister , he shall very short be call again to court , and have a resolution of all the matter in question : and this secretary be now further content to impart , and say to the ambassador that the emperor be full resolve to send a great noble man home with he in ambassage to the queen his sister , then ever he yet at any time send out of his country : and that he determine also to send to the queen a present worth three thousand pound , and to gratify himself at his departure with a gift that shall be worth a thousand pound : and tell he also that the next day the emperor will send a great noble man unto he , to confer with he of certain abuse do he by Shalkan the chancellor , and his minister . and so the day follow he send Bodan Belskoy then in 321 ten chief counsellor that he have , a man most in credit with he : this man examine all matter