company in their order , to do homage to the emperor , bend down their head , and knock they at his foot to the very ground . the stile wherewith he be invest at his coronation , run after this manner . THeodore Ivanowich , by the grace of God great lord and emperor of all Russia , great duke of volodemer , Moscow , and Novogrod , king of Cazan , king of astracan , lord of Plesco , and great duke of Smolensco , of Twerria , Joughoria , Permia , Vadska , Bulghoria , and other , lord and great duke of Novogrod of the low country , of Chernigo , rezan , Polotskoy , Rostove , yaru - slaveley , Bealozera , Liefland , Oudoria , Obdoria , and condensa , commander of all Siberia , and of the north part , and lord of many other country , etc this stile contain in it all the emperor province , and set forth his greatness . and therefore they have a great delight and pride in it , force not only their own people but also stranger ( that have any matter to deliver to the emperor by speech or writing ) to repeat the whole form from the beginning to the end . which breed much cavil , and sometime quarrel betwixt they and the tartar , and Poland ambassadors : who refuse to call he Czar , that be emperor , and to repeat the other part of his long stile . my self when i have audience of the emperor , think good to salute he only with thus much vz . emperor of all Russia , great duke of Volodomer , Moscow and Novogrod , king of Cazan , king of astracan . the rest i omit of purpose , because i know they glory , to have their stile appear to be of a large volume than the queen of England . but this be take in so ill part , that the chancellor ( who then attend the emperor , with the rest of the nobility ) with a loud 376 chafe voice , call still upon i to say out the rest . whereto i answer , that the emperor stile be very long , and can not so well be remember by stranger , that i have repeat so much of it , as may show that i give honour to the rest etc but all will not serve till i command my interpreter to say it all out . their force for the war , with the chief officer and their salary . the soldier of Russia be call Sinaboyarskey , or the son of gentleman : because they be all of that degree , by virtue of their military profession . for every soldier in Russia be a gentleman , and none be gentleman , but only the soldier , that take it by descent from their ancestor : so that the son of a gentleman ( which be bear a soldier ) be ever a gentleman , and a soldier withal , and profess nothing else but military ^ „ 7 ^^ matter . when they be of year able to bear arm , they come to the office of roserade or great constable , and there present themselves : who enter their name , and allot they certain land to maintain their charge , for the most part the same that their father enjoy . for the land assign to maintain the army , be ever certain , annex to this office without improve , or detract one foot . but that if the emperor have sufficient in wage , the room be full so far as the land do extend already , they be many time defer , and have nothing allow they , except some one portion of the land be divide into two . the whole number of his soldier in continual pay , be this . first he have his Dworaney , that be , pensioner , or guard of his person , to the number of 15000 horseman , with their captain and other officer , that be always in a degree readiness . horseman . of these 15000 horseman , there be three sort or 1 • Praetoriani degree , which differ as well in estimation as in wage , or suc ^ as one degree from another . the first sort of they be call " e ^ ennfer - dworaney Bulshey , or the company of head pensioner , son 15000 . 377 two other troop to the number of 65000 . that have some a hundred , some fourscore rubble a year , and none under 70 . the second sort be call Seredney Dworaney , or the middle rank of pensioner . Theise have sixty or fifty rubble by the year , none under forty . the three and low sort , be the Dyta Boiarskey , that be , the low pensioner . their salary be thirty rubble a year for he that have most , some have but 25 , some 20 , none under 12 . whereof the half part be pay they at the Moscow , the other half in the field by the general , when they have any war , and be employ in service . when they receive their whole pay , it amount to 55000 rubble by the year . and this be their wage , beside land allot to every one of they , both to the great and the less , accord to their degree . whereof he that have least , have to yield he twenty rubble or mark by the year . beside these 15000 horseman , that be of better choice ( as be the emperor own guard when himself go to the war , not unlike the roman soldier call Prsetoriani ) be a hundred and ten man of speciali account for their nobility , and trust , which be choose by the emperor , and have their name register , that find among they for the emperor war , to the number of 65000 . horseman , with all necessary meet for the war after the ruff manner . to this end they have yearly allowance make by the emperor for themselves , and their company , to the sum of 40000 rubble . and these 65000 be to repair to the field every year on the border towards the Crim Tartar ( except they be