the charge , or onset . they have drum beside of a huge bigness , which they carry with they upon a board lay on four horse , that be spar together with chain , every drum have eight striker , or drummer , beside trumpet and shaum , which they sound after a wild manner , much different from we . when they give any charge , or make any invasion , they make a great hallow or shout altogether , as loud as they can , which with the sound of their trumpet , shaum , and drum , make a confuse and horrible noise . so they set on first discharge their arrow , then deal with their sword , which they use in a bravery to shake , and brandish over their head , before they come to stroke . their footman ( because otherwise they want order in lead ) be common place in some ambush or place of advantage , where they may most annoy the enemy , with least hurt to themselves . if it be a set battle , or if any great invasion be make upon the ruff border by the tartar , they be set within you run or move castle ( call Beza , or Gulaygorod ) which be carry about with they by the Voiavoda gulavoy ( or the walk general ) who i speak of before . This walk or move castle be so frame , that it may be set up in length ( as occasion do require ) the space of one , two , three , four , five , six , or seven mile : for so long it will reach . it be nothing else but a double wall of wood to defend they on both side behind and before , with a space of three yard or thereabouts , betwixt the two side : so that they may stand within it , and have room enough to charge and discharge their piece , and to use their other weapon . it be close at both end , and make with loop hole on either side , to lay out the nose of their piece , or to push forth any other weapon . it be carry with the army wheresoever it go , be take into piece , and so lay on cart spar together , and draw by horse that be not 384 see , by reason that they be cover with their carriage as with a shelf or penthouse . when if ' is bring to the place where it be to be use ( which be devise and choose out before by the walk Voiavod ) it be plant so much as the present use require , sometime a mile long , sometime two , sometime three or moor : which be soon do without the help of any carpenter , or instrument : because the timber be so frame to clasp together one piece within another : as be easy understood by those that know the manner of the ruff building . in this castle stand their shot well fence for advantage , special against the tartar , that bring no ordinance , nor other weapon into the field with he , save his sword , and bow , and arrow . they have also within it diverse field piece , which they use as occasion do require . of piece for the field they carry no great store , when they war against the tartar : but when they deal with the polonian ( of who force they make more account ) they go better furnish with all kind of munition , and other necessary provision . it be think that no prince of Christendom have better store of munition , than the ruff emperor . and it may partly appear by the artillery house at Moscow , where be of all sort of great ordinance , all brass piece , very fair , to a exceed great number . the Russe soldier be think to be better at his defence within some castle or town , than he be abroad at a set pitch field . which be ever note in the practice of his war , and namely at the siege of Vobsco , about eight year since : where he repulse the polonian king Stepan Batore , with his whole army of iooooo man , and force he in the end to give over his siege , with the loss of many of his best captain and soldier . but in a set field the ruff be note to have ever the worse of the polonian and Sweden . if any behave himself more valiant than the rest , in 385 2 b 1580 . reward for valour . or do any special piece of service , the emperor send he a piece of gold , stamp with the image of saint George on horseback . which they hang on their sleeve , and set in their cap . and this be account the great honour they can receive , for any service they do . of their colony , and maintain of their conquest , or purchase by force . the Russe emperor of late year have very much enlarge their dominion , and territory . their first conquest after the dukedom of Moscow , ( for before that time they be but duke of Volodomer , as before be say ) be the city , and dukedom of Novogrod on you west , and northwest side : which be no small enlargement of their dominion , and strengthen to they for the win of the rest . this be do by Ivan great grandfather to Theodor now emperor , about the year 1480 . the same begin likewise to encroach upon the country of Lituania and Livonia , but the conquest only intend , and attempt by he , upon some part of those country , be pursue and perform by his son Basileus , who first win the city and dukedom of Plesko , afterward the city and dukedom of Smolensco , and many other fair town , with a large territory belong unto they , about the year 1514 . Theise victory against the lettoe or lituanians , in the time of Alexander their duke , he achieve rather by advantage of civil dissension , and treason among themselves , then by any great policy , or force of his own . but all this be lose