both in apparel and armour . when they be to pass over a river with their army , they tie three or four horse together , and take long pole or piece of wood , bound they fast to the tail of their horse : so sit on the pole they drive their horse over . at handy stroke ( when they join battle ) they be account far better man than the ruff people , fierce by nature , but more hardy and bloody by continual practice of war : as man know no art of peace , nor any civil practice . yet their subtlety be more than may seem to agree with their barbarous condition . by reason they be practise to invade continual , and to rob their neighbour that border about they , they be very pregnant , and ready witted to devise stratagem upon the sudden for their better advantage . as in their war against Beala the four , king of Hungary , who they invade with 500000 . man , and obtain against he a great victory . where , among other , have slay his chancellor call Nicholas Schinick , they find about he the king privy seal . whereupon they devise present to counterfeit letter in the king name , to the city and town next about the place , where the field be fight : with charge that in no case they shall convey themselves , and their good out of their dwelling , where they may abide safe without all fear of danger , and not leave the country desolate to the possession of so vile and barbarous a enemy , as be the tartar nation , term themselves in all reproachful manner . for notwithstanding he have lose his carriage , with some few straggler that have march disorderly , yet he doubt not but to recover that loss , with the access of a notable victory , if the savage tartar dare 392 abide he in the field . to this purpose have write their letter in the polish character , by certain young man who they take in the field , and sign they with the king seal , they dispatch they forth to all the quarter of Hungaria , that lie near about the place . whereupon the ungarians that be now fly away with their good , wife , and child , upon the rumour of the king overthrow , take comfort of these counterfeit letter , stay at home . and so be make a prey , be surprise on the sudden by this huge number of these Tartar , that have compass they about before they be aware . when they besiege a town or fort , they offer much parley , and send many flatter message to persuade a surrendry : promise all thing that the inhabitant will require : but be once possess of the place , they use all manner of hostility , and cruelty . this they do upon a rule they have , vz . that justice be to be practise but towards their own . they encounter not light , but they have some ambush , whereunto ( have once show themselves , and make some short conflict ) they retire as repulse for fear , and so draw the enemy into it if they can . but the Russe be well acquaint with their practice be more wary of they . when they come a rove with some small number , they set on horseback counterfeit shape of man , that their number may seem great . when they make any onset , their manner be to make a great shout , cry all out together olla billa , olla billa , God help we , God help we . they contemn death so much , as that they choose rather to die , than to yield to their enemy , and be see when they be slay to bite the very weapon , when they be past strike or help of themselves . wherein appear how different the tartar be in his desperate courage from the ruff and Turk . for the ruff soldier , if he begin once to retire , put all his safety in his speedy flight . and if once he be take by his enemy , he neither defend 393 [ i . 488 . i himself , nor intreat for his life , as reckon straight to die . the Turk common , when he be past hope of escape , fall to intreaty , and cast away his weapon , offer both his hand , and hold they , as it be to be tie : hope to save his life , by offer himself bondslave . the chief booty the Tartar seek for in all their war be to get store of captive , special young boy , and girl , who they sell to the Turk , or other their neighbour . to this purpose they take with they great basket make like baker pannier to carry they tender , and if any of they happen to tire , or to be sick by the way , they dash he against the ground , or some tree , and so leave he dead . the soldier be not trouble with keep the captive and the other booty , for hinder the execution of their war , but they have certain band that intend nothing else , appoint of purpose to receive and keep the captive and the other prey . the Russe borderer ( be use to their invasion light every year in the summer ) keep few other cattle on the border part , save swine only which the tartar will not touch , nor drive away with he : for that he be of the turkish religion , and will eat no swine flesh . of Christ our saviour they confess as much as do the Turk in his Alcoran , viz . that he come of the angel Gabriel and the virgin marie , that he be a great prophet , and shall be the judge of the world at the last day . in other matter likewise , they be much order after the manner and direction of the Turk : have feel the turkish force when he win from they Azov and Caffa , with some other town about the euxine or black sea , that be before tributary to the Crim tartar . so that now