the description of the country of Russia , with the breadth , length , and name of the shire . he country of Russia be sometime call Sarmatia . it change the name ( as some do suppose ) for that it be part into diverse small , and yet absolute government , not depend , nor be subject the one to the other . for Russe in that tongue do signify as much as to part , or divide . the ruff report that four brethren , trubor , rurico , Sinees , and Varivus divide among they the north part of the country . likewise that the south part be possess by 4 . other , Kio , Scieko , Choranus , and their sister Libeda : each call his territory after his own name . of this partition it be call Russia , about the year from Christ 860 . as for the conjecture which i find in some cosmographer , that the ruff nation borrow the name of the people call Roxellani , and be the very same nation with they , it be without all good probability , both in respect of the 357 Strabo in his etymologic of the word ( which be very far fetch ) and especial for the seat and dwell of that people , which be betwixt the two river of Tanais and Boristhenes , ( as Strabo report ) quite another way from the country of Russia . when it bear the name of Sarmatia , it be divide into two chief part : the white and the black . the white Sarmatia be all that part that lie towards the north , and on the side of Liefland : as the province now call Dwina , Vagha , ustiug , Vologda , cargapolia , novo - grodia , etc whereof Novogrod velica be the Metropolite or chief city . Black Sarmatia be all that country that lie southward towards the Euxin or black sea : as the dukedom of volodemer , of Moscow , rezan , etc some have think that the name of Sarmatia be first take Gen . 10 . from one sarmate , who Moses and Josephus call 1 Asarmathes son to Joktan , and nephew to Heber , of ' the posterity of Sem but this seem to be nothing but a conjecture take out of the likeness of the name Asarmathes . for the dwell of all joktans posterity be describe by Moses to have be betwixt Mescha or Masius ( a hill of the Ammonite ) and sephace , near to u - + 75 - ] the river Euphrates : which make it very unlikely that Asarmathes shall plant any colony so far off in you ^ rus ^ ia ^ north and northwest country . it be bound northward ’ by the lap and the north ocean . on the southside by the Tartar call crimme . eastward they have the Nagaian tartar , that possess all the country on the east side of Volga towards the caspian sea . on the west and Southwest border lie Lituania , Livonia and Polonia . the shire oj Russia . the whole country be now reduce under the government of one , contain these chief province or shire . volodemer , ( which bear the first place in the emperor stile , because their house come of the duke of that country ) Moscow , Nisnovogrod , Plesko , smolensko , Novogrod velica ( or novgorod of the low country ) rostove , yaruslave , Bealozera , rezan , Duyna , carga - 358 polia , Meschora , Vagha , Ustuga , ghaletsa . these be the natural shire pertain to Russia , but far great and large than the shire of England , though not so well people . the other country or province which the province the ruff emperor have get perforce add of late y ^ nquest to their other dominion , be these which follow , twerra , Youghoria , Permia , Vadska , Boulghoria , Chernigo , Oudoria , Obdoria , Condora , with a great part of Siberia : where the people though they be not natural russes , yet obey the emperor of Russia , and be rule by the law of his country , pay custom and tax , as his own people do . beside these he have under he the kingdom of Cazan and astracan , get by conquest not long since . as for all his possession in Lituania ( to the number of 30 . great town and more , ) with narve and dorp in Livonia , they be quite go , be surprise of late year by the king of Poland and Sweden . Theise shire and province be reduce all into four jurisdiction , which they call chetfyrd ( that be ) tetrarchy , or fourthpart . the whole country be of great length and breadth . the breadth from the north to the south ( if you measure from Cola country to astracan which bend somewhat eastward ) it reach in length about 4260 . verse , or mile . notwithstanding the emperor of Russia have more territory northward , far beyond Cola unto the river of Tromschua , that run a hundred verse , wellnigh Pechinga . beyond Pechinga , near to Wardhouse , but not entire nor clear limit , by reason of the king of Sweden and Denmark , that have diverse town there , aswell as the ruff , plot together the one with the other : every one of they claim the whole of those north part as his own right . the breadth ( if you go from that part of his territory that lie far westward on the narve side , to the part of Siberia eastward , where the emperor have his garrison ) be 4400 . verse or thereabouts . A verse ( by their reckon ) be a 1000 pase , yet less by one quarter then a english mile . if the 359 whole dominion of the ruff emperor be all habitable , and people in all place , as it be in some , he will either hardly hold it all within one regiment , or be over mighty for all his neighbour prince . of the soil and climate . the soil of the country for the most part be of a sleight sandy mould , yet very much different one place from another , for the yield of such thing as