the emperor of the crim for the most part be choose one of the nobility who the Turk do commend : whereby it be bring now to pass , that the Crim tartar give to the Turk the ten part of the spoil which he get in his war against the Christians . 394 herein they differ from the turkish religion , for that they have certain idol puppet make of silk , or like stuff , of the fashion of a man , which they fasten to the door of their walk house , to be as januss or keeper of their house . and these idol be make not by all , but by certain religious woman which they have among they for that and like use . they have beside the image of their king or great can , of a huge bigness , which they erect at every stage when the army march : and this every one must bend and bow unto as he pass by it , be he tartar or stranger . they be much give to witchcraft , and ominous conjecture upon every accident which they hear or see . in make of manage they have no regard of alliance or consanguinity . only with his mother , sister , and daughter a man may not marry , and though he take the woman into his house , and accompany with she , yet he account she not for , his wife till he have a child by she . than he begin to take a dowry of her friend of horse , sheep , kine , etc if she be barren after a certain time , he turn she home again . under the emperor they have certain duke , the tartar who they call morsei or divoymorsei , that rule nobiluie . over a certain number of 10000 20000 or 40000 . a piece , which they call hoard . when the emperor have any use of they to serve in his war , they be bind to come , and to bring with they their soldier to a certain number , every man with his two horse at the least , the one to ride on , the other to kill , when it come to his turn to have his horse eat . for 7 ^ Tartar their chief vitaile be horse flesh , which they eat without diet . bread , or any other thing with it . so that if a tartar be take by a ruff , he shall be sure light to find a horse - legge , or some other part of he at his saddle bow . this last year when i be at the Moscow , come in i ; 88 - one Kiriach Morsey , nephew to the emperor of the crim that now be ( who father be emperor before ) 395 accompany with 300 . Tartars , and his two wife , whereof one be his brother widow . where be entertain in very good sort after the ruff manner , he have send unto his lodging for his welcome , to be make ready for his supper and his company , two very large and fat horse , ready flay in a sled . they prefer it before other flesh , because the meat be strong ( as they say ) then beef , mutton , and such like . and yet ( which be marveile ) though they serve all as horseman in the war , and eat all of horse flesh , there be bring yearly to the Moscow to be exchange for other commodity 30 . or 40 . thousand tartar horse , which they call Cones . they keep also great herd of cow , and flock of black sheep , rather for the skin and milk ( which they carry with they in great bottle ) then for the use of the flesh , though sometime they eat of it . some use they have of rise , fig , and other fruit . they drink milk or warm blood , and for the most part card they both together . they use sometime as they travel by the way , to let their horse blood in a vain , and to drink it warm , as it come from his body . town they plant none , nor other stand building , but have walk house , which the latins call Veii , build upon wheel like a shepherd cottage . Theise they draw with they whithersoever they go , drive their cattle with they . and when they come to their stage , or stand place , they plant their cart house very orderly in a rank : and so make the form of street , and of a large town . and this be the manner of the emperor himself , who have no other seat of empire but a Agora , or town of wood , that move with he whithersoever he go . as for the fix and stand building use in other country , they say they be unwholesome and unpleasant . they begin to move their house and cattle in the spring time from the south part of their country towards the north part . and so drive on till they 396 have graze all up to the far part northward , they return back again towards their south country ( where they continue all the winter ) by io . or 12 . mile a stage : in the mean while the grass be spring up again , to serve for their cattle as they return from the border of the Shalcan towards the caspian sea , to the ruff frontier , they have a goodly country , special on the south and southeast part , but lose for lack of tillage . of money they have no use at all , and therefore prefer brass and steel before other metal , special bullate , which they use for sword , knife , and other necessary . as for gold and silver they neglect it of very purpose , ( as they do all tillage of their ground ) to be more free for their wander kind of life , and to keep their country less subject to invasion . which give they great advantage against all their neighbour , ever invade and never be invade . such as have take upon they to invade their country ( as of oldetime Cyrus