grow out of the earth . the country northwards towards the part of saint Nicholas and Cola , and Northeast towards Siberia , be all very barren , and full of desert wood by reason of the climate , and extremity of the cold in winter time . so likewise along the river Volgha betwixt the country of Cazan , and astracan : where ( notwithstanding the soil be very fruitful ! ) it be all unhabit , save that upon the river Volgha on the Westside , the emperor have some few castle with garrison in they . This happen by mean of the Crimme tartar , that will neither himself plant town to dwell there , ( live a wild and vagrant life ) nor suffer the ruff ( that be far off with the strength of his country ) to people those part . from Vologda ( which lie almost 1700 . verse from the port of saint Nicholas ) down towards Moscow , and so towards the south part that border upon the Crimme , ( which contain the like space of 1700 . verse or there about ) be a very fruitful and pleasant country , yield pasture , and corn , with wood and water in very great plenty . the like be betwixt rezan ( that lie southeast from Moscow ) to Novogrod and Vobsko , that reach far towards the northwest . so betwixt Moscow , and smolensko ( that lie southwest towards Lituania ) be a very fruitful and pleasant soil . the whole country differ very much from it self , by reason of the year : so that a man will marveile to see the great alteration and difference betwixt the winter , and the summer Russia . the whole 360 country in the winter lie under snow , which fall continual , and be sometime of a yard or two thick , but great towards the north . the river and other water be all freeze up a yard or more thick , how swift or broad so ever they be . and this continue common five month , viz . from the begin of November till towards the end of march , what time the snow begin to melt . so that it will breed a ° f frost in a man to look abroad at that time , and see russta - the winter face of that country . the sharpness of the air you may judge of by this : for that water drop down or cast up into the air congeal into ice before it come to the ground . in the extremity of winter , if you hold a pewter dish or pot in your hand , or any other mettle ( except in some chamber where their warm stove be ) your finger will freeze fast unto it , and draw off the skin at the part . when you pass out of a warm room into a cold , you shall sensible feel your breath to wax stark , and even stifle with the cold , as you draw it in and out . diverse not only that travel ! abroad , but in the very market , and street of their town , be mortal pinch and kill withal : so that you shall see many drop down in the street ; many traveller bring into the town sit dead and stifle in their sled . Divers lose their nose , the tip of their ear , and the ball of their cheek , their toe , foot , etc many time ( when the winter be very hard and extreme ) the bear and wolf issue by troop out of the wood drive by hunger , and enter the village , tear and raven all they can find : so that the inhabitant be fain to fly for safeguard of their life . and yet in the summer time you shall see such a new hue and face of a country , the wood ( for the most part which be all of fir and birch ) so fresh and so sweet , the pasture and meadow so green and well grow , ( and that upon the sudden ) such variety of flower , such noise of bird ( special of nightingale , that seem to be more loud and of a more 361 variable note then in other country ) that a man shall not light travel in a more pleasant country . and this fresh and speedy growth of the spring there seem to proceed from the benefit of the snow : which all the winter time be spread over the whole country as a white robe , and keep it warm from the rigour of the frost , in the spring time ( when the sun wax warm , and dissolve it into water ) do so thorough drench and soak the ground , that be somewhat of a sleight and sandy mould , and then shine so hot upon it again , that it draw the herb and plant forth in great plenty and variety , in a very short time . as the winter exceed in cold , so the summer incline to over much heat , special in the month of June , July and August , be much warm than the summer air in England . the country throughout be very well water with spring , river , and ozera , or lake . wherein the providence of God be to be note , for that much of the country be so far inland , as that some part lie a thousand mile and more every way from any sea , yet it be serve with fair river , and that in very great number , that empty themselves one into another , , run all into the sea their lake be many and large , , some of 60 . 80 . 100 and 200 . mile long , with breadth proportionate . the chief river be these , first , Volgha , that have his head or spring at the root of a aldertree , about 200 . verse above yaruslave , and grow so big by the increase of other river by that time it come thither , that it be broad a english mile and more , and so run into the caspian sea , about 2800 . verse or mile of length . the next be Boristhenes ( now call neper ) that divide the