master Horsey have receive the letter and request of the emperor , provide for his journey over land , . and depart from Moscow the lift day of September , thence unto otver , to torshook , to great Novogrod , to Vobsky , and thence to nyhouse in Livonia , to Wenden , and so to Riga : ( where he be beset , and bring forthwith before a Cardinali call ragevil , but yet suffer to pass in the end : ) from thence to Mito , to golden , and Libou in Curland , to memel , to konings - burgh in Prussia , to Elbing , to Danzig , to Stetine in Pomerland , to Rostock , to Lubeck , to Hamborough , to Breme , to Emden , and by sea to London . be arrive at her majesty royal court , and have deliver the emperor letter with good favour , and gracious acceptance , he be forthwith again command to repass into Russia , with other letter from her majesty to the emperor , and prince Boris Pheodorowich , answer the emperor letter , and withal request the favour and friendship , which his father have yield to the english merchant : and hereunto be he earnest also solicit by the merchant of London themselves of that company , to deal in their behalf . be thus dispatch from London by sea , he arrive in Moscow , the 20 . of April 1586 . and be very honorable welcome . and 345 m . horsei voyage from Moscow to England overland . 1586 . for you merchant behoof , obtain all his request , be therein special favour by you noble prince Boris pheodorowich , who always affect m . Horsey with speciali like . and have obtain privilege for the merchant , he be recommend from the emperor again , to the queen of England his mistress , by who the prince Boris , in token of his honourable and good opinion of the queen majesty , send her highness a royal present of sable , Luzarns , cloth of gold and other rich thing . so that the company of english merchant , next to their thankfulness to her majesty , be to account m . horsei pain their speciali benefit , who obtain for they those privilege , which in twenty year before will not be grant . the manner of m . horsei last dispatch from the emperor , because it be very honourable , i think good to record . he be free allow post horse for he and his servant , victual and all other necessary for his long journey ; at every town that he come unto from Moscow to Vologda , which be by land five hundred mile , he receive the like free and bountiful allowance , at the emperor charge . new victuali and provision be give he upon the river Dwina at every town by the king officer , be one thousand mile in length . when he come to the new castle call Archangel , he be receive of the duke knez Vasili Andrewich isveno - gorodsky by the emperor commission into the castle , , gunner be set in rank after their use , where he be sumptuous feast : from thence he be dispatch with bountiful provision and allowance in the duke boat , with one hundred man to row he , and one hundred gunner in other boat to conduct he , with a gentleman captain of the gunner . come to the road where the english , dutch , and french ship ride , the gunner discharge , and the ship shoot in like manner 46 . piece of their ordinance , and so he be bring ta his lodging at the english house upon rose island . and that which be the full and complete conclusion 346 of the favour of the emperor and Boris Pheodorowich towards m . Horsey , there be the next day send he for his further provision upon the sea by a gentleman and a captain the thing follow . 16 . live ox . 70 . sheep . 600 . hen . 25 . flitche of bacon . 80 . bushel of meal . 600 . loaf of bread . 2000 egg . 10 . goose . 2 . crane . 2 . swan . 65 . gallon of mead . 40 . gallon of aquavitas . 60 . gallon of beer . 3 . young bear . 4 . hawk . store of onion and garlic . 10 . fresh salmon . a wild bear . all these thing be bring he down by a gentleman of the emperor , and another of prince Boris Pheodorowich , and be receive in order by John Frese servant to m . Horsey , together with a honourable present and reward from the prince Boris , send he by m . Francis Cherry a Englishman : which present be a whole very rich piece of cloth of gold , and a fair pair of sable . this gentleman have observe many other rare thing concern those part , which hereafter ( God will ) at moor convenient time and laisure shall come to light .