the description of the region , people , and river , lie north and east from Moscovia : as the way from Moscovia to the river Petzora , and the province Jugaria or Juhra , and from thence to the river Obi . likewise the description of other country and region , even unto the empire of the great can of Cathay , take out of Sigismundus ab Herberstein . he dominion of the prince of Moscovia , reach far towards the east and north , unto the place which we will now describe . as concern which thing , i translate a book y ‘ be present unto i in the moscovite tongue , and have here make a brief rehearsal of the same . i will first therefore describe the journey from Moscovia to Petzora , and so to Jugaria and Obi . from Moscovia to the ci tie of Vologda , be number five hundred verst , one verse contain almost the space of a italian mile . from Vologda to ustiug towards the right hand , descend with the course of the river of Vologda and Suchana with who it join , be count five hundred verstes , where within two verst of the town call Strelze , and hard by the city of ustiug , Suchana join unto lug 405 the dominion of the duke of Moscovia . vdogda . verse . ustiug . lug . So call of his swift and pleasant stream . Pienega . Nicholai . Kulvio . the region by the north sea . Pieza . Piescoia . Rubicho . czircho . Czilma . Petzora . which run from the south : from who mouth unto the spring of the same , be number five hundred verst . but Suchana and lug , after they join together , lose their first name , and make but one river name Dwina , by the which the passage to the city of Colmogro contain five hundred verst , from whence , in the space of six day journey , Dwina enter into the north ocean at six mouth . and the great part of this journey consist by navigation . for by land from Vologda unto Colmogro , pass over the river Uvaga , be a thousand verstes . not far from Colmogro , the river Pienega run from the east on the right hand for the space of seven hundred verst , fall into Dwina . from Dwina by the river Pienega , by the space of two hundred verst , they come to a place call Nicholai , from whence within half a verse ship have passage into the river Kulvio , which have his originali from a lake of the same name toward the north , from who spring be eight day voyage to the mouth of the same , where it enter the ocean . sail by the coast of the right hand of the sea , they pass by the region of Stanuwische , Calunczscho , and apnu : and sail about the promontory or cape of Chorogoski Nosz , Stanuwische , Camenckh , and Tolstickh , they come at length into the river Mezen , and from thence in the space of six day , to a village of the same name , stand in the mouth of the river Pieza , by the which again ascend towards the left hand 8c summer east , they come to the river Piescoia : from whence sail for the space of five verst , they come into two lake , in the which be see two way : whereof one on the right side , go to the river Rubicho , by the which they pass to the river Czircho . other , by a other and short way , bring their ship from the lake direct into Czircho : from whence , except they be hinder by tempest , they come in the space of three week to the river and mouth of Czilma , flow into the great river Petzora , which in that 406 of the north and east region a . d . 1588 . place be two verst in breadth . sail from thence , they come in the space of six day to the town and castle of Pustosero , near unto the which , Petzora Pustosero . enter into the north ocean at six mouth . the inhabitant of this place , be man of simple wit : they receive the faith of Christ , and be baptise in the year m . d . xviii . from the mouth of Czilma unto the mouth of the river Ussa , go by Petzora , be one month voyage . Ussa . Ussa have his spring in the mountain * Poyas Semnoi , * Cingulus be on the left hand towards the summer east , and mun ^- springeth out of a great stone of the same mountain , call come Bolschoi . from the spring of Ussa to the mouth of the same , be number more than a thousand verst . Furthermore , Petzora run from this south winter part , from whence ascend from the mouth of Ussa , unto the mouth of the river Stzuchogora , be three week voyage . they that describe this voyage say that they rest between the mouth of the river of stzuchogora and Potzscheriema , and stzuchogora . leave their victual there which they bring with they Potzscheriema from Russia . beyond the river of Petzora and Stzuchogora towards the mountain Camenipoias , and Camenipoias . the sea with the hand thereabouts , and the castle of Pustosero , be diverse and innumerable nation , which by one common name be call samoged ( that be ) Samoged . such as eat themselves . they have great increase of an fowl , bird , and diverse kind of beast : as sable , and easts - marternes , Bevers , otter , hermelines , squirrel : and in the ocean the beast call a mors : also Vesse , white bear , wolf , hare , Equiwodvani , great whale , and a fish call Semfi , with diverse other . the people of these nation come not to Moscovia : for they be wild , and flee the company and society wild people . of other man . from the mouth of Stzuchogora , sail up the river unto Poiassa , Artawische , Cameni , and Poiassa Poiassa . the great , be three week voyage . Furthermore , the 407 sibut . Lepin . Sossa . Obi . kitaisko . uvogolici . Irtische . Jerom . tumen . Grustina . Kitai . black man withoutspeech . serponow . Lucomoria . man that perelp die and revive . a strange trade of merchandise . ascend to the mount come , be three day journey : from the which descend they come to the river Artawischa , and from thence to the river sibut , from whence they pass to the castle of Lepin , and from Lepin to the river Sossa . the people that inhabit the region by this river , be call uvogolici . leave Sossa on the right hand , they come to the great river Obi , that spring out of the lake Kitaisko , the which , with all the haste they can make , they can scarce pass over in one day , the river be of such breadth that it reach fourscore verst . the people also that dwell about the river , be call uvogolici and Ugritzschi . from the castle of Obea , ascend by the river of Oby , unto the river Irtische , into the which Sossa enter , be three month journey . in these place be two castle name Jerom and Tumen , keep by certain lord call Knesi Juhorski , be tributary to the great duke of Moscovia , as they say . here be diverse kind of beast and fur . from the mouth of the river Irtische to the castle of Grustina , be two month journey : from whence to the lake Kitai , by the river Oby ( which i say to have his spring in this lake ) be more than three month journey . from this lake come many black man , lack the use of common speech . they bring with they diverse ware , and especial pearl and precious stone , which they sell to the people call Grustintzi and Serponowtzi . Theise have their name of the castle serponow , situate in the mountain of Lucomoria , beyond the river Obi . they say that to the man of Lucomoria chance a marvelous thing and incredible : for they affirm , that they die yearly at the xxvii . day of November , be the feast of saint George among the moscovite : and that at the next spring about the xxiii . day of April , they revive again as doe frog . with these also , the