to the queen most excellent majestic from the lord Boris Pheodorovich Godonova . y the grace of God great lord and great duke Theodore Ivanovich governor of Russia , Volodimer , Moscow , and novgorod , king of Cazan and astracan , lord of Vobsko , and great duke of Smolensco , otver , ughori , perm , Viatsky , Bulgary , and other region , lord and great duke of novgorod in the low country , of Chernigo , of rezan , polotsko , Rostove , jeroslave , Bealozera , and of Lifland , of Udorsky , Obdorsky , Condinsky , and all the country of Sibery , and commander of all the north part , and lord over the country of Iversky , and king of Grusinsky , and of the country of Kabardinsky , Cherchasky , and duke of Igorsky , lord and ruler of many country moor , etc most resplendent queen Elizabeth of England , France , and Ireland , etc his princely majesty servant , lord and master of his horse , and high steward of his house , and precedent of the territory of Cazan and astracan , Boris Pheodorovich Godonova , unto your most excellent majesty , great lady queen Elizabeth , send my humble commendation . it have please your majesty to write unto i your gracious and princely letter by your servant Thomas Lind : which letter i receive with all humbleness . during the time of the abode of your messenger Thomas Lind here in the Moscow , it please God of his mercifulness , and our lady the mother of God , and holy saint , by the prayer of our lord and king his majesty Theodore Ivanovich 434 letter from Boris PHEODOROWICH a . d . 1592 - ove all Russia governor , the right believer and lover of Christ , to send our queen and gracious lady Irene Tfie Empresu a young princess , to the great joy and comfort of our a kingdom , name pheodocine . wherefore we give all honour and glory to the almighty God unspeakable , who gift have be manifold with mercy unto we : for which all we christian laud and praise God . after all this your servant be occasion to stay until the come of your merchant from the sea port . touch the letter which you have receive from your love brother our lord and master by your ambassador , therein you perceive sufficient my good meaning , in travail for the continuance of amity and friendship betwixt you mighty great prince , in the which i will continue my endeavour . also your merchant i have take into my protection for to defend they for the love i bear to your majesty . as heretofore i have do it willing , and with great care of their good , so i mean to continue so far as God will give i leave : to the end that brotherly love be hold between you prince without disturbance . as 1 have be to your merchant in time past , so now by the permission and commandment of our lord and master , i will be their defendor in all cause : and will cause all our authorise people to favour they and to defend they , and to give they free liberty to buy and sell at their pleasure . the merchant do not certify your princely majesty of all our friendship and favour show unto they from time to time . and whereas your majesty have now write to our lord and master for the debt which your merchant ought to have of William Turnbull late disease , i have peruse your majesty letter , whereby i be request to be a mean for the recovery and obtain of their say debt , i have move it to our lord and king his majesty , that order may be give therein : and that his kinsman Rainold kitchen with three person more may be send over together with the say turnebulle 435 stuff and other thing , as bill , book and write . all which shall be deliver to your merchant agent and his fellow , and in money 600 rubble of the say turnebulle . and touch your merchant , i will have a great care over they , and protect they , whereby they shall suffer no damage in their trade : and all kind of traffic in merchandise shall be at their liberty . write in our lord and king majesty royal city of Moscow , in the year from the begin of the world 7101 , in the month of Januarie .