take any custom of the aforesaid merchant , howsoever it may be name . also whensoever the say english merchant or any of their factor shall | be desirous to hire carrier to carry their ware to any place of our dominion or city , it shall | be at their choice and pleasure to hire they the best they can , and where they will , either water man to row , or vessel . also when any of the say merchant themselves , or any of they be desirous to travel into any part of our dominion , or into any other kingdom , or into their own kingdom , if any of our treasure be deliver to they , they to take it with they , and to sei it in bartar or otherwise for such ware as be most requisite and necessary to be bring into our kingdom and to be deliver into our treasury . you , our nobili tie , general and all other in authority suffer they to pass through all our city , town and country without take any custom of they . and when the say merchant have do their traffic in any place and come to the Moscow , they shall make it know at their arrival at the house of chancery and secretariship to Vasili Shalkan . and further when there come any english merchant with their ship or vessel by sea , that by mishap shall | be cast away upon any of our shore or cost , we will and command you to aid and help they , and to seek for their good so perish by any casualty , and to be 442 restore again to the say english merchant or their assign without any prolong or detain . as also if any of the aforesaid merchant good be find in any part of our coast or stream and they not present themselves , let the say good be take and lay up in safety in some place or other , and be deliver to the aforesaid merchant or their factor under penalty of our displeasure . furthermore we king , lord , and great duke of all Russia , of our gracious goodness give unto the english merchant and their company , their house in the city of Moscow lie hard by the church of S . mark behind the market place : which they shall keep and remain therein after their old accustom use . provide always that they shall keep one ruff porter or one of their own people , and may keep any other ruff servant at their discretion . also their house in sundry place , as at jeraslave , Vologhda , Colmogro , and at saint Michael Archangel , all these house they shall keep and use at their own pleasure , accord to our former letter patent without pay any duty , rent , or custom . nor you the commonalty of the say town shall take any thing of they or they for any duty that shall belong to you , especial of the house aforesaid : but the say english merchant shall enjoy they peaceable for themselves and their family , but shall not suffer any other stranger russes or other to use the aforesaid house : also you shall suffer they to lay their ware and commodity in their warehouse , and to sell their commodity to who they please without let or hindrance , by virtue of this our gracious letter . their housekeeper be a ruff shall not undertake to meddle , or sell any of their ware without they themselves be present , nor to buy any thing for they . also it shall | be lawful for the say merchant when they shall arrive at their port , to lade and unlade their merchandise as in time past they have do at their pleasure . and when they lade their ship with Russe 443 commodity or unlade they , it shall | be lawful for they to hire any of our subject to help they for the present time , and for they to carry their good to and fro with their own vessel to saint Michael Archangel , or elsewhere . also we command you our authorise people at the sea side as well customer as other to take of the foresay merchant a note , or remembrance , what good they bring in and ship out : whereby it may be know what good come in and go out . but in no wise shall you open or unpack any of their ware or merchandise . in like manner when as they ship or send away any of their country commodity from saint Michael Archangel to any other place , or to our royal city of Moscow you shall not hinder nor let they any manner of wise for the ship of their merchandise in or out , by virtue of these our gracious letter of privilege give they . and whensoever any of the say english merchant have any occasion to send over land out of our dominion into their own country any of their servant or factor , by virtue of this our gracious letter we command you to give they their passport out of the office of our secretariship . and whensoever any of our subject have any thing to do with any of the foresay merchant by way of contention : or that they be damnify or hinder by any of our subject : than we appoint and ordain our Chanceller and Secretary Vasili Shalcan to hear their cause , and final to determine on both side accord to equity and justice : and that he shall search the truth between both party . and when the truth can be prove or find out , then to cast lot by order of the foresay judge , and he to who the lot shall fall to take his oath . furthermore whensoever any of the english merchant or their factor shall come into any part of our dominion or city , and shall | be wrong any kind of way in trade , or otherwise by any abuse , or have 444 any occasion of contention with any by way of trade in merchandise or otherways : we straight charge and command you our governor , and authorise subject within all our realm and territory of the same , to minister justice unto the aforesaid merchant , or to their deputy , and to search the truth of the contention : and for want of sufficient proof cast lot who shall take his oath for the more ready trial of the cause : and in no wise to take any fee or duty of the aforesaid english merchant for the say judgement in law . we will and command all this to be observe and keep in all part of our dominion by all our subject and authorise people , by virtue of these our royal letter patent : and the say letter not to be diminish in any part or parsell thereof , by any person howsoever they be name . and whosoever shall withstand and not regard these our gracious letter shall | be in our high displeasure , and shall incur the loss of his life . this our gracious letter be give in our kingdom and royal city of Moscow , in the year from the begin of the world 7104 . in the month of May . subscribe by the emperor chancellor and secretary Vasili Shalcan .