a letter from the lord Boris Pheodorowich to the right honourable lord William Burghley , lord high treasurer of England . y the grace of God great lord , king , and great duke Theodor Ivanovich , governor of Russia , Volodimer , Moscow , and novgorod , king of Cazan and astracan , lord of Vobsco , and great duke of Smolensco , otver , Ughory , perm , Viatsky , Bulgary , and other region , lord and great duke of all novgorod in the low country , of Chernigo , of Liffeland , of Udorsky , Obdorsky , Condinsky , and all the country of Sibery , and commander of all the north part , and lord over the country of Iversky , and king of Grusinsky , and of the country of kabardinsky , Cherchasky , and duke of Igorsky , lord and ruler of many country moor etc his princely majesty servant , lord and master of his horse , and high steward of his house , precedent of the territory of Cazan and astracan , Boris Pheodorowich Godonova , to the most honourable counsellor of the most resplendent mighty great lady Elizabeth queen of England , France , and Ireland , William Burghley , lord , and knight of the garter , high treasurer of England , send greeting . i perceive by your letter that your merchant last 436 letter from Boris PHEODOROWICH a . d . ship come home in safety , and that you have receive the letter send by they , by the hand of Francis cherry , m - Francis one from our lord and great king of all Russia his majesty , unto your queen most excellent majesty , and one from i to her highness , and one from my self to you : and the content thereof you have cause to be read and well understand at large . and whatsoever be therein write concern Jerome Horsey , you have seek out the ground thereof , and that he be in great displeasure . and her highness have write in her letter concern her majesty merchant , that whereas i have take they into protection , she take it very love and kind , that for her sake they have receive so great kindness . and touch the damage and hindrance which your merchant have sustain by mean of the emperor authorise people and officer , and that they be not permit to traffic at liberty at the sea port in the year 1589 , for the space of three week , it have be against the emperor majesty will and pleasure , as also against i . where you desire and wish that [ i . 5 ° 5 - l between our emperor majesty , and your queen majesty , their love and amity may not be separate at any time , but to continue : and you request i that i shall be good unto the english merchant , and to defend they from all such domage hereafter : your honour love letter i have therein thorough consider : and as i have be heretofore , so i will still continue to be a mean betwixt our lord and king majesty , and your great lady the queen her highness , for the maintain of brotherly love and amity , most joyful and willing , as God know , aswell hereafter as i have be heretofore : pray you to do the like also . my only desire be for your most excellent princess sake , to do all that lie in i for the aid , help and protect of her majesty merchant , by the order and commandment of our lord and king his majesty . 437 and to that end , i have give order to all our authorise people to be careful over they , and to defend they in all cause , and to give they free liberty to traffic at their own will and pleasure . it may be that your merchant do not certify you the truth of all thing , nor make know unto your honour my readiness to protect they : and how my letter and commission be send to all authorise people for they , that they shall aid and assist they accord to the tenor or my letter , to all other that be in authority under the say officer or otherwise . also your honour write of the debar of your merchant at the sea port from their accustom liberty of interchangeable traffic and bartar . touch which complaint search and inquisition have be make , and commandment give , that your queen majesty merchant at the seaside , and in all place where the trade be , do not sustain any damage or hindrance hereafter , but that they shall | be at liberty without any hinder or let , either in the Moscow , the treasurehouse , or else where by any of our authorise people , but absolute to be at free liberty at their own will and pleasure . and also i will continue to be their protector and defendor in all cause , by our lord and king majesty order and commandment : as it shall | be know and certify you by your people resident here in the Moscow . write in our king majesty royal city of Moscow from the begin of the world 7101 . year , in the month of January .