a learned epistle write 1581 . unto the famous cosmographer m . Gerardus Mercator concern the river Pechora , Naramsay , cara reca , the mighty river of ob , the place of yak olgush in Siberia , the great river ardoh , the lake of kittay call of the borderer Paraha , the country of Carrah Colmak , give good light to the discovery of the north - east passage to Cathay , China and the maluca . letter to Gerardus Mercator a . d . 1581 . 451 452 to the famous and renown Gerardus mer - [ i - 511j cator , his reverend and singular friend at Duisburgh in Cliveland , these be deliver . call to remembrance ( most dear friend ) what exceed delight you take at our be together , in read the geographical write of Homer , Strabo , Aristotle , Pliny , Dion , and the rest , i rejoice not a little that i happen upon such a messenger as the bearer of these present , ( who i do especial recom - 453 two ship build upon the river of Dwina for the north - east discovery . mend unto you ) who arrive late here at Arusburg upon the river of Osella . this man experience ( as i be of opinion ) will great avail you to the knowledge of a certain matter which have be by you so vehement desire , and so curious labour for , and concern they which the late cosmographer do hold such variety of opinion : namely , of the discovery of the huge promo ntorie of Tabin , and of the famous and rich country subject unto the emperor of Cathay , and that by the north - east ocean sea . the man be call * Alferius be by birth a Netherlander , who for certain year live captive in the dominion of Russia under two famous man Yacovius and Unekius , by who he be send to Antwerp to procure skilful pilot and mariner , ( by propound liberali reward ) to go unto the two famous personage aforesaid , which two have set a Sweden shipwright on work to build two ship for the same discovery upon the river of Dwina . the passage unto Cathay by the north - east ( as he de - clareth the matter , albeit without art , yet very apt , as you may well perceive , which i request you diligent to consider ) be without doubt very short and easy . this very man himself have travel to the river of ob , both by land , through the country of the samoed , and of Sibier , and also by sea , along the coast of the river Pechora eastward . be encourage by this his experience he be full resolve with himself to conduct a bark lade with , merchandise ( the keel whereof he will not have to draw over much water ) to the bay of saint Nicholas in Russia , be furnish with all thing expedient for such a discovery , and with a new supply of victual at his arrival there , and also to hire into his company certain russes best know unto himself , who can perfect speak the samoeds language , and be acquaint with the river of ob , as have frequent those place year by year . whereupon about the end of may he be determine to sail from the bay of S . Nicholas eastward , by the 454 main of Joughoria , and so to the easterly part of Pechora , and to the island which be call Dolgoia . and island of here also he be purpose to observe the latitude , to Dol & ia . survey and describe the country , to sound the depth of the sea , and to note the distance of place , where , and so oft as occasion shall be offer . and forasmuch as the bay of Pechora be a most convenient place both for harbour and victuali , as well in their go forth as in their return home in regard of ice and tempest , he be determine to bestow a day in sound the flat , and in search out the best entrance for ship : in which place heretofore he find the water to be but five foot deep , howbeit he doubt not but that there be deep channel : and then he intend to proceed on along those coast for the space of three or four league , leave the island call vaigat almost in the middle island of way between Ugoria and Nova Zembla : then also to vaigat . pass by a certain bay between vaigat and ob , trend - baie be southerly into the land of Ugoria , whereinto fall two small river call * Marmesia and Carah , upon the trending which river do inhabit a other barbarous and savage southerly : nation of the samoed . he find many flat in that * or , naram - tract of land , and many cataract or overfal of water , cara yet such as he be able to sail by . when he shall ' come to the river of ob , which river ( as the samoed report ) have seventie mouth , which by reason of the huge breadth thereof contain many and great island , which be inhabit with sundry sort of people , no man scarce can well discover , because he will not spend too much time , he purpose to search three or four at the most of the mouth thereof , those chief which shall be think most commodious by the advice of the inhabitant , of who he mean to have certain with he in his voyage , and mean to employ three or four boat of that country in search of these mouth , as near as possible he can to the shore , which within three day journey of the sea be inhabit , that he may learn where the river be best navigable . if it 455 . the place up - so fall out that he may sail up the river ob against h stream , and mount up to that place which heretofore be itl e accompany with certain of his friend , he pass unto day journey by land through the country of Siberia which be about from you twelve day journey from the sea , where the river ob mouth there - fail into the sea , which place be in the continent near cat yak river ob , and be call yak olgush , borrow his olgish . name from that mighty river which fall into the river ob , then doubtless he will conceive full hope that he have pass the great difficulty : for the people dwell thereabouts report , which be three day sail - ing only from that place beyond the river ob , whereby the breadth thereof may be gather ( which be a rare matter there , because that many row with their boat of leather one day journey only from the shore , have be cast away in tempest , have no skill to guide themselves neither by sun nor star ) that they have see great vessel lade with rich and precious merchandise bring down that great river by black or m . Jenkinson swart people . they call that river * ardoh , which fall ^ bo ^ har ^ * unto kittay , which they call Paraha , where - speak of the upon border that mighty and large nation which they river ardok . call Carrah Colmak , which be none other than the nation of Cathay . there , if need require , he may fit winter and refresh himself and he , and seek all thing which he shall stand in need of : which if it so fall out , he doubt not but in the mean while he shall be much further in search and learn out many thing in that place . howbeit , he hope that he shall reach to Cathaya that very summer , unless he be hinder by great abundance of ice at the mouth of the river of ob , which be sometime more , and sometime less . if it so fall out , he then purpose to return to Pechora , and there to winter : or if he can do so neither , than he mean to return to the river of Dwina , whither he will reach in good time enough , and so the next spring follow to proceed on his voyage . one thing in due place i forget before . 45 $ the people which dwell at that place call yak olgush , affirm that they have hear their forefather say , that they have hear most sweet harmony of bell in the lake of Kitthay , and that they have see therein stately and large building : and when they make mention of the people name Carrah Colmak ( this country be Cathay ) they fetch deep sigh , and hold up their hand , they look up to heaven , signify as it be , and declare the notable glory and magnificence of that nation . i will this Oliver be better see in cosmography , it will great further his experience , which doubtless be very great . most dear friend , i omit many thing , and i wish you shall hear the man himself which promise i faithful that he will visit you in his way at Duisburg , for he desire to confer with you , and doubtless you shall very much further the man . he seem sufficient furnish with money and friend , wherein and in other office of courtesy encage offer he my furtherance if it have please he to have use i . the lord prosper the man desire and forwardness , bless his good beginning , further his proceed , and grant unto he most happy issue . fare you well good sir and my singular friend . from Arusburg upon the river of Ossella , the 20 . of February , 1581 . you whole at commandment , John Balak . master Anthony Jenkinson in a disputation before her majesty with sir Humphrey Gilbert for proof of a passage by the north - east to Cathaya , among other thing allege this : videlicet , that there come a continual stream or currant through mare glacial , of such swiftness as a colmak tell he , that if you cast any thing therein , it will present be carry out of sight towards the west , etc