convenient time and place , i will make far mention , i presume at that very instant to translate it into latin . the prayer be thus . most omnipotent maker and guide of all our world mass , that only search and fadome the bottom of all our heart conceit , and in they see the true original of all our action intend : thou that by thy foresight do true discern , how no malice of revenge , nor quittance of injury , nor desire of bloodshed , nor greediness of lucre have breed the resolution of our now set out army , but a heedful care , and wary watch , that no neglect of foe , nor over - surety of harm may breed either danger to we , or glory to they : these be the ground wherewith thou do inspire the mind , we humble beseech thou with bend knee , prosper the work , and with best forewinde guide the journey , speed the victory , and make the return the advancement of thy glory , the triumph of their fame , and surety to the realm , with the least loss of the english blood . to these devout petition lord give thou thy bless grant . my homely translation be thus . sum praepotens deus , immensae huius totius nostri mundi molis fabricator and rector , qui solus perscrutaris intimos cordis nostri sensus , and ad fundum usque nostrarum cogitationum explorando penetras , ac in eis , 239 quid ver ^ , and ex animo cogitemus , and quae sint actionum nostrarum rationes , ac fundamenta , cognoscis : tu , qui ea , quae in te est , ab omni aeternitate praescientia , vides , quod nec aliqua ulciscendi malitiosa cupiditas , nec injuriarum referendarum , desiderium , nec sanguinis effundendi sitis , nec alicujus lucri , quaestusve aviditus ad istam classem praeparandam , and emittendam nos commoverit : sed potiiis , quod provida quaedam cura , solersque vigilantia huc nos impulerit : ne vel inimicorum nostrorum neglectus , vel status nostri firmitatis nimium secura cogitatio , aut illis gloriam and honorem , aut nobis damnum and periculum pariat : cum , inquam , haec sint nostri , quicquid attentatur , negotii fundamenta : cumque tu hunc nobis animum , mentemque injeceris , ut istud aggrederemur : curvatis genibus a te humillimi petimus , ut velis hoc nostrum incoeptum secundissimi fortunare , totum iter prosperrimis flatibus dirigere , celerem and expeditam victoriam nobis concedere , reditumque talem nostris militibus elargiri , qualis and nomini tuo incrementum gloriae , and illis famae , laudisque triumphum , and regno nostro firmam tranquillitatem possit apportare : idque cum minimus anglorum sanguinis dispendio . his nostris religiosis petitionibus concede , domine , sacrosanctam and annuentem voluntatem tuam . after that we have anchor at Plymmouth that night , as i have say , the three of June very early in the morning , have a reasonable fresh gale of wind , we set sail , and keep our course again , and the nine of the same month come something near to the north cape , in a manner in the same altitude , or not much differ , which be about xliii . degree , and something more , yet bear so , as it be impossible to be descry from the land : there it please the lord to call a select council , which be always do by hang out of a flag of the arm of England , and shoot off of a great warn piece . of this select or privy council , be no more than these : the two lord general , 240 the lord Thomas Howard , the lord warden sir Walter Raleigh , the lord Martiali sir Francis Vere , sir George carry master of the ordinance , sir conier Clifford , and sir Anthony Ashley , clarke of the say counsel . and when it please the lord general to call a common counsel ( as often time they do upon weighty matter best know to their honour ) than they will cause a other kind of flag to be hang out , which be the Redcrosse of S . George , and be very easy to be discern from the other that appertain only to the select counsel , and so often as this flag of saint George be hang out , then come all the master and captain of all the ship , who opinion be to be demand , in such matter as appertain unto this say select counsel : it be present conclude , that our course in sail shall forthwith be alter , and that we shall bear more into the west , for some purpose to they best know . at that very instant many letter of instruction be address and send to every particular master and captain of the ship : what the content of those letter of instruction be it be not as yet know unto any , neither be it hold meet to be inquire or know of any of we . but under the title and superscription of every man particular letter these word be endorse . open not these letter on pain of your life , unless we chance to be scatter by tempest , and in that case open they , and execute the content thereof : but if by mishap you fall into your enemy hand , then in any case cast they into the sea , seal as they be . it shall seem that these letter do contain in they the principali place and meaning of this intend action , which be hitherto by their deep foresight keep so secret , as no man to my knowledge either do , or can so much as suspect it , more than themselves , who have the only manage thereof . a conceit in my judgement of great moment in the world , to effect any matter of importance . i mean , to entertain those two iv 241 queen virtue , fidem , and taciturnitatem : so much commend by the old writer . and if there be ever any great designment , in this our age , and memory , discreet , faithful , and close carry , i assure my self it be this , and though it be but in respect of that point only : yet for such faithful secrecy , it deserve immortali praise . all this while , our ship , God be thank , keep in a most excellent good order , be divide into five squadron : that be to say , the earl of Essex , the lord admiral , the lord Thomas Howard , the lord Warden sir Walter Raleigh , and the admiral of the Hollander . all which squadron , albeit they do every day separate themselves of purpose , by