from who you islander be lineal descend , bring with they out of Norway that art , as also gold and silver coin , so that in old time there be no less use of silver and gold with we , than there be at this day . 168 and it be certain that before the often navigation come of old of Dane , german , and english man unto we , our land £ r0 ^ inS be much more fertile than now it be ( feel the inn - tn 5 ' convenience of the age and decay world , both from heaven and earth ) and bring forth , in certain choice place , corn in abundance . the five section . the king of Denmark and Norway send every year a lieutenant into the country . in the year of our lord eight hundred forty and six Harald Harfagre ( which be to say , golden hair or fair clock ) be bear . who afterward in the year eight hundred fifty and eight , be choose king of Norway , when he be grow to age , and full strength , change the form of the norvagian government . for whereas before it be divide into petty province ( which they call Fylki , and the petty king that the occasion govern they , Fylkis konga ) he reduce it by force of arm unto a monarchic . but when some inhabitant of the country , be mighty , and descend of people of Norgood parentage , can not well brook this hard deal , way . they choose rather to be banish their country , than not to shake off the yoke of tyranny . whereupon , they in the year above name eight hundred seventie and four , transport colony into island be before discover by some man and find out , but unpeople as yet : and so be the first founder of our nation , they call themselves islander , which name their posterity retain unto this day . and therefore the islander live a long time , namely , three hundred eighty and six year , more or less , acknowledge no submission to any other nation . and although Hayuinus Haquinus that crown king of Norway , who reign conatus . long of any norvagian king , namely , above sixty six year , do oftentimes attempt by ambassador to make the islander become tributary unto he , notwithstanding at all time they constant withstand he , till at 169 length about the year of our lord 1260 . they perform homage unto he . and afterward continue always in their promise loyalty , be subject to the king of Norway . but now at this day , since the empire of the noruagians be translate by Margaret queen of Denmark , Suedeland , and Norway unto the Dane , they do honour as their sovereign lord and king the most gracious king of Denmark . the sixth section . all thing be common among they except their wife . here Krantzius in the first place begin with such a gibe . there be many notable thing in their manner , etc Moreover , your wit be too hasty in affirm thing unknown , do here also diminish your credit . the experience as well of all thing as of person and time prove your over greedy desire of novelty , of fame and vainglory , and argue your great negligence in maintain the truth . o worthy writer . but whether the aforesaid thing be true or no , we call the law of our country to witness , which the islander from the beginning have use all one with the Norway : of the king and his subject : of the seat of justice , and of lawcase which come to be decide there : of inheritance : of adoption , marriage , theft , extortion , lend , bargain , and the rest : all which , to what purpose shall they be enjoin unto they with who all thing be common ? we call to witness so many broil and contention in our court , and place of judgement in island concern good moveable , and immoveable : we call to witness our king now of Denmark , aforetime of Norway , who by so many bill of supplication out of island in old time , and of late have be often interrupt , for the set through of controversy concern possession . we call Krantzius himself to witness against himself , 170 who word in the first section be these . before the receive of Christian faith the islander live accord to the law of nature do not much differ from our law , etc if by the law of nature , then doubtless by that law of justice , which give to every man his own : if by the law of justice , then certain distinction of property and possession must needs have take place in our nation : and although this very law be often transgress , and that heinous even in the church : notwithstanding both the church , and also heathen man do acknowledge it to be most just and the seven section . they make all one reckon of their whelp , and of their child : except that of the poor sort you shall easy obtain their son than their shall | be . although in the begin of this treatise i think that Munster and other man of great name in those thing which they have leave write concern island , be not to be charge with slander , yet whether that favour may here be show by any man whatsoever ( be he never so favourable , and never so sincere ) i do not sufficient conceive . for what shall move such great man , follow the despiteful lie , and fable of mariner , to defame and stain our nation with so horrible and so shameful a reproach ? Surely nothing else but a careless licentiousness to deride and contemn a poor and unknown nation , and such other like vice . but , be it know to all man that this untruth do not so much hurt to the islander , as to the author themselves . for in heap up this , and a great number of other into