dare say Munster and Krantzius can be ignorant ) man , be otherwise naked , stand in need of clothes to cover their body . but i have not think it may therefore have proper be say , that sheep and we have all one apparel . man of other country also wear cloth of sheep wool , although it i65 be more fine wrought . but no more concern the attire of the body . for it be a mere folly to seek for praise , and ambitious reputation by that , which argue the infirmity of our nature . state , etc now , it remain that we shall speak of that state , which we be say to have common with beast : but of what kind or manner it shall be , or our writer will have it to be , i can easy discern . state ( say Doletus ) be either of the body , or of cause , or of order and condition . doubtless , that there be another state of our body then of beast ( for beside our two foot , we have hand also , and go with our body , and countenance lift upright ) and that we be of another order and condition from they , we be very persuade . as for these good fellow , if they know any such matter by themselves or other , let they disclose it . we do altogether scorn these , be so vain thing , and breed so great contempt against the majesty of God our creator , neither do we vouchsafe they any large discourse . but because it be our duty not so high to regard either the love of our country , or of any other thing whatsoever , but that we may be ready at all time , and in all place , to give truth the pre - eminence : i will say in a word what that be which perhaps may minister occasion to this infamous reproach of writer . there be near unto Schalholt , upon the south shore of island , three small parish stand between two most swift river Thiorsaa and Olfwis Aa , be in a manner destitute both of wood and turf , which be the accustom fuel of the country . and although most of the inhabitant of these parish , and some of their neighbour , as they do in time of year provide all thing necessary for household , so especial those thing which belong to fire and bath : notwithstanding there be certain among they of the base sort of people , who , because they want those thing at home , and be not able to provide they from other place , be con - 166 1592 - strained to use straw for the dress of their meat . but when the sharp rigor of snowy winter come on , these poor people betake they to their ox stall , and there set up shed , and do their necessary business in the day time , when they be not able to make fire , they borrow heat from their ox , as it have be report to i by other : and so they only , be very few in number , do not willing enjoy , but be constrain to use the same common house with their ox . but for their livelihood and state it be far otherwise with they then with their ox , of which thing i have entreat before . this be the lot , and poverty of certain man in those petty parish , the condition whereof be therefore make a common byeword of the people among we , though somewhat injurious . where i will willing demand with what honesty man can impute that unto the whole nation , which be hard and scant true of these few poor man ? i be weary to stay any long in this matter : only , because i have to do with divine , let that of Salomon suffice , proverb 17 . verse 5 . he that mock the poor , reproach he that make he . and in very deed , because this our nation be now , and heretofore have be poor and needy , and as it be a beggar amongst many rich man , it have sustain so many taunt and scoff of stranger . but let they take heed who they upbraid . very if there be nothing else common unto we with they , yet we both consist of the same element , and have all one father and god . 167 [ the four the four section . they lead their life in holy simplicity , not seek any more than nature do afford . a happy nation , who poverty no man do envy . but the english and danish merchant suffer not the nation to be at rest , who frequent that country to transport fish , have convey thither our vice , together with their manifold ware . for now , they have learn to brew their water with corn , and begin to despise , and loathe the drink of fair water . now they covet gold and silver like unto our man . simplicity , etc i be exceed glad , that the commendation of holy simplicity be give unto we . but it grieve we that there be find so great a decay of justice , and good law , and so great want of government among we , which be the cause of many thousand heinous offence : which all honest and godly man do continual bewail . this inconvenience do not happen through the negligence of the high magistrate , that be , of our most gracious king , but rather by our own fault : who do not present these thing unto his majesty , which be disorderly commit without his knowledge , and which be want in the inferior magistrate . merchant . Moreover , merchant , not only of England and Denmark , but especial of Germany , as at this time , so heretofore frequent our country , not to transport fish , but fish , teach not islander the art of brew corn with water . for the noruagians themselves , the first , to our knowledge , that inhabit this hand ,