we account to be sign of wholesome and convenient nourishment , and of a perfect constitution . beside , our wit be not altogether so gross and barren , 188 as the philosopher seem to assign unto this our air , and these nourishment , which perhaps many of our countryman can much rather verify in deed then in word , if ( as the poet say ) envious poverty do not hold we down . but here the judgement of the common people , as often in other matter , do too plain deceive ( i except all good and well experience man ) some of they which will seem to be wise : namely , that whatsoever their use do not admit , or that they have not see , nor have trial of beforetime , they present condemn . as for example , he that never see the sea will not be persuade that there be a mediterrane sea : so do they measure all thing by their own experience and conceit , as though there be nothing good and profitable , but that only wherewith they maintain their life . but we be not grow to that pitch of folly , that because we have hear of certain people of Aethiopia , which be feed with locust , be therefore call by Diodorus , Acridophagi , and of a certain nation of India also , who Clitarchus and megastenes have name Mandri , as Agatarchides witness , or of other that live upon frog or sea - crab , or round shrimp , which thing be at this day common know , that ( i say ) we shall therefore presume to make they a laugh stock to the common people , because we be not accustom to such sustenance . the sixteenth section . tenth , that uncivil ! beast cast our man in the the ten reteeth with their good hospitality . they do not frocfl - ( say he ) carry about money with they in their purse , neither be it any shame to be entertain in a strange place , and to have meat and drink bestow of free cost . for if they have any thing which they may impart with other , they will very glad . Moreover , he make mention of certain church or holy chapel ( as of a base thing ) which many of the islander have 189 build in their own house : and that first of all in the morning , they have recourse thither , to make their prayer , neither do they suffer any man before they have do their devotion , to interrupt they . Theise be the thing which he have set down as some notable disgrace unto the islander . and no marvel : for filthy swine detest all cleanly one , and hog unclean regard not precious stone . which i fear , lest it may be too true affirm of this slanderer , as it be manifest out of these two last objection . howbeit , since he himself be a most sufficient witness of his own virtue , we will refer the reader , who be desirous to know more of he unto his book of rhyme against island , which we have now examine in our former section : at who rail and filthy speech we have be ashamed on his behalf : insomuch that those thing which he with satirical , satirical ? nay satanical bite and revile of our nation , have not blush to write , be irksome for we to repeat : so great and abominable be his insolency , and his reproach so heinous . good God ! whosoever shall view this cartlode of slander ( for we have mention the least part thereof , because i be loath to lose my labour , or , as the wise man say , to answer a fool accord to his foolishness , whereas in his rhyme there be not one word without a reproach ) will he not judge the author of this pasquill to have be a most lewd man , yea the very dross of mankind , without piety , without humanity ? but here i have just occasion to doubt whether the author of these revile have be the more injurious to islander , or the Printer thereof Joachimus Leo ( and whatsoever else they be who in their edition dare neither profess their own name , nor the name of their city ) which leo have now twice , if not often , publish the say pamphlet at Hamburg . do you suffer this to go unpunished , oh you counsel and commons of ham - 190 burg ? what ? have you determine to gratify island in this sort , which these many year , by reason of your abundant traffic with we , and your transport home of all our commodity , of our beef and mutton , and commo - of a incredible deal of butter and fish , have be esofl ^ and - unto your ci tie in stead of a storehouse ? in time past ancient also , certain city of England and of holland have t ^ iue of reap the commodity or this isle : moreover , there island have be ancient traffic of Denmark , Breme , and Lubeck with the islander . but they never gain by any of their chapman such commendation , and such thank , as be contain in this libel : it have in your , in your city ( i . say ) be breed , bring forth , iterate , if not the third time publish : which have arm other people , unto who the name of island be otherwise scarce know , to the disdain and contempt of this our nation : and this injury offer by a citizen of you , have island sustain these 30 . year and more , and do as yet sustain . but many such accident often come to pass without the knowledge of the magistrate , neither do we doubt but that good man be grieve at such infamous libel , and do take diligent heed that they be not publish : for such edition be contrary to the law of nature : do not that to another which thou will not have do unto thy self : and