unto they : for fear of which ship , the mariner and seaman secret withdraw themselves both day and night , lest that the duke of Parma his soldier shall compel they by main force to go on board , and to break through the Hollander fleet , which all of they judge to be impossible by reason of the straightness of the haven . but it seem that the duke of Parma and than the Spaniard Spaniards ground upon a vain and presumptuous vain ° Ptnion expectation , that all the ship of England and of the c ° heirozvnfleet low country will at the first sight of the spanish and Dunkerk navy have betake themselves to flight , yield they sea room , and endeavour only to defend themselves , their haven , and sea coast from invasion . wherefore their intent and purpose be , that the duke of Parma in his small and flat - bottomed ship , shall as it be under the shadow and wing of the spanish fleet , convey over all his troop , armour , and warlike provision , and with their force so unite , shall invade England ; or while the english fleet be busy in fight against the spanish , shall enter upon any part of the coast , which he think to be most convenient . which invasion ( as the captive afterward confess ) the duke of Parma think first to have attempt by the river of Thames ; upon the bank whereof have at his first arrival land twenty or thirty thousand of he principali soldier , he suppose that he may easy have win the city of London ; both because his small ship shall have follow and assist his land - force , and also for that the city itself be but mean fortify and easy to overcome , by reason of the citizen delicacy and discontinuance from 221 the war , who with continual ! and constant labour may be vanquish , if they yield not at the first assault . they be in good hope also to have meet with some rebel against her majesty , and such as be discontent with the present state , as papist , and other . likewise they look for aid from the favourer of the scottish queen , who be not long before put to death ; all which they think will have stir up sedition and faction . whenas therefore the spanish fleet ride at anchor before Caleis , to the end they may consult with the duke of Parma what be best to be do according to the king commandment , and the present estate of their affair , and have now ( as we will afterward declare ) purpose upon the second of August be Friday , with one power and consent to have put their intend business in practice ; the lord admiral of England be admonish by her majesty letter from the court , think it most expedient either to drive the spanish fleet from that place , or at leastwise to give they the encounter : and for that cause ( accord to her majesty prescription ) he take forthwith eight of his worst and base ship which come next to hand , and disburden they of all thing which seem to be of any value , fill they with gunpowder , pitch , brimstone , and with other combustible and fiery matter ; and charge all their ordinance with powder , bullet , and stone , he send the say ship upon the 28 of July be Sunday , about two of the clock after midnight , with the wind and tide against the spanish fleet : which when they have proceed a good space , be forsake of the pilot , and set on fire , be direct carry upon the king of Spain navy : which fire in the dead of the night put the Spaniard into such a perplexity and horror ( for they fear lest they be like unto those terrible ship , which Frederic Jenebelli three year before , at the siege of Antwerp , have furnish with gunpowder , stone , and dreadful engine , for the dissolution of the duke of 222 Parma his bridge , build upon the river of Scheid ) that cut their cable whereon their anchor be fasten , and hoist up their sail , they betake themselves very confuse unto the main sea . in this sudden confusion , the principali and great the galliass of the four galliass fall foul of another ship , lose her rudder : for which cause when she can not be the guide any long , she be by the force of the tide showld before cast into a certain showld upon the shore of Caleis , c alei . where she be immediate assault by diverse english pinass , hoy , and drumbier . and as they lie batter of she with their ordinance , and dare not board she , the lord admiral send thither his long boat with a hundred choice soldier under the command of captain Amias Preston . upon who m . Amias approach their fellow be more embolden , do offer ? restm to board the galliass : against who the governor iimrtigth fa thereof and captain of all the four galliass , Hugo galliass . de Moncada , stout oppose himself , fight by so much the more valiant , in that he hope present to be succour by the duke of Parma . in the mean season , Moncada , after he have endure the conflict a good while , be hit on the head with a bullet , fall down stark dead , and a great number of Spaniards also be slay in his company . the great part of the residue leap overboard into the sea , to save themselves by swim , be most of they drown . howbeit there escape among other don Anthonio de Manriques , a principali officer in the spanish fleet ( call by they their Veador general ) together with a few Spaniards beside : which Anthonio be the first man that carry certain news of the success of the fleet into Spain . this huge and monstrous galliass , wherein be contain three hundred slave to lug at the oar , and four hundred soldier , be in the space of three hour rifle in the same place ; and there be find among diverse other commodity 50000 ducat of the spanish king treasure . at length when the slave be release out of 223 the great fight before greveling the 29 . of July . their fetter , the english man will have set the say ship on fire , which Monsieur Gourdon the governor of Caleis , for fear of the