his own name gardars - holme , that be to say , gardar lie . there be more also desirous to visit this new land . for after the two former , a certain island . three Noruagian , call Flok , go into island , and name it of the ice , wherewith he see it environ . of ancient habitation , etc i gather not this opinion out of these word of Saxo ( as some man do ) that island have be inhabit from the beginning , or ( to speak in one word ) that the people of island be autochthones , that be , earth - bred , or breed out of their own soil like unto tree and herb ; since it be evident , that this island scarce begin to be inhabit no long ago than about 718 year since . this be Thyle , etc grammarian wrangle about this name , and as yet the controversy be not decide . which notwithstanding , 1 think may easy grow to composition , if man will understand that this hand be first inhabit about the year of our lord 874 . unless some man will say that Thule king of Aegypt ( who , as it be think , give this name thereunto ) pass so far unto a hand , which be at that time until , and destitute of inhabitant . again , if any man will deny this , he may for all i , that it may seem to be but a dream , while they be distract into so many contrary opinion . one affirm that it be island : another , that it be a certain hand , where tree bear fruit twice in a year : the three , that it be one of the Orcades , or the last hand of the Scotish dominion , as Johannes Myritius and other , call it by the name of Thylensey , which 102 Virgil also seem to have mean by his ultima Thyle . if beyond the britans ( by which name the english man and Scot only at this day be call ) he imagine none other nation to inhabit . which be evident out of that verse of Virgil in his first eclogue : and britans whole from all the world divide . the four write , that it be one of the faar - iland : the five , that it be Telemark in Norway : the sixth , that it be Schrichfinnia . which continual cleave to the north part of the hand . that clause that ice continual cleave etc or as Munster affirm a little after , that it cleave for the space of eight whole month , be neither of they both true , when as for the most part the ice be thaw . in the month of April or may , and be drive towards the west : neither do it return before Januarie or aiways to the February , nay often time it come late . what west . if a man shall reckon up many year , wherein ice ( than no ice at all sharp scourge of this our nation ) have not at all jere in bene see about island ? which be find to be true lsland - this present year 1592 . hereupon it be manifest how true Frisius have write that navigation to this hand lie open only for four month in a year , and no long , by reason of the ice and cold , whereby the passage be shut up , when as english ship every year , sometime in march , sometime in April , and some of they in may ; the german and Dane , in may and June , do usual return unto we , and some of they depart not again from hence till August . but the last navigation year , be 1591 , there lay a certain ship of Germany lade with copper within the haven or vopnafiord in the till the midst coast of island about fourteen day in the month of of November . November , which time be expire , she fortunate set sail . wherefore , see that ice , neither continual , nor yet eight month cleave unto island , Munster and Frisius be much deceive . [ the four 103 island 144 germane mile in compass . the four section . the hand be so great that it contain many people . item Zieglerus say : the situation of the hand be extend between the south and the north almost 200 league in length . so great , etc one Wilstenius schoolmaster of Oldenburg , in the year 1591 , send unto my uncle in west - island , a short treatise which he have gather out of the fragment of sundry writer , concern island . where we find thus write : island be twice as great as Sicily , etc but Sicily , accord to Munster , have 150 germane mile in compass . as for the circuit of our hand , although it be not exact know unto we , yet the ancient , constant , and receive opinion of the inhabitant account it 144 league ; namely by the 12 promontory of island , which be common know , be distant one from another 12 league or thereabouts , which two number be multiply , produce the whole sum . many people . etc one Gysserus about the year of our lord 1090 , be bishop of Schalholten in island , cause all the husbandman , or countryman of the hand , who , in regard of their possession be bind to pay tribute to the king , to be number ( omit the poor sort with woman , and the mean sort of the communality ) and he find in the east part of island 700 , in the south part 1000 , in the west part 1100 , in the north part 1200 , to the number of 4000 inhabitant pay tribute . now if any man will try , he shall find that more than half the hand be at that time unpeople . 104 the hand , most part thereof , be mountainous and unacustomated - m ^ ster - tilled . but that part which be plain do great ziHerus abound with fodder , which be