all the haven in Flanders , begin at the mouth of Scheid , or from the town of Lillo , and hold on to grevel and almost unto Caleis , and fortify all their seatown with strong garrison . against the spanish fleet arrival , they have provide 25 . or 30 . good ship , commit the government of they unto admiral lonck , who they command to join himself unto the lord Henry Seymer , lie between Dover and Cales . and when as the foresay ship , ( whereof the great part besiege the haven of Dunkirk ) be drive by tempest into Zealand , Justin of Nassau the admiral of Zealand supply that squadron with 35 . ship be of no great burden , but excellent furnish with gun , mariner and soldier in great abundance , and especial with 1200 . brave musketeer , have be accustom unto sea - fight , and be choose out of all their company for the same purpose : and so the say Justin of Nassau keep such diligent ward in that station that the duke of Parma can not issue forth with his navy into the sea out of any part of Flanders . in the mean while the spanish armada set sail out the spanish of the haven of Lisbon upon the 19 of may , An . Dom . fieete set sail 1588 . under the conduct of the duke of Medina Sidonia , direct their course for the bay of Corunna , i ali ^ s the groin of Gallicia , where they take in soldier and warlike provision , this port be in Spain the near unto England . as they be sail along , there arise such a mighty tempest , that the whole fleet be disperse , so that when the duke be re - iv 209 oh turn unto his company , he can not escry above 80 . ship in all , whereunto the residue by iide and little join themselves , except eight which have their mast blow overboard . one of the four galley of portin - gal escape very hardly , retire her self into the haven . the other three be upon the coast of baion in France , by the assistance and courage of one David Gwin a english captive ( who the french and turkish slave aid in the same enterprise ) utter disable and vanquish : one of the three be first overcome , which conquer the two other , with the slaughter of their governor and soldier , and among the rest of don Diego de Mandrana with sundry other : and so those slave arrive in France with the three galley , set themselves at liberty . they set sail from you groin upon the 11 . of July . the Spaniard come within ken of England . captain fleming . the navy have refresh themselves at the groin , and receive daily commandment from the king to hasten their journey , hoist up sail the 11 . day of July , and so hold on their course till the 19 of the same month , they come then unto the mouth of the narrow sea or english chanel . from whence ( strike their sail in the mean season ) they dispatch certain of their small ship unto the duke of Parma . at the same time the spanish fleet be escry by a english pinnace , captain whereof be m . Thomas Fleming , after they have be advertise of the Spaniard expedition by their scout and espial , which have range along the coast of Spain , be late return home into Plymouth for a new supply of victual and other necessary , who consider the foresay tempest , be of opinion that the navy be of late disperse and toss up and down the main ocean , be by no mean able to perform their intend voyage . moreover , the lord Charles Howard lord high admiral of England have receive letter from the court , signify unto he that her majesty be advertise that the spanish fleet will not come forth , nor be to be any long expect for , and therefore , that upon she 210 majesty commandment he must send back four of her tall and strong ship unto Chattam . the lord high admiral of England be thus on 2 % L . ad - the sudden , namely upon the 19 of July about four mtrahsfmrt of the clock in the afternoon , inform by the pinnace of captain fleme aforesaid , of the Spaniard July . approach , with all speed and diligence possible he warp his ship , and cause his mariner and soldier ( the great part of who be absent for the cause aforesaid ) tocome on board , and that with great trouble and difficulty , insomuch that the lord admiral himself be fain to lie without in the road with six ship only all that night , after the which many other come forth of the haven . the very next day be the 20 . of July the 20 . of about high noon , be the spanish fleet escry by the english , which with a southwest wind come sail along , and pass by Plymouth : in which regard ( accord to the judgement of many skilful navigator ) they great overshoot themselves , whereas it have be more commodious for they to have stay themselves there , consider that the Englishman be as yet unprovide , great rely upon their own force , and know not the estate of the spanish navy . Moreover , this be the most convenient port of all other , where they may with great security have be advertise of the english force , and how the commons of the land stand affect , and may have stir up some mutiny , so that hither they shall have bend all their puissance , and from hence the duke of Parma may more easy have convey his ship . but this they be prohibit to do by the king and his counsel , and be express command to unite themselves unto the soldier and ship of the say duke of Parma , and so to bring their purpose to effect . which be think to be the most easy and direct course , for that they imagine that the english and dutch man will be utter daunt and dismay thereat , and will each man of they retire unto his 211 own province and porte for the defence thereof , and transport the army of the duke under the protection of their huge navy , they may invade England . it be report that the chief commander in the navy , and those which be more skilful in