thence by the 214 english ship which they think can by no mean withstand their impregnable force , persuade themselves that by mean of their huge fleet , they be become lord and commander of the main ocean . for which cause they marvel much how the english man in their small ship dare approach within musket shoot of the Spaniard mighty wooden castle , gather the wind of they with many other such like attempt . immediate after , Valdez and his company , be a man of principal authority in the spanish fleet , and be descend of one and the same family with that Valdez , which in the year 1574 . besiege leiden in holland , be send captive into England . there be in the say ship 55 . thousand ducat in ready money of the spanish king gold , which the soldier merry share among themselves . the same day be set on fire one of their great ship , be admiral of the squadron of Guipusco , and be the ship of Michael de Oquendo viceadmiral of the whole fleet , which contain great store of gunnepowder and other warlike provision . the upper part only of this ship be burn , and all the person therein contain ( except a very few ) be consume with fire . and thereupon it be take by the english , and bring into England with a number of miserable burn and scorch Spaniards . howbeit the gunpowder ( to the great admiration of all man ) remain whole and unconsume . in the mean season the lord admiral of England in his ship call the arke - royall , all that night pursue the Spaniard so near , that in the morning he be almost leave alone in the enemy fleet , and it be four of the clock at afternoon before the residue of the english fleet can overtake he . at the same time Hugo de Moncada governor of the four Galliasses , make humble suit unto the duke of Medina that he may be licence to encounter the admiral of England : which liberty the duke think 215 A . D . 1588 . a great Biscaine ship take by the english . not good to permit unto he , because he be loath to exceed the limit of his commission and charge . the 23 . of upon Tuesday which be the three and twenty of July , the navy be come over against Portland , the wind begin to turn northerly , insomuch that the Spaniard have a fortunate and fit gale to invade the english . but the Englishman have lesser and nimble ship , recover again the vantage of the wind from the Spaniard , whereat the Spaniard seem to be more incense to fight then before . but when the english fleet have continual and without intermission from morning to night , beat and batter they with all their shot both great and small : the Spaniard unite themselves , gather their whole fleet close together into a roundel , so that it be apparent that they mean not as yet to invade other , but only to defend themselves and to make haste unto the place prescribe unto they , which be near unto dunkerk , that they may join force with the duke of Parma , who be determine to have proceed secret with his small ship under the shadow and protection of the great one , and so have intend circumspect to perform the whole expedition . this be the most furious and bloody skirmish of all , in which the lord admiral of England continue fight amid his enemy fleet , and see one of his captain afar off , he speak unto he in these word : oh George what do thou ? will thou now frustrate my hope and opinion conceive of thou ? will thou forsake i now ? with which word he be inflame , approach forthwith , encounter the enemy , and do the part of a most valiant captain . his name be George Fenner , a man that have be conversant in many sea - fight . great in this conflict there be a certain great Venetian we ™ * ™ 1 ship ship with other small ship surprise and take by the ship take by english .... the english . the english navy in the mean while increase , whereunto out of all haven of the realm resort ship and 216 1588 . man : for they all with one accord come flock thither as unto a set field , where immortali fame and glory be to be attain , and faithful service to be perform unto their prince and country . in which number there be many great and honourable personage , as namely , the earl of Oxford , of Northumberland , of Cumberland , etc with many knight and gentleman : to wit , sir Thomas Cecill , sir Robert Cecill , sir Walter Raleigh , sir William Hatton , sir Horatio Palavicini , sir Henry brook , sir Robert Carew , sir Charles blunt , master Ambrose Willoughbie , master Henry Nowell , master Thomas Gerard , master Henry Dudley , master Edward Darcie , master Arthur gorge , master Thomas Woodhouse , master William Harvie , etc and so it come to pass that the number of the english ship amount unto a hundred : which when they be come before Dover , be increase to a hundred and thirty , be notwithstanding of no proportionable bigness to encounter with the Spaniard , except two or three and twenty of the queen es great ship , which only , by reason of their presence , breed a opinion in the Spaniard mind concern the power of the english fleet : the mariner and soldier whereof be esteem to be twelve thousand . the four and twenty of July when as the sea be the 24 , of calm , and no wind stir , the fight be only between the four great galleas and the english ship , which be row with oar , have great vantage of the say english ship , which notwithstanding for all that will not be force to yield , but discharge their chain - shot to cut asunder their cable and cordage of the galleas , with many other such stratagem . they be now constrain to send their man on land for a new supplier of gunpowder , whereof they be in great skarcitie , by reason they have so frank spend the great part in the former conflict . the same day , a counsel be assemble , it be decree that the english fleet shall be divide into 217 four squadron : the principali whereof be commit unto the lord admiral :