a letter write by the grave and learned gudbrandus thorlacius bishop of holen in island , concern the ancient state of island and Gronland , etc 194 A . D . 1595 - the same in english . to the reverend , learned , and virtuous , master Hugh Branham minister of the church of Harewich in England , his brother and fellow - pastor . etc i much marvel ( even as your self , reverend sir , conjecture that i will ) at the first sight of your letter , that be a stranger i shall be salute in write by one altogether unknown unto i . howbeit , read a little further , i find my self , if not otherwise , yet by name at least ( which proceed of 195 this be the brief commentary of Jonas arngrimus immediacy go before . Gronland in old time have Christian bishop . your courtesy ) know unto you : and also , for that i see you desirous of the credit and honest report of we islander , i great rejoice . wherefore i my self will be a mean , that your virtue and good name ( because you congratulate with we for the gospel of Christ here publish , and do think and write so love and honourable of our nation ) may cease hereafter to be unknown among we . as touch the monument of antiquity which be here think to be extant , there be , in very deed , nothing ( except those particular , whereof mention be make in the commentary of island , which you write unto i that you have see ) worthy to be read or write , which i may communicate with you . and as concern our neighbour country we have little to show , beside the history of the king of Norway , ( or rather some fragment of the same history ) which other have otherwise describe : howbeit they be all in a manner such thing as Krantzius never mention : unless it be some few relation . Moreover , as touch Gronland , we hold this from the opinion of our ancestor ; that , from the extreme part of Norway , which be call two Biarmlandia , and from whence the say Gronland be not far distant , it fetch about the northern coast of island with a huge circuit in manner of a half moon . our chronicle likewise do testify that our own countryman in time past resort thither for traffic , and also that the very same country of Gronland have certain bishop in the day of popery . more than this we can avouch . but now it be report that your Englishman ( who i may almost call the lord of the ocean sea ) make yearly voyage unto Gronland : concern which matter if you please to give i further advertisement , you shall do i a especial favour . Moreover , whatsoever news you hear concern the affair of England or of other country thereabouts , i pray you make we acquaint therewith . thus ( reverend sir ) wish you long life , for the service of God , for 196 the increase of learning , and the benefit of the people commit to your charge , i bid you farewell . from island upon the feast of the visitation of the bless virgin mary , anno Dom . 1595 . you Gudbrandus thorlacius bishop of Hola in island .