navigation , to wit , John Martin de recall , Diego flores de Valdez , and diverse other find fault that they be bind unto so strict direction and instruction , because that in such a case many particular accident ought to concur and to be respect at one and the same instant , that be to say , the opportunity of the wind , weather , time , tide , and ebb , wherein they may sail from Flanders to England . oftentimes also the darkness and light , the situation of place , the depth and should be to be consider : all which especial depend upon the conveniency of the wind , and be by so much the more dangerous . but it seem that they be enjoin by their commission to anchor near unto , or about Caleis , whither the duke of Parma with his ship and all his warlike provision be to resort , and while the english and spanish great ship be in the midst of their conflict , to pass by , and to land his soldier upon the down . the spanish captive report that they be determine first to have enter the river of Thames , and thereupon to have pass with small ship up to London , suppose that they may easy win that rich and flourish city be but mean fortify and inhabit with citizen not accustom to the war , who dare not withstand their first encounter , hope moreover to find many rebel against her majesty and popish catholics , or some favourer of the scottish queen ( which be not long before most just behead ) who may be instrument of sedition . thus often advertise the duke of Parma of their approach , the 20 . of July they pass by Plymouth , which the english ship pursue and get the wind 212 the first action in the english channel against the armada 2 first July 1588 the material original position here be too large for reproduction in this reissue . a pdf can be download from the web address give on page iv of this book , by click on it resource available it . 1588 . of they , give they the chase and the encounter , and so both fleet frank exchange their bullet . the day follow which be the 21 . of July , the then - of english ship approach within musquet shoot of the spanish : at what time the lord Charles Howard most hot and valiant discharge his ordinance upon the spanish viceadmiral . the Spaniard then well perceive the nimbleness of the english ship in discharge upon the enemy on all side , gather themselves close into the form of a half moon , and slacken their sail , lest they shall outgo any of their company . and while they be proceed on in this manner , one of their great Galliasses be so furious batter with shot , that the whole navy be fain to come up round together for the safeguard thereof : whereby it come to pass that the principali galleon of Seville ( wherein don Pedro de Valdez , Vasques de Silva , Alonzo de Sayas , and other noble man be embark ) fall foul of another ship , have her foremast break , and by that mean be not able to keep way with the spanish fleet , neither will the say fleet stay to succour it , but leave the distress Galeon behind . the lord admiral of England when he see this ship of Valdez , and think she have be void of mariner and soldier , take with he as many ship as he can , pass by it , that he may not loose sight of the spanish fleet that night . for sir Francis Drake ( who be notwithstanding appoint to bear out his lantern that night ) be give of chase unto five great hulk which have separate themselves from the spanish fleet : but find they to be Easterling , he dismiss they . the lord admiral all that night follow the spanish lantern in stead of the english , find himself in the morning to be in the midst of his enemy fleet , but when he perceive it , he clean convey himself out of that great danger . the day follow , which be the two and twenty of Tk of July , sir Francis Drake espy Valdez his ship , where - 213 unto he send forth his pinnace , and be advertise that Valdez himself be there , and 45 ° - person with he , he send he word that he shall yield himself . Valdez for his honour sake cause certain condition to be propound unto drake : who answer Valdez that he be not now at laisure to make any long parley , but if he will yield himself , he shall find he friendly and tractable : howbeit if he have resolve to die in fight , he shall prove drake to be no dastard . do Pedro de upon which answer Valdez and his company under -^ hls ^ mpstanding that they be fall into the hand of fortunate company take . Drake , be move with the renown and celebri tie of his name , with one consent yield themselves , and find he very favourable unto they . then Valdez with 40 . or 50 . nobleman and gentleman pertain unto he , come on board sir Francis drake ship . the residue of his company be carry unto Plymouth , where they be detain a year and a half for their ransom . Valdez come unto drake and humble kiss his hand protest unto he , that he and his have resolve to die in battle , have they not by good fortune fall into his power , who they know to be right courteous and gentle , and who they have hear by general report to be most favourable unto his vanquish foe : insomuch that he say it be to be doubt whether his enemy have more cause to admire and love he for his great , valiant , and prosperous exploit , or to dread he for his singular felicity and wisdom , which ever attend upon he in the war , and by the which he have attain unto so great honour . with that drake embrace he and give he very honourable entertainment , feed he at his own table , and lodge he in his cabin . here Valdez begin to recount unto drake the force of all the spanish fleet , and how four mighty galley be separate by tempest from they : and also how they be determine first to have put into Plymouth haven , not expect to be repel