courage , refuse to do : wherefore the duke charge he to sail next unto himself : which the night follow he can not perform , by reason of the great abundance of water which enter his ship on all side ; for the avoid whereof , and to save his ship from sink , he cause 50 man continual to labour at the pump , though it be to small purpose . And see himself thus forsake and separate from his admiral , he endeavour what he can to attain unto the coast of Flanders : where , be espy by 4 or 5 man of war , which have their station assign they upon the same coast , he be admonish to yield himself unto they . which he refuse to do , be strong assault by they altogether , and his ship be pierce with many bullet , be bring into far worse case than before , and 40 of his soldier be slay . by which extremity he be enforce at length to yield himself unto Peter banderduess and other captain , which bring he and his ship into Zealand ; and that other ship also last before mention : which both of they , immediate after the great and better part of their good be unlade , sink right down . for the memory of this exploit , the foresay captain Banderduess cause the banner of one of these ship to be set up in the great church of leiden in holland , which be of so great a length , that be fasten to the very roof , it reach down to the ground . about the same time another small ship be by a small ship necessity drive upon the coast of Flanders , about away Blankenberg , be cast away upon the sand , the people and therein be save . thus almighty God will have the Spaniard huge ship to be present , not only to the view of the english , but also of the zelander ; that at the sight of they they may acknowledge of what small ability they have be to resist such impregnable force , have not God endue they with courage , providence , and fortitude , yea , and fight for they in many place with his own arm . 227 the dishonour - than 29 of July the spanish fleet be encounter able flight of English ( as be aforesaid ) and lie close together under their fight sail , with a southwest wind sail prudent advice past dunkerk , the english ship still follow the chase . of the lord ad - of who the day follow when the Spaniard have get mirall . sea roomej they cut their main sail ; whereby they sufficient declare that they mean no long to fight but to fly . for which cause the lord admiral of England dispatch the lord Henry Seymer with his squadron of small ship unto the coast of Flanders , where , with the help of the dutch ship , he may stop the prince of Parma his passage , if perhaps he shall attempt to issue forth with his army . and he himself in the mean space pursue the spanish fleet until the second of August , because he think they have set sail for Scotland . and albeit he follow they very near , yet do he not assault they any more , for want of powder and bullet . but upon the four of August , the wind arise , when as the Spaniard have spread all their sail , betake themselves whole to flight , and leave Scotland on the left hand , trend towards Norway , ( whereby they sufficient declare that their whole intent be to save themselves by flight , attempt for that purpose , with their batter and craze ship , the most dangerous navigation of the northern sea ) the english see that they be now proceed unto the latitude of 57 degree , and be unwilling to participate that danger whereinto the Spaniard plunge themselves , and because they want thing necessary , and especial powder and shot , the english return back for England ; leave behind they r ^ urne h01 ™ certain pinass only , which they enjoin to follow suit of the Spaniard aloof , and to observe their course . and Spaniard the so it come to pass that the four of August , with great 4 of August , danger and industry , the english arrive at Harwich : for they have be toss up and down with a mighty tempest for the space of two or three day together , which it be likely do great hurt unto the spanish fleet , be ( as i say before ) so maim and batter . the 228 english now go on shore , provide themselves forthwith of victual , gunpowder , and other thing expedient , that they may be ready at all assay to entertain the spanish fleet , if it chance any more to return . but be afterward more certain inform of the Spaniard course , they think it best to leave they unto those boisterous and uncouth northern sea , and not there to hunt after they . the Spaniard see now that they want four or five thousand of their people and have diverse maim and sick person , and likewise have lose io or 12 of their principali ship , they consult among themselves , what they be best to do , be now escape out of the hand of the english , because their victual fail they in like sort , and they begin also to want cable , cordage , anchor , mast , sail , and other naval furniture , and utter despair of the duke of Parma his assistance ( who very hope and undoubted expect the return of the spanish fleet , be continual occupy about his great preparation , command abundance of anchor to be make , and other necessary furniture for a navy to be provide ) they think it good at length , so soon as the wind shall serve they , to fetch a compass about Scotland and Ireland , and so to return for Spain . for they well understand , that commandment be give throughout all Scotland , that they shall not have any succour or assistance there . neither yet can they in Norway supply their want . wherefore , have take certain Scotisfi and other fisherboat , they bring the man on board their own ship , to the end they may be their guide and pilot . fear also lest their fresh water shall fail they , they cast all their horse and mule overboard : and so touch no where upon the