that by way of disgrace , by any man , except it be such a one who have take his leave of all modesty , plain deal , humanity , and truth . but i can wish that the love of dog in islander may be more spare reprehend by those people , who matron , and special their noble woman , take so great delight in dog , that they carry they in their bosom through the open street : i will not say in church : which fashion Caesar blame in certain stranger , who he see at Rome carry about young ape and whelp in their arm , ask they this question : whether woman in their country bring forth child or no ? signify hereby , that they do great offend , who bestow upon beast these natural affection , wherewith they shall be invite to the love of mankind , and special of their own offspring : which strange pleasure never overtake , nor possess the nation of the islander . wherefore now ( Munster and Krantzius ) you must find we out other mark of Christianity , of the law of nature , of the german law , and of holy simplicity . iv 177 [ the eight the eight section . they honour their bishop as their king : unto who command all the whole people have respect . whatsoever he prescribe out of the law , the scripture , or the custom of other nation , they do full holy observe . there be indeed at the beginning , about the time of the reformation of religion , great reverence have unto the bishop ; but never so great , that our politic law at the bishop command shall give place to outlandish law and custom . neither in the time of Albertus Krantzius , much less of Munster ( of which two the first decease in the year of our lord 1517 , and the second 1552 ) the bishop of island have the authority of king , when as many of the country which be of the rich sort , will not doubt to rebel ! against they ; which thing be too well know in our country . yet in the mean time , the bishop be terrible with their authority of excommunication , reduce some under their subjection , and other at that time they cruel persecute . moreover , albeit at that time the bishop be have in great , yea , in exceed great reverence , yet now adays , the darkness of popery be dispel , the devil assault man after another sort , and even here among we , he be not slack to arm their mind with contempt , and perverse stubbornness against God , and his holy ministry . the nine section . they live there for the most part upon fish , because of their great want of corn , which be bring in from the port town of other country : who carry home fish from thence with great gain . also Munster say , they do there use stockfish in stead of bread , which grow not in that country . consider ( friendly reader ) how Munster be delight to harp upon one string , that when he can write nothing of a unknown nation which may carry any 178 .... I59X show with it , he be fain either to bring in falsehood , or often to repeat the same thing , and so to become tedious unto his reader : for he say a little before , that the islander live upon fish . his word above recite be these : island contain many people live only with the food of cattle , and sometime by take of fish . and that i may omit the rest in which some trifle may be note : whereas he say that bread grow not in island : it be most true : which i think be common therewith to Germany also , because bread grow not there neither , except it be in Munster field where natural vinegar also do marvelous increase . but these toy , by the liberty of rhetoric forsooth , shall be out of danger . howbeit , unto these reproach , which stranger do gather from the meat and drink of the islander , we will hereafter brief answer , Sect . u - the ten section . the inhabitant do celebrate the act of their ancestor , Munsterus . and of their time , with song , and they grave they kranizius - in rock and promontory , that they may not decay with posterity , but only by the defect of nature . there be diverse find among they that be minstrel , Frisius . and can play upon the lute , who with their delectable music do ensnare and take both fowl and fish . we deny not but that some worthy act of our then islander forefather be reserve in the song and poem of our countryman , as also in prose : but that the same act oftheir thing have be engrave by we , or by our ancestor , ancestor . in rock or promontory , we may in no case acknowledge that praise to be due unto we , nor yet the other of minstrel , and take of bird and fish . for we hold it to be the part of a honest and ingenuous mind , as to refute false crime , so not to challenge undeserving praise unto himself , nor to accept it be offer . 179 but now , let this be the end of our controversy with the author aforesaid , be otherwise man of excellent learning , and of great renown , who notwithstanding so inconsiderate have intermeddle these thing in their write . and now the better part of my labour be finish . but yet there remain that viperous germane brood the mother whereof will have it come to light , as it be at a second birth , without name , that it may so much the more free wound the fame of the islander with venomous sting . moreover , although i be not afraid to encounter with this beast , yet will i have all man to know with what mind i undertake this enterprise , namely , not that i mean