bold affirm , that if the english have be possess of that or the like town , and have be but half so well provide as they be , they will have defend it for one two month at the least , against any power whatsoever in all Christendom . but sure God be a mighty God , and have a wonderful secret stroke in all matter , especial of weight and moment . whether their heart be kill at the mighty overthrow by sea , or whether they be amaze at the invincible courage of the english , which be more than ordinary , care no more for either small shot or great , than in a manner for so many hailstone , or whether the remorse of a guilty conscience towards the english nation , for their dishonourable and devilish practise , against her sacred majesty , and the realm , ( a matter that easy beget a faint heart in a guilty mind ) or what other thing there be in it i know not , but be it speak to their perpetuali shame and infamy , 256 there be never thing more resolute perform of the courageous english , nor more shameful lose of the brag Spaniard . of what wealth this town shall be , i be not able to resolve the asker : for i confess that for my own part , i have not so much good luck , as to be partaker so much as of one penny , or penny worth . howbeit my ill fortune make that town never a whit the poor . but as it shall appear by the great pillage by the common soldier , and some mariner too , and by the goodly furniture , that be deface by the base people , and thereby utter lose and spoil , as not worth the carry away , and by the over great plenty of wine , oil , almond , olive , raisin , spice , and other rich grocery ware , that by the intemperate disorder of some of the rasher sort be knock out , and lie trample under foot , in every common high way , it shall appear that it be of some very mighty great wealth to the first owner , though perchance , not of any such great commodi tie to the last subduer , for that i judge that the better part be most riotous and intemperate spend and consume . a disorder in my opinion very much to be lament , and if it may be by any good mean remedy , in my conceit , it be a most honourable device . the Wednesday , Thursday , and Friday follow , the lord general spend in counsel , about the dispose of all matter , aswell touch the town and prisoner , as also concern all other matter , think meet of they in their honourable wisdom , and in all that mean while do show such honourable bounty and mercy , as be not able to be express . for not only the life of every one be spare , but also there be a especial care have , that all the religious , as well man as woman , shall be well and favourable entreat , who free without any manner of ransom or other molestation , they cause to be safe transport over to port saint marie , a town in a manner as fair as Cadiz : but at that time , iv 257 r as the case do stand , certain know to be of no wealth in the world , and it be some six or seven mile distant over against Cadiz , in a manner as Paul be against Southwark , on the other side of the bay , in a part of Andaluzia , subject to the territory of the duke de Medina Sidonia . moreover , at the same instant they do appoint that worthy knight sir Amias Preston , and some other in some convenient bark , to transport over to the say town safe and in good order , a hundred or more of the better sort of ancient gentlewoman , and merchant wife , who be suffer to put upon themselves , some of they two , yea , some three suit of apparel , with some convenient quanti tie of many jewel , chain , and other ornament belong to their estate and degree . such be the heroical liberality , and exceed great clemency , of those most honourable lord general , thereby , as it shall seem unto i , beat down that false surmise opinion , which have be hitherto common spread abroad , and settle among the Spaniard : which be , that the english do trouble they and their country , more for their gold , riches and pearl etc then for any other just occasion . whereas by these their honourable deal it be manifest to all the world , that it be only in respect of a just revenge for the manifold injury , and most dishonourable practise that have be from time to time attempt by they against we and our nation , and also in the defence of the true honour of England : which they have seek , and daily do seek , by so many sinister and reproachful device , so much as in they lie , to deface . upon Saturday be the 26 . sir John Winkfield knight be bury , in honourable and warlike manner , so far forth as the circumstance of that time and place can permit . at who funeral the navy discharge a great part of their ordinance , in such order , as be think meet and convenient by the lord general commandment . 258 the twenty seven day be Sunday , in the abbey the divine service be have , and a learned sermon be make there by one master Hopkins , the right honourable earl of Essex his preacher , a man of good learning and sweet utterance , and even there the same day , something before the sermon be make , these worthy gentleman follow be knight by the lord general . and here i be to signify by the way that two of these be knight three or four day before , and some three or four more be knight after that time , upon certain occasion : but yet i hold it best ( and i trust without offence ) to recite their name in this place altogether . the name of such noble man and gentleman , as I1 - 6l6 - ] be knight at Cadiz in June 1596 by the two most honourable lord general . Olr Samuel Bagnol . sir John Leigh , alias Lee . June 21 . 22 . o sir Arthur savage . sir