direction , best know to their honourable wisdom . this honourable and merciful edict i be sure be straight and religious observe of the english : but how well it be keep by the dutch , i will neither affirm , nor yet deny . for i perceive between they and the Spaniard there be a implacable heartburn , and therefore as soon as the dutch squadron be espy in the fight , immediate thereupon both they of Sivil and S . Lucar and also some of some other place do not only arrest all such dutch ship , as deal with they friendly 253 by the way of traffic and merchandise , and so confiscate their good , but also imprison the merchant and owner of the same , and , as the report go , do entreat many of they with extreme cruelty thereupon . in the mean while the very next day be the two and twenty day of June , all the spanish ship which be leave on ground in the bay of Cadiz , where the great overthrow have be but the day before , be by the Spaniard themselves there set on fire , and so from that time forward they never leave burn of they , till every one of they , good and all , as far as we know be burn and consume . this their do be much marvel at of we , and so much the more , for that , as i say before , there have be make some offer for the redemption and save of the good , and it be not to they unknown that this their offer be not mislike , but in all probability shall have be accept . the common opinion be , that this be do either by the appointment of the duke de Medina Sidonia , or else by express commandment from the high power . not long after the same time ( three day as i remember ) the galley that be run on ground , do quit themselves also out of that place , and by the bridge of the hand call Puente de sva ? o , make their way round about the same hand , and so by put themselves to the main sea , escape to a town call Rotta , not far off , but something up towards the town of saint lucre , and there purchase their safety by that mean . thus be this notable victory , as well by sea as by land , both begin and in effect perform , within the compass , in a manner , of fourteen hour : a thing in truth so strange and admirable , as in my judgement will rather be wonder at then believe of posterity . and if ever any notable exploit in any age be comparable to Caesar veni , vidi , vici , certain in my poor opinion it be this . 2s4 here it be to be wish ( and perchance of some too it be look for ) that every man particular worthy act in this day service , with the party name also , shall be put down , that thereby both they and their good desert may be register to all posterity : and for my part i will it be so , and wish i be able to do it . but for that i confess it be a matter that pass my power , yea , and for that i think it also a thing impossible to be precise perform by any other , i be to crave pardon for that i rather leave it out altogether , then presume to do it maim : and in this point i refer the reader only to the map that be set forth of this journey , where it be in some part convenient touch and specify . the town of it self be a very beautiful town , and a large , as be the chief see of the bishop there , and have a goodly cathedral church in it , with a right goodly abbey , a nunnery , and a exceed fine college of the Jesuit , and be by natural situation , as also by very good fortification , very strong , and tenable enough in all man opinion of the better judgement . their build be all of a kind of hard stone , even from the very foundation to the top , and every house be in a manner a kind of a fort or castle , altogether flat - roofed in the top , after the turkish manner , so that many man together , and that at ease , may walk thereon : have upon the house top , great heap of weighty stone pile up in such good order , as they be ready to be throw down by every woman most easy upon such as pass by , and the street for the most part so exceed narrow , ( i think to avoid the intolerable great heat of the sun ) as but two man or three at the most together , can in any reasonable sort march through they , no street be broad common than i suppose Watling street in London to be . the town be altogether without glass , except the church , yet with fair comely window , and with fair grate of iron to they , and have very large fold leave 255 of wainscot or the like . it have very few chimney in it , or almost none at all : it may be some one chimney in some one or other of the low out room of least account , serve for some necessary use , either to wash in , or the like , or else now and then perchance for the dress of a dish of meat , have , as it shall seem unto i , always a great care and respect how to keep themselves from all kind of great heat , then how to provide for any store of great roast . it have in it by report of they that shall best know it , some four thousand and more , of very good able fight man , and six hundred horseman at the least . no question but that they be well furnish of all thing appertain thereunto , especial so many good ship lie there , and be so well store with all manner of munition , shot , and powder , as they be . whether they have knowledge of our come or not , i can say nothing to it : themselves give it out that they understand not of it , but only by a caravel the Friday at evening before we come . but whether they know it or no , thus much i dare