coast of Scotland , but be carry with a fresh gale between the Orcades and faar - isle , they proceed far north , even unto 61 degree of latitude , be distant from any land at the least 40 league . here the 229 the Spaniard consult to sail round about Scotland and Ireland , and so to return home . duke of Medina generail of the fleet command all his follower to shape their course for Biscay : and he himself with twenty or five and twenty of his ship which be best provide of fresh water and other necessary , hold on his course over the main ocean , return safe home . the residue of his ship be about forty in number , and commit unto his viceadmiral , fall near with the coast of Ireland , intend their course for cape Clare , because they hope there to get fresh water , and to refresh themselves on land . but after they be drive with many contrary wind , the ship - at length , upon the second of September , they be ■ m - acke of the cast y a tempest arise from the southwest upon diverse upon ^ he ^ rish part ° f Ireland , where many of their ship perish . coast . and among other , the ship of Michael de Oquendo , which be one of the great Galliasses : and two great ship of Venice also , namely , la Ratta and Belanzara , with other 36 or 38 ship more , which perish in sundry tempest , together with most of the person contain in they . likewise some of the spanish ship be the second time carry with a strong west wind into the channel of England , whereof some be take by the english upon their coast , and other by the man of rochel upon the coast of France . moreover , there arrive at Newhaven in Normandy , be by tempest enforce so to do , one of the four great Galliasses , where they find the ship with the spanish woman which follow the fleet at their set forth . two ship also be cast away upon the coast of Norway , one of they be of a great burden ; howbeit all the person in the say great ship be of ship save : insomuch that of 134 ship , which set sail out ° { et ' th ” re p ° rtugahj there return home 53 only small and turn how it great : namely the four galliass but one , and but but 53 . one of the four galley . of the 91 great galleon and hulk there be miss 58 , and 33 return : of the patache and zabrae 17 be miss , and 18 return 230 home . in brief , there be miss 81 ship , in which number be galliass , galley , galleon , and other vessel both great and small . and among the 53 ship remain , those also be reckon which return home before they come into the english channel . two galleon of those which be return , be by misfortune burn as they ride in the haven ; and such like mishap do many other undergo . of 30000 person which go in this expedition , there perish ( accord to the number and proportion of the ship ) the great and better part ; and many of they which come home , by reason of the toil and it inconvenience which they sustain in this voyage , die not long after their arrival . the duke of Medina immediate upon his return be depose from his authority , command to his private house , and forbid to repair unto the court ; where he can hardly satisfy or yield a reason unto his malicious enemy and backbiter . many honourable personage and man of great renown decease soon after their return ; as namely John Martin de recall , with diverse other . a great part also of the spanish nobility and gentry employ in this expedition perish either by fight , disease , or drown , before their arrival ; and among the rest Thomas perenot of granduell a Dutchman , be earl of Cantebroi , and son unto Cardinali granduell his brother . upon the coast of Zealand don Diego de Pimen tell , brother unto the mark de Tamnares , and kinsman unto the earl of Beneventum and Calva , and colonel over 32 band with many other in the same ship be take and detain as prisoner in Zealand . into England ( as we say before ) don Pedro de Valdez , a man of singular experience , and great honour in his country , be lead captive , be accompany with don Vasquez de Silva , don Alonzo de Sayas , and other . likewise upon the Scotish western isle of Lewis , and Ila , and about cape Cantyre upon the main land , 231 there be cast away certain spanish ship , out of which be save diverse captain and gentleman , and almost four hundred soldier , who for the most part , after their shipwreck , be bring unto Edinburgh in Scotland , and be miserable needy and naked , be there clothe at the liberality of the king and the merchant , and afterward be secret ship for Spain ; but the Scotish fleet wherein they pass touch at Yarmouth on the coast of Norfolk , be there stay for a time until the counsel pleasure be know ; who in regard of their manifold misery , though they be enemy , wink at their passage . upon the irish coast many of their nobleman and gentleman be drown ; and diverse slay by the barbarous and wild irish . howbeit there be bring prisoner out of Ireland , don Alonzo de Lu ^ on , colonel of two and thirty band , common call a terza of Naples ; together with Rodorigo de Lasso , and two other of the family of Cordova , who be commit unto the custody of sir Horatio Palavicini , that Monsieur de Teligny the son of monsieur de la notie ( who be take in fight near Antwerp , be detain prisoner in the castle of Turney ) may be ransome for they by way of exchange . to conclude , there be no famous nor worthy family in all Spain , which in this expedition lose not a son , a brother , or a kinse - man . new coin stamp fir the memory of the Spaniard overthrow . for the perpetuali memory of this matter , the zelander cause new coin of silver and brass to be stamp : which on the one