also of another field which burn not the leaf of shady tree that grow direct over it . Theise thing be thus , it be strange that man shall account that a wonder in Hecla only ( for i will grant it to be , for disputation sake , when indeed there be no such matter so far forth as ever i can learn of any man ) which be common to many other part or place in the world , both hilly and plain , as well as to this . and by the same force that bullet , etc Munster Frisius . say the like also . this mountain when it rage , it sound like dreadful thunder , cast forth huge stone , disgorge brimstone , and with the cinder that be blow abroad , it cover so much ground round about it , that no man can inhabit within 20 . mile thereof , etc howbeit , they ought to have compare it with Aetna , or with other fiery mountain , whereof i will present make mention , see there be to be find in they , not only a like accident , but in a manner the very same . unless perhaps this be the difference , that flame break seldome out of Hecla , then out of other mountain of the same kind . for it have now rest these 34 . year full out , the last fiery breach be make in the year 1558 . as we have before note . and there can no such wonder be affirm of our Hecla , but the same or great be to be ascribe unto other burn mountain , as it shall by and by appear . iv 113 h but that brimstone shall be send forth it be a mere fable , and never know unto our nation , by any experiment . this place be the prison of unclean soul . here i be constrain to use a preface , and to crave pardon of the reader , because , whereas in the beginning 1 propound unto my self to treat of the land , and of the inhabitant distinct by themselves , i must of necessity confuse handle certain matter in this first part , which do proper belong unto the second . this be come to pass through the fault of these writer , who have confound this part of the inhabitant religion concern the opinion of hell , or of the infernali prison , with the situation and miracle of the island . wherefore that we may come to this matter , who can but wonder , that wise man shall be grow to this point , not only to listen after , but even to follow and embrace the do thing of the rude people ? for the common sort of stranger , and the offscouring of mariner ( here i do except they of better judgement aswell mariner as other ) hear of this rare miracle of nature , by a inbred and natural blockishness be carry to this imagination of the prison of soul : and that because they see no wood nor any such fuel lay upon this fire as they have in their own chimney at home . and by this persuasion of the gross multitude , the report grow strong , especial ( as they be too much accustom to ban and curse ) while one will wish to another the fiery torment of this mountain . as though elementary , materiali , and visible fire can consume man soul be spirituali , bodiless , and invisible substance . and to be short , who can but wonder , why they shall not feign the same prison of damn soul , aswell in mount Aetna , be no less famous for fire and inflammation then this ? but you will say , that pope Gregory feign it so to be . therefore it be purgatory . i be content it shall be so : then there be the same truth of this prison that there 114 be of purgatory . but before i proceed any further i think it not amiss to tell a merry tale , which be the originali and ground of this hellish opinion : namely that a ship of certain stranger depart from island , under full sail , a most swift pace , go direct on her course , meet with another ship sail against wind and weather , and the force of the tempest as swift as themselves , who hail they of whence they be , answer be give by their governor , de bishop van Bremen : be the second time ask whether they be bind ? he answer , Thom Heckelfeld tho , Thom Heckelfeld tho . i be afeard lest the reader at the sight of these thing shall call for a basin : for it be such a abominable lie , that it will make a man cast his gorge to hear it . away with it therefore to fenny frog , for we esteem no more of it , then of their croak coax coax . nay , it be so palpable that it be not worthy to be smile at , much less to be refute . but i will not trifle any long with the fond papist : let we rather come unto our own writer . and first of all i can here omit a say of that most worthy man doctor Caspar Peucer . there be in island ( quoth he ) mount Hecla , be of as dreadful a depth as any vast gulf , or as hell it self , which resound with lamentable , and miserable yelling , that the noise of the crier may be hear for the space of a great league round about . great swarm of ugly black raven and vulture lie hoover about this place which be think of the inhabitant to nestle there . the common people of that country be very persuade , that there be a descent down into hell by this gulf : and therefore when any battle be fight else where , in whatsoever part of the whole world , or any bloody slaughter be commit , they have learn by long experience , what horrible tumult and outcry , what monstrous skritche be hear round about this mountain . who dare