credit which another author write : that there be a certain great stone in island which run up and down the crag and cliff of mountain by no outward force , but by the own proper and natural motion . he that will believe this , what will he not believe ? for it be such a rare devise that the epicure themselves ( who yet seem to Lucian to have feign many incredible thing ) i be sure never invent the like : unless perhaps the say author do imagine , that a man ( who be call of the islander by the proper name of Stein ) shall compass about , and climb up certain rock : which although it be ridiculous to put into a story of wonder , namely , that a man shall move or walk , yet be it so to be suppose to save the credit of the author , that we may not more severe 140 1592 - condemne that fable , which be so senseless of it self and not worthy to be read . they be guilty of the same crime also who have find out raven , pie , hare and vulture , all white in island : for it be well know that vulture come vulture , very seidome , together with the ice of the sea , unto beam and we , as bear also ( but they seldome than vulture ) ‘ j ^ drift and a certain kind of crow call by the islander ice into island . Isakrakur . but as for white pie , hare , and raven , island never have any . and these in a manner be the thing which , in regard of our daily business , we be able at this present to afford , as touch the former part of our treatise , which be pen by i for this purpose ( as in the beginning i do protest ) that the error of author concern a unknown land , and the affect vanity also of some man may be disclose , for i be not desirous to diminish any man good name : but because i consecrate these my labour to truth and to my country , i can not choose but show , that those thing which hitherto have be report by many concern our hand deserve very little credit : and so to address my self unto the matter follow concern the inhabitant . here end the first part of the commentary . of island the second part , concern the inhabitant . have hitherto finish the miracle of island with certain other particular belong to the first part , the which while writer do wonder at , and diverse extol as it be the fountain of Agamemnon , yea , as thing beside and against all nature , they have be very careless both of truth it self , and of their own credit . now the course of the present speech do admonish i to make haste unto the other part of the treatise concern the inhabitant : wherein what 141 i shall first say , or where i shall begin , i be altogether ignorant . for there be such monstrous , and so many mock , reproach , skoffes , and taunt of certain man against we poor islander dwell in the utmost part of the world ( and among these also , some thing of they who take upon they to profess most simple truth , namely historiographer ) insomuch , that to reckon up the particular be nothing else but to tell the drop of the icarian sea . but as i say in the beginning , we will not deal alike severe with all . for although Krantzius , Munsterus , Frisius and other have write many thing too bold of our nation : yet have otherwise deserve well of learning by their monument , they shall | be still in you same reputation w ‘ we that they be worthy of . howbeit in the mean time , although a man will free they from the mark of slanderer , yet be it not small matter that they shall broach certain senseless , impossible and ridiculous thing , such as those be which we have hitherto lay down : as also that they shall record in history profane and horrible untruth , some of which kind shall now immediate be discuss . as for other , whatsoever they be , who upbraid the nation of islander with daily reproach , they be to have that answer in a readiness which such man deserve . in the number of who , that scoffer be to be account , who by a company of rhyme publish in the germane tongue , to the disgrace of our country , have bring his name into everlasting ignominy . wherefore as our present business require , while we be in hand with the write of author concern this matter , although we meet with some thing contain little reproach , notwithstanding we will examine most of they , note the error as hitherto we have do : in the mean time also when they shall allege any truth , we will in no case dissemble it . and after this manner , first we will hear Munster , Krantzius and Frisius , and other also , if there be any more , what they 142 have to say , reject that Parot and his dutch rhyme infect with fell slander , as he be worthy , unto the last place . First therefore the say author write concern the faith or religion of the islander : and second , of their manner , custom , and course of life in manner follow . the first section . Adalbert metropolitan of Hamburg in the year of Krantzius in Christ 1070 . saw the islander convert unto Christianity : albeit , before the receive of Christian faith , they live accord to the law of nature , and do not much differ from our law : therefore at their humble request , he appoint a certain holy man name islief to be their first bishop . KRantzius in these word , and Munster other where , do seem to attribute unto the islander the prerogative of christian faith : and they shall deal both beseem themselves and the truth , if