be so bold ( most learned sir ) to bring such a incredible report to your ear ? neither have island any vulture , but that second kind of eagle , which Pliny note by their white tail , and call they Pygarsi : neither be there any with we , that can bear witness of the foresay spectacle : nor yet be it likely that raven and eagle will nestle in that place , when as they shall rather be drive from thence by fire and smoke , be thing most contrary to their nature . and yet notwithstanding for proof of this matter , as also of a strange tumult hear within the hollow of the mountain , they allege the experience of the inhabitant , which indeed testify all thing to the contrary . but whereabout shall that hole or window of the mountain be , by the which we may hear outcry , noise and tumult do among they , who inhabit the most contrary , distant , and remote place of the earth from we ? concern which thing i will ask the author of this fable many question , if i may but come to the knowledge of he : in the mean time i can wish that from henceforth he will learn to tell troth , and not presume with so impudent a face to inform excellent Peucer , or other , of such unknown and incredible matter . but to return to Munster , who endeavour to search out the cause of the great and strange fire of that famous hill Aetna , be it not monstrous that the very same thing which he there make natural , he shall here imagine to be preternatural , yea infernal ? but why do i speak of Aetna ? let we rather consider what Munster in another place think of the burn of Hecla . munsterus it be without doubt ( say he ) that some mountain cosmographit anc [ fieid burn in old time throughout the whole ' world ’• and in this our age do burn . as for example : ’ ' mount Hecla in island at certain season cast abroad great stone , spit out brimstone , and disperse ash , for such a distance round about , that the land can be inhabit within 20 . mile thereof . but where mountain do continual burn we understand that 116 there be no stop of the passage , whereby they pour forth abundance of fire sometime flame , and sometime smoke as it be a stream flood . but if between time the fire increase , all secret passage be shut up , the inner part of the mountain be notwithstanding inflame . the fire in the upper part , for want of matter , somewhat abate for the time . but when a more vehement spirit ( the same , or other passage be set open again ) do with great violence break prison , it cast forth ash , sand , brimstone , pumistone , lump resemble iron , great stone , and much other matter , not without the damage of the whole region adjoin . thus far Munster . where consider ( good reader ) how he cut his throat with his own sword , consider ( i say ) that in this place there be the very same opinion of the burn of Hecla , and the burn of Aetna , which notwithstanding in his 4 . book be very diverse , for there he be fain to run to infernali cause . a certain fiery mountain of west India have far more friendly cen - surers , and historiographer then our Hecla , who make not a infernali gulf thereof . the history of which mountain ( because it be short and sweet ) i will set down , be write by Hieronimus Benzo a italian , in his history of the new world , lib . 2 . Theise be the word . about 35 . mile distant from Leon there be a mountain which at a great hole belch out such mighty ball of flame , that in the night they shine far and near , above 100 mile . some be of opinion that within it be melt gold minister continual matter and nourishment for the fire . hereupon a certain Dominican Frier , determine to make trial of the matter , cause a brass kettle , and a iron chain to be make : afterward ascend to the top of the hill with 4 . other Spaniard , he let down the chain and the kettle 140 . elne into the furnace : there , by extreme heat of the fire , the kettle , and part of the chain melt . the monk in a rage run back to Leon , and chide the smith , because he have make the chain far more slender than himself have come - 117 mand . the smith hammer out another of more substance and strength then the former . the monk return to the mountain , and let down the chain and the cauldron : but with the like success that he have before . neither do the caldron only vanish 8c melt away : but also , upon the sudden there come out of the depth a flame of fire , which have almost consume the friar , 8c his companion . than they all return so astonish , that they have small list afterward to prosecute that attempt , 8cc . what great difference be there between these two censure ? in a fiery hill of west India they search for gold : but in mount Hecla of island they seek for hell . howbeit they will perhaps reject this as a thing too new , 8c altogether unknown to ancient writer . why therefore have not writer imagine the same prison of soul to be in chimaera a hill in Lycia ( which , by report , flame continual day and night ) that be in mount Hecla of island ? why have they not imagine the same to be in the mountain of Ephesus , which be touch with a burn torch , be report to conceive so much fire , that the very stone 8c sand lie in the water be cause to burn , 8c from the which ( a staff be burn upon