they , without any far hurt : which thing be necessary to be collect out of that , that have be before mention . and i be able to reckon up a great many of our countryman , who in you very act of hunt , wander somewhat far from the shore ( the ice be disperse by western wind ) and for the space of many league rest upon the ice , be chase with the violence of the tempest , and some whole day and night be toss up and down in the wave of the rage sea , and so ( for it follow by good consequence out of this problem of the historiographer ) have have experi - ■ ence of the torment , and pain of this hell of ice . who at the last , the weather be change , and the wind blow at the north , be transport again to the shore , in this their ship of ice , have return home in safety : some of which number be alive at this day . wherefore let such as be desirous of news snatch up this , and ( if they please ) let they frame a whole volume hereof , and add it to their history . neither do these vain fantasy deserve otherwise to be handle and confute , then with such like merriment and sporting . but to lay aside all jest , let we return to the matter from whence we be digress . first of all therefore it be evident enough out of the second section , ill ice float not about this hand , neither 8 . nor 7 . month in a year : then , that this ice ( although at some time by shuffle together it make monstrous sounding and crackling , and again at some time with the beat of the water , it send forth a hoarse kind of murmur ) do any thing at all resound or lament , like unto man voice , we may in no case confess . but whereas they say that , both in the isle , and in mount Hecla we appoint certain place , wherein the soul of our countryman 124 be torment , we utter stand to the denial of that : and we thank God and our lord Jesus Christ from the bottom of our heart ( who have deliver we from death and hell , and open unto we the gate of the kingdom of heaven ) because he have instruct we moor true , concern the place , whether the soul of our decease countryman depart , than these historiographer do tell we . we know and maintain that the soul of the godly be transport immediate out of their bodily prison , not into the papist purgatory , nor into the elysian field , but into Abraham bosom , into the hand of God , and into the heavenly paradise . we know and maintain concern the soul of the wicked , that they wander not into the fire and ash of mountain , or into visible ice , but immediate be carry away into utter darkness , where be weep and gnash of tooth , where there be cold also , and fire not common , but far beyond our knowledge and curious disputation . where not only body , but soul also , y ‘ be spirituali substance be torment . and we do also hold , y * the islander be no whit near unto this extreme and dark prison , in regard of the situation of place , than the german , Dane , Frenchman , italian , or any other nation whatsoever . neither be it any thing to the purpose , at all to dispute of the place or situation of this dungeon . it be sufficient for we , that ( by the grace and assistance of our lord Jesus Christ , with who precious blood we be redeem ) we shall never see that utter darkness , nor feel the rest of the torment that be there . now let we here shut up the disputation concern the hell of island . [ the ten 125 the ten section . if any man shall take a great quantity of this ice , and shall keep it never so wary enclose in a coffer or vessel , it will at that time when the ice thaw about the hand , utter vanish away , so that not the least part thereof , no nor a drop of water be to be find . oure , this be of necessity to be add : namely , Oy ‘ this ice , which accord to historiographer re - presenteth man voice , and be the place of the damn , do not as all other thing in this wide world , consist of you matter of some element . for whereas it seem to be a body , when indeed it be no body : ( which may direct be gather out of Frisius absurd opinion ) whereas also it pierce through hard and solid body , no otherwise then spirit and ghost : therefore it remain , see it be not of a elementary nature , y ‘ it must have either a spirituali , or a celestial , or a infernal matter . but y ‘ it shall be infernali , we can not be persuade , because we have hear that infernali cold be far more unsufferable than this ice , which use to be put into a box with man hand , and be not of force any whit to hurt even naked flesh , by touch thereof . nor yet will we grant it to be spirituali : for we have learn in natural philosophy , that spiritual substance can neither be see nor feel , and can have any thing take from they : all which thing do notwithstanding most manifest agree to this ice of the historiographer , howsoever accord to they it be supernatural . beside also , it be most true , that the very same ice be melt with the heat of the sun , and resolve into water , upon the upper part thereof , stand fisherman in as good stead to quench their thirst , as any land - river will do , which thing can no way be