380 . great piece , etc Andaluzia , under the conduct of Petro de Valdez , 10 . galleon , one patache , 800 . mariner , 2400 . soldier , 280 . great piece , etc item , under the conduct of John Lopez de Medina , 23 . great flemish hulk , with 700 . mariner , 3200 . soldier , and 400 . great piece . item , under Hugo de Moncada , four Galliasses contain 1200 . galleyslave , 460 . mariner , 870 . soldier , 200 . great piece , etc item , under Diego de Mandrana , four galley of Portugal ! , with 888 . galleyslave , 360 . mariner , 20 . great piece , and other requisite furniture . item , under Anthony de Mendoza , 22 . patache and zabra , with 574 . mariner , 488 . soldier , and 193 . great piece . beside the ship aforemention there be 20 . caravel row with oar , be appoint to perform necessary service unto the great ship : insomuch that all the ship appertain to this navy amount unto the sum of 150 . each one be sufficient provide of furniture and victual . the number of mariner in the say fleet be above 8000 . of slave 2088 . of soldier 20000 ( beside nobleman and gentleman voluntary ) of great cast piece 2650 . the foresay ship be of a huge and incredible 200 1588 . capacity and receipt . for the whole fleet be large enough to contain the burden of 60 . thousand ton . the galleon be 64 . in number , be of a huge description bigness , and very stately build , be of marvelous ° f ^ galeons . force also , and so high , that they resemble great castle , most fit to defend themselves and to withstand any assault , but in give any other ship the encounter far inferior unto the english and dutch ship , which can with great dexterity wield and turn themselves at all assay . the upperworke of the say galleon be of thickness and strength sufficient to bear off musketshot . the low work and the timber thereof be out of measure strong , be frame of plank and rib four or five foot in thickness , insomuch that no bullet can pierce they , but such as be discharge hard at hand : which afterward prove true , for a great number of bullet be find to stick fast within the massy substance of those thick plank . great and well pitch cable be twine about the mast of their ship , to strengthen they against the battery of shot . the Galliasses be of such bigness , that they con - description tain within they chamber , chapel , turret , pulpit , °^ the Gallt ~ and other commodity of great house . the Galliasses ’ be row with great oar , there be in each one of they 300 . slave for the same purpose , and be able to do great service with the force of their ordinance . all these together with the residue aforenamed be furnish and beautify with trumpet , streamer , banner , warlike ensign , and other such like ornament . their piece of brazen ordinance be 1600 and of the great iron a 1000 the bullet thereto belong be 120 . thousand . item of gun - poulder 5600 . quintal . of match 1200 . quintal . of musket and kaleiver 7000 of halebert and partisan 10000 201 bullet , gun - poulder , and other furniture . their provision of victual and other thing necessary . a spanish terza consist - eth of 3200 . soldier . moreover they have great store of canon , doublecanon , culvering and field - piece for land service . likewise they be provide of all instrument necessary on land to convey and transport their furniture from place to place ; as namely of cart , wheel , wagon , etc also they have spade , mattock and basket to set pioner on work . they have in like sort great store of mule and horse , and whatsoever else be requisite for a land - army . they be so well store of biscuit , that for the space of half a year , they may allow each person in the whole fleet half a quintali every month ; whereof the whole sum amount unto a hundred thousand quintal . likewise of wine they have 147 . thousand pipe , sufficient also for half a year expedition . of bacon 6500 . quintal . of cheese three thousand quintal . beside fish , rise , bean , pease , oil , vinegar , etc moreover they have 12000 . pipe of freshwater , and all other necessary provision , as namely candle , lantern , lamp , sail , hemp , ox - hides and lead to stop hole that shall be make with the battery of gunshot . to be short , they bring all thing expedient either for a fleet by sea , or for a army by land . this navy ( as Diego Pimentelli afterward confess ) be esteem by the king himself to contain 32000 . person , and to cost he every day 30 . thousand ducat . there be in the say navy five terzae of Spaniards , ( which terzae the Frenchman call regiment ) under the command of five governor term by the Spaniard , master of the field , and among the rest there be many old and expert soldier choose out of the garrison of Sicily , Naples , and Ter ^ era . their captain or colonel be Diego Pimentelli , don Francisco de Toledo , don Alonso de Lu ^ on , don Nicolas de Isla , don Augustin de Mexia ; who have each of they 32 . company under their conduct . beside the which company there be many band 202 1588 . also of castilian and Portugal , every one of which have their peculiar governor , captain , officer , colour and weapon . it be not lawful for any man , under grievous penalty , to carry any woman or harlot in the fleet : for which cause the woman hire certain ship , wherein they sail after the navy : some of the which be drive by tempest arrive upon the coast of France . the generail of this mighty navy , be don Alonso Perez de Guzman duke of Medina Sidonia , lord of S . Lucar , and knight of the golden fleece : by reason that the mark of santa Cruz appoint for the same dignity , decease before the time . John Martin de recall be admiral of