other half when the realm of England or any famous port thereof be subdue . and for the great furtherance of the whole business , he dispatch one D . Allen a english man ( who he have make Cardinali for the same end and purpose ) into the low country , unto who he commit the administration of all matter ecclesiastical throughout England . This Allen be enrage against his own native country , cause the pope bull to be translate into english , mean upon the arrival of the spanish fleet , to have it so publish in England . by which bull the excommunication of the two former pope be confirm , and the queen most sacred majesty be by they most unjusdy deprive of all princely title and dignity , her subject be enjoin to perform obedience unto the duke of Parma , and unto the pope legate . but that all matter may be perform with great secrecy , and that the whole expedition may seem rather to be intend against the low country , then against England , and that the english people may be persuade that all be but bare word and threaten , and that nought will come to effect , there be a solemn meeting appoint at borborch in Flanders for a treaty of peace between her majesty and the spanish king . ...... against which treaty the unite province make open protestation , use all mean possible to hinder it , 206 allege that it be more requisite to consult how the enemy now press upon they may be repel from off their frontier . howbeit some there be in England that great urge and prosecute this league , say , that it will be very commodious unto the state of the realm , as well in regard of traffic and navigation , as for the avoid of great expense to maintain the war , affirm also , that at the same time peace may easy and upon reasonable condition be obtain of the Spaniard . other think by this mean to divert some other way , or to keep back the navy now come upon they , and so to escape the danger of that tempest . howsoever it be , the duke of Parma by these wile enchant and dazzle the eye of many english and dutch man that be desirous of peace : whereupon it come to pass , that England and the unite province prepare in deed some defence to withstand that dreadful expedition and huge armada , but nothing in comparison of the great danger which be to be fear , albeit the constant report of the whole expedition have continue rife among they for a long time before . howbeit they give ear unto the relation of certain that say , that this navy be provide to conduct and waft over the indian fleet : which seem the more probable because the Spaniard be deem not to be man of so small discretion as to adventure those huge and monstrous ship upon the shallow and dangerous chanel of England . at length when as the french king about the end her majesty of May signify unto her majesty in plain term that warlike prepare shall stand upon her guard , because he be now , atlon sea ‘ most certain inform , that there be so dangerous a invasion imminent upon her realm , that he fear much lest all her land and sea - force will be sufficient to withstand it , etc then begin the queen majesty more careful to gather her force together , and to furnish she own ship of war , and the principali ship of her subject with soldier , weapon , and other necessary provision . the great and strong ship of the 207 the preparation of the unite province . whole navy she send unto Plymouth under the conduct of the right honourable lord Charles Howard , lord high admiral of England , etc under who the renown knight sir Francis Drake be appoint vice - admiral . the number of these ship be about a hundred . the lesser ship be 30 . or 40 . in number , and under the conduct of the lord Henry Seimer be command to lie between Dover and Caleis . on land likewise throughout the whole realm , soldier be muster and train in all place , and be commit unto the most resolute and faithful captain . and whereas it be common give out that the Spaniard have once unite himself unto the duke of Parma , mean to invade by the river of Thames , there be at Tilburie in Essex over - against Gravesend , a mighty army encamp , and on both side of the river fortification be erect , accord to the prescription of Frederike Genebelli a italian enginier . likewise there be certain ship bring to make a bridge , though it be very late first . unto the say army come in proper person the queen most royal majesty , represent Tomyris that Scythian warlike princess , or rather divine Pallas her self . also there be other such army levy in England . the principali catholic recusant ( lest they shall stir up any tumult in the time of the spanish invasion ) be send to remain at certain convenient place , as namely in the isle of Ely and at Wisbich . and some of they be send unto other place , to wit , unto sundry bishop and nobleman , where they be keep from endanger the state of the common wealth , and of her sacred majesty , who of her most gracious clemency give express commandment , that they shall be entreat with all humanity and friendship . the province of holland and Zealand , etc give credit unto their intelligence out of Spain , make preparation to defend themselves : but because the spanish ship be describe unto they to be so huge , 208 the material original position here be too large for reproduction in this downwodedfrom http : / / www . cambridge . org / corelgnivfrsityaf nj £ ew £ t > e 5 ^ 30 ^ ^ w ^ v , subject to the camhifeffdtfltrmfafuuse ^ hnpsvww - varbdgeog / oe . ems . 1588 . they rely partly upon the shallow and dangerous sea all along their coast . wherefore they stand most in doubt of the duke of Parma his small and flat - bottomed ship . howbeit they have all their ship of war to the number of 90 . and above , in a readiness for all assay : the great part whereof be of a small burden , as be more meet to sail upon their river and shallow sea : and with these ship they besiege