the distance of certain league , as well to look out for such ship as be happy under sail , as also for the better procure of sea - room : yet always common either that day , or the next day , toward evening , they come all together , with friendly salutation and gratulation one to a other : which they term by the name of hail : a ceremony do solemn , and in very good order , with sound of trumpet and noise of cheerful voice : and in such sort perform as be no small encouragement one to the other , beside a true report of all such accident , as have happen in their squadron . hitherto , as i say , our journey be most prosperous , and all our ship in very good plight , more than that the mary rose , by some mischance , either spring or spend her foreyarde , and two day after sir Robert cross have in a manner the like mischance . now be thus between the north cape , and cape S . Vincent , and yet keep such a course a loof , that by no mean , those from the shore may be able to descry we : the ten of June , a french bark , and a fleme come from the coast of Barbary be bring in by some of our company : but they be both of they very honourable and well use by the lord general : and so after a few day tarry , be 242 1596 . peaceable send away , after that they have confer with they about such matter , as be think good in their honourable wisdom . the twelve of the same month , sir Richard Levison knight , assist with sir Christopher blunt , fight with three hamburger , and in that fight slay two of they , and hurt eleven , and in the end bring they all three inn : and this be the very first handsel and maidenhead ( as it be ) of any matter of importance , or exploit worthy observation that be do in the way outward of this honourable voyage , and be so well perform of those most worthy gentleman , as every man high commend they for their great valour , and discretion , and no less rejoice at this their fortunate success . the next day after , sir Richard Weston meet with a Fleming , who refuse to vale his foretop , with the like good courage and resolution , attempt to bring he in . the fight continue very hot between they , for a good space : in the end the swan , wherein the say sir Richard be , have her fore - beake strike off : and have spend before in fight the one side of her tire of ordinance , while she prepare to cast about , and to bestow on he the other side , in the mean time the fleming take this opportunity , do get almost half a league from he : and so for that time make his escape . and yet the next day after , the say Fleming be in a manner get to the very mouth of the river up to Lisbon , be take , and bring in by m . Dorrell , be captain of the John and Francis of London . thus by divide their squadron , and spread the whole sea over a mighty way , there can not so much as the least pink pass but she be espy and bring in . the 13 . 14 . and 15 . day , certain little straggle caravel be take by certain of the fleet , and in one of they a young beggarly friar utter unlearned , with a great packet of letter for Lisbon : the poor wretch be marvellous well use by the lord 243 general , and that caravel , and the like still as they be take be command to give their attendance , and their honour do understand what they may of these poor man , of the estate of Spain for that present . about this time and in this place it be , that first in all my life time i do see the fly fish , who when they be hardly pinch and chase by the bonito and other great fish , than to avoid the danger , they present mount up , and forsake the water , and betake themselves to the benefit of their wing and make their flight , which common be not above five or six score , or there about , and then they be constrain to fall down into the water again , and it be the mariner opinion that they can fly no long than their wing be wet . the fish it self be about the bigness of a mack - rell or a great white hear , and much of that colour and make , with two large wing shape of nature very cunning , and with great delight to behold , in all the world much like to our gentlewoman dutch fan , that be make either of paper , or parchment , or silk , or other stuff , which will with certain plight easy run and fold themselves together . one of these fly fish be present to my lord admiral by a fisher man , and new take in his lord return from Cadiz , and then i have good leisure and opportunity to view it . the 18 . day early in the morning we take a irish man , and he come direct from Cadiz , have be there but the day before at twelve of the clock at high noon . this man be examine , tell true that there be now great store of ship at Cadiz , and with they xviii . or nineteeen . galley in a readiness , and that among those ship there be diverse of the king best : and namely , that the fillip of Spain be among they , but what their intent be , he can not tell . this man be command also to give his attendance . the 20 . of June be Sunday , we come before Cadiz very early in the morning , and in all this time as yet , the whole navy have not lose either by sickness or by any 244 other manner of way six man to my knowledge : as for the dutch company , i be not able precise to say what happen there , for that they be no part of our charge to be look unto , but be a regiment entire of themselves , and by themselves to be provide for , either for their diet , or for the preservation