judge they to eternal pain ( Matth . 13 . 42 . and 25 . 4 . ) but that he will reward they with eternal life , who believe in his name ( Matth . 25 . 34 . ) This Jesus Christ ( i say ) we acknowledge to be our redeemer ( Matth . 1 . 21 . ) our head ( 1 . Corinth . 12 . 27 . ) and our lord ( Ephe . 4 . 5 . ) and that we in our holy baptism do give , and have give our name unto he ( act 2 . 38 . ) and that we be engraft into he by baptism ( 1 . Corin . 12 . 13 . ) and this we do plain , ingenuous , free , and willing confess , and witness : and as for all other who invent any other name in heaven give unto man by which they may be save , we do earnest detest , curse , and condemn they ( act 4 . 12 . ) we hold his most holy word to be the only rule of our salvation : and that alone ( all man devise be cast away and contemn ) we propound unto our self as a infallible rule , and level of our faith ( Galat . 1 . 8 . Esai 29 . 13 . Ezech . 20 . ) which we contain under the name of the old and new testament ( Hebr . 8 . ) deliver by the prophet and apostle ( Ephe . 2 . 20 . ) by the singular and infinite goodness of God , preserve ever unto this day and to be preserve hereafter always in the church ( Matth . 28 . last verse . Psal . 71 . 18 . 1 . Cor . 11 . 26 . ) therefore we render thanks unto our most gracious and almighty God from our soul , and from our whole heart , because that even unto we be separate a huge distance from the rest of the body of his church , and inhabit the far part of the world , he will that this light grant for the revelation of the gentile , and prepare before the face of all people , and in old time favourable show to holy Simeon ( for in Christ be all the treasure of wisdom hide ) which now do 148 enlighten and cherish with the save beam thereof our whole nation , that he will ( i say ) this light shall come unto we . This in brief ( run over the very sum ) be our faith , and our religion , which by the direction of the holy spirit , and of his minister in the vineyard of Christ , we have draw and that out of the fountain of Israel . in the year of our lord 1070 . saw the islander convert unto Christ , etc it be doubtful unto we whether in these word Kranzius will have say , that you islander be first convert unto Christ in the year of our lord 1070 : or whether he do not deny that they be indeed before convert , but say that it be know first unto Adalbert that year . but whithersoever of these he affirm : notwithstanding the yearly record , and most ancient chronicle of our nation testify the contrary do make his credit to be suspect in this place , unto which record and chronicle , whether you have rather give assent concern our own proper and domestical affair , do within the bound of our island , or to Krantzius or any other be ignorant in the story of our country , i appeal , ' ( friendly reader ) unto your own discretion . for my part i be enforce by many reason to agree rather unto our own writer . for our countryman affirm those thing only that be know , and in a manner domestical : he write matter foreign and unknown : they have compile their history without the difiam , disgrace or reprehend of any other nation , only that they may assign unto their own act and exploit the true time or age thereof : he have intermeddle in his historic certain thing contrary to the truth , and that to the upbraid of our nation be most unknown unto he , as it shall immediate appear : they describe the name , year , order , succession of all the bishop of island : he mention only one , and that far otherwise then the truth . Furthermore , 149 the most ancient chronicle of island . that i may make good the credit of our Coun treyman , i will impart with stranger a few thing which i find in our most ancient record of the conversion of island unto Christ , and of the succession of bishop in our church . which although they be of little moment , and not altogether worthy to be write , yet must they of necessity be set down for the defence of the truth of our affair against Krantzius and other : thus therefore stand the certainty thereof . island first in the year of Christ 874 . island ( be indeed inhabit . discover before that time , as be above mention ) be then first of all inhabit by certain noruagian . their chieftain be one Ingulphus from who name the east cape of island be call ingulff hoffdi . Theise planter be reckon up by name in our record more than to the number of 400 . together with those of their blood and kindred , and great family beside : neither only be their number describe , but it be also plain set down , what coast , what shore , and what inland place each of they do occupy and inhabit , and what name the first inhabitant do give unto strait , bay , harborough , neckland , creek , cape , rock , crag , mountain , hill , valley , hammock , spring , flood , river . and to be short , what name they give unto their grange or house , whereof many at this day be retain and use . therefore the Norway with their company people all the habitable part of