bishop of Breme , to preach Christian faith in the north . 137 their anchor they go a shore , and kindle fierce ( for it be very likely that the mariner be not a little vex with the nip cold which they feel at sea ) and so provide victual for the rest of their journey . but when their fire grow very hot , this hand sink , and sudden vanish away , and the mariner escape drown very narrow with the boat that be present . this be the foundation of the matter , but how incredible it be , i appeal to the reader . but what ail these mariner , or what mean they to do , who in a tempestuous sea , see a rock before their eye , or ( as Munster say ) a little hand , will not rather with all diligence have avoid it for fear of run a shore and shipwreck , than to rest in such a dangerous harbour ? but in what ground shall the anchor be fasten ? for mariner for the most part be destitute of such long cable , whereby they may let down a anchor to the bottom of the main sea , therefore upon the back of whale , say Munster . but then they have need first to bear a hole for the flouke to take hold in . o silly mariner , that in dig can discern whale flesh from lump of earth , nor know the slippery skin of a whale from the upper part of the ground : without doubt they be worthy to have Munster for a pilot very in this place ( as likewise before treat of the land - miracle of island ) he gather fruit as they say , out of Tantalus his garden , and follow hard after those thing which will never and no where be find , while he endeavour to proule here and there for miracle , peruse sea and land to stuff up his history : where notwithstanding he can hunt out ought but feign thing . but they be call in their language Trollwal . go not far than your skill , Munster , for i take it you can skill of our tongue : and therefore it may be a shame for a learned man to teach other that which he know not himself : for such a attempt be subject to manifold error , as we will show by this your example . 138 for while you take in hand to school other , and to teach they by what name a whale - fish be to be call in our tongue , leave out through ignorance the letter h , which almost alone make up the signification of the word , you deliver that which be not true : for val in our language signify not a whale , but choose or choice of the verb eg well , that be to say , i choose , or i make choice , from whence val be derive , etc but a whale be call hualur with we , and therefore you ought to have write trollhualur . neither do troll signify the devil , as you interpret it , but certain giant that live in mountain . you see therefore ( and no marvel ) how you err in the whole word . it be no great injury to our language be in one word only : because ( doubtless ) you know not more than one . other also do offend in the same fault , for it be not to be allow that a certain man be about to publish a map of island receive from islander themselves , have rather mar the fashion of all , or in very deed of the most name of cape , bay , mountain , spring , river , hammock , valley , hill and town ( because that be ignorant of our language , he be not able to read those thing aright , which he receive from our countryman ) he have rather ( i say ) deprave and corrupt they all , then learn of the islander themselves , which at that time , namely in the year 1585 . live in the university of Hafnia , or copen Hagen , how every thing ought to be read and write . and we esteem he for this his wilful mar of our native name and word , ( whereupon it come to pass that we read the same , can acknowledge very few to be our own ) that he be no slight offender against our tongue , otherwise retain the pure and the ancient property . but now we have after some sort examine most of the miracle of island , which our writer have mention . notwithstanding before we enter into any 139 far matter , we think it good in this section to touch that which the last forename man ( in this map of island , that he cause to be put forth in you foresay year under his own name ) have give out concern two other fountain beside the former : whereof the one shall die white wool black , and the other black wool white . which thing where he receive it , or who be the whence he have it , we can by no mean imagine : for islanduh | t js not to founj ; in our own writer , nor in you wnie ' - writer of other country . but whence soever it be , it be but a tale , and have not one jot of truth in it . and although it be incredible that black wool may be die of a white colour , see it be affirm by Pliny , that black wool ( of all other ) will receive no colour : notwithstanding there be some such thing report by Theophrastus : namely , that there be a river in Macedonia which make black sheep white . speculum also , that Norway pamphlet call the royal lookingregale . glass } which i mention before , do attribute these fountain to Ireland , which be also call Hybernia , and not to island . which peradventure deceive the reader , read in a strange language s instead of R . that likewise deserve no better