the fleet . Francis Bovadilla be chief martial : who all of [ i . 594 . j they have their officer fit and requisite for the guide and manage of such a multitude . likewise Martin Alorcon be appoint vicar general of the inquisition , be accompany with more than a hundred monk , to wit , Jesuit , Capuchin , and friar mendicant . beside who also there be physician , chirurgeon , apothecary , and whatsoever else pertain unto the hospitali . over and beside the forename governor and officer be man of chief note , there be 124 . very noble and worthy gentleman , which go voluntary of their own cost and charge , to the end they may see fashion , learn experience , and attain unto glory . among who be the prince of Ascoli , Alonzo de Leiva , the mark de Pennafiel , the mark de Ganes , the mark de Barlango , count de Paredes , count de Yelvas , and diverse other marquess and earl of the honourable family of Mendoza , of Toledo , of pachieco , of Cordova , of Guzman , of Manricques , and a great theprepara - number of other . .................... while the Spaniard be furnish this their navy , aid tJe the duke of Parma , at the direction of king Philip , make Spaniards . 203 great preparation in the low country , to give aid and assistance unto the Spaniard ; build ship for the same purpose , and send for pilot and shipwrights out of Italy . in Flanders he cause certain deep channel to be make , and among the rest the channel of Yper common call yper - lee , employ some thousand of workman about that service : to the end that by the say chanel he may transport ship from Antwerp and ghendt to Bruges , where he have assemble above a hundred small ship call hoy be well store with victual , which hoy he be determine to have bring into the sea by the way of Sluys , or else to have convey they by the say yper - lee be now of great depth , into any port of Flanders whatsoever . in the river of Waten he cause 70 . ship with flat bottom to be build , every one of which shall serve to carry 30 . horse , have each of they bridge likewise for the horse to come on board , or to go forth on land . of the same fashion he have provide 200 . other vessel at Neiuport , but not so great . and at dunkerk he procure 28 . ship of war , such as be there to be have , and cause a sufficient number of mariner to be levy at Hamburgh , Breme , Emden , and at other place . he put in the ballast of the say ship , great store of beam of thick plank , be hollow and beset with iron pike beneath , but on each side full of clasp and hook , to join they together . he have likewise at grevel provide 20 . thousand of cask , which in a short space may be compact and join together with nail and cord , and reduce into the form of a bridge . to be short , whatsoever thing be requisite for the make of bridge , and for the bar and stop up of haven mouth with stake , post , and other mean , he command to be make ready . Moreover not far from Neiuport haven , he have cause a great pile of wooden faggot to be lay , and other furniture to be bring for the rear up 204 of a mount . the most part of his ship contain two oven a piece to bake bread in , with a great number of saddle , bridle , and such other like apparel for horse . they have horse likewise , which after their land shall serve to convey , and draw engine , field - piece , and other warlike provision . near unto Neiuport he have assemble a army , over the which he have ordain Camillo de monte to be campmaster . this army consist of 30 . band or ensign of italian , of ten band of wallon , eight of Scot , and eight of Burgundians , all which together amount unto 56 . band , every band contain a hundred person . near unto Dixmud there be muster 80 . band of dutch man , sixty of Spaniard , six of high german , and seven band of english fugitive , under the conduct of sir William Stanley a english knight . in the suburb of cortreight there be 4000 horseman together with their horse in a readiness : and at waten 900 . horse , with the troop of the mark deal gwasto captain generail of the horseman . unto this famous expedition and presuppose victory , many potentate , prince , and honourable personage hie themselves : out of Spain the prince of Melito call the duke of Pastrana and take to be the son of one ruygome de Silva , but in very deed account among the number of king fillip base son . also the mark of Burgrave , one of the son of Archiduke Ferdinand and Philippa Welsera . Vespasian Gonsaga of the family of Mantua , be for chivalry a man of great renown , and heretofore viceroy in Spain . item John Medici base son unto the duke of Florence . and Amadas of Savoy , the duke of Savoy his base son , with many other of inferior degree . the pope fur - likewise pope Sixtus quintus for the set forth of thermce to the the foresay expedition , as they use to do against Turk and infidel , publish a Cruzado , with most ample indulgence which be print in great number . Theise country . 205 a treaty of peace , to the end that England and the unite province may be secure of invasion . vain bull the english and Dutchmen deride , say that the devil at all passage lay in ambush like a thief , no whit regard such letter of safe conduct . some there be which affirm that the pope have bestow the realm of England with the title of defensor fidei , upon the king of Spain , give he charge to invade it upon this condition , that he shall enjoy the conquer realm , as a vassal and tributary , in that regard , unto the sea of Rome . to this purpose the say pope proffer a million of gold , the one half thereof to be pay in ready money , and the