the second , to sir Francis drake : the three , to captain Hawkins : the four , to captain Frobisher . the Spaniard in their sail observe very diligent and good order , sail three and four , and sometime more ship in a rank , and follow close up one after another , and the strong and great ship protect the lesser . the 25 . of the five and twenty of July when the Spaniard be come over - against the isle of wight , the lord admiral of England be accompany with his best ship , ( namely the lion , captain whereof be the lord Thomas Howard : the Elizabeth Jonas under the commandment of sir Robert southwel son in law unto the lord admiral : the bear under the lord Sheffield nephew unto the lord admiral : the victory under captain Barker : and the Galeon Leicester under the forename captain George Fenner ) with great valour and dreadful thunder of shot , encounter the spanish admiral be in the very midst of all his fleet . which when the Spaniard perceive , be assist with his strong ship , he come forth and enter a terrible combat with the english : for they bestow each on other the broad side , and mutual discharge all their ordinance , be within one hundred , or a hundred and twenty yard one of another . at length the Spaniard hoist up their sail , and again gather themselves up close into the form of a roundel . in the mean while captain Frobisher have engage himself into a most dangerous conflict . whereupon the lord admiral come to succour he , find that he have valiant and discreet behave himself , and that he have wise and in good time give over the fight , because that after so great a the 26 . of battery he have sustain no damage . July . for which cause the day follow , be the six and 218 1588 . twenty of July , the lord admiral reward he with the order of knighthood , together with the lord Thomas Howard , the lord Sheffield , m . John Hawkins and other . the same day the lord admiral receive intelligence from Newhaven in France , by certain of his pinnace , that all thing be quiet in France , and that there be no preparation of send aid unto the Spaniard , which be great fear from the guisian faction , and from the leaguer : but there be a false rumour spread all about , that the Spaniard have conquer England . the seven and twenty of July , the Spaniard about the z ^ . of the sunsetting be come over - against Dover , and . ride at anchor within the sight of Caleis , intend to ancr / before * hold on for dunkerk , expect there to join with Caleis . the duke of Parma his force , without which they be able to do little or nothing . likewise the english fleet follow up hard upon they , anchor just by they within culverin - shot . and here the lord Henry Seymer unite himself unto the lord admiral with his fleet of 30 . ship which ride before the mouth of Thames . as the spanish navy therefore lie at anchor , the duke of Medina send certain messenger unto the duke of Parma , with who upon that occasion many nobleman and gentleman go to refresh themselves on land : and among the rest the prince of Ascoli , be account the king base son , and a very proper and towardly young gentleman , to his great good , go on shore , who be by so much the more fortunate , in that he have not opportunity to return on board the same ship , out of which he be depart , because that in return home it be cast away upon the irish coast , with all the person contain therein . the duke of Parma be advertise of the spanish fleet arrival upon the coast of England , make all the haste he can to be present himself in this expedition for the performance of his charge : vain persuade 219 the 30 . oj July . himself that now by the mean of Cardinali Allen , he shall be crown king of England , and for that cause he have resign the government of the low country unto count Mansfeld the elder . and have make his vow unto saint marry of hall in Henault ( who he go to visit for his blind devotion sake ) he return towards Bruges the 28 . of July . the next day travel to dunkerk he hear the thunder ordinance of either fleet : and the same evening be come to Dixmud , he be give to understand the hard success of the spanish fleet . upon Tuesday which be the thirty of July , about high noon , he come to dunkerk , when as all the spanish fleet be now pass by : neither dare any of his ship in the mean space come forth to assist the say spanish fleet for fear of five and thirty warlike ship of holland and Zealand , which there keep watch and ward under the conduct of the admiral Justin of Nassau . the foresay five and thirty ship be furnish with most cunning mariner and old expert soldier , among the which be twelve hundred musketeer , who the state have choose out of all their garrison , and who they know to have be heretofore experience in sea - fight . this navy be give especial in charge not to suffer any ship to come out of the haven , nor to permit any zabra , patache or other small vessel of the spanish fleet ( which be more likely to aid the Dunkerkers ) to enter thereinto , for the great ship be not to be fear by reason of the shallow sea in that place . howbeit the prince of Parma his force be as yet unready , be not come on board his ship , only the english fugitive be seven hundred in number under the conduct of sir William Stanley , come in fit time to have be embark , because they hope to give the first assault against England . the residue show themselves unwilling and loath to 220 1588 . depart , because they see but a few mariner , who be by constraint draw into this expedition , and also because they have very bare provision of bread , drink , and other necessary victual . moreover , the ship of holland and Zealand stand continual in their sight , threaten shot and powder , and many inconvenience