ascribe to a spirituali substance . it be not therefore spirituali , nor yet infernali . now none will so bold to affirm , that it have celestial matter , lest some man perhaps may hereupon imagine , y ‘ this ice have bring hell ( which the historiographer 126 annex unto it ) down from heaven together with it self : or that the same thing shall be common unto heaven , be of one and the same matter with ice , and so that the prison of the damn may be think to have change place with the heavenly paradise , and all by the oversight of these historiographer . wherefore see the matter of this historical ice be neither elementary ( as we have so often prove by this place of Frisius ) neither spirituali , nor infernali , both which we have conclude evident , in short , yet sound and substantiali reason : nor yet celestial matter , which , religion for - biddeth a man once to imagine : it be altogether manifest , you accord to the say historiographer , there be no such thing at all , which notwithstanding they blaze abroad with such astonish admiration , and which we think to be a ordinary matter common see and feel . therefore it be , and it be not : which proposition when it shall fall out true , in the same respect , in the same part , and at the same time , then will we give credit to these freeze miracle . now therefore the reader may easy judge , that we need none other help to refute these thing , but only to show how they disagree one with another . but it be no marvel that he , which have once incline himself to the fabulous report of the common people , shall oftentimes fall into error . there be a like strange thing invent by another concern the sympathy or conjoin of this ice : namely , that it follow the departure of that huge lump , whereof it be a part , so narrow , and so swift , that a man by no diligence can observe it , by reason of the unchangeable necessity of follow . but we have oftentimes see such a solitary lump of ice remain ( after the other part thereof be drive away ) and lie upon the shore for many week together , without any post or engine at all to stay it . therefore it be plain that these miracle of ice be ground upon a more slippery foundation than ice it self . 127 Frisius . not far from these mountain ( the three forename ) decline to the sea shore , there be four fountain of a most contrary nature between themselves . the first , by reason of his continual ! heat convert into a stone any body cast into it , the former shape only still remain . the second be extreme cold . the three be sweet than honey , and most pleasant to quench thirst . the four be altogether deadly , pestilent , and full of rank poison . even this description of fountain do sufficient declare how impure that fountain be , out of which the geographer draw all these miraculous story . for he seem to affirm , that the three foresay mountain do almost touch one another : for he ascribe four fountain indifferent unto they all . otherwise , if he have not make they stand near together , he will have place next unto some one of these , two of the foresay fountain . but neither doe these mountain touch ( be distant so many league a sunder ) neither be there any such four fountain near unto they , which , he that will not believe , let he go try . but to confute these thing , the very contrariety of writer be sufficient . for another concern two fountain gainsayth Frisius in these word . there do burst out of the same hill Hecla two fountain , the one whereof , by reason of the cold stream , the other with intolerable heat exceed all the force of element . Theise be Frisius his two first fountain , save that here be omit the miracle of harden body , be by he attribute to one of the say fountain . but they can at one time break forth , both out of the mountain it self , and near unto the mountain . but here i will willing demand , by what reason any of the peripatetic can affirm , that there be some thing in nature cold than the element of water , or hot than the element of fire . from whence ( i pray 128 you , learned writer ) proceed this coldness ? from whence come this heat ? have we not learn out of your school that water be a element most cold and somewhat moist : and in such sort most cold , that for the make of secondary quality , it must of necessity be remit , and be simple , that it can be apply to the use of mankind ? i do here deliver these oracle of the natural philosopher , not know whether they be true or false . m . John Fernelius , lib . 2 . Phys . cap . 4 . may stand for one witness among all the rest , and in stead of they all . so excessive ( say he ) be these four first quality in the four element , that as nothing be hot than pure fire , and nothing light : so nothing be dry than earth , and nothing heavy : and as for pure water , there be no quality of any medicine whatsoever exceed the coldness thereof , nor the moisture of air . Moreover , the say quality be so extreme and surpass in they , that they can be any whit increase , but remit they may be . i will not hear heap up the reason or argument of the natural philosopher . Theise writer have need be wary of one thing , lest while they too much magnify the miracle of the fountain , they exempt they out of the number of thing create , aswell as they do the ice of the islander