side contain the arm of Zealand , with this inscription : glory to God only : and on the other side , the picture of certain great ship , with these word : the spanish fleet : and in the circumference about the ship : it come , go , and was . anno 1588 . that be to say , the spanish fleet come , go , and be vanquish this year ; for which , glory be give to God only . 232 compass and breech - loading gun from the spanish GALLEON ‘ FLORENCIA ’ find in Tobermory bay June I903 likewise they coin another kind of money ; upon the one side whereof be represent a ship flee , and a ship sink : on the other side four man make prayer and give thank unto God upon their knee ; with this sentence : man purpose ; God dispose . 1588 . also , for the last memory of the same matter , they have stamp in holland diverse such like coin , accord to the custom of the ancient roman . while this wonder and puissant navy be sail the people of along the english coast , and all man do now plain tnglandandof see and hear that which before they will not be per - v - tnceh swade of , all people throughout England prostrate fast , and give themselves with humble prayer and supplication unto thank unto God : but especial the outlandish church ( who have god - great cause to fear , and against who by name , the Spaniard have threaten most grievous torment ) enjoined to their people continual fast and supplication , that they may turn away God wrath and fury now imminent upon they for their sin : know right well , that prayer be the only refuge against all enemy , calamity , and necessity , and that it be the only solace and relief for mankind , be visit with affliction and misery . likewise such solemn day of supplication be observe throughout the unite province . also a while after the spanish fleet be depart , there be in England , by the commandment of her majesty , and in the unite province , by the direction of the state , a solemn festival day public appoint , wherein all person be enjoin to resort unto the church , and there to render thank and praise unto God : and the preacher be command to exhort the people thereunto . the foresay solemnity be observe upon the 29 of November ; which day be whole spend in fast , prayer , and give of thank . likewise , the queen majesty herself , imitate the ancient roman , ride into London in triumph , in regard of her own and her subject glorious deliverance . for be attend upon very solemn by all the principali 233 estate and officer of her realm , she be carry through she say city of London in a triumphant chariot , and in robe of triumph , from her palace unto the cathedral church of saint Paul , out of the which the ensign and colour of the vanquish Spaniards hang display . and all the citizen of London in their livery stand on either side the street , by their several company , with their ensign and banner : and the street be hang on both side with blue cloth , which , together with the foresay banner , yield a very stately and gallant prospect . her majesty be enter into the church , together with her clergy and noble give thank unto God , and cause a public sermon to be preach before she at Paul cross ; wherein none other argument be handle , but that praise , honour , and glory may be render unto God , and that god name may be extol by thanksgiving . and with her own princely voice she most christianly exhort the people to do the same : whereupon the people with a loud acclamation wish she a most long and happy life , to the confusion of her foe . thus the magnificent , huge , and mighty fleet of the Spaniard ( which themselves term in all place invincible ) such as sail not upon the ocean sea many hundred year before , in the year 1588 vanish into smoke ; to the great confusion and discouragement of the author thereof . in regard of which her majesty happy success all her neighbour and friend congratulate with she , and many verse be pen to the honour of her majesty by learned man , whereof some which come to our hand we will here annex . ’ 34 ad serenissimam ELIZABETHAM anglic reginam . THEODOR . BEZA . traverat innumeris Hispanus navibus aequor , Regnis juncturus sceptra Britanna suis . tanti huius , rogitas , quae motus causa ? superbos impulit ambitio , vexit avaritia . quam bene te ambitio mersit vanissima ventus ? et tumidos tumidae vos superasti aquae ! quam bene totius raptores orbis avaros , hausit inexhausti justa vorago maris encage at tu , cvi venti , cvi totum militat aequor , regina , d mundi totius una , decus , sic regnare deo pergo , ambition remota , Prodiga sic opibus pergo juvare pios , ut te Angli longum , longiim Anglis ipsa fruaris , quam dilecta bonis , tam metuenda malis . the same in english . the spanish fleet do float in narrow sea , and bend her ship against the english shore , with so great rage as nothing can appease , and with such strength as never see before : and all to join the kingdom of that land unto the kingdom that he have in hand . now if you ask what set this king on fire , to practise war when he of peace do treat , it be his pride , and never quench desire , to spoil that island wealth , by peace make great : his pride which far above the heaven do swell , and his desire as unsuffic ’ d as hell . but well have wind his proud blast overblow , and swell wave allay his swell heart , well have the sea with greedy gulf unknow , devour the devourer to his smart : and make his ship a prey unto the sand , that mean to pray upon another land . 235 and now , oh queen , above all other bless , for who both wind and wave be press to fight , so rule your own , so succour friend oppress , ( as far from pride , as ready to do right ) that England you , you England long enjoy , no less your friend delight , than foe annoy .