all military action , of as great praise and good desert as any gentleman of their degree whosoever , 247 have with they some of you ship of London , and some of the dutch squadron of reasonable burden , shall lead the dance , and give the onset , and that the two most noble lord generail with some other of their company , shall in their convenient time and order , second the main battle . the fight be begin and grow very hot , the lord general the earl of Essex , ( who infinite princely virtue , with triumphant fame , deserve to be immortalize ) be on port s . mary side , upon a sudden and unlock for of other , thrust himself among the foremost into the main battle . the other most honourable lord general ( who singular virtue in all respect be of such a excellency and perfection , as neither can my praise in any part increase they , nor any man envy any whit blemish or diminish they ) understanding , the most noble earl to be in fight among they , and perceive by the m . of his ship , the ark royal , that for lack of water , it be not possible , that he may put any near , without far delay , call present for his pynnesse , and in the same pynnesse put himself , and his honourable son L . William Howard that now be , aboard the honour de la mer , and there remain in the fight till the battle be end . the fight be very terrible , and most hideous to the beholder by the continual discharge of those roar thunder great piece , on all side , and so continue doubtful till about one or two of the clock in the afternoon : about which time the fillip , who in very truth , they have all most fancy unto , begin to yield and give over , her man that remain alive shift for themselves as they be able , and swim and run a shore with all the haste that they can possible , and therewithal ! , at the very same instant themselves fire their ship , and so leave she , and present thereupon a great argosy , with a other mighty great ship , fire themselves in you like manner . immediate hereupon , the residue of the ship , run they - self on ground , as far from we as they can , and thereby purchase their own safety , or rather breathe 248 / n ^ n a fJrytna / ty Henry Cornelius five ] * oom . / / / . » - lt / hyraph from a angtnal letter tn the Pofjteffian rf John thane . space for the time . of they all two fair ship only be board and take by our man with most part of their furniture in they , the one call S . matthy , a ship by estimation of some twelve . hundred ton , and the other saint Andrew , be a ship of not much lesser burden . the galley , see this sudden great victorious overthrow , make all the haste they can towards the bridge call Puente de sva ? o , and there shroud themselves in such sort as our ship can not by any mean possible come nigh they for lack of water . the spanish ship in all be lix . and as be say , all tall ship and very rich furnish and well appoint , whereof some of they be bind for the Indies , and other freight and furnish for Lisbon , as themselves affirm : and have we not come that very time that we do , ( which for my part , i do not attribute so much unto mere chance , as to some secret deep insight and foreknowledge of the two most worthy lord general , who no doubt spare for no cost or labour for true intelligence ) we have certain miss of they all . of what great wealth and riches these ship be , that i leave to other man judgement and report , but sure i be , that themselves offer two million and a half of ducat for the redemption of the good and riches that be in they : which offer of they , albeit it be accept of the lord general , and shall have be receive , yet we be defeat of it , as hereafter shall be more at large declare . what manner of fight this be , and with what courage perform , and with what terror to the beholder continue , where so many thunder tear piece be for so long a time discharge , i leave it to the reader to think and imagine . yet such be the great mercy and goodness of our live God , that in all this cruel terrible fight , in the end , there be not either slay or hurt by any manner of mean ( except one mischance that happen , whereof i will by and by make mention ) many above the number of 100 of our man : notwithstanding 249 diverse of our ship be many time shoot through and thorough : yea and some of they no less than two and twenty time , as i be inform by credible report of the captain and master themselves . i know not of any other hurt do , save only that sir Robert Southwell , who always show himself a most valiant resolute knight in all this action , make a little too much haste with his pinnace to board the fillip , have there his say pinnace burn with the fillip at the same instant , and yet by good care and diligence his man be save . one other mischance ( as i say ) there happen , and it be thus : one of the Fleming flyboat , who have , in all the conflict before , carry himself very well and valiant , about ten of the clock while the fight continue sharp , chance by great negligence and misfortune , to be fire and blow up by his own powder , who can not have any few in he , than one hundred fight man by all supposal , and so in the very twinkle of a eye , both ship and man be all cast away , except seven . or viii . which by very good fortune , and great care and diligence of some of the other ship be save . immediate upon this notable victory without any far stay in all the world , the lord general the earl of Essex put to shore , and land about 3000 . shot , and pikeman : of