say stone do show the number of their year , by the number of their bark , or stony husk . So ( if we may give credit to author ) drop of the Goth fountain be disperse abroad , become stone . and in Hungary , the water of Cepusius be pour into pitcher , be convert to stone . and Pliny report , that wood be cast into the river of the Cicones , and into the Veline lake in the field of Pice , be enclose in a bark of stone grow over it . the second be extreme cold . as for the second fountain , here be none to any man knowledge so extreme cold : in deed there be very many that be indifferent code , insomuch that ( our common river in the summer time be lukewarm ) we take delight to fetch water from those cool spring . it may be that there be some far cold in other country : for Cardane make mention of a river ( stream from the top of a hill in the field of Corinth ) cold than snow : and within a mile of Culma , the river call Insana seem to be very hot be most extreme cool , etc the three be sweet than honey . neither be this altogether true . for there be not any fountain with we , which may in the least respect be compare with the sweetness of honey . and therefore saxon write more 132 1592 . true , say , that certain fountain ( for there be very many ) yield taste as good as beer : and also in the same place there be fountain and river not only of diverse taste , but of diverse colour . and albeit natural philosopher teach , that water natural of it self have neither taste nor smell , yet it be likely ( as we have touch before , which other call per accidens ) that oftentimes it represent the quality of that earth wherein it be engender , and through the vein whereof it have passage and issue : and from hence proceed the diverse and sundry smell , colour and savour of all water . of such water do Seneca make mention , whereof some provoke hunger , other make man drunken , some hurt the memory , and some help it , and some resemble the very quality and taste of wine , as that fountain which Pliny speak of in the he of i ” Andros , within the temple of Bacchus , which in the mtrab - auscult - nones of January use to flow over with wine . and Aristotle report , that in the field of Carthage there be a fountain which yield oil , and certain drop smell like cedar . also Orcus a river of Thessaly flow into Peneus , swim aloft like oil . Cardane report , that there be in Saxony , near unto the town of bruns - wic , a fountain mix with oil : and another in Suevia near unto the abbey call Tergensch . also in the valley of the mountain Jurassus . he suppose the cause of this thing to be very fatty pitch , which can but contain oil in it . the same author say : it be report that in Cardia near to the place of Daschylus , in the white field , there be water sweet than milk . another also near unto the bridge which we pass over go to the town of Valdeburg . Propertius likewise in the three book of his elegy mention certain water represent the savour of wine in these word . amid the isle of Naxus lo , with fragrant smell and fine a freshet run ; the naxian go fill cup , carouse , there ’ s wine . 133 this Naxus be one of the hand call Cyclades lie in the tegaean sea . Cardane give a reason hereof , namely , because Hydromel or water - honey , in long continuance will become wine . Aristotle name a fountain in Sicilia , which the inhabitant use in stead of vinegar . the same author make the cause of savour in water to be heat , because the earth be hot change and give savour unto the water . now concern the colour of water so say Cardane . there be the same reason ( say he ) of the colour of water , that there be of the savour thereof , for both have their originali from the earth . for there be white water within two mile of Glauca a town in Misena : red water in Radera a river of Misena not far from Radeburg . : and in old time near unto Joppa in Judea : green water in the mountain of Carpathus by Neusola : sky - coloured or blue water between the mountain of Feltrius and Tarvisius : and it be report that there be water of that colour in Thermopylis : coalblack water in Alera a river of Saxony , at that place where it dischargeth it self into the Weser . the cause of these colour be the colour of the soil . also Aristotle say , that about the promontory of Japigia , there be a fountain which stream blood : add moreover , that mariner be drive far from that place of the sea , by reason of the extreme stench thereof . Furthermore , they say that in Idumaea there be a fountain which change colour four time in a year : for sometime it be green , sometime white , sometime bloody , and sometime muddy colour . concern the smell of water , thus write Cardane . there be the like reason of difference in smell . but for the most part the steam of water be unpleasant , because the earth do seidome time smell well . the water of the river Anigris in Aelis stink , to the destruction , not only of fish , but also of man . about Meton in Messania , out of a certain pond there have be draw most sweet smell , and odoriferous water . j34 i do recite all these example to the end that no man shall make a great wonder at the colour , smell , and savour of water that be