to contend with his pestiferous rancour , by reproach , and rail speech ( for as it be in the common proverb : i know , that if i strive with dung most vile , how ere it be , my self i shall defile ) but that i may satisfy all honest and well affect man , even stranger themselves , who shall hereafter read or heare ^ or have heretofore hear that germane pasquill , lest they also shall think that we worthy sustain so monstrous a disgrace : and also that i may from henceforth , if it be possible , restrain other ( who use those venomous germane rhyme to the upbrade of our nation , and from hence borrow their scoff , and reproachful taunt to the debase of we Iselanders ) from that liberty of backbiting . therefore , that i may not be tedious to the reader with long circumstance , i will come to the rehearse of those thing which that rail germane have heap up in his lewd pasquill : who also i can bring in , repeat his friendly verse of the islander , within the compass of this my book , but that i do foresee that 180 the say slanderous libel be stuff with so many and diverse reproach , may breed offence to all honest man , and deter they from read it , with the filthiness thereof . i will therefore repeat the principali matter ( omit those thing which he have common with other , or , that heretofore have be examine ) but far more modest than he , lest ( as i say ) i cause good and learned man ear to tingle at his lewd and unseemly rhyme : they that be desirous to see or hear he , let they inquire at the stationer . it be no part of our meaning ( i say ) to defile these paper with his stink slander , or with the filthy sink of his reproach . first therefore , this our goodly germane history - the first grapher object that there be many pastors in island , objec , ion or which preach not to their people once in two year , as p ' it be read in the former edition of this pasquill , which notwithstanding the latter edition do refute : say that the say pastors use to preach but five time in a whole year : which two , how well they agree together , let the reader be judge , see it be manifest that the author himself , present after the first edition , have scarce see island . so oftentimes one lie betray another , accord to that say : truth agree unto truth ; but falsehood agree neither to truth nor to falsehood . but sith it be our part not to dissemble the truth in any place , we will not deny that holy sermon , about the time wherein this sycophant live in island , namely in the year 1554 , be seldome in use than they be at this day , namely , the darkness of popery be scarce at that time dispel . which also be to be understand concern the psalm of David mumble by the common people in latin , as he cast we in the tooth : for the papist ground all the hope of their salvation in the mass , do little regard the sermon , or doctrine . but after we be free from that mist , it have be ( god be thank ) far otherwise with we : although we can 181 altogether excuse the dulness , sloth , and preposterous care of certain of our pastors . which , whether it agree to any of their countryman or no , let other nation judge . the twelve section . the second second , the trifler shameful report , that adultery teproch . and whoredom be not only public , and common vice among islander : but that they be not account by they for vice . although indeed these most filthy abomination , even in our common wealth , be not altogether unusual : notwithstanding , since all man know that they be far more common in other nation , where be great multitude of people , he do undeserved , and malicious note the islander rather with this reproach , then other people and nation , who be more infamous with this crime then our countryman . and albeit i wish with all my heart that vice and enormity be much less wink at in our country , than we see they be , yet notwithstanding this juggler , by reason of his natural inclination to backbiting , have add this in his last reproach : namely , that these vice by the iselander be not account for vice . for , in what common wealth dare the impudent companion affirm this to be true ? what ? in that common wealth which have swear to observe the law contain in our statute book under the title of Manhelge chapter 28 , whereby it be enact , that whosoever commit adultery with another man wife the second time , his good be { i . 586 . ] confiscate , he shall be punish with death ? or in that common wealth , which not long since have inflict the penalty of 80 daller upon a servant commit adultery with his master wife ? or in that common wealth which have decree , that if he do not pay , nor lay in surety at the day appoint , he shall | be banish the country ? or in that common wealth the politic law whereof doe straight command that whosoever be accord to 182 law find in adultery with another man wife , by her husband , if he escape , he shall undergo the punishment of manslaughter ? or in that common wealth , the politic law whereof do also enjoin a man that be take in carnail copulation with the mother , daughter , or sister , by the son , father , or brother , to redeem his life with the one half of that which he ought to have pay , if he have shed the innocent blood of the say party ? or in that common wealth the politic law whereof have note and