their history , they cause their credit in other place also to be suspect : and hereby they gain thus much ( as Aristotle say ) that when they speak truth no man will believe they without suspicion . 171 but attend a while ( reader ) and consider with i the gravity and wisdom of these great clerk : that we may not let pass such a notable commendation of island . Krantzius and Munster have hitherto teach , that the islander be Christians . also : that before the receive of Christian faith they live accord to the law of nature . also : that the islander live after a law not much differ from the law of the germane . also , that they live in holy simplicity . attend i say ( good reader ) and consider , what mark of Christianity , of the law of nature , of the germane law , of holy simplicity , these author require , and what mark they show and describe in the islander . there be one of the say mark before : namely , that the islander do place hell or the prison of the damn , within the gulf and bottom of mount Hecla : concern which , read the first section of this part , and the seven section of the former . the second mark be , that with the Anabaptists they take away distinction of property and possession : in the section next go before . the three and most excellent be this : those singular and natural affection , that love and tender care , and that fatherly and godly mind of the islander towards their child , namely that they make the same account of they , or less than they do of their dog . what ? will Munster and Krantzius after this fashion picture out unto we the law of Christ , the law of nature , the law of the germane , and holy simplicity ? o rare and excellent picture , though not altogether match the skill of Apelles : oh sharp and wonderful invention , if authentical : oh knowledge more than humane , though not at all divine . but we islander ( albeit the far of all nation and inhabit a freeze clime ) require far other note of Christianity . for we have the commandment of God , that every man shall love his neighbour as himself . now there be none ( i suppose ) that do not love or esteem more of himself then of his dog . and if 172 there aught to be so great favour , so great estimation , so great love unto our neighbour , then how great affection do we owe unto our child ? the most near and inseparable love of who , beside that nature have most friendly settle in our mind , the love of God also command we to have speciali regard in train they up ( Exod . 12 . 24 . Ephes . 6 . 4 . ) namely , that there may be in holy marriage certain seminary of God church , and exercise of all piety and honesty : accord to the excellent say of the poet . god will have each family , a little church to be . also of humane life or man society , a school or college be holy matrimony . that it may be manifest , that among Christians their son be more to be account of and regard , than their dog : and if any do not otherwise esteem of they , that they be not Christians . but this natural affection toward our most dear offspring be plain see in the heathen themselves : that whosoever you total deprive of this , you deny they also to be man . the mother of Carthage testify this to be true , when as in the three punic war the most choice and gallant young man in all the city be send as pledge into Sicilia , who they follow unto the ship with most miserable weep and lamentation , and some of they be with grief separate from their dear son , when they see the sail hoist , and the ship depart out of the haven , for very anguish cast themselves headlong into the water : as Sabellicus witness . Egaeus do testify this , who when he see the ship of his son Theseus , return out of Crete with black sail , think that his son have perish , end his life in the next water : Sabell . lib . 3 . cap . 4 . Gordianus the elder , proconsul of Africa , do testify this , who likewise , upon rumour of the death of his son , 173 hang himself . campoful . lib . 5 . cap . 7 . also Jocasta the daughter of Creon , Auctolia daughter of Simon , Anius king of the tuscan , Orodes king of the parthian , and a infinite number of other . concern who read Plutarch stat . lib . 2 . and other author etc to these may be add that sentence , love descend , etc so that you see , it be no less proper to a man entire to love his child , then for a bird to fly : that if our writer at any time have confess the islander to be man ( much less to be Christians , ) they must , will they will they , ascribe unto they this love and affection towards their child : if not , they do not only take from they the title and dignity of man , but also they debase they under every brute beast , which even by the instinct of nature be bind with exceed great love , and tender affection towards their young one . i will not add against this shameless untruth most notable example of our own countryman : i will omit our law of manstealing , more ancient than the islander themselves , be receive from the noruagians , and be extant in our book of law under the title Manhelge cap . 5 . whosoever sell a freeman ( any man much more a son ) unto stranger etc now if any man be drive to that hard fortune , that he must needs commit