manifest how the mariner course ( be it never so direct , as they suppose ) do at all time swerve . in you mean while therefore i will set down diverse opinion of author , concern the situation of island , that from hence every man may gather that of the distance which 98 seem most probable ; until perhaps my self be one day teach by my own experience , may , if not intrude , yet at least adjoin , what i shall think true as touch this matter . Longit . latitude . deg . min . deg . min . Munster place island almost in 20 68 gemma Frisius place the midst of island 7 O 65 30 thirte 5 50 64 44 Nadar 6 40 57 10 the west shore of island 20 O 63 0 the promontory of Chos 22 46 63 0 the east shore be extend North - ward , and have bound of the north shore be extend West - ward , and have bound of extension in 28 o 69 0 the description of the west side . the promontory of Heckelfell 25 O 67 0 the promontory of madher 21 20 65 10 the inland city of island holen the seat of a bishop 28 O 67 50 schalholten the seat of a bishop 22 63 30 by mid - island 69 island stretch it self 3 degree within the circle arctic from the equinoctial , insomuch that you say circle arctic do almost divide it in the midst etc seven day sail from island to Hamburg . island but two day sail distant from faar - lslands , y from the desert shore of Norway . there be other also , who either in their map , or write have note the situation of island : notwithstanding it be to no purpose to set down any more of their opinion , because the more you have , the more contrary shall you find they . for my part , albeit i have probable conjecture persuade i not to believe any of the former opinion , concern the situation of island , but to dissent from they all : yet have i rather leave the matter in suspense then affirm a uncertainty , until ( as i have say ) i may be able perhaps one day not to guess at the matter , but to bring forth my own observation , and experience . a certain writer have put down the distance between the mouth of Elbe and batzende in the south part of island to be 400 league : from whence if you shall account the difference of longitude to the meridian of Hamburgh , island must have none of the forename longitude in that place . i be able to prove by three sundry voyage of certain hamburger , that it be but seven day sail from island to Hamburgh . beside all those island , which by reason of the abundance of sheep , be call fareyiar , or more right faareyiar , as likewise the desert shore of Norway , be distant from we but two day sail . we have four day sail into habitable Gronland : and almost in the same quantity of time we pass over to the province of Norway , call Stad , lie between the town of Nidrosia or Trondon , and Bergen , as we find in the ancient record of these nation . 100 in this hand , at the summer solstitium , the sun pass through the sign of cancer , there be no night , and therefore at the winter solstitium there be no day . also : Vadianus . but in that hand , which far within the arctic circle be seat in the main ocean , at this day call island , and next unto the land of the freeze sea , which they call Engrontland , there be many month in the year without night . at the solstitium of winter , that there be no day ( that be to say , no time , wherein the sun be see above the horizon ) we confess to be true only in that angle of island ( if there be any such angle ) where the pole be elevate full 67 degree . but at holen ( which be the bishop seat for the north part of island , and lie in a most deep valley ) the latitude be about 65 degree and 44 minute , as i be inform by the reverend father , gudbrand , bishop of that place : and yet there , the short day in all the year be at least two hour long , and in south - island long , as it appear by the table of mathematician . heerehence it be manifest , first that island be not situate beyond the arctic circle : second , that in island there be not want in summer solstitium many night , nor in winter solstitium many day . the three section . it be name of the ice which continual cleave unto the north part thereof . another write : from the west part of Norway there lie a hand which be name of the ice , environ with a huge sea , and be a country of ancient habitation , etc Zieglerus . this be Thyle , whereof most of the ancient writer have make mention . it be name of ice , etc island have be call by three name , one after another . for one Naddocus a norvagian bear , who be think to be the first 101 Olaus magnus and other . island be not within the circle arctic . Saxo . islandfirst discover by Naddocus in a tempest . discoverer of the same , as he be sail towards the faar - iland , through a violent tempest do by chance arrive at the east shore of island ; where stay with his whole company certain week , he behold abundance of snow cover the top of the mountain , and there - sneland . upon , in regard of the snow , call this hand Sneland . after he one Gardarus , be move thereunto by the report which Naddocus give out concern island , go to seek the say hand ; who , when he have find Gardasholme . it , call it after