catch by the spirit , he be throw down upon the ground . he will fain have make a shout , and be not able . at length ( when the spirit and he have struggle together upon the ground a good while ) he be find by certain passenger , and carry home half dead . and when he be come to himself again , be ask what be the matter , he up and tell this strange relation . hereupon ( be utter daunt , and discourage , when neither by his friend , nor by physician , nor by priest , he can be persuade , that these thing be but his own conceit , and that there be no such matter ) 8 . day after he die . i hear also afterward of other which be his neighbour , that no man can more constant affirm himself to be wound of his enemy , than this man do , that he 121 be cast upon the ground by a ghost . and when some demand what he do , after he be tumble on the earth ? the dead man ( quoth he ) lay his hand to my throat , go about to strangle i : neither be there any remedy , but by defend my self with my own hand . when other doubt lest he may suffer these thing of a live man , they ask he how he can discern a dead man from a live ? to this , he render a very probable reason , say that he seem in handle to be like cottum , and that he have no weight , but hold he down by main force . and present after he add . in like manner as in island , so in the desert sand of . / Egypt , Ethiopia , and India , where the sun be hot , the very same apparition , the same spright be wont to delude wayfare man . thus much Cardane . yet from hence ( i trow ) no man will conclude as our writer of island do , that in the place of . / Egypt , . / Ethiopia , and India , there be a prison of damn soul . i think good to write these thing out of Cardane , that i may bring even the testimony of stranger on our side , against such monstrous fable . this place of Cardane impli these two thing , namely y * apparition of spright be not proper to island alone ( which thing all man know , if they do not malicious feign themselves to be ignorant ) and second that that conference of the dead with the live in you gulf of Hecla be not ground upon any certainty , but only upon fable coin by some idle person , be more vain than any bubble , which the brutish common sort have use , to confirm their opinion of the torment of soul . and be there any man so fantastical , that will | be induce to believe these gulf , mention by writer , to be any where extant , although they be never so full of dead man miracle ? yea doubtless . for from hence also they say , y * reproach be just use against our nation : namely , y * there be nothing in all the world more base , and worthless then it , which contain hell within the bound thereof . This very be the good that we have get 122 by those historiographer , who have be so greedy to publish novelty . but this opinion , breed by the sottishness of the common people have hitherto ( as i hope ) be sufficient overthrow as a thing foolish and vain , and as be devise for the upbraid of our nation . wherefore , proceed ( friendly reader ) and be far instruct in this philosophy of infernali secret . the nine section . but round about the hand , for the space of 7 . or 8 . Frisius and month in a year there float ice , make a munster - miserable kind of moan , and not unlike to man voice , by reason of the clash together . the inhabitant be of opinion that in mount Hecla and in the ice , there be place wherein the soul of their countryman be torment . no doubt , a worthy augmentation of the history , concern the hell of island , shut up within the bottom of one mountain , and that no great one : yea , at some time ( by fit and season ) change place : namely , when it be weary of lurk at home by the fire side within you mountain , it delight to be range abroad , and to venture to sea , but without a ship , and to gather it self round into morsel of ice . Come forth , and give ear all the y ‘ wonder at this secret . Lo , i will afford these historiographer another addition of history very notable . let they write therefore , that you islander have not only hell within their jurisdiction , but also y * they enter into it willing and witting , and come forth again untouched you very same day . how can that be ? why : it be a ancient custom of the island take of that they which inhabit near the sea shore do usual s ™ 1 ” on the go betimes in a morning to catch seal , even upon the ' very same ice which the historiographer make to be hell , and in the evening return home safe and sound . set down also ( if you please ) that the prison of the damn be keep in store by the islander in coffer and vessel , as we shall anon hear out of Frisius . 123 ice fioat not 7 . or 8 . month about island . but you have need wise to foresee , lest you islander beguile all your country of the commendation of courage and constancy : namely , as they ( for so it please your writer to report ) who both can and will endure the torment of hell , and who be able to break through and escape