they , 8c trail after a man on the ground ) there proceed whole river of fire , as Pliny testify ? why not in cophantrus a mountain of Bactria , always burn in the night ? why not in the isle of Hiera , flame in the midst of the sea ? why not in Aeolia in old time likewise burn for certain day in the midst of the sea ? why not in the field of Babylon burn in the day season ? why not in the field of Aethiopia glitter always like star in the night ? why not in the hill of Lipara open with a wide and bottomless gulf ( as Aristotle bear record ) whereunto it be dangerous to approach in the night : from whence the sound of cymbal and the noise of rattle , with unwonted and uncouth laughter be hear ? why not in the field of Naples , near unto Puteoli ? why not in the pike of Teneriffa before mention , like 118 Aetna continual burn and cast up stone into the air , as Munster himself witness ? why not in that aethiopian hill , which Pliny affirm to burn more than all the former ? and to conclude , why not in the mountain of Vesuvius , which ( to the great damage of all the country adjoin , and to the utter destruction of Caius Plinius pry into you cause of so strange a fire ) vomit out flame as high as the cloud , fill the air with great abundance of pumistone , and ash , and with palpable darkness intercept the light of the sun from all the region thereabout ? i will speak , and yet speak no more than the truth : because in deed they foresee , that man will yield no credit to those thing as be too well know , though they shall have feign they to have be the flame of hell : but they think the burn of Hecla ( the rumor whereof come more slow to their ear ) to be fit for the establish of this fond fable . but get you pack , your fraud be find out : leave off for shame hereafter to persuade any simple man , y ‘ there be a hell in mount Hecla . for nature have teach both we and other ( maugre your opinion ) to acknowledge her operation in these firework , not the fury of hell . but now let we examine a few more such fable of you common people , which have so unhappy mislead our historiographer and cosmographers . 119 [ the eight the eight section . near unto the mountain ( the 3 . forename Hecla 8cc . ) there be three vast hole , the depth whereof , especial at mount Hecla , can be discern by any man , be he never so sharp sight : but there appear to the beholder thereof certain man at that instant plunge in , and as yet draw their breath , who answer their friend ( exhort they with deep sigh to return home ) that they must depart to mount Hecla : and with that , they sudden vanish away . to confirm the former lie , of a earthly and visible hell ( albeit i will easy grant that Frisius in write these thing do not intend to reproach any , but only to blaze abroad new and incredible matter ) certain idle companion know neither hell nor heaven have invent this fable , no less reproachful than false , and more vain 8c detestable than sicilian scoff . which fellow these writer ( be otherwise man of excellent part , and to who learning be much indebt ) have follow with a over hasty judgement . but it be to be wish , that none will write history with so great a desire of set forth novelty 8c strange thing , that they fear not , in that regard to broach any fabulous 8c old - wive toy , 8c so to defile pure gold with filthy mire . but i pray you , how may those drown man be swim in the infernal lake , 8c yet for all that , parl with their acquaintance 8c friend ? what ? will you conjure , 8c raise up unto we from death to life old Orpheus confer with his wife Eurydice ( draw back again down to the stygian flood ) 8c in these part of the world , as it be by the bank of snowy Tanais , 8c Hebrus descant upon his harp ? but in very deed although other will not acknowledge the falsehood , 8c vanity of these trifle , yet Cardane be a diligent considerer of all thing in his 18 . book de subtilitate , do acknowledge 8c find they 120 out . who word be these . there be Hecla a mountain in island , which burn like unto / Aetna at certain season , and hereupon the common people have conceive a opinion this long time , that soul be there purge : some , lest they shall seem liar , heap up more vanity to this fable , that it may appear to be probable , and agreeable to reason . but what be those vanity ? namely , they feign certain ghost answer they , that they be go to mount Hecla : as the same Cardane say . and further he add . neither in island only , but every where ( albeit seidome ) such thing come to pass . and then he tell this story follow of a man - killing spirit . there be ( say he ) solemnize this last year the funerali of a common citizen , in the gate near unto the great church , by that marketplace , which in regard of the abundance of herb , in our tongue have the name of the herbmarket . there meet with i one of my acquaintance : i ( accord to the custom of physician ) present ask of what disease the man die ? he give i answer that this man use to come home from his labour 3 . hour within night : one night among the rest he espy a hobgoblin pursue he : which to avoid , he run away with all speed : but be