. we will prosecute in order the property of these fountain set down by the foresay writer . the first by reason of his continual heat . there be many very many bath or hot fountain in island , but few ™ \ 11 i * i 1 * 1 1 1 island . vehement hot , which we think ought not to make any man wonder , when as i have learn out of author , that Germany every where abound with such hot bath , especial near the foot of the Alps . the hot bath of Baden , gebarsvil , Calben in the duchy of Wittenberg and many other be very famous : all which Fuchsius do mention in his book de arte medendi . and not only Germany , but also France , and beyond all the rest Italy that mother of all commodity , say Cardan . and Aristotle report , that about Epyrus iv 129 1 these hot water do much abound , whereupon the place be call Pyriplegethon . and i say , these thing shall therefore be you less admire , because the searcher of nature have as well find out cause of the heat in water , as of the fire in mountain : namely , that water run within the earth through certain vein of brimstone and Allom , and from thence take not only heat , but taste also , and other strange quality . Aristotle in his book de mundo have teach this . the earth ( say he ) contain within it fountain not only of water , but also of spirit and fire : some of they flow like river , do cast forth red hot iron : from whence also do flow , sometime lukewarm water , sometime scald hot , and sometime temperate . and Seneca . Empedocles think that bath be make hot by fire , which the earth secret contain in many place , especial if the say fire be under that ground where the water pass . and Pontanus write very learned concern the baian bath . no marvel though from bank of baian shore hot bath , or vein of scald liquour flow : for Vulcan forge incense evermore do teach we plain , that heart of earth below and bowel burn , and fire enrage glow . from hence the flit flood send smoky stream , and bath do boil with secret burn gleam . i think good in this place to touch that which Saxo Grammaticus the most famous historiographer of the Dane report . that certain fountain of island do sometime increase and flow up to the brink : sometime again they fall so low that you can scarce discern they to be fountain . which kind of fountain , albeit they be very seidome find with we , yet i will make mention of some like unto they , produce by nature in other country , lest any man shall think it somewhat strange . Pliny make a great recital of these . there be one ( say he ) in the isle of Tenedos , which at the solstitium of summer do always flow from the 130 three hour of the night , till the sixth . in the field of Pitinas beyond the apennine mountain , there be a river which in the midst of summer always increase , and in winter be dry up . he make mention also of a very large fountain , which every hour do increase and fall . neither be it to be omit , that some river run under the ground , and after that fall again into a open chanel : as Lycus in Asia , Erasinus in Argolica , Tigris in Mesopotamia , unto which Cardan add Tanais in Moscovia : and those thing which be throw into Aesculapius fountain at Athens , be cast up again in Phaletico . and Seneca write that there be certain river which be let down into some cave under ground , be withdraw out of sight , seem for the time to be utter perish and take away , and that after some distance the very same river return , enjoy their former name and their course . and again Pliny report that there be a river receive under ground in the field of Atinas that issue out twenty mile from that place . all which example and the like , shall teach we that the fountain of island be not to be make great wonder than the rest . do forthwith convert into a stone any body cast into it . by these two property , namely warmth or most vehement heat , and a virtue of harden body do Frisius describe his first fountain . and i have hear report ( though i never have experience thereof my self ) that there be such a fountain in island not far from the bishop seat of Schalholt , in a village call Haukadal . Seneca report of the like , say : that there be a certain fountain which convert wood into stone , harden the bowel of those man which drink thereof . And add further , that such fountain be to be find in certain place of Italy : which thing Ovid in the 15 . book of his metamor . ascribe unto the river of the Cicones . water drink out of ciconian flood 131 river of island in summer season lukewarm . ought else therewith besprinckt , as earth or wood become marble straight : a thing most strange . and Cardane . Georgius Agricola affirm , that in the territory of Elbogan , about the town which be name of falcon , that the whole body of pine tree be convert into stone , and which be more wonderful , that they contain , within certain rift , the stone call Pyrites , or the flint . and Domitius Brusonius re - porteth , that in the river of Silar ( run by the foot of that mountain which stand in the field of the ci tie in old time call ursence , but now Contursia ) leave and bough of tree change into stone , and that , not upon other man credit , but upon his own experience , be bear and bring up in that country : which thing Pliny also avouch , say , that the