the miraculous victory achieve by the english fleet , under the discreet and happy conduct of the right honourable , right prudent , and valiant lord , the lord Charles Howard , L . high admiral of England , etc upon the spanish huge armada send in the year 1588 . for the invasion of England , together with the woeful and miserable success of the say armada afterward , upon the coast of Norway , of the scottish western isle , of Ireland , of Spain , of France , and of England , etc record in latin by Emanuel van Meteran in the 15 . book of his history of the low country . ave in part declare the strange and wonderful event of the year eighty eight , which have be so long time foretell by ancient prophecy ; we will now make relation of the most notable and great enterprise of all other which be in the foresay year achieve , in order as it be do . which exploit ( although in very deed it be not perform in any part of the low country ) be intend for their ruin and destruction . and it be the expedition which the spanish king , have a long time determine the same in his mind , and have consult thereabouts with the pope , set forth and undertook against England and the low country . to the end that he may subdue the realm of England , and reduce it unto his catholic religion , and by that 197 the preparation of the spanish king to subdue England and the low country . mean may be sufficient revenge for the disgrace , contempt and dishonour , which he ( have 34 . year before enforce they to the pope obedience ) have endure of the english nation , and for diverse other injury which have take deep impression in his thought . and also for that he deem this to be the most ready and direct course , whereby he may recover his heredetarie possession of the low country , have restrain the inhabitant from sail upon the coast of England . which very , upon most weighty argument and evident reason , be think will undoubt have come to pass , consider the great abundance and store of all thing necessary wherewith those man be furnish , which have the manage of that action commit unto they . but now let we describe the matter more particular . the spanish king have with small fruit and commodity , for above twenty year together , wage war against the netherlander , after deliberation with his counsellor thereabouts , think it most convenient to assault they once again by sea , which have be attempt sundry time heretofore , but not with force sufficient . unto the which expedition it stand he now in hand to join great puissance , as have the english people his profess enemy ; who island be so situate , that it may either great help or hinder all such as sail into those part . for which cause he think good first of all to invade England , be persuade by his secretary Escovedo , and by diverse other well experience Spaniards and Dutchman , and by many english fugitive , that the conquest of that hand be less difficult than the conquest of holland and Zealand . Moreover the Spaniard be of opinion , that it will be far more behooveful for their king to conquer England and the low country all at once , then to be constrain continual to maintain a warlike navy to defend his east and west Indie fleet , from the english drake , and from such like valiant enemy . 198 and for the same purpose the king catholique have give commandment long before in Italy and Spain , that a great quantity of timber shall be fell for the build of ship ; and have beside make great preparation of thing and furniture requisite for such a expedition ; as namely in sound of brazen ordinance , in store up of corn and victual , in train of man to use warlike weapon , in leavy and muster of soldier : insomuch that about the begin of the year 1588 . he have finish such a mighty navy , and bring it into Lisbon haven , as never the like have before that time sail upon the ocean sea . a very large and particular description of this navy be put in print and publish by the Spaniard ; wherein be set down the number , name , and burden of the ship , the number of mariner and soldier throughout the whole fleet ; likewise the quantity of their ordinance , of their armour , of bullet , of match , of gun - poulder , of victual , and of all their naval furniture be in the say description particularize . unto all these be add the name of the governor , captain , nobleman and gentleman voluntary , of who there be so great a multitude , that scarce be there any family of account , or any one principali man throughout all Spain , that have not a brother , son or kinsman in that fleet : who all of they be in good hope to purchase unto themselves in that navy ( as they term it ) invincible , endless glory and renown , and to possess themselves of great signory and riches in England , and in the low country . but because the say description be translate and publish out of spanish into diverse other language , we will here only make a abridgement or brief rehearsal thereof . Portugal furnish and set forth under the conduct of the duke of Medina Sidonia general of the fleet , ten galleon , two zabra , 1300 . mariner , 3300 . soldier , 300 . great piece , with all requisite furniture . 199 the number and quality of the ship in the spanish tleete , with the soldier , mariner , and piece of ordinance . Biscay , under the conduct of John Martin de recall admiral of the whole fleet , set forth ten galleon , 4 . patache , 700 . mariner , 2000 soldier , 250 . great piece , etc Guipusco , under the conduct of Michael de Oquendo , ten galleon , 4 . patache , 700 . mariner , 2000 soldier , 310 . great piece . Italy with the Levant island , under Martine the verten - dona , 10 . galleon , 800 . mariner , 2000 soldier , 310 . great piece , etc Castille , under Diego flores de Valdez , 14 . galleon , two patache , 1700 . mariner , 2400 . soldier , and