the high pitch of sovereignty : and be advance , continual to bless you with most prosperous success in all your affair : and be bless , long to preserve you , as the chief ornament , defence and safeguard of these kingdom , and as the shield and fortress of his church : and hereafter in the life to come , to make you shine glorious like a star , among the principali nurse father of God church , in the perfect joy of his heavenly kingdom . the same most merciful father likewise grant , that these prayer , the often they be daily repeat and multiply in every corner of your majesty most ample territory and island , so much the more sure and certain they may remain , amen . at Haffhia , or copen Hagen 1593 . in the month of march . Y . s . m . most humble subject , arngrimus Jonas , islander . to the courteous and Christian reader Gudbrandus thorlacius , bishop of holen in island , wish health . here come to light about the year of Christ 1561 , a very deform imp , beget by a certain pedlar of Germany : namely a book of germane rhyme , of all that ever be read the most filthy and most slanderous against the nation of island . neither do it suffice the base printer once to send abroad that base brat , but he must publish it also thrice or four 93 great error grow upon mariner fabulous report . time over : that he may thereby , what lie in he , more deep disgrace our innocent nation among the german , and Dane , and other neighbour country , with shameful , and everlasting ignominy . so great be the malice of this printer , and his desire so greedy to get lucre , by a thing unlawful . and this he do without controlment , even in that city , which these many year have traffic with island to the great gain , and commodity of the citizen . his name be Joachimus Leo , a man worthy to become lion food . moreover , there be many other writer find , who when they will seem to describe the miracle of nature , which be think to be very many in this island , and the manner , and custom of the islander , have altogether swerve from the matter and truth it self , follow mariner fable more trifle then old wife tale , and the most vain opinion of the common sort . Theise writer , although they have not leave behind they such filthy and reproachful stuff as that base rimer : yet there be many thing in their write that will not suffer they to be excuse , and altogether acquit from cause a innocent nation to be have in derision by other . wherefore mark , read , and weigh these thing with my self , and consider that there daily spring up new writer , which offer injury to the fame and reputation of the islander , be such man also as do shameless filtch out of other man labour , delude their reader which feign description , and a new rehearsal of monster , i often wish that some one man will come forth , to make answer to the error of historiographer and other unjust censurer : and by some writing , if not to free our innocent nation from so many reproach , yet at leastwise , in some sort to defend it , among christian and friendly reader . and for this cause i have now procure a honest and learned young man one Arngrimus Fitz - Jonas , to peruse the work of author , that have write any thing concern island , and by sound reason to detect their error , and falsehood . and albeit at the first he be very loath , yet at length my friendly admonition , and the common love of his country prevail with he so far , that he compile this brief commentary , take his proof , not out of the vain fable of the people , but from his own experience , and many other man also of sufficient credit . now , he that undertake this matter at my procurement , do again as it be by his own authority challenge at my hand , that i shall in two or three word at least , make a preface unto his book ; think it may gain some credit , and authority thereby . wherefore to speak my mind in a word : for my part , i judge he to have take both honest and necessary pain , who have do his endeavour not only to weigh the diverse opinion of wrighter concern thing unknown , and to examine they by the censure of truth , and experience , but also to defend his country from the venomous bite of certain sycophant . it be thy part therefore ( gentle reader ) to accept this small treatise of he , be as it be guard with the sacred love of truth , and of his country , against the perverseness of carper . farewell . anno 1592 . Julii 29 . here begin the commentary of island . Ven as in war , daily experience teach we , that some upon no just and lawful ground ( be egg on by ambition , envy , and covetise ) be induce to follow the army , and on the contrary side , that other arm themselves upon just and necessary cause : namely such as go to battle for the defence and propagation of the gospel , or such as be any way provoke thereunto , do withstand present violence and wrong , or at least ( not be provoke ) by reason of the enemy approach be constrain to be up in arm : right so , they that fight under Apollo banner . among who , a great part , not upon any honest , philosophical , or indeed Christian intention , address themselves to wright : especial such as for desire of glory , for envy and spite , or upon malicious and affect ignorance , carp at other : and , that they may be account superior , sometime whet their stile against the person ,