condemn adultery under the name of a most heinous offence ? and do straight command that he which be take the three time in that beastly act shall | be punish with death ? you see therefore ( friendly reader ) what a injurious notary we have , affirm that adultery and whoredom in island deserve not the name of sin and wickedness : for although some officer let slip this or that vice unpunished , yet ought not the whole nation , nor the law , nor all good and godly man , in that regard , to be accuse or evil speak of . the thirteenth section . the three reproach be , whereby he do brand the islander the three with the mark of deceit and treachery towards the repnch - germans . doubtless the author of this libel be some vagabond huckster or pedlar , and have go particular into many corner of island to utter his trumpery ware , which he also testify of himself in his worthy rhyme , that he have travail through the great part of island , whereupon when he have play the cozen mate with other ( for often time deceit and lie be join together , and he have sufficient prove himself to be a liar , by this trial of his wit ) peradventure himself be beguile by they who he before time have defraud . from hence proceed this slander against our whole nation : dissemble in the mean time with what honesty certain germane , make yearly voyage into 183 island , deal with our man . but see by this complaint i have not determine to reproach other , but to lay open the undeserving reproach of other against our nation , i do here of purpose surcease . the fourteen section . 4 > 5 > 6 , four , he say that in banquet none of the guest ^ 7 reproach . use tQ rjse from the taye . but that the good wife of the house reach to every one a chamber - pot , so oft as need require . Moreover , he note much unmanerlinesse of eat and drink at banquet . five , he object custom of lie in bed , and of dine : namely that ten person , more or less , man and woman lie altogether in the same bed , and that they eat their meat lie in bed : and that in the mean time they do nothing but play at dice or at table . six , he report that they wash their hand and their face in piss . seven , he despiteful abase our solemnizing of marriage , spousal , birthday , and our custom at burial . these , and a number of such like reproach have this impure slanderer spew forth against a innocent nation , yea and that nation which have deserve right well of he and his countryman . which be of the same kind with these , in so much that we altogether disdain to make answer unto they . for , that we may grant ( which notwithstanding we will in no case yield unto ) that this worthy germane notary observe some such matter among base companion , and the very offscouring of the common people , with who he be much more conversant than with good and honest person ( for he have live , as his rhyme testify , somewhat long upon the coast of island , whither a confuse rout of the mean common people , in fish time do yearly resort , who be nought aswell through their own lewdness , as by 184 1592 . the wicked behaviour of outlandish mariner , often time do lead a bid and dishonest life ) notwithstanding we be in this place more manifest wrong through the knavery of this one varlet , and desperate sycophant by his defame of the whole nation ( as other also usual do ) than that it shall need any refutation at all . of which thing stranger themselves , who be not a little conversant in our island , may be most sufficient witness . i can also gather together many such filthy , unmannerly , and bawdy fashion note by other even in his own country . but i detest this dogged eloquence , neither take i any pleasure to be witty in the disgrace of other : and yet i will not show my self such a milksop as to be daunt with light word . only , let all honest and good man consider , what disposition it argue , for one to object against a whole nation certain misdemeanour commit by some one or other particular man . if any man shall travel throughout all the city and town of Germany or any other nation , and heap together the offence , and most lewd manner , the robbery , manslaughter , murder , whoredom , adultery , incest , riot , extortion , and other profane , and filthy act , shall affirm they to be common to all german , or otherwise to any other whole nation , and shall exaggerate all these thing with notorious lie , be he to be account one that spend his time in a good argument ? but what marvel be it , though a varlet , and , that i may give he his true title , a filthy hog , that rimer ( i say ) have bewray his nature and disposition in such like reproach ? for it be well know that swine , when they enter into most pleasant garden , do not pluck lily , or rose , or any other most beautiful and sweet flower ; but thrust their snout into the ground , do tumble and toss up and down whatsoever dirt and dung they can find , until they have root up most unclean thing , namely such as be best agreeable to their nature , wherewith they greedy 185 glut themselves : even so this hoggish rhymer light pass over the best and most commendable thing of our common wealth , but as for the worst , and those which have be commit by none , or by very few , namely , such thing as best fit his humour and disposition ( that he may indeed show himself to be the same