they do not in other place deprive we of the same . for ( to speak of Krantzius anon ) that which Munster before report concern our faith or opinion about the place and situation of hell , be very far from christian piety : namely to be desirous to pry into those secret which God have keep close unto himself alone , and which his pleasure be , shall exceed our capacity : for there be not any thing find in the holy scripture of this matter , where the place and situation of hell , or of eternal fire prepare for the devil and his angel , and so for all damn soul , be bound or compass about . the holy bible ( i say ) assign no local ! or bodily situation beneath the earth , or upon the earth , or in any other place of this world , to that prison of the damn : but it affirm that this earth shall perish , and that a new earth , and new heaven shall be create for the habitation of just and holy man , revel . 2 . 2 . Pet . 3 . and Easie 65 . wherefore a christian man willing give over to search into such hide secret : and he account it lawful 143 to receive or deliver unto other , opinion ( ground upon no plain and manifest place of scripture ) for certainty and truth . Deut . 4 . and 12 . Easie 8 . Matth . 27 . 2 . Tim . 3 . further also that commendation wherewith Munster and Krantzius do grace the islander , be mere contrary to christian religion : namely , that they make all one reckon of their whelp and of their child . but more of this matter anon in the 7 . section . so therefore Munster disagree with himself , whereas those who he affirm to be Christians , afterward he make to be master - builder of hell . also Krantzius and Munster both together , when as those who they affirm to be engraft by faith into Christ , they exempt from all sense of piety and honesty , in that they write that their son be not dear unto they then their whelp . but to return to the matter : in very deed we have no great thing to say concern our religion , what , or of what sort it be when gentilism be first put to flight . no more ( i think ) have other northern nation near unto we to say concern the beginning of their faith . for ( alas ) we must needs confess and bewail with deep sigh , that until that day which shine unto we like the begin of immortality , and bring unto we the pure doctrine of the gospel , our countryman , as likewise other church of the north , be overspread with more than cimmerian darkness . but we may just and religious think thus much , that among we and our neighbour of Norway ( for i will not range out of my bound , nor affirm any thing of unknown people ) after heathenish idolatry be root out , Christian faith and religion do flourish far more sincere and simple , as be less infect with the poison of popery at that time , then afterward , when as the pestiferous leaven of the see of Rome be augment , and the contagious mischief grow ripe , the poison thereof be disperse through you whole world : for , as it shall afterward appear , island embrace Christ many year before the 144 new idolatry of the papist begin to prevail , and do sound forth nothing but faith in God the father , the son and the holy ghost , like unto those two most renown king of Norway , who as they have one common name , so have they one common care and pro - fession to advance the gospel of Christ . i mean Olaus the first the son of thryggo , who be bear in the year of c1 , ian ktnS Christ 968 . attain to the kingdom of Norway in the orwa > 27 . year of his age , and be the first , as we have hear , that offer Christ unto the norwegian , over who he reign five year : and another of that name call Olaus Sanctus the son of Harald , who in the year of Christ 1013 . or there about , govern with more severity , and for the space of 17 . year do bold deliver the doctrine of Christ . in the year of Christ 1030 . being unjust slay by wicked murderer , he shed his blood for you name of Christ in a town of Norway call sticfla stodum . our country also have , among many other , one man Nialus the of excellent piety who name be Nialus , who about the first know year of Christ 1000 live in the village of Berthorshvol frofeuourof situate in the parish of island call Landehum : who in also for his experience in humane affair , for his great wisdom and sage counsel be account famous . for whereas in his time island be turmoil with many fierce mutiny , the inhabitant be in subjection to no superior magistrate , he intermeddle not in any quarrel , save that by his discreet virtue and diligence , he set through and bring to composition a great number : he never do nor suffer violence , but only upon the last day of his life . so careful avoid he all sedition and strife : and give good assistance to other , who be desirous also to avoid and escape they : neither do any man ever put in practise his counsel , but it turn to his especial good : nor ever any do swerve therefrom , but with the danger of his life and possession . the word or rather the oracle that come from he be so certain , that it be wonderful from whence any man shall have iv 145 king a sum oj the islander religion . so great and so sure forecast and counsel of thing to come , as be find to be in he . whereupon his discreet and provident