, notwithstanding ( as the same man witness ) it do always burn . 107 wherefore , if we will give credit unto they , even this mountain also , since it be cover with snow , and yet burn , must be a prison of unclean soul : which thing they have not doubt to ascribe unto Hecla , in regard of the freeze top , and the fiery bottom . and it be no marveile that fire lurk so deep in the root of a mountain , and never break forth except it be very seidome , shall not be able continual to melt the snow cover the top of the say mountain . Cardanus . for in Caira ( or Capira ) also , the high top of the mountain be say continual to be white with snow : and those in Veragua likewise , which be five mile high , and never without snow , be distant notwithstanding but only 10 degree from the equinoctial . we have hear that either of the foresay province stand near unto Paria . what , if in Teneriffa ( which be one of the canary or fortunate hand ) the pike so call , arise into the air , accord to Munster , eight or nine germane mile in height , and continual flame like Aetna : yet ( as Benzo a italian , and historiographer of the west Indies witness ) be it not able to melt the girdle of snow embrace the midst thereof . which thing , what reason have we more to admire in the mountain of Hecla ? and thus much brief concern fiery mountain . now that also be to be amend , whereas they write that these mountain be lift up even unto the sky . for they have no extraordinary height beyond the other mountain of island , but especial that three mountain , call by Munster Helga , and by we Helgafel , that be the holy mount , stand just by a monastery of the same name , be cover with snow , upon no part thereof in summer time , neither deserve it the name of a high mountain , but rather of a humble hillock , never yet ( as i say in the begin of this section ) so much as once suspect of burn . neither yet ought perpetuali snow to be ascribe to Hecla only , or to a few other ; for island have very many such snowy 108 mountain , all which the cosmographer ( who have so extol and admire these three ) shall not easy find out , and reckon up in a whole year . and that also be not to be omit , that mount Hecla stand not towards the west , as Munster and Ziegler have note , but between the south and the east : neither be it a headland , but rather a midland hill . continue always burn etc whosoever they be that have ascribe unto Hecla perpetuali belch out of flame , they be far beside the mark : insomuch that as often as it have be inflame , our countryman have record it in their yearly chronicle for a rare the chronicle accident : namely in the year of Christ 1104 , 1157 , ° fls ^ and - 1222 , 1300 , 1341 , 1362 , and 1389 : for from that year we never hear of the burn of this mountain until the year 1558 , which be the last break forth of fire in that mountain . in the mean time i say not that be impossible , but that the bottom of the hill may inward breed and nourish flame , which at certain season ( as have be heretofore observe ) have burst out , and perhaps may do the like hereafter . the seven section . the flame of mount Hecla will not burn tow ( which Frisius . be most apt for the wieke of a candle ) neither be it Munsterus . quench with water : and by the same force that bullet be discharge out of warlike engine with we , from thence be great stone cast forth into the air , by reason of the mixture of cold , and fire , and brimstone . this place be think of some to be the prison of unclean soul . item : Zieglerus . this place be the prison of unclean soul . will not burn tow . where these writer shall find such matter , it be not easy to conjecture . for our people be altogether ignorant of they , neither have they ever be hear of here among we , if they have not bring they to light . for there be no man 109 speculum regale write in the norvagian tongue . whence the fablesofIsland grow . with we so rash and fond curious , that dare for his life , the hill be on fire , try any such conclusion , or ( to our knowledge ) that ever dare : which notwithstanding Munster affirm , say : they that be desirous to contemplate the nature of so huge a fire , and for the same purpose approach unto the mountain , be by some gulf swallow up alive , etc which thing ( as i say ) be altogether unknown unto our nation . yet there be a book extant , write in the ancient language of the noruagians , wherein you may find some miracle of earth , water , fire , and air , etc confuse write , few of they true , and the most part vain and false . whereupon it easy appear that it be write long since by some that be imagine to be great wise man in the time of popery . they call it a royal look glass : howbeit , in regard of the fond fable , wherewith ( but for the most part under the show of religion and piety , whereby it be more difficult to find out the cousinage ) it do all over swarm , it deserve not the name of a look glass royal , but rather of a popular , and old wife look glass . in this glass there be find certain figment of the burn of Hecla , not much unlike these which we now entreat of , nor