she , and at that instant there be one man slay outright , and 2 . other grievous hurt . the error be espy and perceive , our ship give over immediate from any far shoot . assoon as the galley come near we , my lord admiral cause a gracious salutation to be sound with his trumpet , and will the captain forthwith to come aboard his ship : which they do , and then he feast they with a very fine and honourable banquet , as the time and place may serve . and then by they under - 265 stand of that unfortunate mischance that have happen by the shot of the say ship , he be very sorry for the same , and yet such be the merciful providence of almighty God , that even in this mischance also , he do hold his holy hand over the english . and all the harm that be do do light only upon the poor Turk , and the Spaniard himself . when this lord have well banquet they , he present call for his barge , and do accompany the say galley to the lord general the earl of Essex , who then do ride with his ship a good distance off : and there they be in like manner most honorable receive , and entertain , the spanish gentleman deliver up their prisoner the english captive , of who some have be there 6 year , some 8 , or ten : yea , and some 22 . year , and upward , and some of they but late take in saint Francis drake last voyage to the Indies . the number of the prisoner deliver be but 39 and no more , and be bring in , and deliver by don Antonio de Corolla and his brother , and by don Pedro de Cordua , and certain other . if you demand why , of one and fifty captive , there be no more deliver then be , i presuppose , ( and i think it true to ) that at that time the residue be far offend in some remote place of Spain bestow , and so by that mean , not able at this time to be in a readiness , but yet like enough that there be some good order take for they hereafter , to be redeem , and send over into England . if any man presume here so far , as to inquire how it chance , that the lord general rest so long at Cadiz , and go no far , and why port S . Mary be so fair a town , and so near to they , be forbear ? and why shears ali & s xeres ? and why Rotta and the like ? and why this or that be do ? and why that or this leave undo ? i will not answer he with our common english proverb , as i may , which be : that one fool may ask more question in one hour , than ten discrete man can well answer in five day . 266 but that grave ancient writer , Cornelius Tacitus , have a wise , brief , pithy say , and it be this : Nemo tentavit inquirere in columnas Herculis , sanctifisque ac reverentius habitum est de factis deorum credere , quim scire . which say , in my fancy , fit marvellous well for this purpose : and so much the rather , for that this Cadiz be that very place , ( at least by the common opinion ) where those say pillar of Hercules be think to be place : and , as some say , remain as yet not far off to be see . but to let that pass , the say bear this discrete meaning in it , albeit in a pretty kind of mystical manner utter : that it befitteth not inferior person to be curious , or too inquisitive after prince action , neither yet to be so saucy and so malapert , as to seek to dive into their secret , but rather always to have a right reverend conceit and opinion of they , and their do : and thereon so rest our inward thought , to seek to go no further , but so to remain ready always to arm our self with dutiful mind , and willing obedience , to perform and put in execution that which in their deep insight and heroical designment , they shall for our good , and the care of the common wealth determine upon . this , and much less to , may suffice to satisfy any honest mind man . but yet if any will needs desire to be a little far satisfy , albeit it need not , yet then , thus much i dare say and affirm , that upon my knowledge , the chief cause why port saint mary , and the rest be leave untouched , be this : for that it be most certain know , that they be town not worth the salute of such a royal company , in which there be no manner of wealth in the world leave , more than bare house of stone , and stand wall , and may well have serve rather as a stale , perchance , to have entrap , then as a mean to have enrich . and it have be more than a suspicion of folly , for such a army as this , to have seek to fight with the air , and to have labour with great pain and charge , yea , and with 267 A . D . I596 . some evident danger too , to have overthrow that , which can very little or nothing have profit , be destroy : and yet now , can do as little harm be leave , as it be , untouched . and thus much for our journey to Cadiz : for the accident that happen by the way , for the win , spoil , and burn of the say town , for the overthrow of the spanish fleet there , and for all other by - matter that happen , as appendance to the same , both in the time of our abode there , as also at the very last hour of our come from thence . as for our return home , and our entrance into a part of portingal by the way , with the take , spoil , and burn of the town of Faraon there , and march into the spanish confine thereabouts , etc i mind to leave it to some other , who chance be to be present at the action , as my self be not , and shall | be off more sufficient ability to perform it .