the second section . they inhabit for the most part in cave , or hollow place within the side of mountain . and again , they have many house and church build with the bone of fish , and whale . again . many of they also to avoid the extremity of cold , do keep themselves close in their cave , even as the people of Africa do to avoid the heat of the sun . also Munster say : many in island at this day build their house with the rib and bone of whale . here the second member take his beginning concern the course of life , and the manner of the inhabitant . and first of all what building or house they do use : namely accord to Munster , Krantzius , Frisius etc hole and cave of mountain . but although in gorgeous building , and such other worldly bravery there be very little help to the attain of a life true happy : notwithstanding , we can not in this place conceal the truth : and we plain affirm that cosmographer and historiographer also do err in this point . for such habitation as they write to be common 160 unto the whole nation , be but in very few place , and be either sheep - cot for shepherd , or cottage and receptacle for fisherman at that time of the year only when they go a fish , and the other stand in need to watch their flock . but for their house themselves , and the very dwell place of man , the islander have have they build from ancient time stately and sumptuous enough , accord to the condition of the country , with timber , stone , and turf , until such time as traffic and exchange of ware begin to cease traffic with between they and the noruagians , who be wont to , , .... i r , Norway supply they with timber , and for that cause now our ceaset ^ house begin to decay : whenas neither we have wood convenient for building , not yet there be now a day , drift « and not as there be in old time , tree cast upon our shore by so Plentift11 the benefit of the sea , which may in any sort relieve we : timespast . neither do outlandish merchant succour our necessity : whereupon many of our mean country village be much decay from their ancient integrity , some whereof be fall to the ground , and other bee very ruinous . notwithstanding there be many farm and village which i can easy reckon up , the building whereof do resemble that ancient excellency , the house be very large , both in breadth and length , and for the most part in height also . as for example : farm or grange which contain chamber in they , more than fifty cubit in length , ten in breadth , and twenty in height . and so other room , as a parlour , a stove , a buttery , etc answer in proportion unto the former . i can here name many of our country building both large and wide , neither ill - favoured in show , nor base in regard of their workmanship and costly firmness or strength , with certain church also , or religious house build of timber only , accord to ancient and artificiali seemeli - nesse and beauty : as the cathedral church of holen have a body the five pillar whereof on both side be four elne high , and about five elnes thick , as also beam and weather - bourdes , and the rest of the roof iv 161 l proportional answer to this low building . our most gracious king lord Frederick , who memory be most sacred unto we , in the year 1588 . do most liberal bestow timber for the re - edify of this body be cast down in the year 1584 . by a horrible tempest . but the church it self do manifest exceed the body thereof in all quantity : also the inner part of the church , which be common call the quire be somewhat less , both then the middle part of the church , and also then the body . the church of Schalholt be far great as i have hear in old time , than this our cathedral , which have now be twice burn , be bring to a lesser scantling . likewise there be some other church of our hand , although not match , yet resemble the ancient magnificence of these . for here the matter seem not to require that i shall run into a long description of these thing . for as we do not great extol our house and building , so be we nothing ashamed of they : because be content with our poverty , we render unto Christ immortali praise who despise not to be receive of we under a base roof , and contemn not our temple and house , ( which Munster , Krantzius and Frisius do not true affirm to be build of fish and whale bone ) more than the marble vault , the paint wall , the square pavement , and such like ornament of church and house in other country . the three section . Krantzius . they and their cattle use all one house , all one food or Munsterus . victual , all one state ( here Krantzius have it lodging . ) also . they live only by feed of cattle , and sometime by take of fish . these be the thing together with those that follow , which Krantzius have champ , and put into Munster mouth , so that Munster shall not need so much as once to chew they , which may appear by compare they both together . for Munster , as he 162 swallow these reproach , take they out of Krantzius his preface upon Norway , so he cast up the very same morsel undigested and raw against our nation , in his four book of cosmography cap . 8 . those thing which have be hitherto , although they have sufficient grieve we , yet will we let they seem more tolerable : but this most malicious devise , and those which follow