his own son into the hand of some inhabitant or stranger , be urge thereunto by famine , or any other extreme necessity , that he may not be constrain to see he hungerstarve for want of sustenance , but keep his dog still for his own eat , this man be not to be say , that he esteem equal or more base of his son then of his dog : whether islander or any other countryman do the same . the germane or the danish mariner may perhaps find among we certain beggar lade with child ( for we have here a great number of they ) who in jest manner for they be much give to trifle talk , may say : give i this , or sell i that : and when the stranger 174 shall ask , what will you give i for it ? the beggar may answer : i have ten or fourteen child , i will give you some one or more of they , etc for this rabble of beggar use thus fond to prate with stranger . now if there be any well dispose man , who pity the need and folly of these beggar , release they off one son , and do for God sake by some mean provide for he in another country : do the beggar therefore ( who together with his son be ready to die for hunger and poverty , yield and com - mitteth his son into the hand of a merciful man ) make less account of his son then of his dog ? such work of love and mercy have be perform by many , aswell islander themselves as stranger : one of which number be that honourable man Accilius Julius , be send by the most gracious king of Denmark into island in the year of our lord 1552 , who , as i have hear , take , and carry with he into Denmark fifteen poor boy : where afterward it be report unto i , that by his good mean every one of they be bind to a several trade , prove good and thrifty man . what if some man be drive to that pass , that he do not only sell his son , but not find a chapman , his own self kill and eat he ? example of this kind be common , namely of the unwilling and force cruelty of parent towards their child , not be prick on through hate , or want of natural affection , but be compel thereunto by urgent necessity . shall any man hereupon ground a generail reproach against a whole nation ? we read that in the siege of Samaria , two mother slay their son , and eat they sodden : 4 . king . chapter 6 . we read in the siege of Jerusalem , how lamentable the voice of that distress mother be , be about to kill her tender child : my sweet babe , say she ( for i will report Eusebius own word , concern this matter , though very common , that the affection of a mother may appear ) bear to misery and mishap , for who shall i convenient reserve thou 175 in this tumult of famine , of war , and sedition ? if we be subdue to the government of the roman , we shall wear out our unhappy day under the yoke of slavery . but i think famine will prevent captivity . beside , there be a rout of seditious rebel much more intolerable than either of the former misery . Come on therefore , my son , be thou meat unto thy mother , a fury to these rebel , and a byeword in the common life of man , which one thing only be want to make up the calamity of the Jew . Theise say be end , she kill her son , roast and eat one half , and reserve the other , etc Eusebius lib . 3 . cap . 6 . now , what man will not believe that this unhappy mother will full glad have pass over this her son into the possession of some master or chapman , if she can have happen upon any such , with who she think he may have be preserve ? that famine be well know which oppress Calagurium , a city of Spain , when in old time Cneius Pompeius lay siege thereunto ( Valerius lib . 7 . cap . 7 . ) the citizen whereof convert their wife and child into meat for the satisfy of their extreme hunger , who doubtless they will with all their heart have sell for other victual . that famine also be well know which in the year of our lord 851 ( Vincent , lib . 25 . cap . 26 . ) afflict Germany , insomuch that the father be glad to devour his own son . it be well know after the death of the emperor Henry the seven , in a famine continue three whole year , how the parent will devour their child , and the child their parent , and that especial in Polonia and Bohemia . and that we may not only allege ancient example : it be report that there be such a grievous dearth of corn in the year 1586 , and 1587 , throughout Hungary , that some be compel for want of food be fain to sell their child unto the most bloody and barbarous enemy of Christians , and so to enthral they to the perpetuali yoke of turkish slavery : and some be say to have take their child , who they can no long 176 1592 . sustain , and with cruel mercy to have cast they into Danubius , and drown they . but shall these story and the like make any man so mad as to affirm that this or that nation accustome to kill their child for their own food , and to sell they willing unto the turk , or to drown and strangle they willing in the water ? i can think it . so neither ( because beggar in island be enforce through extreme and bite necessity , do willing part with their son ) be this custom general to be impute unto the whole nation , and