to the law imperial of infamous libel : wherein be law against enjoin a most grievous penalty unto those , who invent , write , utter , or cause such libel to be buy or sell , or do not present upon the find thereof tear they in piece . but now time bid we to sound a retreat : and to return home unto thou island ( our most dear mother ) who neither poverty , nor cold , nor any other such inconvenience shall make irksome unto we , so long as thou cease not to give hearty and willing entertainment unto Christ : where , first we do earnest exhort thou to the serious and ardent affection , and love of God , and of the heavenly knowledge reveal unto we in Christ : 191 that thou will prefer this before all thing , be inflame with desire of doctrine , and of the word : that thou will not light esteem , contemn or hate the holy ministry and minister , but reverence , cherish , and love they . account those that practise the contrary as wicked and profane : and manage all thy affair both private and public , accord to the prescript rule of piety and honesty , that unto this , thy state and order ecclesiastical and politic may in all thing be conform : and so in either kind of life rely thy self upon that level and line of equity and justice , and avoid other , who upon stubborness and impiety swerve therefrom . that thou will also inflict just punishment upon offender : all which we doubt not but the magistrate will have respect unto . but especial that thou admit none to be magistrate , but man of approve fidelity and honesty , and such as may adjoin unto these virtue other hereto belong , by which mean inconvenience may fit be prevent . for if this matter be well handle , namely that they which be the best of all good man be choose to bear public authority , wicked and unfit man be altogether reject ; the condition of the subject shall | be most prosperous : the life and manner of all man shall prove by so much the more commendable : godliness also and honesty shall become the more glorious . but on the contrary , if pastor of church be not answerable to their function , either in life or doctrine ; if all man without respect or difference be admit to the government of the common wealth , who aspire thereunto by their own rashness , ambition , or avarice , and desire of honour , yea though they be suspect or convict of crime and dishonesty , or be pro tectour or unjust favourer of such person as be suspect and convict ; then what will be thy state , oh island ? what will be thy outward show or condition ? doubtless most miserable . neither shall thou by any other mean more sudden approach to thy ruin and destruction , 192 i592 - then if thou commit thy self to the government of such man , who to the uttermost of their power , although they be of thy own brood , daily seek thy overthrow for their own private advantage and secret malice . wherefore ( to be short ) let these be to advertise my dear country , how behovefiill it be that the matter aforesaid be put in practice . but while i be speak these thing unto thou ( my country ) oh that my deep and doleful sigh , which lie hide in the former speech , may pierce the ear of our king most excellent majesty , before who , on thy behalf i do bewail the public misery , which in this respect especial do arise , because we be so far distant from the seat and royal presence of our king , that many therefore take more liberty , and promise more securi tie of offend unto themselves . but we will commit all these matter to the most just judge of heaven and earth who behold all thing in equity . now it remain ( my belove country ) that thou will take in good part these my labour employ in thy service , and accept they with that favourable and courteous mind which i have expect . and although they be not of such worth as i can wish , yet sith a willing mind be worth all , i will not therefore give over because i mistrust my self as one insufficient to contend for thy innocence , for thy reputation , and thy honour , my dear country . but rather whatsoever it be ( if it be aught ) and how mickle - soev which for my slender ability i be able to afford in thy defence , i think good not to suppress it : for i esteem not those man worthy of commendation , who despair to overgrow the limb of Lyco stout , neglect to cure their body of the gout . and in very deed , it do not whit repent i of my labour , if this little treatise shall tend neither to thou nor to my own disgrace . but if it shall any iv 193 n thing avail to thy honour or defence , i will think my travail right well bestow . yea , if by this my slender attempt i may but only excite other of thy child , and my native countryman , be far my superior both in learning and industry to take thy cause in hand , either now or hereafter , what reason be there why any man shall say that it be not worth my labour ? now , if they address themselves to write , howsoever my fame shall | be obscure , yet will i comfort my self with their excellency , who be like to impair my credit : for albeit a man ought to have speciali regard of his name and fame , yet be he to have more of his country , who dignity be safe and sound , we also must needs esteem our self to be in safety . write at holen hialtedale in island , the year of our lord 1592 . the 17 . of the kalend of May .