any whit more ground upon experience , and for that cause to be reject . but that i may not seem somewhat foolhardy , for accuse this royal look glass of falsehood ( not to mention any of those thing which it report as less credible ) lo here a few thing ( friendly reader ) which i suppose deserve no credit at all . 1 of a certain isle in Ireland , have a church and a parish in it , the inhabitant whereof decease be not bury in the earth , but like live man , do continual , against some bank or wall in the churchyard , stand bolt - upright : neither be they subject to any corruption or downfall : insomuch that any of the posterity may there seek for , and behold their ancestor . 2 of another isle of Ireland , where man be not mortali . iio 3 of all the earth and tree of Ireland , be of force to resist all poison , and to kill serpent , and other venomous thing , in any country whatsoever , by the only virtue and presence thereof , yea even without touch . 4 of a three isle of Ireland , that the one half thereof become a habitation of devil , but that the say devil have no jurisdiction over the other half , by reason of a church there build , although , as the whole isle be without inhabitant , so this part be continual destitute of a pastor , and of divine service : and that it be so by nature . 5 of a four isle of Ireland float up and down in a huge lake , the grass whereof be a most present remedy for all kind of disease , and that the hand , at certain season , especial on Sunday , come to the bank of the lake , so that any man may then easy enter into it , as it be into a ship : which notwithstanding ( say he ) destiny will not suffer any more than one to enter at a time . Furthermore , he report that this hand every seven year grow fast to the bank , so that you can discern it from firm land : but that into the place thereof there succeed another , altogether like the former , in nature , quantity , and virtue : which , from what place it come , no man can tell : and that all this happen with a kind of thunder . 6 of the hunter of Norway who be so expert to tame wood ( for so he speak very improper , whereas unto wood neither life nor tame can be ascribe ) that wooden patten of eight elnes long be bind to the sole of their foot do carry they with so great celerity even upon high mountain , that they can be outrun , either by the swiftness of hound and dear , or yet by the fly of bird . and that they will kill nine roe or more at one course and with one stroke of a dart . these and such like , concern Ireland , Norway , m island , Gronland , of the miracle of water , and air , this master of fragment have gather together into his look glass : whereby , although he have make his own follower wonder , and the common people to be astonish , yet have he minister unto we nothing but occasion of laughter . but let we hear Frisius . the flame of mount Hecla ( say he ) will not burn tow ( which be most apt matter for the wieke of a candle ) neither be it quench with water . but i say that this strange opinion may be confirm by many reason borrow out of your school of philosophy . for the natural philosopher do teach , that it be common to all forcible flame to be quench with dry thing , and nourish with moist : whereupon even blacksmithe , by sprinkle on of water , use to quicken and strengthen their fire . for ( say they ) when fire be more vehement , it be stir up by cold , and nourish by moisture , both which quality do concur in water . item , water be wont to kindle scorch fire : because the moisture it self , which arise , do prove more fatty and gross , neither be it consume by the smoke enclose it , but the fire it self feed upon the whole substance thereof , whereby be make pure , and gather round together , it become then more vehement by reason of cold . and therefore also wildfire can be quench with water . item , there be place abound with brimstone and pitch , which burn of their own accord , the flame whereof can be quench with water . the grand philosopher also have affirm , that fire be nourish by water . Arist . 3 . de anim . and Pliny , in the second book of his natural historic cap . no . and Strabo in his 7 . book . in Nympheum there proceed a flame out of a rock , which be kindle with water . the same author say : the ash continual flourish , cover a burn fountain . and moreover that there be sudden fire at some time , even upon water , as namely that the lake of Thrasumenus in the field of IT2 perugi , be all on fire , as the same Strabo witness . and in the year 1226 , and 1236 , not far from the promontory of island call Reykians , a flame of fire break forth out of the sea . yea even upon man body sudden fire have glitter : as namely , there spring a flame from the head of Servius Tullius lie a sleep : and also Lucius Martius in Spain after the death of the Scipions , make a oration to his soldier , and exhort they to revenge , be all in a flame , as Valerius Antias do report . Pliny in like sort make mention of a flame in a certain mountain , which , as it be kindle with water , so be it quench with earth or hay :