of their health by physic . thus than i say , be all in good plight and strong , the 20 . of June we come to Cadiz , and there very early in the morning present our self before the town , ride about a league or something less , from it . the sea at that instant go marvelous high , and the wind be exceed large . notwithstanding , a council be call , our lord general forthwith attempt with all expedition to land some certain company of their man at the west side of the town , by certain long boat , light horseman , pynness , and barge make for the purpose , but can not compass it , and in the attempt thereof , they chance to sink one of their barge , with some four score good soldier well appoint in she , and yet by good hap and great care , the man be all save except viii . and therefore they be constrained to put off their land till a other more convenient time . that morning very timely , there light a very fair dove upon the main yard of the lord admiral ship , and there she sit very quiet for the space of 3 . or 4 . hour , be nothing dismay all that while , every man gaze and look much upon she , and speak their mind and opinion , yet all conclude by no mean to disquiet she : i for my part , take it for a very good omen and bode , as in truth ( God be thank ) there fall out nothing in the end to the contrary . and as at our very first come to Cadiz this chance , so likewise on the very last day of our depart from the same town , another dove present her self in the self same order into the same ship , and present grow wonderful tame and familiar to we all , and do so still keep we company , even till our arrival here in England . 245 we no soon present our self , but present a goodly sort of tall spanish ship come out of the mouth of the bay of Cadiz , the galley accompany they in such good order , and so place as all of they may well succour each other , and therewithal ! keep themselves very close to their town , the castle , and the fort , for their better guard and defence , abide there still , and expect our far determination . all that day pass , be very rough and boisterous , and little or nothing can be do , more than that about the evening there pass some friendly and kind salutation send one from the other in warlike manner , by discharge certain great piece , but to my knowledge no hurt do at all , or else very little . a careful and diligent watch be have all that night through out the whole army , and on Monday morning be the 21 . day , the wind and weather be become moderate and favourable , between five and six of the clock in the morning , our ship in the name of almighty God , and in defence of the honour of England , without any far delay , with all speed , courage , and alacrity , do set upon the spanish ship , be then under sail , and make out of the mouth of the bay of Cadiz , up towards Puente de Suago on Granada side , be in number lix . tall ship , with nineteeen . or ago . galley attend upon they , sort in such good order , and reasonable distance as they may still annoy we , and always relieve themselves interchangeable : have likewise the castle , fort , and town , continual to assist they and they , and always ready to play upon we and we . in most man opinion it seem that the enemy have a wonderful advantage of we , all circumstance be well weigh , but especial the straightness of the place , and the natural form and situation of the bay it self , be right consider . for albeit the very bay it self be very large and exceed beautiful , so that from Cadiz to port S . mary , be some vi . or seven . English mile over or there about , yet be there many rock , shelf , sand 246 and shallow in it , so that the very channel and place for sea room , be not above 2 . or 3 . mile , yea and in some place , not so much , for the ship of any great burden , to make way in , but that they must either be set on ground or else constrain to run foul one on another . all this notwithstanding , with great and invincible courage , the lord generail present set upon they , and sort out some such convenient ship , as to their honourable wisdom seem fit for that time service , they be drive to take some other course then before have be by they intend . wherefore upon a grave consultation have by a select counsel , what great danger may ensue upon so mighty a disadvantage as appear in all probability , if it be not by good and sound judgement prevent , and therewithal in their singular wisdom foresee that some great stratagem may be practise by the enemy , either by firework , or some other subtle politic devise , for the hazard of her majesty ship of honour in so narrow a place , thus with all expedition they conclude that the viceadmiral , the lord Thomas Howard , that most noble lord Howard ( who exceed great magnanimity , courage , and wisdom , join with such a honourable kind of sweet courtesy , bounty , and liberality , as be not able by i and my weakness to be express , have win he all the faithful love heart of as many as ever have have any manner of deal with he ) this lord Thomas , i say , in you non pareille for that time , and the rear admiral sir Walter Raleigh ( a man of marvelous great worth and regard , for many his exceed singular great virtue , right fortitude and great resoluteness in all matter of importance ) in the warspight associate with diverse most famous worthy knight , namely , sir Francis veer the lord Martiali in the rainbow , sir George carry m . of the ordinance , in the mary rose , sir Robert Southwell in the lion , gentleman for all laudable good virtue , and for perfect courage and discretion in