in island , then at those which be in other country . the four be altogether deadly . Isidore affirm , that there be a certain fountain who water be drink , extinguish life . and Pliny say , that about Nonaris in Arcadia , the river of Styx ( near the mountain of Cillene , say Cardane : it will be contain in nothing but a horsehoof : and it be report that Alexander the great be poison therewithal ) not differ from other water , neither in smell nor colour , be drink , be present death . in Berosus a hill of the same the people call Tauri , there be three fountain , every author say . one of they deadly without remedy , and yet without grief . and ( which be the strange thing of all the rest ) Seneca make mention of a pool , into which whosoever look , do present die . but , as for this four fountain of Frisius , which Saxo do likewise mention , we islander , as always heretofore , so even at this day do testify , that it be utter unknown unto we : and therefore in this regard , we render unto God in - Island free mortali thank , because he have vouchsafe to preserve our nation from such fountain , from serpent and venomous worm , and from all other pestiferous and con - beast . tagious creature . furthermore about the foresay mountain there be such abundance of brimstone . the three mountain call by Munster and Frisius , fiery mountain , do all of they stand a huge distance from our mine . wherefore , when as near unto these hill they have find out a place for four fountain , which they do so mighty extol for wonder , they must needs have some brimstone mine also , stand a like distance from the say fountain . And assure , neither about mount Hecla , as Munster will have it , nor by Frisius his fountain ( the report whereof how true it be , have be hitherto declare ) be Brimston dig up at this 135 mine only in the north part of island . abundance offish about island diminish . day : nor i think ever be within the remembrance of our father . neither be it true that Munster re - porteth concern the abundance of brimstone : namely , that it be almost the only merchandise and tribute of the hand . for whereas the hand be divide into four part , the four part only towards the north ( nay , but even the half thereof ) do use it for merchandise , and there be not one crumb of brimstone pay for tribute of the hand . the twelve section . there be so great store of fish in this hand , that they be lay forth on pile to be sell in the open air , as high as the top of house . in the open air . in deed we have see other country merchant do so , until they have unlade their ship of outlandish ware , and fill they again with fish and with other of our country merchandise . but whether our man have do the like at any time , it be not manifest . certain , that plentiful and ancient abundance of fish be now decay , and the islander now begin to be pinch with the want of these and other good thing , the lord lay the just scourge of our impiety upon we , which i pray God we may due acknowledge . the thirteenth section . they have most swift horse , which will run without cease a continual course for the space of 30 . league . a certain cosmographer in his map of island re - porteth concern the horse of one parish , that they will run 20 . league at once in a continue race . but we account both to be impossible . for Munster write that those beast which excel all other in swiftness and strength of body , call two Rangiferi , can run above 30 . league in 24 . hour . 136 there be see sometime near unto island huge whale Munster . like unto mountain , which overturn ship , unless they be terrify away with the sound of trumpet , or beguile with round and empty vessel , which they delight to toss up and down . it sometime fall out that mariner think these whale to be hand , and cast out anchor upon their back , be often in danger of drown . they be call in their tongue Trollwal Tuffelwalen , that be to say , the devilish whale . like unto mountain . Loe here once again ( gentle reader ) Munster falsify echo , and ( as the proverb say ) his blind dream . such a false and senseless overreaching do exceed disgrace a history , and that by so much the more , by how much the less necessary it be . for to what purpose shall a historiographer make leasing , if history be a report of plain truth ? why shall he use such strange surmounting ? what be it that he will persuade , or whither will he ravish the reader , if he propound unto himself nothing but the simple declaration of thing ? poet and painter have leave of old , to feign , to blaze , in all thing to be bold . but not historiographer . the back of whale which they think to be hand . this fable , like all the rest , be breed of a old , ridiculous and vain tale , the credit and truth whereof be not worth a straw . and it be this that follow , namely , that the bishop of Breme ( call by the ancient Norway Brandan , and by Kranzius , if i be not deceive , alebran - dus ) in old time send certain legate with a Coven of friar to preach and publish in the north the popish faith , which be then think to be Christian : and when they have spend a long journey in sail towards the north , they come unto a hand , and there cast certain letter send by bran - dan