we can easy brook . it be our part therefore in this place also to avouch the truth , and to turn the lease upon the author own head . house , etc first , that which they say concern the same common house ( as also live , and state ) with our cattle , we plain affirm to be false and erroneous , not only the truth it self be our witness , if any man will make trial , but also the experience of many stranger , that have live some year among we , and have more mind to speak the truth then to revile our nation : who have see our house and habitation with their own eye , and know that in every particular farm or grange there be many several room : namely , in those that be most simple and base , seven or eight : in other which be great , sometime ten , and sometime twenty . in the great sometime forty , and sometime fifty . which for the most part be sever , both by roof and wall , do serve for the daily and household affair of one owner or master , seidome of two or three , but almost never of more : whereupon the reader may easy judge , how true it be that the islander and their cattle have all one house to lie in , when every husbandman in this variety of room have several oxe - stalle , sheep - cote , stable , lambs - cot separate indifferent space one from another , which the servant go unto so oft as need require , and from thence return back to the dwell house . but whereas one note in his map of island , concern the province of skagefiord , that under the same roof , man , dog , swine and sheep live all together , it be partly false , and partly no marvel : for sheep , as 163 it have be say , and special for swine ( when as that province have no swine at all ) it be utter false : for dog it be no marvel , when as not king court be ever , or at this day be destitute of they , as it be well know to all man . but as touch dog afterward in the seven section . victual , etc whither beast meat may fit be term by the name of victus , a man may just doubt : when Doletus interpret a piece of Tully , say : as for victus ( say he ) we will so expound it with the civilian , namely that we comprehend under the word of victus all thing necessary for the life of man , as meat , drink , attire of the body , etc and Ulpianus de verborum signification define victus in the very same word . but in this place the say author call beast meat by the name of victus . but let we see what truth and plain deal be to be find in these man . we have no labour cattle beside horse and ox : these have grass and hay ( except where hay be want ) for their fodder , and water to drink . now , the very same writer confess , that the islander live by fish , butter , flesh both beef , and mutton , and corn also , though it be scarce , and bring out of other country . therefore they have not the same food with brute beast , which notwithstanding the say writer affirm in these word : they and their cattle use all one victual or food . what Munster meaning be in this clause , he himself a little before have plain teach . island ( say he ) contain many people live only with the food of cattle , and sometime by take of fish . but what else be the food of cattle , but the meat of cattle , say Doletus ? unless perhaps Munster call the food of cattle , cattle themselves slay for the food of man : who , as i think , the use of the latin tongue do gainsay , which have teach we that as man do eat , so beast do feed , and have term the victual of man , and the food or fodder of cattle . 164 but may i think that Munster and Krantzius be so mad as to imagine that the islander live upon grass and hay ? to this pass of misery be Nabuchodonozor bring undergo the yoke of God vengeance : Daniel 4 . vers . 30 . we will easy grant that beast , and cattle will not perhaps refuse many thing , which man not only of our country but of you also eat , if the say beast be destitute of their usual food : as horse be feed with corn and barley loaf : they will drink milk also ( like unto calf and lamb ) and ale , if it be proffer they , and that greedy . and dog in like manner will devour any dainty dish whatsoever . may any man therefore say that man use the same common victual with dog and horse ? now , whatsoever thing have happen in the time of grievous famine ought not to be record in historic for the general custom of any country . as it be not lawful for we to write concern other nation , that the people of this or that country , do usual live by eat of dog , mouse , cat , although perhaps in the time of famine or siege or dearth of corn , they have often be constrain so to do . but that the same drink be some time common to many man with beast , we will not great gainsay : namely most pure water , that natural drink create by God for all live creature : which also in some respect physician do commend , yea , neither the patriarch themselves , nor our saviour Christ despise it . as touch apparel ( for we comprehend apparel also under the name of victus ) it be no wise common to we with beast . for nature have clad they with hair and bristle ( as i