: and so take upon i a thing very dangerous , and perhaps subject to the sinister judgement of many . in this purpose the example of Cneius Pompeius have likewise confirm i : who be choose procurator for corn among the roman , and in a extreme scarcety and dearth of the city , have take up some store of grain in Sicilia , Sardinia , and Africa , be report to have have great regard of his country , then of himself . for when he make haste towards room , and a mighty and dangerous tempest arise , he perceive the pilot to tremble , and to be unwilling to commit themselves to the rigor of the stormy sea , himself first go on board , and command the anchor to be weigh , break forth into these word : that we shall sail necessity urge : but that we shall live , it urge not . in which word he seem wise to infer , that great care be to be have of our country lie in danger , then of our own private safety . sif small with great as equal may agree : and fly with elephant compare be . namely that gather together and lay up in store those thing which may be apply to succour the fame and credit of our nation , have now this long time be oppress with stranger , through the envy of certain malicious person , i bold adventure to present these few meditation of i unto the view of the world , and so hoist up sail to commit my self unto a troublesome sea , and to break forth into the like speech with he : that i shall write necessity urge : but that my write in all place shall satisfy every delicate taste , or escape all peevishness of carper it urge not . i doubt not but many will allow this my enterprise : the success perhaps all man will not approve . nevertheless , i think that there be great regard to be have of my country , sustain so many man mock and reproach , then of my own praise or dispraise , redound perhaps unto i upon this occasion . for what cause shall move i to shun the envy and hate of some man , be join with a endeavour to benefit and gratify my country ? but if i shall seem somewhat too bold in censure the error of the error of writer , or too severe in reprehend the writer oj slander of some man : yet i hope all they will judge r indifferent of i , who shall serious consider , how intolerable the error of writer be , concern our nation : how many also and how grievous be the reproach of some , against we , wherewith they have sundry way provoke our nation , and as yet will not cease to provoke . they ought also to have i excuse in regard of that inbred affection root in the heart of all man , towards their native soil , and to pardon my just grief for these injury offer unto my country . and i in very deed , so much as lie in i , have in all place moderate my self , and have be desirous to abstain from reproach : but if any man think , we shall have use more temperance in our stile , i trust , the former reason will content he . since therefore , i be to undergo the same hazard , which i see be common incident to all man , that publish any write : i must now have especial regard of this one thing : namely , of seek out some patron , and Meccenas for this my brief commentary , under who name and protection it may more safe pass through the hand of all man . but for this purpose i can not find out , nor wish for any man more fit than your royal majesty , most gracious prince . for unto he , who have receive under his power and tuition our life and good , unto he ( i say ) do we make humble suit , that he will have respect also unto the credit of our nation , so injurious disgrace . yea very ( most gracious king ) we be constrain to crave your majesty merciful aid , not only in this matter , but in many other thing also which be want in our country , or which otherwise belong to the public commodity and welfare thereof : which not by i , but by the letter supplicatory of the chief man of our nation , be at this time declare , or will shordy be declare . for we doubt not but that your sacred majesty , after the example of your christian predecessor , will vouchsafe unto our country also , among other island of your majesty dominion , your kingly care and protection . for as the necessity of flee for redress unto your sacred majesty , be we : so the glory of relieve , regard , and protect we , shall whole redound unto your sacred majesty : as also , there be lay up for you , in respect of your foster and preserve of God church , upon the extreme northerly part almost of the whole earth , and in the uttermost bound of your majesty dominion ( which by the singular goodness of God , enjoy at this present tranquillity and quiet safety ) a reward and crown of immortali life in the heaven . but consider these thing be not proper to this place , i will leave they , and return to my purpose which i have in hand : most humble beseech your 92 s . m . that you will of your clemency vouchsafe to become a favourer and patron unto these my labour and study , for the behalf of my country . it now remain ( most gracious and merciful sovereign ) for we to make our humble prayer unto almighty God , that king of king , and disposer of all humane affair , that it will please he of his infinite goodness , to advance your majesty ( yearly grow up in wisdom and experience , and all other heroical virtue ) to