. while he be bishop , the icing lieutenant with some of his follower be invite to Schalholt , in the time of the banquet , be slay by certain conspirator : because he have in all place wicked waste the inhabitant and their good . but Augmundus as the author of that murder ( although he purge himself with a other ) be transport into Denmark , there end his life . xxvii . Gysserus . elect , Augmundus yet live . enter the see . he be the abolish of popish tradition about priest marriage : his own marriage be solemnize at Schalholt . [ Xxviii . withstand Gysserus and Martinus bishop of Schalholt , be command by the most religious king christian the 3 . under pain of banishment to come with all speed into Denmark . but neglect the king commandment , heetooke Martine bishop of Schalholt , and commit he to ward . at length he himself also be take by a man of great name ( who before that time , it be say , he have provoke ) and be bring to Schalholt , be , together with his two son , by the authority of the king lieutenant behead . in revenge whereof not long after , then . say lieutenant with some of his company , be villanous slay by certain roister , which be once servant to the party behead . xxl Olaus Hialterus . depart his country . enter the see . [ this 1551 . 1552 . 1553 - J57 in the year of Christ . the bishop of Schalholt . the bishop of holen . in the year of Christ . > 5 + 7 - Xxviii . Martinus . bishop , etc and the this man ( be as yet in the life time of his predecessor fellow - year follow . Xxix . Gislaus Jonas . this man present , in the time of bishop Augmund begin in his youth to be inflame with you love of true piety , and of the pure labourer with he ) be the first that kindle the love of sincere doctrine at holen in the heart of many : and then be bishop do open teach and defend the say doctrine . he die . 1568 . 1556 . doctrine of the gospel , and be pastor of the church of selardal , diligent to advance the same , by which mean he do so procure unto himself the hatred of papist , as be constrain to give place unto their craft and cruelty , he depart over to Hamburg , from whence come to copen Hagen in Denmark , and painefiil proceed in his former study of divinity , he live in the familiarity , and favour of many , but special of D . D . Peter Palladius : who be at that time bishop there . afterwards re - Xxii . Gudbrandus thorlacius . the ornament , not only of his age , but of posterity also : who beside that , by the direction of the holy spirit , he have most notable bring the work begin , and leave unto he by his predecessor Olaus to that perfection which it have please God to vouchsafe : ( namely his labour and diligence in maintaining the truth of the gospel , and in abolish of popish superstition ) even in this his country he 1587 - turn into his country , Martine give place unto he of his own accord . this man die also , have be the first that have establish a print house . for which cause his country ( beside , for many > 5 8 in the year of Christ . the bishop of Schalholt . the bishop of holen . in the year of Christ . 1588 . 1589 . for the space of 31 . year or there about , profess the gospel of Jesus Christ : neither do he help and further the church of God by the sound of his voice only , but by all other mean to the utmost of his ability , by teach , preach , write , by his wealth and his counsel . Xxx . Otto Enerus , a grave , godly , and learned man . be choose he depart his country . he be consecrate , return , and enter the sea , endeavour himself in the labour of his function . other book translate into our mother tongue ) shall eternal bind unto he , that the sacred bible also , by his mean , be fair print in the language of island . he ( i say ) be at this present , bishop , when he be about to take his charge : depart his country . return and enter the see of holen . 1570 . 1571 . in these time therefore light be restore unto our soul from heaven , and the gate of the kingdom of heaven be open unto we by the sincere preach of Christian doctrine . for in either of the bishop seat there be a free school found by the liberality and piety of that most renown king of Denmark christian the three : and afterward the son follow the godly step of his most christian father , the say free school by lord Friderick the second , our most religious king , be call up to his heavenly country in the year 1588 , have be increase and further : which at this day also do prosper and flourish by the 159 favour and authority of the most gracious king and our prince , Christian the four , wherein the youth of our island be instruct in the rudiment of liberali art , and sacred divinity , be train up to knowledge and true godliness , that from hence minister of church may proceed . we be come at length in the register of the bishop of island down to this present day , wherein the forename excellent man Gudbrandus thorlacius , and Otto Enerus , the one at holen , and the other at Schalholt be bishop of our cathedral church : both of which man , that it will please God long to preserve unto his church in health and life , for the glory of his most holy name , we all do earnest and with fervent prayer beseech he .