which we have term he ) those thing ( i say ) have he scrape up together : whereupon hereafter by my consent , for his manner and disposition let he enjoy the name of a swine . the fifteen section . the nine xt 7 " ee will here rehearse the nine reproach , which reproach . wonderful that slanderous hog have draw from the manner of live , and special from the meat and drink of the islander , and that not in one or a few word , but in a large invective : namely , that they eat old and unsavoury meat , and that , without the use of bread . also , that they eat diverse kind of fish which be unknown to stranger : and that they mingle water and whey together for drink . all which this venomous pasquill , with eloquent rail and witty slander have set out at the full . and albeit we do scarce vouchsafe to stand long about answer of he , yet in regard of other , who at this day partly wonder at the matter , and partly object it to our nation , we think good to add some few thing in this place . first therefore we will divide this our nation into two part : into beggar , and those that sustain both themselves , and , among other , beggar also . as touch all kind of meat wherewith beggar and other poor man satisfy their hunger , it be no easy matter to rehearse and examine they : neither , because extreme necessity have at some time compel they to eat this or that , therefore be it meet to prescribe certain kind and number of meat to the rest of the nation . for we have also a law amone the canon 186 1592 . apostolical , which forbid to eat thing strangle : in the observe of which canon , antiquity have seem to be very devout . moreover , we will make a distinction of time also , that it may seem no strange accident in the time of famine , though many thing be , and have be use by a great number of man to satisfy their hunger , which at other time be scarce meat for dog . as very late in the year 1590 we hear concern the citizen of Paris , be environ with the most strait siege of Henry the four , king of Navarre , suffer ( as Petrus Lindebergius speak ) the famine of Saguntum : insomuch that they do not only eat their horse , but also take the flesh of dead man , and beat their bone to powder in a mortar , they mingle therewith a handful or two of meal , esteem it dainty . and it be well know also of other nation , who in the like urgent necessity have live by eat of mouse , cat and dog . in like manner sometime be we islander constrain to do , not be besiege by our enemy ( although hitherto we have abstain from man flesh , yea , and to our knowledge , from dog , mouse , and cat ) for whereas we provide thing necessary for food out of the land and sea , and no sustenance , or very little , be bring unto we by stranger : so often as God withhold his gift of land and sea , then must follow and ensue a dreadful scarcity of victual , whereupon the inhabitant be sometime vex with grievous famine . and therefore it be likely that they among we which use to live from hand to mouth , and have not some provision of former year remain , have be drive to great extremity , so often as need have enforce they thereunto . but whether this thing ought worthy to minister occasion to a public and perpetuali reproach against the islander , more than other nation , i refer it to the judgement of indifferent and honest mind . moreover , whereas diverse use to object concern 187 the islander mean of preserve their meat without salt . the proper and accustom fare of our country , especial of flesh , fish , butter be long time keep without salt : also concern white - meat , want of corn , drink of water , and such like : in most place of island ( for there be many of our countryman also , who , after the manner of the Dane and german so far forth as aught in a mean to suffice chaste and temperate mind , although we have not any great variety of sauce , be destitute of apothecary shop , be of ability to furnish their table , and to live moderate ) we confess it to be even so : namely that the foresay kind of victual be use in most place without the season of salt . and i will further add , that the very same meat , which certain stranger abhor so much as to name , yet stranger themselves , when they be among we do use to eat they with delight . for albeit for the most part we have no corn , nor meal , nor yet salt the provocation of gluttony , for the season of our victual , be common to we all : yet notwithstanding almighty god of his goodness have teach our man also the way , how they shall handle , and keep in store those thing which belong to the sustentation of life , to the end it may appear , that God in nourish and sustain of we islander , be not tie to bread and salt . but whereas stranger boast that all their victual be more pleasant and wholesome : yet we deny that to be a sufficient reason , why they shall upbraid we in regard of we : neither do we think God to be a debtor unto our dainty mouth : but rather we give he thank with our whole heart , that he vouchsafe without this delicate and nice fare , which be esteem to be so pleasant and wholesome , to grant even unto the man of our country many year , and a good age as also constant health , and flourish strength of body ; all which