so rank , that they be * fain to drive their cattle from the pasture , lest they surfeit or be choke . that danger of surfeit or choke be never hear tell of , in our father , grandfather , greatgrandfather or any of our predecessor day , be they never so ancient . the six section . there be in this hand mountain lift up to the sky , ^^ ria ' who top be white with perpetuali snow , their ' root boil with everlasting fire . the first be towards the west , call Hecla : the other the mountain of the cross : and the three Helga . item : • Zieglerus . the rock or promontory of Hecla boil with continual fire . item : Saxo . there be in this hand also a mountain , which resemble the starry firmament , with perpetuali flashing of fire , con - tinueth always burn , by uncessant belch out of flame . MUnster and Frisius be about to report the wonder of island do present stumble , as it be , upon the threshold , to the great inconvenience of they both . for that which they here affirm of mount Hecla , although it have some show of truth : notwithstanding concern the other two mountain , that they shall burn with perpetuali fire , it be a manifest error . for there be no such mountain to be find in island , nor yet any thing else ( so far forth as we can imagine ) which may minister occasion of so great a error unto writer . howbeit there be see ( yet very late ) in the year 1581 out of a certain mountain of south 105 island lie near the sea , and cover over with continual snow and frost , a marvelous eruption of smoke and fire , cast up abundance of stone and ash . but this mountain be far from the other three , which the say author do mention . howbeit , suppose that these thing be true which they report of fiery mountains : be it possible therefore that they shall seem strange , or monstrous , whenas they proceed from natural cause ? what ? do they any whit prevail to establish that opinion concern the hell of island , which follow next after in Munster , Ziegler , and Frisius ? for my part , i think it no way tolerable , that man shall abuse these , and the like miracle of nature , to avouch absurdity , or , that they shall with a kind of impiety wonder at they , as at matter impossible . as though in these kind of inflammation , there do not concur cause of sufficient force for the same purpose . there be in the root of these mountain a matter most apt to be set on fire , come so near as it do to the nature of brimstone and pitch . there be air also , which insinuate it self by passage , and hole , into the very bowel of the earth , do puff up the nourishment of so huge a fire , together with saltpetre , by which puff ( as it be with certain bellows ) a threenaturall most ardent flame be kindle . for , all these thus con - cause of fine cur } fire have those three thing , which necessary moun in s . mahe it burn , that be to say , matter , motion , and force of make passage : matter which be fatty and moist , and therefore nourish last flame : motion which the air do perform , be admit into the cave of the earth : force of make passage , and that the invincible might of fire it self ( which can not be without inspiration of air , and can not but break forth with a incredible strength ) do bring to pass : and so ( even as in undermine trench , and engine or great warlike ordinance , huge iron bullet be cast forth with monstrous roar , and crack , by the force of kindle brimstone , and saltpeter , whereof gun - 106 powder be compound ) chingle and great stone be scorch in that fiery gulf , as it be in a furnace , together with abundance of sand and ash , be vomit up and discharge , and that for the most part not without a earthquake : which , if it come from the depth of the earth , ( be call by Posidonius , Succussio ) it must either be a open or a quake . open cause the earth in some place to gape , and fall a sunder . by quake the earth be heave up and swell , and sometime ( as Pliny say ) cast out huge lib - 2o - capheap : such a earthquake be the same which i even 20 - now mention , which in the year 1581 do so sore trouble the south shore of island . and this kind of earthquake be most clearke describe by Pontanus in these verse : the stir breath run on with steal step , urge now up , and now enforce down : for freedom eke try all , it skip , it leap , to rid it self from uncouth dungeon . then quake the earth as it will burst anon , the earth yquake , and wall city quiver , strong quarry crack , and stone from hill do shiver . i think good to add these thing , not that i suppose any man to be ignorant thereof : but least other man shall think that we be ignorant , and therefore that we will run after their fable , which they do from hence establish . but yet there be somewhat more in these three feign mountain of island , which cause the say writer not a little to wonder , namely whereas they say that their foundation be always burn , and yet for all that , their top be never destitute of snow . howbeit , it beseem not the authority and learning of such great clerk to marveile at this , who can not but well know the flame of mount Aetna , which ( accord to Pliny ) be full of snow all winter