Richard Weston . the earl of Sussex . sir Richard wainman . the lord Harbert . sir James Wootton . 27 - the lord Burk . sir Richard ruddal . count Lodowick . sir Robert Mansfield . sir William Howard . sir William Mounson . sir George d ’ eureux . sir John Bowles . sir Henry Nevel . sir Edward bow . sir Edmund Richard sir Humphrey druel . sir Richard Leven . sir Amias Preston . sir Peter Egomort . sir Robert Remington . sir Anthony Ashley . sir John buck . sir Henry Leonard . sir John Morgan . sir Richard Levison . sir John Aldridg . sir Horatio Vere . sir John Asshindon . sir Arthur Throckmorton . sir Matthew Browne . sir mile Corbet . sir John Acton . sir Edward Conway . sir Thomas gate . sir Oliver Lambert . sir Gilly mericke . sir Anthony cook . sir Thomas smith . 259 sir Christopher Heydon . sir Francis Popham . sir Philip Woodhouse . sir Alexander Clifford . sir Maurice Barkley . sir Charles blunt . sir George Gifford . sir Robert cross . sir James Escudamor . sir Urias Leigh . sir William Pooley . sir Thomas palmer . sir John Stafford . sir Robert Lovel . sir John Gylbert . sir William Harvie . sir John grey . do Christ . prince of portingal sir John Vanderfoord , admiral of the Hollander . sir Robert Dudley . 8 . August . i be not curious in place these gentleman , but put they down at a venture . only encage have observe , as near as i can , the just day and time when they be create . and i trust where the place of it self be so worthy and equal , there the bare name and place of the party , shall breed no offence , or make a disparity . the two gentleman that be last knight receive their knighthood in the way of our return from Cadiz : the one of they upon the sea , not far from the bay of the groin , at what time our ship stand upon their stay for a space , while certain pinnace be send to descry what ship be at the groin : the other at Plymouth in the open street , when the lord general come from the sermon . the one a man of long service , and good desert among the dutch : the other of so many good part of a worthy gentleman , as the like be seidome see to concur in any . i speak in the begin of her majesty prayer , which i presume ( though worthy ) to translate into latin : and now at this very time , there be some opportunity offer , for to make some use of that translation . for now be in Cadiz , attend upon my most honourable good lord , i talk with certain of the religious man , such as i find learned , whereof indeed there be some , though not very many . i 260 talk also with the bishop of Cusco there , a grave age comely man , and be of late choose to that bishopric , he be as then to have go to the Indies , have not we then take he prisoner , and so stay his journey for that time . with these man ever as occasion do serve , i do seek now and then to spend some speech , and to entertain time withal , i will break with they of this our victory , and of the injury and bad deal of their prince and country offer to her majesty , whereby she be provoke , and in a manner draw to this action : though otherwise of her own most excellent princely good nature , she be altogether give to peace , and quietness . and always in some part of our conference , i will show they a copy of her majesty prayer in latin , which i have always of purpose ready about i , whereby it may the better appear unto they , how unwilling , and upon how great and urgent occasion her majesty be , as it be enforce to undertake this action : and therewithal ! i do use now and then to bestow upon they a copy of the same in writing . they seem in all outward show to allow of my speech , and to praise her majesty good inclination , and earnest to wish that there may be a firm concord and peace again . it please the lord general to deal exceed favourable with this say bishop of Cusco : for it be their good pleasure to give he his free passage without any ransom , and therewithal to let he to understand , that they come not to deal with churchman , or unarm man , or with man of peace , weakling and child , neither be it any part of their meaning to make such a voyage for gold , silver , or any other their wealth and riches , etc but that their only come be to meet with their dishonourable practise , and manifold injury , and to deal with man of war and valour , for the defence of the true honour of England : and to let they to understand , that whensoever they 261 attempt any base - conceited and dishonourable practice to their sovereign queen , their mistress , that it shall be revenge to the uttermost , etc in this mean space , while the lord general continue at Cadiz , there come to they certain poor wretched turk , to the number of 38 , that have be a long time galleyslave , and either at the very time of the fight by sea , or else immediate thereupon , take the opportunity , do then make their escape , and do swim to land : yield themselves to the mercy of their most honourable lordship . it please they with all speed to apparel they , and to furnish they with money , and all other necessary , and to bestow on they a bark , and a pilot , to see they free and safe convey into Barbary , will they to let the country understand what be do , and what they have see . whereby i doubt not , but as her majesty be a most admirable prince already , over all Europe , all Africa , and Asia , and throughout Christendom : so the whole world hereafter shall have just cause to admire her infinite princely virtue , and thereby be provoke to confess , that as she have be mighty protect from time to time , by the powerful hand of the almighty , so undoubted , that she be