damage which may thereupon ensue to the town and haven , will not permit they to do , but drive they from thence with his great ordinance . upon the 29 of July in the morning , the spanish fleet after the foresay tumult , have arrange themselves again into order , be , within sight of grevel , most brave and furious encounter by the english ; where they once again get the wind of the Spaniard : who suffer themselves to be deprive of the commodity of the place in Caleis ride , and of the advantage of the wind near unto dunkerk , rather than they will change their array or separate their force now conjoin and unite together , stand only upon their defence . and albeit there be many excellent and warlike ship in the english fleet , yet scarce be there 22 or 23 among they all which match 90 of the spanish ship in bigness , or can convenient assault they . wherefore the english ship use their prerogative of nimble stirrage , whereby they can turn and wield themselves with the wind which way they list , come often time very near upon the Spaniard , and charge they so sore , that now and then they be but a pike length asunder : and so continual give they one broad side after another , they discharge all their shot both great and small upon they , spend one whole day from morning till night in that violent kind of conflict , until such time as powder and bullet fail they . in regard of which want they think it convenient not to pursue the Spaniard any long , because they have many great vantage of the english , namely for the extraordinary bigness of their ship , and also for that they be so near conjoin , and keep together in so good array , that they can by no mean be fight withal one to one . the english think therefore , that they have right well acquit themselves , in chase the Spaniard 224 the final battle off gravelines 20th July 1588 1588 . first from Caleis , and then from dunkerk , and by that mean to have hinder they from join with the duke of Parma his force , and get the wind of they , to have drive they from their own coast . the Spaniard that day sustain great loss and damage have many of their ship shoot through and thorough , and they discharge likewise great store of ordinance against the english ; who indeed sustain some hindrance , but not comparable to the Spaniard loss : for they lose not any one ship or person of account . for very diligent inquisition be make , the english man all that time wherein the spanish navy sail upon their sea , be not find to have want above one hundred of their people : albeit sir Francis drake ship be pierce with shot above forty time , and his very cabben be twice shoot through , and about the conclusion of the fight , the bed of a certain gentleman lie weary thereupon , be take quite from under he with the force of a bullet . likewise , as the earl of Northumberland and sir Charles blunt be at dinner upon a time , the bullet of a demi - culverin break through the midst of their cabin , touch their foot , and strike down two of the stander by , with many such accident befall the english ship , which it be tedious to rehearse . whereupon it be most apparent , that God miraculous preserve the english nation . for the lord admiral write unto her majesty that in all humane reason , and accord to the judgement of all man ( every circumstance be due consider ) the english man be not of any such force , whereby they may , without a miracle , dare once to approach within sight of the spanish fleet : insomuch that they free ascribe all the honour of their victory unto God , who have confound the enemy , and have bring his counsel to none effect . the same day the spanish ship be so batter with three Spanish english shoot , that that very night and the day follow , hip sink two or three of they sink right down : and among 1n t } ie fight . iv 225 p two galleon take and cart into Beland . the rest a certain great ship of Biscay , which captain cross assault , which perish even in the time of the conflict , so that very few therein escape drown ; who report that the governor of the same ship slay one another upon the occasion follow : one of they which will have yield the ship be sudden slay ; the brother of the slay party in revenge of his death slay the murderer , and in the mean while the ship sink . the same night two Portugal galleon of the burden of seven or eight hundred ton a piece , to wit the saint Philip and the saint Matthew , be forsake of the spanish fleet , for they be so tear with shot , that the water enter into they on all side . in the galeon of saint Philip be Francis the Toledo , brother unto the count de Orgas , be colonel over two and thirty band : beside other gentleman ; who see their mast break with shot , they shape their course , as well as they can , for the coast of Flanders : whither when they can not attain , the principali man in the ship commit themselves to their skiff , arrive at the next town , which be Ostend ; and the ship it self be leave behind with the residue of their company , be take by the ulishinger . in the other galeon , call the saint Matthew , be embark don Diego Pimentelli another campmaster and colonel of 32 band , be brother unto the mark of tamnare , with many other gentleman and captain . their ship be not very great , but exceed strong , for of a great number of bullet which have batter she , there be scarce 20 wherewith she be pierce or hurt : her upper work be of force sufficient to bear off a musket shoot : this ship be shoot through and pierce in the fight before grevel ; insomuch that the leakage of the water can not be stop : whereupon the duke of Medina send his great skiff unto the governor thereof , that he may save himself and the principal person that be in his ship : which he , upon a halt 226