the voyage of gutwere a english lady marry to Baldwine brother of godfreide duke of Bouillon , towards Jerusalem about 1097 . and the 11 . year of William Rufus king of England . he christian army of godfrie of Bouillon pass the city of Iconium , alias Agogna in the country of Licaonia , and from thence by the city of Heraclia , come at length unto the ci tie of Marasia , where they encamp , and sojourn there three whole day , because of the wife of Baldwine brother germane of the duke of Loraigne . « 93 which lady be long time vex with a grievous malady , be in extremity , where at length pay the debt due to nature , she change this transitory life , for life eternal ; who , in her life time , be a very worthy and virtuous lady , bear in England , and descend of most noble parentage name gutwere ; which , accord to her degree , be there most honourable inter , to the great grief of all the whole army . as report William archbishop of tyre , lib . 3 . cap . 17 . hist , belli sacri . the same author in the 10 . book 8c first chapter of the same history concern the same english lady , write further as follow , Baldwine have follow the war for a time , give his mind to marriage , so that be in England he fall in love with a very honourable and noble lady name gutwere , who he marry and carry with he in that first happy expedition , wherein he accompany his brethren the lord , duke Godfrey and Eustace , person very commendable in all virtue and of immortali memory . but he have hard fortune in his journey , because his foresay wife , be weary with a long sickness finish her life with a happy end near the city of Marasia , before the christian army come unto Antioch , where she be honourable bury , as we have declare before . chronicon Hierosolymitanum in lib . 3 . cap . 27 . make also mention of this english lady , which he call Godwera in this manner . ac in region Maresch uxor baldewini nobilissima , quam de regno angliae eduxit , diutina corporis molestia aggravata , 8c duci Godefrido come - data , vitam exhalavit , sepulta Catholicis obsequiis ; cujus nomen erat godwera . the same in english . in this province of Maresch the most noble wife of Baldwine , which he carry with he out of England be visit with daily sickness and infirmity of 294 body , and commend to the custody of duke Godfrey , depart out of this life , and be bury after the christian manner . her name be Godwera .