the voyage of Ingulphus abbot of Croiland unto Jerusalem , perform ( accord to Florentius Wigorniensis ) in the year of our lord , 1064 , and describe by the say Ingulphus himself about the conclusion of his brief history . A . D . 1064 . densis , natus in anglia , and a parentibus Anglicis , quip urbis pulcherrimae A . D . 1051 . A . D . 1064 , accord to florentine ifigomieneie . 288 iv 289 t A . D . io64 . the same in english . IIngulphus a humble servant of reverend Guthlac and of his monastery of Croiland , bear in England , and of english parent , at the beautiful ! city of London , be in my youth , for the attain of good letter , place first at Westminster , and afterward send to the university of Oxford . and have excel diverse of my equal in learning of Aristotle , i inure my self somewhat unto the first and second rhetoric of Tully . and as i grow in age , disdain my parent mean estate , and forsake my own native soil , i affect the court of king and prince , and be desirous to be clad in silk , and to wear brave and costly attire . and lo , at the same time William our sovereign king 290 now , but then earl of Normandy , with a great troup of follower and attendant come unto London , to confer with king Edward the confessor his kinsman . 1051 . into who company intrude my self , and proffer my service for the performance of any speedy or weigh tie affair , in short time , after i have do many thing with good success , i be know and most entire belove by the victorious Erle himself , and with he i sail into Normandy . and there be make his secretary , i govern the earl court ( albeit with the envy of some ) as my self please , yea who i will i abase , and prefer who i think good . when as therefore , be carry with a youthful heat and lusty humour , i begin to be weary even of this place , wherein i be advance so high above my parentage , and with a inconstant mind , and affection too too ambitious , most vehement aspire at all occasion to climb high : [ ii i . 10 . ] there go a report throughout all Normandy , that diverse archbishop of the empire , and secular prince be desirous for their soul health , and for devotion sake , to go on pilgrimage to Jerusalem . wherefore out of the family of our lord the earl , sundry of we , both gentleman and clerk ( principali of who be my self ) with the licence and good will of our say lord the earl , speed we on that voyage , and travail thirty horse of we into high Germany , we join our self unto the archbishop of Mentz . And be with the company of the bishop seven thousand person sufficient provide for such a expedition , we pass prosperous through many province , and at length attain unto Constantinople . where do reverence unto the emperor Alexius , we see the church of sancta Sophia , and kiss diverse sacred relic . depart thence through Lycia , we fall into the hand of the arabian thief : and after we have be rob of infinite sum of money , and have lose many of our people , hardly escape with extreme danger of our life , at length we joyful enter into the most wish ci tie of 291 Jerusalem . where we be receive by the most reverend , age , and holy patriarch Sophronius , with great melody of cymbal and with torchlight , and be accompany unto the most divine church of our saviour his sepulchre with a solemn procession aswell of Syrians as of Latines . here , how many prayer we utter , what abundance of tear we shed , what deep sigh we breathe forth , our lord Jesus Christ only know . wherefore be conduct from the most glorious sepulchre of Christ to visit other sacred monument of the city , we see with weep eye a great number of holy church and oratory , which Achim the sultan of Egypt have late destroy . and so have bewail with sad tear , and most sorrowful and bleed affection , all the ruin of that most holy city both within and without , and have bestow money for the re - edify of some , we desire with most ardent devotion to go forth into the country , to wash our self in the most sacred river of Jordan , and to kiss all the step of Christ . howbeit the thievish arabian lurk upon every way , will not suffer we to travel far from the city , by reason of their huge and furious multitude . wherefore about the spring there arrive at the port of Joppa a fleet of ship from Genoa . in which fleet ( when the christian merchant have exchange all their ware at the coast town , and have likewise visit the holy place ) we all of we embark , commit our self to the sea : and be toss with many storm and tempest , at length we arrive at Brundisium : and so with a prosperous journey travel through Apulia towards Rome , we there visit the habitation of the holy apostle Peter and Paul , and do reverence unto diverse monument of holy martyr in all place throughout the city . from thence the archbishop and other prince of the empire travel towards the right hand for Alemain , and we decline towards the left hand for France , depart asunder , take our leaf with unspeakable thanks and courtesy . and so at length , of 292 thirty horseman which go out of Normandy fat , lusty , and frolic , we return thither scarce twenty poor pilgrim of we , be all footman , and consume with leanness to the bare bone . A . D . c . 1097 .