, but afterward so soon as they can , revolt again to the sala - dine : for the which it be afterward command by the king , that none of they shall be baptize against their will . the thirteenth day of the say month of July , king fillip of France , and king Richard , after they have obtain the possession of Achon , divide between they all thing therein contain as well the people as gold and silver , with all other furniture whatsoever be remain in the city : who in divide the spoil , be so good carver to themselves that the knight and baron have but title to their share , whereupon they begin to show themselves somewhat discontent , which be know of the king , they send they answer that their will shall be satisfy . the twenty day of July , king Richard speak with the french king , desire he that they two with their army , will bind themselves by oath to remain there still in the land of Jerusalem the space of 3 . year , for the win and recover again of those country : but he say he will swear no such oath , and so the next day after king Richard with his wife and sister enter into the city of Achon , and there place himself in the king palace : the french king remain in the house of the templary , where he continue till the end of that month . about the begin of the month of August , Philip the french king after that he and king Richard have make agreement between Guido and con - radus the mark , about the kingdom of Jerusalem , go from Achon to Tyrus , notwithstanding king Richard and all the prince of the christian army with great intreaty desire he to tarry , show what a 333 shame it be for he to come so far , and now to leave undo that for which he come , and on the 3 . day of August depart from Tyrus , leave the half part of the city of Achon , in the hand of the aforesaid Conradus Marques . the french after his departure the pagan refuse to keep their king shame - covenant make , who neither will restore the holy fmreturne cross nor the money , nor their captive , send word i ' to king Richard , that if he behead the pledge leave with he at Achon , they will chop off the head of such captive of the christian , as be in their hand . short after this the Saladine send great gift to king Richard , request the time limit for behead of the captive to be prorogue , but the king refuse to take his gift , and to grant his request , whereupon the Saladine cause all the christian captive within his possession forthwith to be behead , which be the 28 . of August : which albeit king Richard understand , yet will not he prevent the time before limit for the execution of his prisoner , be then the captive 20 . day of August : upon which day he cause they of the Saracen prisoner of the Saracen open in the sight of ^ Richard th6 saladines army to loose their head : the number ' of who come to two thousand and five hundred , save only that certain of the principal of they he reserve for purpose and consideration , especial to make exchange for the holy cross , and certain other of the christian captive . after this king Richard purpose to besiege the city of joppe , where by the way between Achon and Joppe , near to a town call Assur , Saladine with a great multitude of his Saracen come fierce against the king rearward , but through God merciful grace in the same battle , the king warrior acquit themselves so well , that the Saladine be put to flight , who the tone against Christians pursue the space of 3 . mile , and he lose the Saladine . that same day many of his noble and captain , in 334 such sort ( as it be think ) that the Saladine be not put to such confusion 40 . year before , and but one Christian captain call James Avernus in that conflict be overthrow . from thence king Richard proceed further go to joppe , and then to Ascalon , where he find first the city of joppe forsake of the Saracen , who dare not abide the king come : Ascalon the Saladine throw down to the ground , and likewise forsake the whole land of Syria , through all which land the king have free passage without resistance : neither dare the saracen prince encounter after that with king Richard . king Richard of all which his atchevance the say king Richard send ™ f ™ esslmof his letter of certificate as well into England , as also y ’ to the abbot of Clara valle in France , well hope y ‘ he god willing shall be able to make his repair again to they by easter next . many other famous act be do in this voyage by these two king , and more shall have be , have not they fall into discord dissever themselves , by reason whereof Philip the french king return home again within short space : who be return again eftsoon invade the country of Normandy , exciting also John the brother of king Richard , to take on he the kingdom of England in his brother absence : who then make league upon the same with the french [ ii i . 27 . ] king , and do homage unto he , which be about the four year of king Richard . who then be in 1193 . Syria , and hear thereof , make peace with the Turk for three year : and not long after , king Richard the king Richard next spring follow return also , who in his return retumethfrom drive by distress of weather about the part of Palartina . Histria , in a town call Synaca , be there take by lympold , duke of the same country , and so sell to the emperor for sixty thousand mark : who for no small joy thereof ,