king keep still at Messana , either for lack of 324 wind and weather , or for the repair of their ship . and in the aforesaid February , in the year 1191 . king Richard send over his galley to Naples , there to meet his mother Elinore , and Berengaria the daughter of zanctius king of Navarre , who he be purpose to marry , who by that time be come to Brundisium , under the conduct of Philip earl of Flanders , and so proceed unto Naples , they find the king ship wherein they sail to Messana . in this mean space , king Richard show himself exceed bounteous and liberali to all man : to the french king first he give diverse ship , upon other likewise he bestow rich reward , and of kiss treasure and good he distribute large to his soldier and servant about he , of who it be report , that he distribute more in one month , than any of his predecessor do in a whole year : by reason whereof he purchase great love and favour , which not only redound to the advancement of his fame , but also to his singular use and profit , as the sequel afterward prove . the first day of march follow , he leave the city of Messana , where the french king be , and go to Cathneia , a city where Tancredus king of Sicily then lie , where he be honorable receive , and there remain with king Tancredus three day and three night . on the four day when he shall depart , the aforesaid Tancredus offer he many rich present in gold and silver , and precious silk , whereof king Richard will receive nothing , but one little ring for a token of his good will : for the which king Richard give again unto he a rich sword . at length when king Richard shall take his leave , king Tancred will not let he so depart , but needs will give he 4 . great ship , and 15 . galley , and furthermore he himself will needs accompany he the space of two day journey , to a place call Tavernium . then the next morning when they shall take their leave , Tancredus declare unto he the message , which 325 the french king a little before have send unto he by the duke of Burgundy , the content whereof be these : that the king of England be a false traitor , and will never keep the peace that be between they : and if the say Tancredus will war against he , or secret by night will invade he , he with all his power will assist he , to the destruction of he and all his army . to who Richard the king protest again , that he be no traitor , nor never have be : and as touch the peace begin betwixt they , the same shall never be break through he : neither can he believe that the french king be his good lord , and his swear compartner in that voyage , will utter any such word by he . which when Tancredus hear , he bring forth the letter of the french king , send to he by the duke of Burgundy , affirm moreover , that if the duke of Burgundy will deny the bring of the say letter , he be ready to try it with he by any of his duke . king Richard receive the letter , and muse not a little upon the same , return again to Messana . the same day that king Richard depart , the french king come to Tavernium to speak with Tancred , and there abide with he that night , and on the morrow return to Messana again . from that time king Richard move in stomach against king Philip , never show any gentle countenance of peace and amity , as he before be wont : whereat the french king great marvel , and inquire earnest what shall be the cause thereof , word be send he again by Philip earl of Flanders from king Richard , what word he have send to the king of Sicily , and for testimony thereof the letter be show , which he write by the duke of Burgundy to the king of Sicily : which when the french king understand , first he hold his peace as guilty in his conscience , not know well what to answer . at length turn his tale to another matter , he begin to quarrel with king Richard , pretend as though he seek cause to 326 i 191 . break with he , and to malign he : and therefore he forge ( say he ) these lie upon he , and all because he by that mean will avoid to marry with Alise his sister , accord as he have promise . add moreover that if he will so do , and will not marry the say Alise his sister accord to his oath , he will be a enemy to he , and to his , while he live . to this king Richard say again , that he can by no mean marry that woman , forsomuch as his father have carnail copulation with she , and also have by she a son : for proof whereof he have there present to bring forth diverse and sundry witness to the king face , to testify with he . in conclusion , through counsel and persuasion of diverse about the french king , agreement at last be make , so that king Philip do acquit king Richard from this bond of marry his sister , and king Richard again shall be bind to pay to he every year for the space of five year , two thousand mark , with certain other condition beside , not great materiali for this place . and thus peace be between they conclude the 28 day of the say month of march , the [ ii i . 24 . ] French king launch out of the haven of Messana , the 22 day after in the easter week , come with his army to the siege of Achon . after the departure of the french king from Messana , king Richard with his army yet remain behind , arrive queen