Alinor the king mother , bring with her Berengaria the king of navar daughter , to be espouse to king Richard : which be do , king Richard in April follow , about the 20 day of the say month , depart from the haven of Messana with 150 great ship , and 53 great galley well man and the navy of appoint , and take his journey towards Achon : who Kin & Ruhard ‘ be upon the sea on good Friday about the nine hour , rise a mighty south wind with a tempest , which dissever and scatter all his navy , some to one place , and some to another . the king with a few ship be 327 drive to the he of Creta , and there before the haven of Rhodes cast anchor . the ship that carry the king sister , queen of Sicily , and Berengaria the king of navar daughter , with two ship be drive to the he of Cyprus . the king make great moan for the ship of his sister , and Berengaria his wife that shall be , not know where they be become , after the tempest be overblow , send forth his galley diligent to seek the rest of his navy disperse , but especial the ship wherein his sister be , and the maiden who he shall marry , who at length be find safe and merry at the port of Lymszem in the lie of Cyprus , notwithstanding the two other ship , which be in their company before in the same haven , be drown with diverse of the king servant and man of worship , among who be m . Roger , call Malus Catulus , the king vicechan - cellour , who be find with the king seal hang about his neck . the king of Cyprus be then Isakius ( call also the emperor of the griffon ) who take and imprison all english man , which by shipwreck be cast upon his land , also inveigle into his hand the good and prize of they which be find drown about his coast , neither will suffer the ship wherein the two lady be to enter within the port . the tiding of this be bring to king Richard , he in great wrath gather his galley and ship together , boord the land of Cyprus , where he first in gentle wise signify ! to king Isakius , how he with his english man , come as stranger to the supportation of the holy land , be by distress of weather drive upon his bound , and therefore with all humble petition beseech he in god behalf , and for reverence of the holy cross , to let go such prisoner of he as he have in captivity , and to restore again the good of they that be drown , which he detain in his hand , to be employ for the behoof of their soul . and this the king once , 328 twice , and thrice desire of the emperor : but he proud answer again , send the king word , that he neither will let the captive go , nor render the good of they which be drown . when king Richard hear this , how light the emperor Isakius make of he so humble and honest petition , and how that nothing can be get without violent force , eftsoon give commandment throughout all his host to put themselves in armour and follow he , to revenge the injury receive of that proud and cruel king of Cyprus , will they to put their trust in God , and not to misdoubt but that the lord will stand with they , and give they the victory . the emperor in the mean time with his people stand ward the sea coast , where the english man shall arrive , with sword , bill , and lance , and such other weapon as they have , set board , stool , and chest before they as a wall : few of they be harness , and for the most part all unexpert and unskilful in the feat of war . then king Richard with his soldier issue out of their ship , first set his bowman before , who with their shot make a way for other to follow . the Englishman thus win the land upon they , so fierce press upon the gryffon , that after long fight and many blow , at last the emperor be put to flight , who king Richard valiant pursue , and slay many , and diverse he take alive , and have go near also to take the emperor , have not the night come on and part the battle . and thus king Richard with much spoil , and great victory , return to the port town of Lymszem , which the townsman have leave for fear , find there great abundance of corn , wine , oil and victual . the day after the victory get , Joanna the king sister , and Berengaria the maiden , enter the porte and Towne of Lymszem , with 50 . great ship , and 14 . galliot : so that all the whole navy there meet together , be 254 . tall ship , and above threescore galliot . then Isakius the emperor , see no way for 329 he to escape by sea , the same night pitch his tent five mile off from the english army , swear that the three day after , he will sure give battle to king Richard : but he prevent he before , sudden the same morning before the day of battle shall be , set upon the tent of the griffon early in the morning , they be unaware and a sleep , and make of they a great slaughter , insomuch that the emperor be fain to run away naked , leave his tent and pavilion to [ ii i . 25 . ] the Englishman , full of horse and rich treasure , also with the imperial standard , the low part whereof with a costly streamer be cover , and wrought all with gold . king Richard return with victory and triumph to his sister and Berengaria , short after in the month of May next follow , and the 12 . day of the say month