the worthy voyage of Richard the first , king of England into Asia , for the recovery of Jerusalem out of the hand of the Saracen , draw out of the book of act and monument of the church of England , write by m . John fox . king Richard the first of that name , for his great valour surname ceur de lion , the son of Henry the second , after the death of his father remember the rebellion that he have undutiful raise against he , seek for absolution of his trespass , and in part of satisfaction for the same , agree with Philip the [ ii i . 21 . ] French king to take his voyage with he for the recovery of Christ patrimony , which they call the holy land , whereupon the say king Richard immediate after his coronation , to prepare himself the better towards his journey , use diverse mean to take up sum of money , and exact a ten of the whole realm , the Christians to make threescore and ten thousand pound , and the Jew which then dwell in the realm threescore thousand . have thus get sufficient money for the exploit , he send certain earl and baron to fillip the french king in the time of his parliament at saint Denis , to put he in mind of his promise make for the recovery of 319 u the oath of fidelity betwixt king Richard , and the french king . the discipline and order of the king . Christ holy patrimony out of the Saracen hand : to who he send word again in the month of December , that he have bind himself by solemn oath , depose upon the evangelist , that he the year next follow , about the time of easter , have certain prefix to address himself towards that journey , require he likewise not to fail , but to be ready at the term above limit , appoint also the place where both the king shall meet together . in the year therefore 1190 . king Richard have commit the government of this realm in his absence to the bishop of Ely then chancellor of England , advance forward his journey , and come to Turon to meet with Philip the french king , and after that go to Vizeliac , where the french king and he join together , for the more continuance of their journey , assure themselves by solemn oath , swear fidelity one to the other : the form of who oath be this . that either of they shall defend and maintain the honour of the other , and bear true fidelity unto he , of life , member and worldly honour , and that neither of they shall fail one the other in their affair : but the french king shall aid the king of England in defend his land and dominion , as he will himself defend his own city of Paris if it be besiege : and that Richard king of England likewise shall aid the french king in defend his land and dominion , no otherwise then he will defend his own city of roan if it be besiege , etc concern the law and ordinance appoint by king Richard for his navy , the form thereof be this . 1 . that who so kill any person on shipboard , shall be tie with he that be slay , and throw into the sea . 2 . and if he kill he on the land , he shall in like manner be tie with the party slay , and be bury with he in the earth . 320 3 . he that shall convict by lawful witness to draw out his knife or weapon to the intent to strike any man , or that have strike any to the draw of blood , shall loose his hand . 4 . also he that strike any person with his hand without effusion of blood , shall be plunge three time in the sea . 5 . item , who so speak any opprobrious or contumelious word in revile or curse one another , for so oftentimes as he have revile , shall pay so many ounce of silver . 6 . item , a thief or felon that have steal be lawful convict , shall have his head shear , and boil pitch pour upon his head , and feather or down straw upon the same , whereby he may be know , and so at the first land place they shall come to , there to be cast up . these thing thus order , king Richard send his navy by the spanish sea , and by the strait of Gibraltar , between Spain and Africa , to meet he at Marsilia , he himself go as be say to Vizeliac to the french king . which two king from thence go to lion , where the bridge over the flood Rhodanus with press of people break , and many both man and woman be drown : by occasion whereof the two king for the combrance of their train , be constrain to dissever themselves for time of their journey , appoint both to meet together in Sicily : and so fillip the french king take his way to Genua , and king Richard to Marsilia , where he remain 8 . day , appoint there his navy to meet he . from thence cross over to Genua where the french king be , he pass forward by the coast of Italy , and enter into Tiber not far from room . king Richard stay in Marsilia 8 . day for his navy which come not , he there hire 20 . galley , and ten great bark to ship over his man , and so come to Naples , and so partly by horse and wagon , and partly by iv 321 ten the sea , pass to Falernum , come to Calabria , where after that he have hear that his ship be arrive at Messana in Sicily , he make the more speed , and so the 23 . of September enter Messana with such a noise of trumpet and shaum , with such a rout and show , that it be to the great wonderment and terror both of the Frenchman , and of all other that do