hear and behold the sight . [ ii i . 22 . ] to the say town of Messana the french king be come before the 16 . of the same month of September , and have take up the palace of Tancredus king of Sicily for his lodging : to who king Richard after his arrival ! eftsoon resort , and when the two king have commune together , immediate the french king take ship and enter the sea , think to sail towards the land of Jerusalem : but after he be out of the haven , the wind rise contrary against he , return he back again to Messana . then king Richard ( who lodging be prepare in the suburb without the city ) after he have resort again and talk with the french king , and also have send to Tancredus king of Sicily , for deliverance of Joan his sister ( who have be sometime queen of Sicily ) and have obtain she to be send unto he , the last day of September pass over the strait deal fare , and there get a strong hold call de la baguare , or le bamare , and there place his sister with a sufficient garrison , he return again to Messana . the 2 . of October king Richard win another strong hold , call monasterium griffonum , situate in you midst of the strait deal fare , between Messana and Calabria , from whence you monk be expulse , he repose there all his store and provision of victual , which come from England or other place . the citizen of Messana see that the king of England have win the castle and island de le baguare , and also the monastery of the griffon , and doubt least the king will extend his power further to invade their city , and get if he can the whole isle of Sicily , 322 begin to stir against the king army , and to shut the Englishman out of the gate , and keep their wall against they . the Englishman see that , make to the gate , and by force will have break they open , insomuch that the king ride among they with his staff , and break diverse of their head , can not assuage their fierceness , such be the rage of the Englishman against the citizen of Messana . the king see the fury of his people to be such that he can not stay they , take boat , and go to the palace of king Tancred , to talk of the matter with the french king , in which mean time the matter be so take up by the wise handle of the ancient of the city , that both part lay down their armour , go home in peace . the four day of the say month of October , come to king Richard the archbishop of Messana with two other archbishop also with the french king , and sundry other earl , baron , and bishop , to entreat of peace , who as they be together consult , and have almost conclude upon the peace , the citizen of Messana issue out of the town , some go up upon the mountain , some with open force invade the mansion or lodging of Hugh Brune a english captain . the noise whereof come to the ear of the king , he sudden break off talk with the french king and the rest , depart from they , and come to his man , command they forthwith to arm themselves . who then with certain of his soldier make up to the top of the mountain ( which seem to pass their power to climb ) there put the citizen to flight , chase they down the mountain , unto the very gate of the city , who also certain of the king servant pursue into the city , of who five valiant soldier and twenty of the king servant be slay , the french king look upon , and not once will to rescue they , contrary to his oath , and league before make with the king of England : for the french king with his man 323 A . D . ii90 . be there present , ride in the midst of they safe , and without any harm too and fro , and may well have ease the king party , more than he , if it have so like he .. this be know to the english host how their fellow be slay , and the Frenchman permit in the city , and that they be exclude and the gate bar against they , be also stop from buy of victuali , and other thing , they upon great indignation gather themselves in arm , brace open the gate , and scale the wall , and so win the city , set up their flag with the english arm upon the wall : which when the french king do see , he be mighty offend , require the king of England that the arm of France may also be set up , and join with his : but king Richard to that will in no case agree , notwithstanding to satisfy his mind , he be content to take down his arm , and to commit the custody of the city to the hospitalary and templary of Jerusalem , till the time that Tancred king of Sicily and he shall agree together upon condition . these thing be do the five and sixth day of October , it follow then upon the eight day of the same , that peace be conclude among the king . in which peace , first king Richard , and fillip the french king renew again their oath and league before make , concern their mutual aid and society , during the time of that peregrination . second , peace also be conclude between king Richard and Tancred king of Sicily aforesaid , with condition , that the daughter of tancrede in case king Richard shall die without issue , shall be marry to Arthur duke of Britain the king nephew and next heir to his crown , whereof a formali chart be draw , and letter send thereof to pope Clement be date the nine of November . from this time until February the next year these two