, marry the say Berengaria daughter of zanctius , king of Navarre , in the isle of Cyprus at Lymszem . the king of Cyprus see himself overmatch , be drive at length to yield himself with condition to give king Richard 20000 mark in gold for amends of such spoil as he have get of they that be drown , also to restore all the captive again to the king : and furthermore , he in his own person to attend upon the king to the land of Jerusalem , in god service and he , with 400 . horseman , and 500 footman : in pledge whereof he will give to his hand his castle , and his only daughter , and will hold his kingdom of he . this do , and the emperor swear fidelity to king Richard before Guido king of Jerusalem , and the prince of Antioche ( who be come thither to king Richard a little before ) peace be take , and Isakius commit to the ward of certain keeper . notwithstanding short after he break from his keeper , be again at defiance with the king : whereupon king Richard besetting the hand of Cyprus round about with ship and galley , do in such sort prevail , that the 330 1191 . subject of the land be constrain to yield themselves to the king , and at last the daughter of the emperor , and the emperor himself , who king Richard cause to be keep in fetter of gold and silver , and to be send to the city of Tripoli . these thing thus do , and all set in order touch the lord the possession of the he of Cyprus , the keep whereof Chamberlaine he commit to radulphe son of Godfrey lord , Chamberlaine , be then the first day or June upon the of five of the say month , king Richard depart from the Cyprus . he of Cyprus , with his ship and galley towards the siege of Achon , and on the next morrow come to Tyrus , where by procurement of the french king he be restrain by the citizen to enter . the next day after , which be the first day of June , cross the sea , he meet with a great carrack fraught with soldier and man of war to the number of a thousand and five hundred , which pretend to be Frenchmen , and set forth their flag with the french arm , be indeed Saracen , a great ship of secret send with wild fire and certain barrel of un - Saracen take know serpent to the defence of the town of Achon , b % rbin & wb which king Richard at length perceive , eftsoon set ’ upon they and so vanquish they , of who the most be drown and some take alive : which be once know in the city of Achon , as it be a great discomfort to they , so it be a great help to the christian for win the city . the next day after which be the seven of June , king Richard king Richard come to Achon , which at that time have arrive at be long besiege by the Christians . after who achm - comming it be not long , but the pagan within the city , see their wall to be undermine and tower overthrow , be drive by composition to escape with life and limb , to surrender the city to the two king . another great help to the christian in win the city , be this . in the say city of Achon there be a secret Christian among the Saracen , who in time of the siege thereof use at sundry time to cast over the wall 331 the form of peace conclude between the king and the prince of Achon . [ ii i . 26 . ] into the camp of the christian , certain bill write in hebrew , greek , and latin , wherein he disclose to the christian from time to time , the do and counsel of the enemy , advertise they how and what way they shall work , and what to beware , and always his letter begin thus . in nomine patris , 8c Filii , 8c spiritus sancti amen . by reason whereof the Christians be much advantage in their proceed : but this be a great heaviness unto they , that neither he will utter his name , nor when the city be get do they ever understand who he be . to make of a long siege a short narration . upon the twelve day of July the year aforesaid , the prince and captain of the pagan , upon agreement resort to the tent of the templary to commune with the two king touch peace , and give up of their city : the form of which peace be thus . 1 that the king shall have the city of Achon free and full deliver unto they , with all which be therein . 2 that 500 captive of the Christians shall be restore to they , which be in Achon . 3 that the holy cross shall be to they render , and a thousand christian captive with two hundred horseman , whosoever they themselves will choose out of all they which be in the power of the Saladine . 4 that they will give unto the king two hundred thousand bysant , so that they themselves shall remain as pledge in the king hand , for the performance hereof , that if in forty day , the aforesaid covenant be not accomplish , they shall abide the king mercy touch life and limb . these covenant be agree upon , the king send their soldier and servant into the city , to take a hundred of the rich 8c best of the city , to close they up in tower under strong keep , 8c the residue they commit to be keep in house and in street , minister unto they accord to their necessity : to 332 who notwithstanding this they premit , that so many of they as will be baptize and receive the faith of Christ , shall be free to go whither they will : whereupon many there be of the pagan , which for fear of death pretend to be baptize