write to fillip the french king , these letter here follow . [ the letter 335 the letter of the emperor to fillip the french king , concern the take of king Richard . henricus dei gratia romanorum imperator , and semper Augustus , Dilecto and speciali amico suo , Philippo illustri francorum regi salutem , and sincerae dilectionis affectum . quoniam Imperatoria celsitudo non dubitat regalem magnificentiam tuam laetiorem effici , de universis quibus omnipotentia creatoris nostri nos ipsos , and Romanum Imperium honoraverit and exaltaverit , nobilitati tuus tenore praesentium declarare duximus , quod inimicus Imperii nostri , and turbator Regni tui rex angliae , quum esset in transeundo mare ad part suas reversurus , accidit ut ventus rupta navi sva , in qua ipse erat , induceret eum in part histriae ad locum qui est inter Aquileiam , and Venetias . ubi rex , dei permissidne passus naufragium cum paucis evasit . quidam itaque fidelis noster comes , maynardus de grooxce , and populus regionis illius , audito quod in terra erat , and considerato diligentius , qualem nominatus rex in terra promissionis proditionem and traditionem , and perditionis svae cumulum exercuerat , insecuti sunt , intendentes eum captivare . ipso autem rege in fugam converso , ceperunt de n ' est octo milite : postmodum processit rex ad Burgum in archiepiscopatu salsebur - gensi , qui voco Frisorum , ubi Fridericus de betesow , rege cum tribus tantum versus austriam properante , noctu sex milite de suis coepit : dilectus autem consanguineus noster Lympoldus Dux Austria , observata strata saepe , dictum regem juxta denam in villa viciniori in domo despecta captivavit . cum itaque in nostra nunc habeatur potestate , and ipse semper tua molestavit , and turbationis operam praestiterit , ea quae praemisimus , nobilitati tuus insinuare curavimus : sciente ea dilectioni tuus bene placita existere , animo tuo uberrimam importare laetitiam . Datum apud ritheoun - tum 5 . Kalendas Janua . king Richard be thus traitorous take , and sell 336 to the emperor by the duke of Austridge for 60000 . mark , be there keep in custody a year and 3 . month . in some story it be affirm , that king Richard return out of Asia , come to Italy with prosperous wind , where he desire of the pope to be absolve of a other make against his will and can not obtain it : and so set out from thence towards England , pass by the country of Conradus the Marques , who death ( he be slay a little before ) be false impute by the french king to the king of England , there traitorous be take ( as be aforesay ) by Limpoldus duke of Austridge . albeit in another story i find the matter more credible set forth : which say thus . that king Richard slay the brother of this Limpoldus , play with he at chess in the french king court : and Limpoldus take his vantage , be more cruel against he and deliver he ( as be say ) to the emperor . in who custody he be detain during the time above mention , a year and 3 month . during which time of the king endurance , the french king in the mean season stir war in Normandy : and Earle John the king brother , make stir and invade England , but the baron and bishop of the land mighty withstand he . at length it be so agree and conclude with the emperor , that king Richard shall be release for a hundred and four thousand pound : of which money part shall remain to the duke of Austridge , the rest shall be the emperor . the sum of which money be here gather and make in England of chalice , cross , shrine , candlestick and other church plate , also with public contribution of friar , abbot , and other subject of the realm : whereof part be present pay , and for the residue remain , hostage and pledge be take , which be about the five year of his reign : and then it be obtain of the pope , that priest may celebrate with chalice of latten and tin . at what time this aforesaid money be pay , and iv 337 five A . D . 1193 - the just judgement of God upon the duke of Austria . [ ii i . 28 . ] Civitas joppe . the hostage give for the ransom of the king , i have a old history which say , that the aforesaid duke of Austridge be short after plague by God , with 5 . sundry plague . first , with the burn of his chief town . 2 . with drown of ten thousand of his man in a flood happen no man can tell how . 3 . by turn all the ear of his corn field into worm . 4 . by take away almost all the noble of his land by death . 5 . by break his own leg fall from his horse , which leg he be compel to cut off with his own hand , and afterward die of the same : who then at his death be report to forgive king Richard 50000 . mark , and send home the hostage that be with he . and further a certain book entitle Eulogium declare , that the say Limpoldus duke of ostrich fall in displeasure with the bishop of room , and die excommunicate the next year after , anno 1196 . but thus , as you have hear , Richard the king be ransom and deliver from the covetous captivity of the emperor , and return home make a end of his voyage for Asia , which be both honourable to himself and to all christian state , but to the Saracen the enemy of Christianity , terrible and dishonourable . this history of king Richard voyage to Jerusalem be very excellent and large write in latin by Guilielmus Neobrigensis , and Roger Hoveden . Epitaphium richardi primi regis anglorum apud fontem Ebraldi . scribitur hoc auro , rex auree , laus tua tota aurea , materiae convenient nota . laus tua prima fuit Siculi , Cyprus altera , dromo tertia , Caruanna quarta , suprema * jope . Retrusi Siculi , Cyprus pessundata , dromo mersus , Caruanna capta , retenta jope .