the voyage of prince Edward the son of king Henry the three into Asia in the year 1270 . bout the year of our lord , 1267 . Octobonus the pope legate be in England , prince Edward the son of king Henry , and diverse other noble man of England take upon they the cross upon saint John Baptists day , by the say legate hand at Northhampton , to the relief of the holy land , and the subversion of the enemy of the cross of Christ . for which purpose , and for the better furnish of the prince towards the journey , there be grant he a subsidy throughout all the realm , and in the month of May , in the year of our lord 1270 . he begin to set forward . at Michaelmas follow he with his company come to Eguemortes , which be from Marsilia eight league westward , and there take ship again ( have a merry and prosperous wind ) within ten day arrive at Tunez , where he be with great joy welcome , and entertain of the christian prince that there be to this purpose assemble , as of Philip the french king , who father Lodovicus die a little before , of Carolus the king of Sicilia , and the two king of Navarre and Arragon , and as this lord Edward come thither for his father the king of England , thither come also Henry the son of the king of almain for his father , who at his return from the voyage be slay in a chapel at Viterbium . when prince Edward demand of these king and prince what be to be do , they answer he again , and say , the prince of this city and the province adjoin to the same have be accustom to pay tribute unto the king of Sicily every year : and now for that the same have be for the space of seven year unpaid and more , therefore we think good to make invasion upon he . but the king know 359 the same tribute to be but just demand , have now accord to our own desire satisfy for the time past , and also pay his tribute before hand . then say he , my lord , what be this to the purpose ? be we not here all assemble , and have take upon we the lord character to fight against the infidel and enemy of Christ ? what mean you then to conclude a peace with they ? God forbid we shall do so , for now the land be plain and hard , so that we may approach to you holy city Jerusalem . then say they , now have we make a league with they , neither be it lawful for we to break the same . but let we return again to Sicilia , and when the winter be past we may well take ship to Aera . but this counsel nothing at all like he , neither do he show himself well please therewith : but after he have make they a princely banquet , he go into his closet or privy chamber from among they , neither will be partaker of any of that wicked money which they have take . they notwithstanding continue their purpose , at the next merry wind take ship , and for want of ship leave 200 . of their man a shore , cry out , and piteous lament for the peril and hazard of death that they be in : wherewith prince Edward be somewhat move to compassion , come back again to the land , and receive and stow they in his own ship , be the last that go aboard . within seven day after , they arrive in the kingdom of Sicilia , over against the city trape , cast their anchor a league from thence within the sea , for that their ship be of great burden , and thorough fraught : and from the haven of the city they send out barge and boat to receive and bring such of the nobility to land as will , but their horse for the most part , and all their armour they keep still within board . at length towards the evening the sea begin to be rough , and increase to a great tempest and a mighty : insomuch that their ship be beat one against another side , and drown there be of they at that 360 tempest lie at anchor more than 120 . with all their armour and munition , with innumerable soul beside , and that wicked money also which they have take before , likewise perish , and be lose . but the tempest hurt not so much as one ship of prince Edward , who have in number 13 . nor yet have one man lose thereby , for that ( as it may be presuppose ) he consent not to the wicked counsel of the rest . when in the morning the prince and king come to the sea side , and see all their ship drown , and see their man and horse in great number cast upon the land drown , they have full heavy heart , as well they may , for of all their ship and mariner , which be in number 1500 . beside the common soldier , there be no more save than the mariner of one only ship , and they in this wise . there be in that ship a good and wise matron , a countess or a earl wife , who perceive the tempest to grow , and fear her self , call to she the m . of the ship , and ask he whether in attempt to the shore it be not possible to save themselves : he answer , that to save the ship it be impossible : howbeit the man [ ii i . 37 - ] that be therein by god help he doubt not . then say the countess , for the ship force no whit , save the soul therein , and have to thou double the value of the ship : who immediate hoist the sail with all force , run the ship aground so near the shore as be possible , so that with the vehemency of the weather and force he come withal , he brace the ship and save all that be within the same , as he have show , and say before . then the king and prince ( alter their purpose after this so great a shipwreck ) return home again every one unto their own land : only Edward the son of the king of England , remain behind with his man and ship , which the lord have save and preserve . then prince Edward renovate his purpose , take ship again , and within fifteen day after easter 361 the arrival of arrive he at Aera , and go aland , take with he a prince ed - thousand of the best soldier and most expert , and war at ci a . tarjej there a whole month , refresh both his man and horse , and that in this space he may learn and know the secret of the land . after this he take with Nazareth take by the prince . a victory against the Saracen , wherein iooo of they be slay . the prince of Cyprus acknowledge obedience to the king of England . he six or seven thousand soldier , and march forward twenty mile from Aera , and take Nazareth , and those that he find there he slay , and afterward return again to Aera . but their enemy follow after they , think to have set upon they at some strait or other advantage , be espy by the prince , and return again upon they give a charge , and slay many of they , and the rest they put to flight . after this , about midsummer , when the prince have understanding that the Saracen begin to gather at cakow which be forty mile from Aera , he march thither , set upon they very early in the morning , and slay of they more than a thousand , the rest he put to flight , and take rich spoil , march forward till they come to a castle name Castrum peregrinorum , situate upon the sea coast , and tarry there that night , and the next day they return again towards Aera . in the mean season the king of Jerusalem send unto the noble man of Cyprus , desire they to come with speed to aid the christian , but they will not come , say they will keep their own land , and go no further . then prince Edward send unto they , desire that at his request they will come and join in aid with he : who immediady thereupon come unto he with great preparation and furniture for the war , say , that at his commandment they be