bind to do no less , for that his predecessor be sometime the governor of that their land , and that they ought always to show their fidelity to the king of England . then the Christians be herewith animate , make a three voyage or road , and come as far as the fort call vincula sancti Petri , and to saint Georgius , and when they have slay certain there , not find any to make 362 resistance against they , they retire again from whence they come : when thus the fame of prince Edward grow among his enemy , and that they begin to stand in doubt of he , they devise among themselves how by some policy they may circumvent he , and betray he . whereupon the prince and admiral of Joppa send unto he , feign himself under great deceit willing to become a christian , and that he will draw with he a great number beside , so that they may be honorable entertain and use of the Christians . this talk please the prince well , and persuade he to finish the thing he have so well begin by write again , who also by the same messenger send and write back unto he diverse time about the same matter , whereby no mistrust shall spring . this messenger ( say my author ) be one ex caute nutriti , one of the stony heart , that neither fear God nor dread death . the five time when this messenger come , and be of the prince servant search accord to the manner and custom what weapon and armour he have about he , as also his purse , that not so much as a knife can be see about he , he be have up into the prince chamber , and after his reverence do , he pull out certain letter , which he deliver the prince from his lord , as he have do other before . this be about eight day after Whitsuntide , upon a Tuesday , somewhat before night , at which time the prince be lay upon his bed bear head , in his jerkin , for the great heat and intemperature of the weather . when the prince have read the letter , it appear by they , that upon the Saturday next follow , his lord will be there ready to accomplish all that he have write and promise . the report of these news by the prince to the standard by , like they well , who draw somewhat back to consult thereof among themselves . in the mean time , the messenger kneel , and make his obeisance to the prince ( question further with he ) 363 prince Edward traitorous wound . put his hand to his belt , as though he will have pull out some secret letter , and sudden he pull out a envenome knife , think to have strike the prince into the belly therewith as he lie : but the prince lift up his hand to defend the blow , be strike a great wound into the arm , and be about to fetch another stroke at he , the prince again with his foot take he such a blow , that he fell he to the ground : with that the prince gate he by the hand , and with such violence wrast the knife from he , that he hurt himself therewith on the forehead , and immediate thrust the same into the belly of the messenger and striker , and slay he . the prince servant be in the next chamber not far off , hear the bustle , come with great haste run in , and find the messenger lie dead in the floor , one of they take up a stool , and beat out his brain : whereat the prince be wroth for that he strike a dead man , and one that be kill before . but the rumour of this accident , as it be strange , so it go soon throughout all the court , and from thence among the common people , for which they be very heavy , and great discourage . to he come also the captain of the temple , and bring he a costly and precious drink against poison , lest the venom of the knife shall penetrate the lively blood , and in blame wise say unto he : do i not tell your grace before of the deceit and subtlety of this people ? notwithstanding , say he , let your grace take a good heart , you shall not die of this wound , my life for you . but straight way the surgeon and physician be send for , and the prince be dress , and within few day after , the wound begin to putrify , and the flesh to look dead and black : whereupon they that be about the prince begin to mutter among themselves , and be very sad and heavy . which thing he himself perceive , say unto they : why mutter you thus among your self ? what see 364 1270 . you in i , can i not be heal ? tell i the truth , be you not afraid . whereupon one say unto he , and it like your grace you may be heal , we mistrust not , but yet it will be very painful for you to suffer . May suffer ( say he again ) restore health ? yea say the other , on pain of lose my head . then say the prince , i commit my self unto you , do with i what you think good . then say one of the physician , be there any of your noble in who your grace repose special trust ? to who the prince answer yea , name certain of the noble man that stand about he . then say the physician to the two , who the prince first name , the lord Edmund , and the lord John voisie , and do this lord you also faithful love your lord and prince ? who Edmund be answer both , yea undoubted . then say he , take you away this gentlewoman and lady ( mean his wife ) ' and let she not see her lord and husband , till such time as i will you thereunto . whereupon they take she from the prince presence , cry out , and wring her hand . then say they unto she , be you content good lady and madam , it be better that one woman shall weep a little while , then that all the realm of England shall weep a great season . then on the morrow they cut out all the dead and invenime flesh out of the prince arm , and throw it from they , and say unto he : how cheer your grace , we promise you within these fifteen day you shall show your self abroad ( if God permit ) upon your horseback , whole and well as ever you be . And accord to the promise he make the prince , it come to pass , to the no little comfort and admiration of all his subject . when the great sultan hear hereof , and that the prince be yet alive , he can scarce believe the same , and send unto he three of his noble and prince , excuse himself by they , call his god to witness that the same be do neither by he nor his 365 consent . which prince and messenger stand aloof off from the king son , worship he , fall flat upon the ground : you ( say the prince ) do reverence i , but yet you love i not . but they understand he not , because he speak in English unto they , speak by a interpreter : nevertheless he honourable entertain they , and send they away in peace . thus when prince Edward have be eighteen month in Aera , he take ship about the assumption of our lady , as we call it , return homeward , and after seven week he arrive in Sicilia at trape , and from thence travail through the mid of Apulia , till he come to roam , where he be of the pope honorable entertain . from thence he come into France , who fame and noble prowess be there much bruit among the common people , and envy of the nobility , especial of the earl of Chalons , who think to have entrap he and his company , as may appear in the story : but prince Edward continue forth his journey to Paris , and be there of the french king honourable entertain : and after certain day he go thence into Gascon , where he tarry till that he hear of the death of the king his father , at which time he come home , and be crown king of England , in the year of our lord 1274 .