the voyage of William | | longespee earl of two or , Sarisburie into Asia , in the year 1248 , and sword ' in the 32 year of the reign of Henry the three , king of England . Ewis the french king be recover of his sickness which he fall into , in the year 1234 , vow thereupon for a free will sacrifice to God , that he ( if the council of his realm will suffer he ) will in his own person visit the holy land : which matter be open and debate in the parliament of France hold in the year 1247 . where at length it be conclude , that the king accord to his vow shall take his journey into Asia , and the time thereof be also prefix , which shall be after the feast of saint John Baptist the next year ensue . at which time William Longespee a worthy warrior , with the bishop of Worcester and certain other great man in the realm of England ( move with the example of the Frenchman ) prepare themselves likewise to the same journey . it fall out in this enterprise , that about the begin of October , the french king assault and take Damiata , be the principali fort or hold of the iv 353 z Saracen in all Egypt , anno 1249 . and have fortify the city with a able garrison leave with the duke of Burgundy , he remove his tent from thence to go eastward . in who army follow William longespee , accompany with a pike number of english warrior retain unto he . but such be the disdain of the Frenchman against this William Longespee and the Englishman that they can not abide they , but flout they after a opprobrious manner with english tail , insomuch that the french king himself have much ado to keep peace between they . the originali cause of this grudge between they begin thus . there be not far from Alexandria in Egypt a strong fort or castle replenish with great a fort win by lady and rich treasure of the Saracen : which hold the english - chance the say William Longespee with his com - men ‘ pany of english soldier to get , more by politic dexterity then by open force of arm , wherewith he and his retinue be great enrich . when the Frenchman have knowledge hereof ( they not be make privy hereto ) begin to conceive a heart burn against the english soldier , and can not speak well of they after that . it happen again not long after , that the say William have intelligence of a company of rich merchant among the Saracen go to a certain fair about the part of Alexandria , have their camel , ass and mule , rich load with silk , precious jewel , spice , gold and silver , with cart load of other ware , beside victuali and other furniture , whereof the soldier then a rich booty stand in great need : he have secret knowledge “ the english - hereof ’ gather all the power of Englishman unto he man . that he can , and so by night fall upon the mere - chant , some he slay with their guide and conductor , some he take , soihe he put to flight : the cart with the driver , and with the ox , camel , ass and mule , with the whole carriage and victual he take and bring with he , loose in all the skirmish but one soldier , 354 and eight of his servitor : of who notwithstanding some he bring home wound to be cure . this be know in the camp , forth come the Frenchman which all this while loiter in their pavilion , and meet this carriage by the way , take all the foresay pray whole to themselves , rate the say injury of William and the Englishman for adventure and issue out of the camp without leave or knowledge ' of their general , contrary to the discipline of war . William say again he have do nothing but he will answer to it , who purpose be to have the spoil divide to the behoof of the whole army . when this will not serve , he be sore grieve in his mind so cowardly to be spoil of that which he so adventurous have travail for , go to the king to complain : but when no reason nor complaint will serve by reason of the proud earl of artoys the king brother , which upon spite and disdain stand against he , he bid the king farewell say he will serve he no long : and so William de Longespee with the lons - rest of his company break from the french host go to Achon . upon who departure the earl or artoys king . say , now be the army of french man well rid of these tail people , which word speak in great despite be ill take of many good man that hear they . but not long after , when the keeper of Cayro and Babylonia , bear a good mind to the christian religion , and be offend also with the sultan , promise to deliver the same to the french king , instruct he what course be best for he to take to accomplish it , the king hereupon in all haste send for William Longespee , promise he a full redress of all his injury before receive : who at the king request come to he again , and so join with the french power . after this , it happen that the french king pass with his army towards Cayro aforesaid , come to the great river Nilus , on the further part whereof the sultan have pitch himself to withstand his come over : 355 there be at this time a sarazen late convert to Christ , serve the earl Robert the french king brother , who tell he of the absence of the sultan from his tent , and of a shallow ford in the river where they may easy pass over . whereupon the say earl Robert and the master of the temple with a great power , esteem to the three part of the army issue over the river , after who follow W . longspee with his band of english soldier