. Theise be join together on the other side of the water , encountered the same day with the Saracen remain in the tent and put they to the worst . which victory be get , the french earl surprise with pride and triumph , as though he have conquer the whole earth , [ ii i , 35 . ] will needs forward , divide himself from the main host , think to win the spur alone . to who certain sage man of the temple , give he contrary counsel , advise he not to do so , but rather to return and take their whole company with they , and so shall they be more sure against all deceit and danger , which may be lay privy for they . the manner of that people ( they say ) they better know , and have more experience thereof then he : allege moreover their weary body , their tire horse , their famish soldier , and the insufficiency also of their number , which be not able to withstand the multitude of the enemy , especial at this present brunt , in which the adversary do well see the whole state of their dominion now to consist either in win all or lose all . which when the proud earl do hear , be inflate with no less arrogancy than ignorance , with opprobrious taunt revile they , call they cowardly dastard , and betrayer of the whole country , object unto they the common report of many , which say , that the land of the holy cross may soon be win to christendom , be it not for rebellious templary , with the hospitalary , and their follower . to these contumelious rebuke , when the master of 356 the temple answer again for he and his fellow , bid he display his ensign when he will , and where he dare , they be as ready to follow he , as he to go before they . then begin William de longespe the worthy knight to speak , desire the earl to give ear to those man of experience , who have better knowledge of those country and people then have he , commend also their counsel to be discreet and wholesome , and so turn to the master of the temple , begin with gentle word to mitigate he likewise . the knight have not half end his talk , when the earl take his word out of his mouth , begin to fume and swear , cry out of those cowardly Englishman with tail : what a pure army ( say he ) shall we have here , if these tail and tail people be purge from it , with other like word of villainy , and much disdain : whereunto the english knight answer again , well , earl Robert ( say he ) wheresoever you dare set your foot , my step shall go as far as you , and ( as i believe ) we go this day where you shall not dare to come near the tail of my horse , as in deed in the event it prove true : for earl Robert will needs set forward , ween to get all the glory to himself before the come of the host , and first invade a little village or castle , which be not far off , call Mansor . the country boor and pagan in the village , see the Christians come , run out with such a main cry and shout , that it come to the sultan hear , who be near than our man do think . in the mean time , the Christians invade and enter into the munition incircumspect , be pelt and pash with stone by they which stand above , whereby a great number of our man be lose , and the army sore maim , and almost in despair . then immediate upon the same , come the sol - dan with all his main power , which see the christian army to be divide , and the brother separate from the brother , have that which he long wish for , and so 357 the worthy answer of williamlong - spe to earl Robert . enclose they round about , that none shall escape , have with they a cruel fight . then the earl begin to repent he of his heady rashness , but it be too late , who then see William the english knight doughty fight in the chief brunt the cowardly of the enemy , cry unto he most cowardly to fly , fi ^^ eark see God ( say he ) do fight against we : to who a ere | it ' the knight answer again , God forbid ( say he ) that my father son shall run away from the face of a saracen . the earl then turn his horse , flee away , think to avoid by the swiftness of his horse , and so take the river Thafnis , oppress with harness , be there sink and drown . thus the earl be go , the Frenchman begin to despair and scatter . then William de longespe bearing all the force of the enemy , stand against they as long as he can , wound and slay many a sarazen , till at length his horse be kill , and his leg the valiant maim , he can no long stand , who yet notwith - ende of will - stanj ; hang . as he be jowne mangle their foot and leg , and do the Saracen much sorrow , till at last after many blow and wound , be stone of the Saracen , he yield his life . and after the death of he , the Saracen set upon the residue of the army , who they have compass on every side , devour and destroy they all , insomuch that scarce one man remain alive , save two templary , one hospitale , and one poor rascal soldier , which bring tiding , hereof to the king . and thus by the imprudent and foolish hardiness of that french earl , the Frenchman be discomfit , and that valiant english knight overmatch , to the grief of all christian people , the glory of the Saracen , and the utter destruction and ruin of the whole french army , as afterward it appear .