husband : and that after this manner . if any man father be sick , the son straight go unto the soothsaying or prognosticate priest , request he to demand of his god , whether his father shall recover of that infirmity or no ? than both of they 421 go unto a idol of gold or of silver , make their prayer unto it in manner follow : lord , thou be our god , and thou we do adore , beseech thou to resolve we , whether such a man must die , or recover of such a infirmity or no ? then the devil answer out of the foresay idol : if he say ( he shall live ) then returns his son and minister thing necessary unto he , till he have attain unto his former health : but if he say ( he shall die ) then go you priest unto he , and put a cloth into his mouth do strangle he therewith : which be do , he cut his dead body into morsel , and all his friend and kinsfolk be invite unto the eat thereof , with music and all kind of mirth : howbeit his bone be solemn bury . and when i find fault with that custom demand a reason thereof , one of they give i this answer : this we do , lest the worm shall eat his flesh , for than his soul shall suffer great torment , neither can i by any mean remove they from that error . many other novelty and strange thing there be in this country , which no man will credit , unies he see they with his own eye . howbeit , i ( before almighty [ ii i . 59 ] God ) do here make relation of nothing but of that only , whereof i be as sure , as a man may be sure . concern the foresay island i inquire of diverse well - experienced person , who all of they , as it be with one consent , answer i say , that this India contain 4400 . island under it , or within it : in which island there be sixty and four crown king : and they say moreover , that the great part of those island be well inhabit . and here i conclude concern that part of India . or , China . of the upper India : and of the province of Maney . first of all therefore , have travel many day journey upon the ocean - sea towards the east , at length i arrive at a certain great province call 422 Maney , be in latin name India . concern this India i inquire of Christians , of Saracen , and of idolater , and of all such as bear any office under the great can . who all of they with one consent answer , that this province of Maney have more than 2000 great city within the precinct thereof , and that it abound with all plenty of victual , as namely with bread , wine , rise , flesh , and fish . all the man of this province be artificer and merchant , who , though they be in never so extreme penury , so long as they can help themselves by the labour of their hand , will never beg alm of any man . the man of this province be of a fair and comely personage , but somewhat pale , have their head shave but a little : but the woman be the most beautiful under the sun . the first city of you say India which i come unto , be call Ceuskalon , which or , Ceuskala . be a day journey distant from the sea , stand upon a river , the water whereof , near unto the mouth , where it exonerate it self into the sea , do overflow the land for the space of 12 . day journey . all the inhabitant of this India be worshipper of idol . the foresay city of Ceuskalon have such a huge navy belong thereunto , that no man will believe it unless he shall see it . in this city i see 300 . ll of good and new ginger sell for less than a groat . there be the he mean great , and the fair goose , and most plenty of they to be sell in all the whole world , as i suppose : they be as aniarci5 cai white as milk , and have a bone upon the crown of their Alcatrarzi . head as big as a egg , be of the colour of blood : under their throat they have a skin or bag hang down half a foot . they be exceed fat and well sell . also they have duck and hen in that country , one as big as two of we . there be monstrous great serpent likewise , which be take by the inhabitant and eat : whereupon a solemn feast among they without serpent be nought set by : and to be brief , in this city there be all kind of victual in great abundance . from thence i pass by many city and at length i come unto a city 423 name cai tan , wherein you friar minorite have two place of abode , unto the which i transport the bone of the dead friar , which suffer martyrdom for the faith of Christ , as it be above mention . in this city there be abundance of all kind of victual very cheap . the say city be as big as two of Bononia , and in it be many monastery of religious person , all which do worship idol . i my self be in one of those monastery , and it be tell i , that there be in it three . m . religious man , have xi . m . idol : and one of you say idol which seem unto i but little in regard of the rest , be as big as our Christopher . Theise religious man every day do feed their idol - god : whereupon at a certain time i go to behold the banquet : and indeed those thing which they bring unto they be good to eat , and fume hot , insomuch that the steam of the smoke thereof ascend up unto their idol , and they say that their god be refresh with the smoke : howbeit all the meat they convey away , eat it up their own self , and so they feed their dumb god with the smoke only . of the city Fuco . travel more eastward , i