and from the navel downward a ox . the very same idol deliver oracle unto they , and sometime require the blood of fourty virgin for his hire . and therefore the man of that region do consecrate their daughter and their son unto their idol , even as Christians do their child unto some religion or saint in heaven . likewise they sacrifice their son and their daughter , and so , much people be put to death before the say idol by reason of that accurse ceremony . also , many other heinous and abominable villainy do that brutish beastly people commit : and i see many 413 more strange thing among they which i mean not here to insert . another most vile custom the foresay the burn nation do retai ne : for when any man die they burn of their dead , dead corpse to ash : and if his wife survive he , her they burn quick , because ( say they ) she shall accompany her husband in his tilth and husbandry , when he be come into a new world . howbeit the say wife have child by her husband , may if she will , remain [ ii i . 56 . ] still alive with they , without shame or reproach : notwithstanding , for the most part , they all of they make choice to be burn wl their husband . now , albeit the wife die before her husband , that law bind not the husband to any such inconvenience , but he may marry another wife also . likewise , you say nation have another strange custom , in that their woman drink wine , but their man do not . also the woman have the lid and brow of their eye and beard shave , but the man have not : with many other base and filthy fashion which the say woman do use contrary to the nature of their sex . from that kingdom i travel 10 . day journey unto Mobar , or another kingdom call Mobar , which contain many maltapor . city . within a certain church of the same country , the body of saint Thomas the apostle be inter , the very same church be full of idol : and in 15 . house round about the say church , there dwell certain priest who be nestorian , that be to say , false , and bad Christians , and schismatics . of a strange and uncouth idol : and of certain custom and ceremony . in the say kingdom of Mobar there be a wonderful strange idol , be make after the shape and resemblance of a man , as big as the image of our Christopher , and consist all of most pure and glitter gold . and about the neck thereof hang a silk ribbon , full of most rich and precious stone , some one of which be of more value than a whole kingdom . the house of this idol be all of beat gold , namely the roof , the pave - 414 mean , and the siel of the wall within and without . unto this idol the Indians go on pilgrimage , as we do unto saint Peter . some go with halter about their neck , some with their hand bind behind they , some other with knife stick on their arm or leg : and if after their peregrination , the flesh of their wound arm fester or corrupt , they esteem that limb to be holy , and think that their god be well please with they . near unto the temple of that idol be a lake make by the hand of man in a open and common place , whereinto the pilgrim cast gold , silver , and precious stone , for the honour of the idol and the repair of his temple . and therefore when any thing be to be adorn or mend , they go unto this lake take up the treasure which be cast in . Moreover at every yearly feast of the make or repair of the say idol , the king and queen , with the whole multitude of the people , and all the pilgrim assemble themselves , and place the say idol in a most stately and rich chariot , they carry he out of their temple with song , and with all kind of musical harmonic , and a great company of virgin go procession - wise two and two in a rank sing before he . many pilgrim also put themselves under the chariot wheel , to the end that their false god may go over they : and all they over who the chariot run , be crush in piece , and divide asunder in the midst , and slay right out . yea , and in do this , they think themselves to die most holy and secure , in the service of their god . and by this mean every year , there die under the say filthy idol , more than 500 person , who carcase be burn , and their ash be keep for relic , because they die in that sort for their god . Moreover they have another detestable ceremony . for when any man offer to die in the service of his false god , his parent , and all his friend assemble themselves together with a consort of musician , make he a great and solemn feast : which feast be end , they hang 5 . sharp knife about his neck carry he before the idol , and so soon as he be come thither , he 415 take one of his knife cry with a loud voice , for the worship of my god do i cut this my flesh , and then he cast the morsel which be cut , at the face of his idol : but at the very last wound wherewith he murder himself , he utterth these word : now do i yield my self to death in the behalf of my god , and be dead , his body be burn , and be esteem by all man to be holy . the king of the say region be most rich in gold , silver , and precious stone , and there be the fair union in all the world . travel from thence by the ocean sea 50 . day journey southward , i come unto a certain land name perhaps he Lammori , where , in regard of extreme heat , the people mean co - both man and woman go stark - naked from top to toe : mort ‘ who see i apparel scoff at i , say , that God make Adam