water fowl : and in the wood grow upon the mount there be great store of all bird , and wild beast . and therefore when the great can will solace himself with hunt or hawk , he need not so much as once to step forth of his palace . Moreover , the principali palace , wherein he make his abode , be very large , have within it 14 pillar of gold , and all the wall thereof be hang with red skin , which be say to be the most costly skin in all the world . in the midst of the palace stand a cistern of two yard high , which consist of a precious stone call Merdochas , and be wreathe about with gold , and at each corner thereof be the golden image of a serpent , as it be , furious shake and cast forth his head . this cistern also have a kind of network of pearl wrought about it . likewise by the say cistern there be drink convey through certain pipe and conduct , such as use to be drink in the emperor court , upon the which also there hang many vessel of gold , wherein , whosoever will may drink of the say liquour . in the foresay palace there be many peacock of gold : and when any tartar make a banquet unto his lord , if the guest chance to clap their hand for joy and mirth , the say golden peacock also will spread abroad their wing , and lift up their train , seem as if they dance : and this i suppose to be do by art magic or by some secret engine under the ground . of the glory and magnificence of the great can . moreover , when the great emperor can sit in his imperiali throne of estate , on his left hand sit his queen or empress , and upon another inferior seat there sit two other woman , which be to accompany the emperor , when his spouse be absent , but in the low place of all , there sit all the lady of his kindred . all the marry woman wear upon their head a kind of orna - 43 ° mean in shape like unto a man foot , of a cubit and a half in length , and the low part of the say foot be adorn with crane feather , and be all over thick set with great and orient pearl . upon the right hand of the great can sit his first beget son and heir apparent unto his empire , and under he sit all the noble of the blood royal . there be also four secretary , which put all thing in write that the emperor speak . in who presence likewise stand his baron and diverse other of his nobility , with great train of follower after they , of who none dare speak so much as one word , unless they have obtain licence of the emperor so to do , except his jester and stage - player , who be appoint of purpose to solace their lord . neither yet dare they attempt to do aught , but only accord to the pleasure of their emperor , and as he enjoin they by law . about the palace gate stand certain baron to keep all man from tread upon the threshold of the say gate . when it please the great can to solemnize a feast , he have about he 14000 . baron , carry wreathe and little crown upon their head , and give attendance upon their lord , and every one of they wear a garment of gold and precious stone , which be worth ten thousand floren . his court be keep in very good order , by governor of ten , governor of hundred , and governor of thousand , insomuch that every one in his place perform his duty commit unto he , neither be there any defect to be find . i friar Odoricus be there present in person for the space of three year , and be often at the say banquet ; for we friar minorite have a place of abode appoint out for we in the emperor court , and be enjoin to go and to bestow our blessing upon he . and i inquire of certain courtier concern the number of person pertain to the emperor court ? and they answer i , that of stage - player , musician , and such like , there be eighteen Thuman at the least , and that the keeper of dog , beast and fowl be 431 fifteen Thuman , and the physician for the emperor body , be four hundred ; the Christians also be eight in number , together with one Saracen . at my be there , all the foresay number of person have all kind of necessary both for apparel and victual out of the emperor court . Moreover , when he will make his progress from one country to another , he have four troop of horseman , one be appoint to go a day journey before , and another to come a day journey after he , the three to march on his right hand , and the four on his left , in the manner of a cross , he himself be in the midst , and so every particular troop have their daily journey limit unto they , to the end they may provide sufficient victual without defect . now the great can himself be carry in manner follow ; he ride in a chariot with two wheel , upon which a majestical throne be build of the wood of aloe , be adorn with gold and great pearl , and precious stone , and four elephant brave furnish doe draw the say chariot , before which elephant four great horse rich trap and cover do lead the way . hard by the chariot on both side thereof , be four baron lay hold and attend thereupon , to keep all person from approach near unto their emperor . upon the chariot also two milkwhite jerfalcon do sit , and see any game which he will take , he let they fly , and so they take it , and after this manner do he solace himself as he ride . Moreover , no man dare come within a stone cast of the chariot , but such as be appoint . the number of his own follower , of his wife attendant , and of the train of his first beget son and heir apparent , will seem incredible unto any man , unless he have see it with his own eye . the foresay great can