372 374 375 376 377 378 380 A . D . 1330 - iv 385 2 b Java . 386 387 389 390 391 393 395 Pythagorica Chilenso . Thalay . Kakam . Caramoran . Cambalec . 397 398 400 iv 401 2 c 402 403 405 406 here begin the journal of Frier Odoricus , one of the order of the minorite , concern strange thing which he see among the Tartar of the east . Pera . [ ii i . 5 + - ] lbeit many and sundry thing be report by diverse author concern the fashion and condition of this world : notwithstanding i friar Odoricus of Friuli , de portu Vahonis be desirous to travel unto the foreign and remote nation of infidel , see and hear great and mira - culous thing , which i be able true to avouch . first of all therefore sail from Pera by Constantinople , i arrive at Trapesunda . this place be right commodi - ously situate , as be a haven for the persian and Medes , and other country beyond the sea . in this land i behold with great delight a very strange spectacle , namely a certain man lead about with he more than four thousand partridge . the man himself walk upon the ground , and the partridge fly in the air , which he lead unto a certain castle call Zavena , be three day journey distant from Trapesunda . the say partridge be so tame , that when the man be desirous to lie down and rest , they 408 will all come flock about he like chicken . and so he lead they unto Trapesunda , and unto the palace of the emperor , who take as many of they as he please , and the rest the say man carry unto the place from whence he come . in this city lie the body of Athanasius , upon the gate of the city . and then i pass on further unto Armenia major , to a the city of certain city call Azaron , which have be very rich Azaronin ar - in old time , but now the Tartar have almost lay major - it waste . in the say city there be abundance of bread and flesh , and of all other victual except wine and fruit . this city also be very cold , and be report to be high situate , than any other city in the world . it have most wholesome and sweet water about it : for the vein of the say water seem to spring and flow from the mighty river of Euphrates , which be but a day journey from the say city . also , the say city stand direct in the way to Tauris . and i pass on unto a certain mountain call Sobissacalo . in the foresay country there be the very Sobissacalo . same mountain whereupon the ark of Noah rest : unto the which i will willing have ascend , if my company will have stay for i . howbeit the people of that country report , that no man can ever ascend the say mountain , because ( say they ) it please not the high god . and i travail on further unto Tauris that great and royal city , which be in old time Tauris a city call Susis . this city be account for traffic of ° f ^ ersta - marchandize the chief city of the world : for there be no kind of victual , nor any thing else belong unto merchandise , which be not to be have there in great abundance . this city stand very commodious : for unto it all the nation of the whole world in a manner may resort for traffic . concern the say city , the christian in those part be of opinion , that the persian emperor receive more tribute out of it , than the king of France out of all his dominion . near unto the say city there be a salt - hill yield salt unto the city : and of 409 that salt each man may take what please he , not pay ought to any man therefore . in this city many Christians of all nation do inhabit , over who the Saracen bear rule in all thing . than i travel on further unto a or , sum / tania . city call * Soldania , wherein the persian emperor lie all summer time : but in winter he take his progress the caspian unto another city stand upon the sea call * Baku . sea - also the foresay city be very great and cold , have good and wholesome water therein , unto the which also store of merchandise be bring . Moreover i travel with a certain company of Caravans towards upper India : and in the way , after many day journey , i come unto or , Cassibin . the city of the three wise man call * Cassan , which be a noble and renown city , save that the Tartar have destroy a great part thereof , and it abound with bread , wine , and many other commodity . from this city unto Jerusalem ( whither the three foresay wiseman be miraculous lead ) it be fifty day journey . there be many wonder in this city also , which , for brevity sake , i omit . from thence i depart unto a certain guest . city call * guest , whence the sea of sand be distant , one day journey , which be a most wonderful and dangerous thing . in this city there be abundance of all kind of victual , and especial of fig , reisin , and grape ; moor ( as i suppose ) then in any part of the whole world beside . this be one of the three principali city in all the persian empire . of this city the Saracen report , that no Christian can by any mean live therein above a year . then pass many day journey on forward , i como . come unto a certain city call * Comum , which be a huge and mighty city in old time , contain well nigh fifty mile in circuit , and have do in time past great damage unto the roman . in it there be stately palace altogether destitute of inhabitant , notwithstanding it abound with great store of victual . from hence travel through many country , at length i come unto the land of Job name hus , which be rail of all kind of victual , and very pleasant situate . there - 410 about be certain mountain have good pasture for cattle upon