come unto a city name Fuco , which contain 30 . mile in circuit , wherein be exceed great and fair cock , and all their hen be as white as the very snow , have wool in stead of feather , like unto sheep . it be a most stately and beautiful city and stand upon the sea . than i go 18 . day journey on further , and pass by many province and city , and in the way i go over a certain great mountain , upon you one side whereof i behold all live creature to be as black as a coal , and the man and woman on that side differ somewhat in manner of live from other : howbeit , on the other side of the say hill every live thing be snow - white , and the inhabitant in their manner of live , be altogether unlike unto other . there , all marry woman carry in token that they have husband , a great trunk of horn upon their head . from thence i 424 travel 18 . day journey further , and come unto a certain great river , and enter also into a city , where - a great unto belong a mighty bridge to pass the say river . nver - and my host with who i sojourn , be desirous to show i some sport , say unto i : sir , if you will see any fish take , go with i . than he lead i unto the foresay bridge , carry in his arm with he certain dive - doppers or water - fowl , bind unto a company rout catch - of pole , and about every one of their neck he tie a ingfish . thread , lest they shall eat the fish as fast as they take they : and he carry 3 . great basket with he also : then loose he the dive - doppers from the pole , which present go into the water , and within less than the space of one hour , catch as many fish as fill the 3 . basket : which be full , my host untie the thread from about their neck , and enter the second time into the river they feed themselves with fish , and be satisfy they return and suffer themselves to be bind unto the say pole as they be before . and when i do eat of those fish , i think they be exceed good . travail thence many day journey , at length i arrive at another city call * Canasia , which cansahor signify in our language , the city of heaven . never in quinzat - all my life do i see so great a city ; for it contain in circuit a hundred mile : neither see i any plot thereof , which be not thorough inhabit : yea , i see many house of ten or twelve story high , one above another . it have mighty large suburb contain more people than the city it self . also it have twelve principali gate : and about the distance of eight mile , in the high way unto every one of the say gate stand a city as big by estimation as Venice , and Padua . the foresay city of Canasia be situate in water or marsh , which always stand still neither ebb - ing nor flow : howbeit it have a defence for the wind the italian like unto Venice . in this city there be more than 10002 . bridge , many whereof i number and pass over they : 7ioo ^ and upon every of those bridge stand certain watch - bridge . 425 man of the city , keep continual watch and ward about the say city , for the great can the emperor of catay . the people of this country say , that they have one duty enjoin unto they by their lord : for every fire pay one Balis in regard of tribute : and a Balis be five paper or piece of silk , which be worth one floren and a half of our coin . ten or twelve household be account for one fire , and so pay tribute but for one fire only . all those tributary fire amount unto the number of 85 . Thuman , with other four Thuman of the Saracen , which make 89 . in all ; and one Thuman con - sisteth 10000 fire . the residue of the people of the city be some of they Christians , some merchant , and some traveller through the country : whereupon i marveiled much how such a infinite number of person can inhabit and live together . there be great abundance of victual in this city , as namely of bread and wine , and especial of hogs - flesh , with other necessary . of a monastery where many strange beast of diverse kind do live upon a hill . in the foresay city four of our friar have convert a mighty and rich man unto the faith of Christ , at who house encage continual abode , for so long time as i remain in the city . who upon a certain time say unto i : Ara , that be to say , father , will you go and behold the city ? and i say , yea . then embark we our self , and direct our course unto a certain great monastery : where be arrive , he call a religious person with who he be acquaint , say unto he concern i : this Raban Francus , that be to say , this religious Frenchman come from the western part of the world , and be now go to the city of cambale to pray for the life of the great can , and therefore you must show he some rare thing , that when he return into his own country , he may say , this strange sight or novelty have i see in the city of Canasia . then the say religious man take two great 426 basket full of break relic which remain of the table , and lead i unto a little wall park , the door whereof he unlock with his key , and there appear unto we a pleasant fair green plot , into the which we enter . in the say green stand a little mount in form of a steeple , replenish with fragrant herb , and fine shady tree . and while we stand there , he take a cymbali or bell , and ring therewith , as they use to ring to dinner or bevoir in cloister , at the sound whereof many