. Moreover by certain conduct he make wine and milk [ ii i . 65 . ] to flow abundant . This senex , when he have a mind to revenge himself or to slay any king or baron , commands he that be governor of the say paradise , to bring thereunto some of the acquaintance of the say king or baron , permit he a while to take his pleasure therein , and then to give he a certain potion be of force , to cast he into such a slumber as shall make he quite void of all sense , and so be in a profound sleep to convey he out of his paradise : who be awake , and see himself thrust out of the paradise will become so sorrowful , that he can not in the world devise what to do , or whither to turn he . then will he go unto the foresay old man , beseech he that he may be admit again into 438 his paradise : who say unto he , you can be admit thither , unless you will slay such or such a man for my sake , and if you will give the attempt only , whether you kill he or no , i will place you again in paradise , that there you may remain always : then will the party without fade put the same in execution , endeavour to murder all those against who the say old man have conceive any hatred . and therefore all the king of the east stand in awe of the say old man , and give unto he great tribute . of the death of senex de monte . a nd when the Tartar have subdue a great part of the world , they come unto the say old man , and take from he the custody of his paradise : who be incense thereat , send abroad diverse desperate and resolute person out of his forename paradise , and cause many of the tartarian noble to be slay . the Tartar see this , go and besiege the city wherein the say old man be , take he , and put he to a most cruel and ignominious death . the friar in that place have this speciali gift and prerogative : namely , that by the virtue of the name of Christ Jesus , and in the virtue of his precious blood , which he shed upon the cross for the salvation of mankind , they do cast forth devil out of they that be possess . and because there be many possess man in those part , they be bind and bring ten day journey unto the say friar , who be dispossess of the unclean spirit , do present believe in Christ who deliver they , account he for their god , and be baptise in his name , and also deliver immediate unto the friar all their idol , and the idol of their cattle , which be common make of felt or of woman hair : then the say friar kindle a fire in a public place ( whereunto the people resort , that they may see the false god of their neighbour burn ) and cast the say idol thereinto : howbeit at the first those idol come out of the fire again . then the friar sprinkle 439 A . D . 1330 - the say fire with holy water , cast the idol into it the second time , and with that the devil flee in the likeness of black smoke , and the idol still remain till they be consume unto ash . afterwards , this noise and outcry be hear in the air : behold and see how i be expel out of my habitation . and by these mean the friar do baptise great multitude , who present revolt again unto their idol : insomuch that the say friar must eftsoon , as it be , underprop they , and inform they anew . there be another terrible thing which i see there : for pass by a certain valley , which be situate beside a pleasant river , i see many dead body , and in the say valley also i hear diverse sweet sound and harmony of music , especial the noise of cithern , whereat i be great amaze . this valley contain in length seven or eight mile at the least , into the which whosoever enter , die present , and can by no mean pass alive through the midst thereof : for which cause all the inhabitant thereabouts decline unto the one side . Moreover , i be tempt to go in , and to see what it be . at length , make my prayer , and recommend my self to God in the name of Jesus , i enter , and see such swarm of dead body there , as no man will believe unless he be a eye witness thereof . at the one side of the foresay valley upon a certain stone , i see the visage of a man , which behold i with such a terrible aspect , that i think very i shall have die in the same place . but always this sentence , the word become flesh , and dwell among we , i cease not to pronounce , sign my self with the sign of the cross , and near than seven or eight pase i dare not approach unto the say head : but i depart and flee unto another place in the say valley , ascend up into a little sandy mountain , where look round about , i see nothing but the say cithern , which i think i hear miraculous sound and play by themselves without the help of musician . And be upon the top of the mountain , i find 440 silver there like the scale of fish in great abundance : and i gather some part thereof into my bosom to show for a wonder , but my conscience rebuke i , 1 cast it upon the earth , reserve no whit at all unto my self , and so , by god grace i depart without danger . and when the man of the country know that i be return out of the valley alive , they reverence i much , say that i be baptise and holy , and that the foresay body be man subject unto the devil infernali , who use to play upon cithern , to the end they may allure people to . enter , and so murder they . thus much concern those thing which i behold most certain with my eye , i friar Odoricus have here write : many strange thing