have divide his empire into twelve part or province , and one of the say province have two thousand great city within the precinct thereof . whereupon his empire be of that length and breadth , that unto whatsoever part thereof he 43 2 ... I33 °* intend his journey , he have space enough for six month continual progress , except his island which be at the least 5000 . of certain inn or hospital appoint for traveller throughout the whole empire . the foresay emperor ( to the end that traveller may have all thing necessary throughout his whole empire ) have cause certain inn to be provide in sundry place upon the high way , where all thing pertain unto victual be in a continual readiness . and when any alteration or news happen in any part of his empire , if he chance to be far absent from that part , his ambassador upon horse or drome - [ ii i . 63 . ] dary ride post unto he , and when themselves and their beast be weary , they blow their horn , at the noise whereof , the next inn likewise provide a horse and a man , who take the letter of he that be weary , and run unto another inn : and so by diverse inn , and diverse post , the report , which ordinary can scarce come in 30 . day , be in one natural day bring unto the emperor : and therefore no matter of any moment can be do in his empire , but straightway he have intelligence thereof . Moreover , when you great can himself will go on hunt , he use this custom . some twenty day journey from the city of kambale there be a forest contain six day journey in circuit , in which forest there be so many kind of beast and bird , as it be incredible to report . unto this forest , at the end of every three or four year , himself with his whole train resort , and they all of they together environ the say forest , send dog into the same , which by hunt do bring forth the beast : namely , lion and stag , and other creature , unto a most beautiful plain in the midst of the forest , because all the beast of the forest do tremble , especial at the cry of hound . then come the great can himself , be carry upon three elephant , and shoot five iv 433 2 e arrow into the whole herd of beast , and after he all his baron , and after they the rest of his courtier and family do all in like manner discharge their arrow also , and every man arrow have a sundry mark . than they all go unto the beast which be slay ( suffer the live beast to return into the wood that they may have more sport with they another time ) and every man enjoy that beast as his own , wherein he find his arrow stick . of the four feast which the great can solemnize every year in his court . four great feast in a year do the emperor can celebrate : namely , the feast of his birth , the feast of his circumcision , the feast of his coronation , and the feast of his marriage . and unto these feast he invit all his baron , his stage - player , and all such as be of his kindred . then the great can sit in his throne , all his baron present themselves before he , with wreath and crown upon their head , be diverse attire , for some of they be in green , namely , the principali : the second be in red , and the three in yellow , and they hold each man in his hand a little ivory table of elephant tooth , and they be gird with golden girdle of half a foot broad , and they stand upon their foot keep silence . about they stand the stage - player or musician with their instrument . and in one of the corner of a certain great palace , all the philosopher or magician remain for certain hour , and do attend upon point or character : and when the point and hour which the say philosopher expect for , be come , a certain crier cry out with a loud voice , say , incline or bow your self before your emperor : with that all the baron fall flat upon the earth . than he cry out again ; arise all , and immediate they all arise . likewise the philosopher attend upon a point or character the second time , and when it be fulfil , the crier cry out amain ; put 434 your finger in your ear : and forthwith again he say ; pluck they out . again , at the three point he cry , Boult this meal . many other circumstance also do they perform , all which they say have some certain signification : howbeit , neither will i write they , nor give any heed unto they , because they be vain and ridiculous . and when the musician hour be come , than the philosopher say , solemnize a feast unto your lord : with that all of they sound their instrument , make a great and a melodious noise . and immediate another cry , peace , peace , and they be all whist . then come the women - musician and sing sweet before the emperor , which music be more delightful unto i . after they come in the lion and do their obeisance unto the great can . then the juggler cause golden cup full of wine to fly up and down in the air , and to apply themselves unto man mouth that they may drink of they . Theise and many other strange thing i see in the court of the great can , which no man will believe unless he have see they with his own eye , and therefore i omit to speak of they . i be inform also by certain credible person , of another miraculous thing , namely , that in a certain kingdom of the say can , wherein stand the mountain call kapsei ( the kingdom name be kalor ) there grow great gourd or pompion , which lamb in a be ripe , do open at the top , and within they be and urd " find a little beast like unto a young lamb , even as i my self have hear report , that there stand certain tree upon the shore of the irish