creature of diverse kind come down from the mount , some like ape , some like cat , some like monkey ; and some have face like man . and while i stand behold of they , they gather themselves together about he , to the number of 4200 . of those creature , put themselves in good order , before who he set a platter , and give they the say fragment to eat . and when they have eat he ring upon his cymbal the second time , and they all return unto their former place . then , wonder great at the matter , i demand what kind of creature those may be ? they be ( quoth he ) the soul of noble man which we do here feed , for the love of God who govern the world : and as a man be honourable or noble in this life , so his soul after death , enter into the body of some excellent beast or other , but the soul of simple and rustical people do possess the body of more vile and brutish creature . than i begin to refute that foul error : howbeit my speech do nothing at all prevail with he : for he can not be persuade that any soul may remain without a body . from thence i depart unto a certain city name Chilenso , the wall whereof contain 40 . mile in cir - Chilenso . cuit . in this city there be 360 . bridge of stone , the fair that ever i see : and it be well inhabit , have a great navy belong thereunto , and abound with all kind of victual and other commodity . and thence i go unto a certain river call Thalay , which , where it Thalay . be most narrow , be 7 . mile broad : and it run through the midst of the land of Pygmaei , who chief city be 427 Cakam . call Cakam , and be one of the goodly city in the [ ii i . 61 . ] world . Theise pigmaean be three of my span high , and they make large and better cloth of cotton and silk , than any other nation under the sun . And coast along by the say river , i come unto a certain city Janzu . name Janzu , in which city there be one receptacle for the friar of our order , and there be also three church of the nestorian . This Janzu be a noble and great city , contain 48 Thuman of tributary fier , and in it be all kind of victual , and great plenty of such beast , fowl and fish , as Christians do usual live upon . the lord of the same city have in yearly revenue for salt only , fifty Thuman of Balis , and one balis be worth a floren and a half of our coin : insomuch that one Thuman of balis amount unto the value of fifteen thousand floren . howbeit the say lord favour his people in one respect , for sometime he forgive they free two hundred Thuman , lest there shall be any scarcity or dearth among they . there be a custom in this city , that when any man be determine to banquet his friend , go about unto certain tavern or cook house appoint for the same purpose , he say unto every particular host , you shall have such , and such of my friend , who you must entertain in my name , and so much i will bestow upon the banquet . and by that mean his friend be better feast at diverse place , than they shall have be at one . ten mile from the say city , about the head of the foresay river of Thalay , there be a certain other city call montu , which have the great navy that i see in the whole world . all their ship be as white as snow , and they have banquet house in they , and many other rare thing also , which no man will believe , unless he have see they with his own eye . 428 travel eight day journey further by diverse territory and city , at length i come by fresh water unto a certain city name Leneyn , stand upon the river of * Karavoran , which run through the midst of Cataie , and do great harm in the country when it overflow the bank , or break forth of the channel . from thence pass along the river eastward , after many day travel , and the sight of diverse city , 1 arrive at a city call * sumakoto , which abound more with silk than any other city in the world : for when there be great scarcity of silk , forty pound be sell for less than eight groat . in this city there be abundance of all merchandise , and of all kind of victual also , as of bread , wine , flesh , fish , with all choice and delicate spice . then travel on still towards the east by many city , i come unto the noble and renown city of cambale , which be of great antiquity , be situate in the province of Cataie . this city the Tartar take , and near unto it within the space of half a mile , they build another city call Caido . the city of Caido have twelve gate , be each of they two mile distant from another . also the space lie in the midst between the two foresay city be very well and thorough inhabit , so that they make as it be but one city between they both . the whole compass or circuit of both city together , be 40 . mile . in this city the great emperor can have his principali seat , and his Imperiali palace , the wall of which palace contain four mile in circuit : and near unto this his palace be many other palace and house of his noble which belong unto his court . within the precinct of the say palace Imperiali , there be a most beautiful mount , set and replenish with tree , for which cause it be call the green mount , have a most royal and sumptuous palace stand thereupon , in which , for the most part , the great can be resident . upon the one side of the 429 Karamoron . Sumacoto . say mount there be a great lake , whereupon a most stately bridge be build , in which lake be great abundance of goose , duck , and all kind of