and Eve naked . in this country all woman be common , so that no man can say , this be my wife . also when any of the say woman bear a son or a daughter , she bestow it upon any one that have lie with she , who she please . likewise all the land of that region be possess in common , so that there be not mine and thou , or any propriety of possession in the division of land : howbeit every man have his own house peculiar unto himself . man flesh , if it be fat , be eat as ordinary there , as beef in our country . and albeit the people be most lewd , yet the country be exceed good , abound with all commodity , as flesh , corn , rise , silver , gold , wood of aloe , Campheir , and many other thing . merchant come unto this region for traffic do usual bring wl they fat man , sell they unto the inhabitant as we sei hog , who immediate kill and eat they . in this island towards the Sumatra . south , there be another kingdom call simoltra , where both man and woman mark themselves with redhot iron in 12 . sundry spot of their face : and this nation be at continual war with certain naked people in another region . than i travel further unto another Java . island call Java , the compass whereof by sea be 3000 . [ ii i . 57 ] mile < the king of this hand have 7 . other crown 416 king under his jurisdiction . the say hand be thorough inhabit , and be think to be one of the principali hand of you whole world . in the same hand there grow great plenty of clove , cubibez , and nutmeg , and in a word all kind of spice be there to be have , and great abundance of all victual except wine . the king of the say land of Java have a most brave and sumptuous palace , the most lofty build , that ever i see any , and it have most high grief and stayer to ascend up to the room therein contain , one stair be of silver , and another of gold , throughout the whole building . also the low room be pave all over with one square plate of silver , and another of gold . all the wall upon the inner side be seel over with plate of beat gold , whereupon be engrave you picture of knight , have about their temple , each of they a wreath of gold , adorn with precious stone . the roof of the palace be of pure gold . with this king of Java the great can of catay have have many conflict in war : who notwithstanding the say king have always overcome and vanquish . of certain tree yield meal , honey , and poison . near unto the say hand be another country call Panten , or Tathalamasin . and the king of the same country have many hand under his dominion . in this land there be tree yield meal , honey , and wine , and : the most deadly poison in all you whole world : for against it there be but one only remedy : and that be this : if any man have take of the poison , and will be deliver from the danger thereof , let he temper the dung of a man in water , and so drink a good quantity thereof , and it expel the poison immediate , make it to avoid at the fiinde - ment . meal be produce out of the say tree after this manner . they be mighty huge tree , and when they be cut with a axe by the ground , there issue out of the stock a certain liquour like unto gum , which they take iv 417 2d and put into bag make of leaf , lay they for 15 day together abroad in the sun , and at the end of those 15 day , when the say liquour be thorough parch , it become meal . than they steep it first in sea water , wash it afterward with fresh water , and so it be make very good and savoury paste , whereof they make either meat or bread , as they think good . of which bread i my self do eat , and it be fair without and somewhat brown within . by this country be the sea call mare mortuum , which run continual southward , into you which whosoever fall be never see after . in this country also be find cane of a incredible length , namely of 60 pace high or more , and they be as big as tree . other cane there be also call Cassan , which overspread the earth like grass , 8c out of every knot of they spring forth certain branch , which be continue upon the ground almost for the space of a mile . in the say cane there be find certain stone , one of which stone , whosoever carry about with he , can be wound with any iron : 8c therefore the man of that country for the most part , carry such stone with they , whithersoever they go . many also cause one of the arm of their child , while they be young , to be lance , put one of the say stone into the wound , heal also , and close up the say wound with the powder of a certain fish ( the name whereof i do not know ) which powder do immediate consolidate and cure the say wound . and by the virtue of these stone , the people aforesaid do for the most part triumph both on sea and land . howbeit there be one kind of stratagem , which the enemy of this nation , know the virtue of the say stone , do practise against they : namely , they provide themselves armour of iron or steel against their arrow , 8c weapon also poison with the poison of tree , 8c they carry in their hand wooden stake most sharp 8c hard - pointed , as if they be iron : likewise they shoot arrow without iron head , and so they confound 8c slay some of their un - 418 1330arm foe trust too secure unto the virtue of their stone . also of the foresay cane call Cassan they make sail for their ship , and little house , and many make other necessary . from thence after many day travel !