also i have of purpose [ ii i . 66 . ] omit , because man will not believe they unless they shall see they . of the honour and reverence do unto the great can . i will report one thing more , which i see , concern the great can . it be a usual custom in those part , that when the foresay can travel through any country , his subject kindle fire before their door , cast spice thereinto to make a perfume , that their lord pass by may smell the sweet and delectable odour thereof , and much people come forth to meet he . and upon a certain time when he be come towards cambale , the fame of his approach be publish , a bishop of we with certain of our minorite friar and my self , go two day journey to meet he : and be come nigh unto he , we put a cross upon wood , i my self have a censer in my hand , and begin to sing with a loud voice : veni creator spiritus . and as we be sing on this wise , he cause we to be call , command we to come unto he : notwithstanding ( as it be above mention ) that no man dare approach within a stone cast of his chariot , unless he be call , but such only as keep his chariot . and when we come 441 near unto he , he veil his hat or bonnet be of a inestimable price , do reverence unto the cross . and immediate i put incense into the censer , and our bishop take the censer perfume he , and give he his benediction . Moreover , they that come before the say can do always bring some oblation to present unto he , observe the ancient law : thou shall not appear in my presence with a empty hand . and for that cause we carry apple with we , and offer they in a platter with reverence unto he : and take out two of they he do eat some part of one . and then he signify unto we , that we shall go apart , lest the horse come on might in ought offend we . with that we depart from he , and turn aside , go unto certain of his baron , which have be convert to the faith by certain friar of our order , be at the same time in his army : and we offer unto they of the foresay apple , who receive they at our hand with great joy , seem unto we to be as glad , as if we have give they some great gift - . .... all the premise abovewritten friar William de Solanga have put down in write even as the foresay friar Odoricus utter they by word of mouth , in the year of our lord 1330 , in the month of May , and in the place of saint Anthony of Padua . neither do he regard to write they in difficult latin or in a eloquent stile , but even as Odoricus himself rehearse they , to the end that man may the more easy understand the thing report . i friar Odoricus of Friuli , of a certain territory call Portus Vahonis , and of the order of the minorite , do testify and bear witness unto the reverend father Guidotus minister of the province of saint Anthony , in the marquesate of Treviso ( be by he require upon my obedience so to do ) that all the premise above write , either i see with my own eye , or hear the same report by credible and substantiali person . the 442 common report also of the country where i be , testify those thing , which i see , to be true . many other thing i have omit , because i behold they not with my own eye . howbeit from day to day i purpose with my self to travel country or land , in which action i dispose my self to die or to live , as it shall please my God . of the death of friar Odoricus . in the year therefore of our lord 1331 the foresaid friar Odoricus prepare himself for the performance of his intend journey , that his travel and labour may be to great purpose , he determine to present himself unto pope John the two and twenty , who benediction and obedience be receive , he , with a certain number of friar willing to bear he company , may convey himself unto all the country of infidel . and as he be travel towards the pope , and not far distant from the city of Pisa , there meet he by the way a certain old man , in the habit and attire of a pilgrim , salute he by name , and say : all hail friar Odoricus . and when the friar demand how he have knowledge of he : he answer : while you be in India i know you full well , yea , and i know your holy purpose also : but see that you return immediately unto the coven from whence you come , for ten day hence you shall depart out of this present world . wherefore be astonish and amaze at these word ( especial the old man vanish out of his sight , present after he have speak they ) he determine to return . and so he return in perfect health , feel no crazedness nor infirmity of body . And be in his coven at Udene in the province of Padua , the ten day after the foresay vision , have receive the communion , and prepare himself unto God , yea , be strong and sound of body , he happy rest in the lord : who sacred departure be signify unto the [ ii i . 67 . ] 443 pope aforesaid , under the hand of the public notary in these word follow . in the year of our lord 1331 , the 14 . day of Januarie , Beatus Odoricus a friar minorite decease in Christ , at who prayer God show many and sundry miracle , which i guetelus public notary of utina , son of m . Damianus de porto Gruaro , at the commandment and direction of the honourable Conradus of the borough of Gastaldion , and one of the council of utina , have write as faithful as i can , and have deliver a copy thereof unto the friar minorite : howbeit not of all , because they be innumerable , and too difficult for i to write .