, ° freedes - i arrive at another kingdom call Campa , a most Campa . beautiful and rich country , and abound with all kind of victual : the king whereof , at my be there , have so many wife and concubine , that he have 300 son and daughter by they . this king have 10004 tame elephant , which be keep even as we keep drove of ox , or flock of sheep in pasture . of the abundance of fish , which cast themselves upon the shore . in this country there be one strange thing to be observe , the every several kind of fish in those sea come swim towards the say country in such abundance , that , for a great distance into the sea , nothing can be see but you back of fish : which , cast themselves upon the shore when they come near unto it , do suffer man , for the space of 3 . day , to come and to take as many of they as they please , and then they return again unto the sea . after that kind of fish come another kind , offer it self after the same manner , and so in like sort all other kind whatsoever : notwithstanding they do this but once in a year . and i demand of the inhabitant there , how , or by what mean this strange accident can come to pass ? they answer , that fish be teach , even by nature , to come and to do homage unto their , emperor . there be tortoise also as big as a oven . many other t ' artojse . thing i see which be incredible , unless a man shall i - 11 ' b see they with his own eye . in this country also dead man be burn , and their wife be burn alive with they , as in the city of polumbrum above mention : for the man of that country say that she go to accompany he in another world , that he shall take none other wife in manage . Moreover i travel on 419 further by the ocean - sea towards the south , pass through many country and island , wherot one be call Moumoran , and it contain in compass two . m . mile , wherein man and woman have dog face , and worship a ox for their god : and therefore every one of they carry the image of a ox of gold or silver upon their forehead . the man and the woman of this country go all naked , save that they hang a linen cloth before their privity . the man of the say country be very tall and mighty , and by reason that they go naked , when they be to make battle , they carry iron or steel - target before they , which do cover and defend their body from top to toe : and whosoever of their foe they take in battle not be able to ransom himself for money , they present devour he : but if he be able to redeem himself for money , they let he go free . their king wear about his neck 300 . great and most beautiful union , and say every day 300 . prayer unto his god . he wear upon his finger also a stone of a span long , which seem to be a flame of fire , and therefore when he wear it , no man dare once approach unto he : and they say that there be not any stone in the whole world of more value than it . neither can at any time the great tartarian emperor of katay either by force , money , or policy obtain it at his hand : notwithstanding that he have do the utmost of his endeavour for this purpose . of the island of Sylan : and of the mountain where Adam mourn for his son Abel . 1 pass also by another island call Sylan , which contain in compass above two . m . mile : wherein be a infinite number of serpent , and great store of lion , bear , and all kind of raven and wild beast , and especial of elephant . in the say country there be a huge mountain , whereupon the inhabitant of that region do report that Adam mourn for his son Abel you space of 500 year . in the midst of this mountain 420 there be a most beautiful plain , wherein be a little lake contain great plenty of water , which water you inhabitant report to have proceed from the tear of Adam and Eve : howbeit i prove that to be false , because i see the water flow in the lake . this water be full of horseleeche , and bloodsucker , and of precious stone also : which precious stone the king take not unto his own use , but once or twice every year he permit certain poor people to dive under the water for you say stone , and all that they can get he bestow upon they , to the end they may pray for his soul . but ill they may with less danger dive under the water , they take limon which they pil , anoint themselves thorough with the juice thereof , and so they may dive naked under you water , the horseleeche not be able to hurt they . from this lake the water run even unto the sea , and at a low ebb the inhabitant dig ruby , diamond , pearl , and other precious stone out of the shore : whereupon it be think , that you king of this island have great abundance of precious stone , than any other monarch in the whole earth beside . in the say country there be all kind of beast and fowl : and the people tell i , that those beast will not invade nor hurt any stranger , but only the natural inhabitant . i see in this island foul as big as our country goose , have two head , and other miraculous thing , which i will not here write off travel on further towards the south , i arrive at a certain island call Bodin , which Or ^ Dadin . signify in our language unclean . in this island there do inhabit most wicked person , who devour and eat raw flesh commit all kind of uncleanness and abomination in such sort , as it be incredible . for the father eat his son , and the son his father , the husband his own wife , and the wife her