they . here also manna be find in great abundance . four partridge be here sell for less than a groat . in this country there be most comely old man . here also the man spin and card , and not the woman . this land border upon the north part of Chaldasa . of the manner of the chaldasans , and of India . from thence i travel into Chaldaea , which be a great kingdom , and 1 pass by the tower of Babel . This tw ° f region have a language peculiar unto it self , and there be beautiful man , and deform woman . the man of the same country use to have their hair kempt , and trim like unto our woman : and they be golden turban upon their head rich set with pearl , and precious stone . the woman be clad in a course smock only reach to their knee , and have long sleeve hang down to the ground . and they go barefooted , wear breech which reach to the ground also . they wear no attire upon their head , but their hair hang disheavele about their ear : and there be many [ ii i . $ 5 . ] other strange thing also . from thence i come into the low India , which the Tartar overrun and waste . and in this country the people eat date for the most part , whereof 42 . livre . be there sell for less than a groat . i pass further also many day journey unto the ocean sea , and the first land where i arrive , be call * Ormes , ormus . be well fortify , and have great store of merchandise and treasure therein . such and so extreme be the heat in that country , that the privity of man come out of their body and hang down even unto their mid - leg . and therefore the inhabitant of the same place , to preserve their own life , do make a certain ointment , and anoint their privy member therewith , do lap they up in certain bag fasten unto their body , for otherwise they must needs die . here also they use a kind of bark or ship call jase be compact together only 411 with hemp . and i go on board into one of they , wherein i can not find any iron at all , and in the Thana , where - space of 28 . day i arrive at the city of Thana , wherein of Frederick four of our friar be martyr for the faith of Christ . etfl this country be well situate , have abundance of bread and wine , and of other victual therein . T . his kingaome in old time be very large and under the dominion of king Porus , who fight a great battle with Alexander the great . the people of this country be idolater worship fire , serpent and tree . and over all this land the Saracen do bear rule , who take it by main force , and they themselves be in subjection unto king Daldilus . there be diverse kind of beast , as namely black lion in great abundance , and ape also , and monkei , and bat as big as our dove . also there be mouse as big as our country dog , and therefore they be hunt with dog , because cat be not able to encounter they . Moreover , in the same country every man have a bundle of great bough stand in a waterpot before his door , which bundle be as great as a pillar , and it will not wither , so long as water be apply thereunto : with many other novelty and strange thing , the relation whereof will breed great delight . how peper be have : and where it grow . moreover , that it may be manifest how peper be have , it be to be understand that it grow in a certain Malabar . kingdom whereat i my self arrive , be call * Minibar , and it be not so plentiful in any other part of the world as it be there . for the wood wherein it grow contain in circuit 18 . day journey . and in the say or , Alan - wood or forest there be two city , one call * Flan - dnna . drina , and the other Cyncilim . in Flandrina both Jew and christian do inhabit , between who there be often contention and war : howbeit the christian overcome the Jew at all time . in the foresay wood pepper be have after this manner : first it grow in leaf like unto potherb , which they plant near unto great tree 412 as we do our vine , and they bring forth pepper in cluster , as our vine do yield grape , but be ripe , they be of a green colour , and be gather as we gather grape , and then the grain be lay in the sun to be dry , and be dry be put into earthen vessel : and thus be pepper make and keep . now , in the same wood there be niany river , wherein be great store of crocodile , and of other serpent , which the inhabitant thereabouts do burn up with straw and with other dry fuel , and so they go to gather their pepper without danger . at the south end of the say forest stand the city of polumbrum , which abound with merchandise of all polumbrum . kind . all the inhabitant of that country do worship a live ox , as their god , who they put to labour for six year , and in the seven year they cause he to rest from all his work , place he in a solemn and public place , and call he a holy beast . Moreover they use this foolish ceremony : every morning they take two bason , either of silver , or of gold , and with one they receive the urine of the ox , and with the other his dung . with the urine they wash their face , their eye , and all their five sense . of the dung they put into both their eye , than they anoint the ball of their cheek therewith , and three their breast : and then they say that they be sanctify for all that day ; and as the people do , even so do their king and queen . this people worship also a dead idol , which , from the navel upward , resembles a man ,