sea , bear fruit like unto a gourd , which , at a certain time of the year do fall into the water , and become bird call barnacle , and this be most true . of diverse province and city . a nd after three year i depart out of the empire his retume of Cataie , travail fifty day journey towards westward . the west . and at length i come unto the empire of 435 [ ii i . 64 . ] Pretegoani , who principali city be Kosan , which have many other city under it . from thence pass many Casan . day travel , i come unto a province call Casan , which be for good commodity , one of the only province under the sun , and be very well inhabit , insomuch that when we depart out of the gate of one city we may behold the gate of another city , as i my self see in diverse of they . the breadth of the say province be fifty day journey , and the length above sixty . in it there be great plenty of all victual , and especial of chestnut , and it be one of the twelve province of the great can . go on further , i come unto a certain two or , thebet . kingdom call two Tebek , which be in subjection unto the great can also , wherein i think there be more plenty of bread and wine then in any other part of the world beside . the people of the say country do , for the most part , inhabit in tent make of black felt . their principali city be environ with fair and beautiful wall , be build of most white and black stone , which be dispose checkerwise one by another , and curious compile together : likewise all the high way in this country be exceed well pave . in the say country none dare shed the blood of a man , or of any beast , for the reverence of a certain idol . in the foresay city their Abassi , that be to say , their pope be resident , be the head and prince of all idolater ( upon who he bestow and distribute gift after his manner ) even as our pope of Rome account himself to be the head of all Christians . the woman of this country wear above a hundred trick and trifle about they , and they have two tooth in their mouth as long as the tusk of a boar . when any man father decease among they , his son assemble together all the priest and musician that he can get , say that he be determine to honour his father : then cause he he to be carry into the field ( all his kinsfolk , friend , and neighbour , accompany he in the say action ) where the priest with great solemnity cut 436 off the father head , give it unto his son , which be do , they divide the whole body into morsel , and so leave it behind they , return home with prayer in the company of the say son . so soon as they be depart , certain vulture , which be accustom to such banquet , come fly from the mountain , and carry away all the say morsel of flesh : and from thenceforth a fame be spread abroad , that the say party decease be holy , because the angel of God carry he into paradise . and this be the great and high honour , that the son can devise to perform unto his decease father . then the say son take his father same head , seethe it and eat the flesh thereof , but of storycmcern - the skull he make a drink cup , wherein himself same people with all his family and kindred do drink with great in William de solemnity and mirth , in the remembrance of his dead Rubricis . and devour father . many other vile and abominable thing do the say nation commit , which i mean not to write , because man neither can nor will believe , except they shall have the sight of they . of a certain rich man , who be feed and nourish by fifty virgin . while i be in the province of Maney , i pass by the palace of a certain famous man , which have fifty virgin damosel continual attend upon he , feed he every meal , as a bird feed her young one . also he have sundry kind of meat serve in at his table , and three dish of each kind : and when the say virgin feed he , they sing most sweet . this man have in yearly revenue thirty thuman of tagar of rise , every of which thuman yield ten thousand tagar , and one tagar be the burden of a ass . his palace be two mile in circuit , the pavement whereof be one plate of gold , and another of silver . near unto the wall of the say palace there be a mount artificial wrought with gold and silver , whereupon stand turret and steeple and other delectable thing for the solace 437 and recreation of the foresay great man . and it be tell i that there be four such man in the say kingdom . it be account a great grace for the man long nail . of that country to have long nail upon their finger , and especial upon their thumb , which nail they may fold about their hand : but the grace and beauty of their woman be to have small and slender foot : and therefore the mother when their daughter be young , do bind up their foot , that they may not grow great . travel on further towards the south , i arrive at a melistorte . certain country call melistorte , which be a pleasant and fertile place . and in this country there be a certain age man call senex de monte , who round about two mountain have build a wall to enclose the say mountain . within this wall there be the fair and most crystal fountain in the whole world : and about the say fountain there be most beautiful virgin in great number , and goodly horse also , and in a word , every thing that can be devise for bodily solace and delight , and therefore the inhabitant of the country call the same place by the name of paradise . the say old senex , when he see any proper and valiant young man , he will admit he into his paradise