. nevertheless , the say lord give no great credence to all that be bring and tell , because that many year before , the predecessors of the great Turk have make great army : and always it be say that they go to Rhodes , the which come to none effect . and it be hold for a mock and a byeword in many place , that the Turk will go to besiege Rhodes . and for this reason doubt be have of this last army , and some thought that it shall have go into Cyprus or to Cataro , a land of the lordship of 6 Venice . howbeit the great master not willing to be take unwary , but the mean while as careful and diligent for the wealth of his town , and his people , understand these tiding of the Turk army , do all his diligence to repair and strengthen the town . among all other thing to build up , and raise the bulwark of Auvergne , and to cleanse and make deep than ditch . and the more to cause the workman to haste they in their business , the say lord oversawe they twice or thrice every day . how the lord great master counsel with the lord for provision for the town . than the say reverend lord think to furnish and store the town with more victual for the sustenance thereof , and for the same many time he speak with the lord that have the handle and rule of the treasury , and of the expense thereof in his absence , and since his coming : that be to wit , with the great commander Gabriel de pommerolle , lieutenant of the say lord : the turcoply sir John Bourgh of the english nation : and the Chanceller sir Andrew de meral , of who be speak afore , and of his untruth against his religion . the which three lord say , that he shall take no thought for it , for the town be well store with victual for a great while , and that there be wheat enough till new come in : notwithstanding it be good to have more , or the siege be lay afore the town , and therefore it be behooveful to send for wheat and other necessary into the west for succour of the town , and at that time to purvey for every thing . sir Joh . Bourgh the english turcoply . of the provision for victual and ordinance [ two . two . 75 . ] of war . as touch the store and ordinance of war , the say lord affirm that there be enough for a year and more , whereof the contrary be find , for it fail a month or the city be yield . it be of truth that there be great store , and to have last long than it do . but it be needful to spend large at the first come of the enemy to keep they from come near , and from bring earth to the ditch side as they do . and moreover you be to consider the great number of they , and their power that be spread round about the town , give we so many assault and skirmish in so many place as they do , and by the space of six whole month day and night assail we , that much ordinance and store be waste to withstand they in all point . and if it fail , it be no marvel . howbeit the noble lord great master provide speedy for it , and send brigantine to Lango , to the castle of saint Peter , and to the castle of his isle Feraclous and Lyndo , for to bring powder and saltpeter to strength the town , but it suffice not . and for to speak of the purveiance of victual , it be advise by the lord great master and his three lord , that it be time to send some ship for wheat to place thereabouts , before the Turks host be come thither . and for this purpose be appoint a ship name the gal - lienge , who captain hight Brambois , otherwise call wolf , of the almain nation , a expert man of the sea , the which make so good diligence , that within a month he perform his voyage , and bring good store of wheat from Naples and Romania , which do we great comfort . how a brigantine be send to Candie for wine , and of diverse ship that come to help the town . after this , a motion be make to make provision of wine for the town , for the man of Candie dare not sail for to bring wine to Rhodes as they be wont to do for fear of the Turk host : and also they of the town will send no ship into Candie , fear to be take and enclose with the say host by the way . howbeit some merchant of the town , be willing to have adventure themselves in a good ship of the religion , name the mary , for to have lade she with wine in Candie . but they can not agree with the three lord of the treasure , and their let be but for a little thing : and all the cause come of the say traitor de merall , feign the wealth of the treasure ; for he intend another thing , and break this good and profitable enterprise and will of the say merchant , see that it be hurtful to the Turk , who part the say traitor hold in his devilish heart : that notwithstanding , the reverend lord great master , that in all thing from the beginning to the end , have always show his good will , and with all diligence and right that may be requisite to a sovereign captain and head of war , find other expedience , and send a brigantine into Candie , in the which he send a brother sergeant name Anthony of Bosus , a well spright man and wise , that by his wisdom wrought so well , that within a small time he bring fifteen vessel call gripes , lade with wine , and with they man of war the which come under shadow of those wine , because the governor of Candie dare let none of