earth fall from the say bulwark , and pight seven banner nigh to our repair . than our man fight with morispike and fix spear against they the space of three whole hour , till at the last they be well beat with great ordinance and small on every side , withdraw themselves . and of their banner our man gate one , for it be not possible to get any more : for assoon as any of our man go up on our 1522 . repair , he be slay with small gun of the trench , and hole make in the wall of our ditch . and there two thousand be slay of our enemy that day at the assault 2000 of mean man , and three person of estate , which lie al ^ ar ^ U dead along in the ditch , with fair and rich harness . and it be report to we from the camp , they be three saniacbei , that be to say , great seneshalle or stuard . and of Christian man of our part abode about thirty person . and this be the second victory give to we by the grace divine . how sir John Bourgh Turcoplier of England be slay at a assault of the english bulwark . the 17 day of the same month , about midday , the enemy come again to give another assault to the say bulwark , at the same place aforesaid , without set of fire in mine , and bring five banner with they , nigh to the repair . then be there strong fight on both part , and there be get two of their banner , of the which sir Christopher Valdenare , that time castelaine of Rhodes , gate one : the other be in the hand of sir John Bourgh Turcoplier of England , chief captain of the succour of the say postern of England , a valiant man and hardy : and in hold of it he be slay with the stroke of a handgunne , which be great damage . the say banner be recover by one of our man . and after long fight on both side , the enemy see that they get nothing but stripe , return into their trench . at the say fray the lord prior of saint Giles pre John be hurt through the neck with a handgun , and be in great danger of death , but he escape and be make whole . the same day , and the same hour of the say assault , the enemy mount to the breach in the wall of Spain , and come to the repair to the hand of our man , and fight a great while : but the great quantity of artillery that be shoot so busy and so sharp from our traverse on each side , 29 and out of the bulwark of Auvergne and Spain , skirmish they so well , that there abide as many at that assault as at the other of England , well near to the number of 5000 . and they withdraw themselves with their great loss and confusion , which be the three time that they be chase and overcome : thank be our lord , which give we the force and power so to do , for they be by estimation a hundred against one . also the 22 day of the same month of September they fire a i between Italy and Provence , which do no harm . of the terrible mine at the postern of Auvergne . a nd the 23 day of the same month they fire two mine , one at the postern of Spain , and the other by the bulwark of Auvergne , the which mine by Auvergne be so terrible , that it make all the town to shake , and make the wall to open from above to beneath unto the plain ground : howbeit , it fall not , for the mine have vent or breath in two place , by one of the countermine , and by a rock under the Barbican , the which do cleave , and by that cleave the fury and might of the mine have issue . and if the say two vent have not be , the wall have be turn upside down . and for truth , as it be report to we out of the camp , the enemy have great hope in the say mine , think that the wall shall have be overthrow , and then they may have enter into the town at their pleasure : but when they see the contrary , they be very ill please . and the captain determine to give assault at four place at once , to make we the more ado , and to have a entrance into the town by one of the four . and the say day and night they cease not to shoot artillery : and there come in hope of the mine threescore thousand man and more into the trench . how the bulwark of Spain be lose , and [ ii i . 84 . ] woonne again . the 24 day of the same month , a little before day , they give assault at the breach of Spain , to the bulwark of England , to the postern of Provence , and at the plain ground of Italy , all at one hour and one time . the first that mount to the breach of Spain , be the aga of the janissary , a valiant man , and of great courage with his company , and bear three score or three score and ten banner and sign , and pight they in the earth of the breach , and then fight with our man , and mount on our repair , make other manner of fray and more rigorous than the other that be pass , and the say skirmish last about six hour . and forthwith , as the assault be give , a great sort of Turks enter into the bulwark of Spain , and set up eight or nine sign or banner upon it , and drive our man out , i can not tell how , unware or otherwise . and they be lord of it three hour and more . howbeit there be of our man beneath in the i of the say bulwark , the which bulwark so lose , give we