the voyage of m . Roger Bodenham with the great bark Aucher to Candia and Chio , in the year 1550 . n the year 1550 . the 13 of November i Roger Bodenham captain of the bark Aucher enter the say ship at Gravesend , for my voyage to the hand of Candia and Chio in the Levant . the master of my ship be one William Sherwood . from thence we depart to the bark Tilbery hope , and there remain with contrary wind aucher g > eth until the 6 . of January 1551 . the 6 of Januarie , the f ° rlevant - m . come to Tilbery , and i have provide a skilful pilot to carry i over the land end , who name be m . wood , and with all speed i vale down that night xo mile to take the tide in the morning , which happy i do , and that night come to Dover , and there come to a anchor , and there remain until Tuesday , meet with the worthy knight sir Anthony Aucher owner of the say ship . [ ii i . ico . ] the two day we arrive in Plimoth , and the 13 in the morning we set forward on our voyage with a prosperous wind , and the 16 we have sight of cape Finister on the coast of Spain . the 30 we arrive at Cade , and there discharge certain merchandise , and take other aboard . the 20 of February we depart from Cade , and pass the straight of Gibraltar that night , and the 25 Mallorca . we come to the he of Mallorca , and stay there five day with contrary wind . the first of march , we have sight of Sardenna , and the Messina . five of the say month we arrive at Messina in Sicilia , and there discharge much good , and remain there until good Friday in Lent . the chief merchant that jade the say bark Aucher be a merchant stranger call Anselm Salvago , and because the time be then very dangerous , and no go into Levant , especial to Chio , without a safe conduct from the Turk , the say Anselm promise the owner sir Anthony Aucher , that we shall receive the same at Messina . but i be post from thence to Candia , and there i be answer that i shall send to Chio , and there i shall have my safe conduct . i be force to send one , and he have his answer that the Turk will give none , will i to look what be best for i to do , which be no small trouble to i , consider i be bind to deliver the good that be in the ship at Chio , or send they at my adventure . the merchant without care of the loss of the ship will have compel i to go , or send their good at i the Turk adventure , the which i deny , and say plain i will armylo be ” not go > because the Turk galley be come forth to siege Malta , go against Malta , but by the french king mean , he ■ be persuade to leave Malta , and to go to Tripoli in Barbary , which by the french he win . in this time there be in Candia certain Turk vessel call Skyrasas , which have bring wheat thither to sell , and be ready to depart for turquoise . and they depart in the morning be time , carry news that i will not go forth : the same night i prepare beforehand what i think good , without make any man privy , until i see time . than i have no small business to cause my mariner to venture with the ship in such a manifest danger . nevertheless i win they to go all with i , except three which i set on land , and with all diligence i be ready to set forth about eight of the clock at night , be a fair moon shine night , and go out . than my 3 mariner make such request unto the rest of my man to come aboard , as i be constrain to take they in . and so with good wind we put into the archipelago , and be among the hand the wind scant , and i be force to anchor at a hand call Micone , where i tarry 10 or 12 day , have a greek pilot to carry t ^ eat the ship to Chio . in this mean season , there come many small boat with mysson sail to go for Chio , with diverse good to sell , and the pilot request i that i will let they go in my company , to which i yield . after the say day expire , i weigh and set sail for the island of Chio , with which place i fall in the after noon , whereupon i cast to seaward again to come with the island in the morning betimes . the foresay small vessel which come in my company , depart from i to win the shore , to get in you night , but upon a sudden they espy 3 foist of Turk come upon they to spoil they . my pilot , have a son in one of those small vessel , entreat i to cast about towards they , which at his request i do , and be some thing far from they , i cause my gunner to shoot a demy - colvering at a foist that be ready to enter one of the boat . this be so happy a shot , that it make the Turk to fall a stern of the boat and to leave he , by the which mean he escape . than they all come to i , and request that they may hang at my stern until day light , by which time i come before the mole of Chio , and send my boat on land to the merchant of that place to send for their good out of hand , or else i will return back with all to Candia , and they shall fetch their good there . but in fine , what by persuasion of my merchant english man , and those of Chio , i be entreat to come into the harbour , and have a safe assurance for 20 day