their man go to the succour of Rhodes for fear of the Turk . and beside those fifteen gripes come a good ship who capitaine and owner be a rich young gentleman venetian , messire John Antonio de Bonaldi , which of his good will come with his ship lade with 700 . butt of wine to succour the town with his person and folk , who good and lowable will i leave to the consideration of the reader of this present book . for he be purpose to have have his wine to Constantinople , or he be inform of the business of Rhodes , and be in the porte du castle in Candie , will not bear his victual to the enemy of the faith , but come out and return his way towards Rhodes , forget all particular profit and advantage . he be arrive at Rhodes , dispatch and sell his wine , which be a great increase and comfort for the town . and when he have so do , he present his person , his ship , and his folk , to the reverend great master , the which retain he , and set he in wage of the religion . and during the siege , the say capitaine behave he worthy in his person , and put himself in such place as worthy man ought to be , spend his good large without demand any payment or recompense for his do , of the religion . how the corn be shear down half ripe and bring into the town for fear of the Turk host . during these thing , the reverend lord great master careful and busy to have every thing necessary , as man and other strength , send vessel call brigantine , for to cause the wafter of the sea to come into Rhodes for the keep and fortify of the town , the [ ii i . 76 . ] which at the first send come and present their person and ship to the service of the religion . harvest in after that the say lord cause to sheer down the Apnl and jsje ^ anj cause ; it to be bring into the ’ town , which be do in April : and then in may in some place , he make to sheer the wheat half ripe , howbeit the most part be leave in the field , because the Turk host be come out of the strait of Constantinople . And doubt that any number of ship shall come before to take the people of the say isle unaware , the say lord make they to leave shear of wheat , and cause the people of the further part of the isle to come into the town . while that the great master provide for all thing after the course of time and tiding that he have , there arrive a carrack of Genoa lade with spicery from Alexandria , the which pass before the port of Rhodes the eight day of April , and rid at anchor at the Fosse , 7 . or 8 . mile from the town , for to know and hear tiding of the turkish host . then the lord willing to furnish he with people as most behooveful for the town , send a knight of Provence name sir anastase de sancta Camilla , commander de la Tronquiere to the captain of the carrack , pray he to come into the haven with his ship for the defence of the town , proffering he what he will , assure he his ship . the captain excuse he , say , that the merchandise be not his own , but belong to diverse merchant to who he must yield account . howbeit at the last after many word and promise to he make , he come into the haven , the which captain be name messire Domingo de fournati , and he in his person behave he valiant in the time of the say siege . how the great master cause generail muster to be make , and send a vessel to the Turk navy , of who he receive a letter . after the month of April the lord master see that the Turk host draw near , and that he have the most part of the wafter within the town , he cause general muster of man of arm to be make . And begin at the knight , the which upon holy rood day in may make their muster before the commissioner ordain by the say lord in place depute to each of they call Aulberge . the which Commissioners make report to the lord that they have find the knight in good order of harness and other thing necessary for war , and their array fair and proper , with cross on they . when the muster of the knight be do , the lord master think to make the muster of they of the town , and stranger together : but his wisdom perceive that harm shall come thereby , rather than good , doubt that the number of people shall not be so great as he will , or need to have , whereof the great Turk may have knowledge by goer and comer into Rhodes , and therefore he cause they of the town to make their muster several by band and company , and the stranger also by themselves , to the end that the number shall not be know , notwithstanding that there be good quantity of good man and well willing to defend themselves . and the more to hearten and give they courage and good will , some knight of the cross , deck their man with colour and devise , and take with they man of the town and stranger , and with great noise of trumpet and timbrel , they make many muster , as envy each other which shall keep best array and order , and have the fair company . it be a great pleasure to see they all so well agree , and so well willing . the number of the man of the town amount and be esteem , three or four thousand , beside man of the village , that may be 1500 . or 2000 the eight day of the same month , the Turk hear of those tiding , make a fire for a token in a place call le Fisco , in the main land right against