of the faith . and also to keep so much small people , as woman and child , that they will torment and cut some in piece , other take , and perforce cause they to forsake their faith , with innumerable violence , and shameful sin that shall be commit and do , if the town be put to the sword , as be do at Modon , and late at bellegrado . whereby they do conclude , that it be better , and more agreeable to God , for to take the treaty , if it be proffer , then for to die as people desperate , and without hope . how the great Turk send two of his man to the town , to have it by entreat . and how the lord great master send two knight to he , to know his assurance . upon these consultation and word almighty God that save they which trust in he , and that will not that so many evil and cruelty shall come to the poor city and inhabitant of it , and also that the great Turk may not arise in over great pride and vainglory , put he in mind to seek to have the say town by treaty , which he ought not to have do for his honour , nor by reason , for the town be in a manner his . and in like sort he ought not to have let we go as he do , see that 47 we be his mortali enemy ever , and shall be still in the time come , consider the great slaughter of his people that we have make in this siege . howbeit , the eternal goodness have blind he , and have please that these thing shall be thus , for some cause unknown of we . and for conclusion , the great Turk send to have a communication and parley in follow the word of the Genouese aforesaid . then be a sign set upon the church of the abbey without the town , to the which be make answer with another at the mill of quosquino . and forthwith come two turk to speak with they of the town . then the lord great master send the prior of S . Giles pre John , and the captain Gabriel Martiningo to know the cause of their come . and when they come to they , without hold of long speech , the two Turk deliver they a letter for to bear to the lord great master from the great Turk , and then return safe into their tent . when the two lord have receive it , they bear and present it to the reverend lord great master , which cause it to be read . by the which the great Turk demand of the lord great master to yield the town to he , and in so do he be content to let he go and all his knight , and all the other people of what condition soever they be , with all their good and jewel safe without fear of any harm or displeasure of his folk . and also he swear and promise on his faith so to do . the say letter be seal with his signet that he use , that be as it be gild . and he say afterward , that if the lord great master will not accept the say treaty , that none of the city , of what estate soever he be , shall think to escape , but that they all unto the cat shall pass by the edge of the sword , and that they shall send he a answer forthwith , either yea or nay . after the sight of the content of the say letter of so great weight , and the time so short for to give so great a answer , and with demand , the say lord great master and all the lord of the council be in great thought , howbeit they determine to give a answer , see the estate of the town so ill that it can be no worse . hear the report and opinion a day or two before of the two lord ordain to view the defect of the town , say that the town be lose without remedy : consider also that the principal of the town will have appointment . and in likewise , at the [ ii i . 91 . ] other counsel all the lord have already will and declare , that it be better to save the town for respect of the poor people , than to put it all whole to the fury of the enemy , whereupon they agree and conclude to take the foresay treaty . after the conclusion take , answer be make ready for a good respect ; that be to weet , to take the Turk at his word , to the end that he shall not repent he of it , nor change his opinion . for every hour his people win and enter further and further into the town . and for to go unto the great Turk be ordain these two knight , sir Passin afore name , and he bear the token of the white cross : and another of the town name Robert the perruse judge ordinary . when these two ambassador have make they ready , they go out at the gate of quosquino , and go to the tent of acmek basham , capitaine general . and because it be late , and that they may not go that day to the great Turk , on the next day in the morning the foresay captain acmek lead and convey our say ambassador to the great Turk pavilion , that they may have the more knowledge plain , and for to hear his will as touch the word which be report to the reverend lord great master , and after , the content of his letter and write . when the say two ambassador be depart out of the town , there do enter two man of authority of the camp ; one be nephew or kinsman of the say acmek , the other be the great Turk truchman , which the lord master cause to be well receive , and they be lodge nigh the say gate of quosquino . and then truce be take for 3 . day , and the enemy come to