and there go to receive he messieur prou John prior of saint Giles , and the prior of Navarre . then after his honourable receive as to he well appertain , they bring he before the lord great master , that love receive he , and he be glad see and welcome of the people , as a man that be name very wise and ingenious in feat of war . then come a Spaniard renegado from the host , that give we warning of all that be do in the field , and of the approach by the trench that our enemy make . and in likewise there arise a great noise in the town , that the slave turk that wrought for we in the ditche have slay their keeper , and will have flee , which be not so . nevertheless , the rumour be great , and they ring alarm : wherefore the say slave come to prison , as it be ordain in all the alarm , be meet of 20 the people , which in great anger put they to death : so that there be slay a hundred and more than same day . and if the lord great master have not command that none shall hurt they , they have be all slay , and there be fifteen hundred of they : which slave do great service in time of the siege : for they labour daily to make our defence , and to cast earth out of the ditch , and in all work they be necessary at our need . how the great Turk arrive in person before Rhodes . the 25 day of the say month many of our man go out for to skirmish in the field and make great murder of Turks , and in likewise do our artillery . and it be to be note that the 28 day of the same month the great Turk in person passed le Fisco a haven in the main land with a galley and a fust , and arrive about noon , where his army lie , the which day may be call unhappy for Rhodes . for his come , his presence and continual abide in the field be and have be cause of the victory that he have have . when the galley that he come in be arrive , all the other ship of the host hang banner aloft in their top and on their sail yard . soon after that the Turk be arrive , he go to land , and mount on his horse , and ride to his pavilion which be in a high place call Megalandra , four or five mile from the town out of the danger of the gun shoot . and on the morrow , as it be report to we , he come to a church nigh the town call saint Steven , for to view the town and fortress , whereas they have set up mantellet for to lay their ordinance . the last day of July , one of our brigandine go out with a good company of man array as Turk , and some of they can speak turkish , and go by night to land through the Turk host , and demand 21 if there be any that will pass over into turquoise , that they shall haste they to come . the Turk ween that they have be of turquoise , there enter a 12 . person , the which be carry to Rhodes , by who we know what they do in the camp . the first day of August the captain Gabriel martin - ingo be make knight of the order of the religion by the lord great master , and be make the first ancient of the italian nation , of the first baliage or priory that shall be vacant . and in the mean season the religion shall give he twelve hundred ducat for pension every year , and the same day he be receive to the council in the room of a bailiff . the five day of the say month our master gunner be slay with a gun , which be great loss for we at that time . the 15 . day of the say month be know and take for a traitor , messire John Baptista , the physician aforesaid , which confess his evil and devilish do , and have his head strike of . of the marvelous mount that the turk make afore the town , and how the captain be order in the trench . after the come of the great Turk , the enemy begin to shoot with ordinance of another sort than they do before , and special with harquebuss and handgun , and also to make their trench and approach . and also they do more diligence than afore , to bring you earth nigh the town with spade and pickax . and it be to weet , that they move the earth from half a mile off , and there be shoot out of the town innumerable stroke with ordinance against the say earth , and innumerable quantity of people hide behind the say earth , be slay . nevertheless they never leave work till they have bring it to the brim of the ditch : and when it be there , they raise it high and high in strengthen it behind . and in conclusion the say earth be high 1522 . then the wall of the town by 10 . or 12 . foot , and it seem a hill . and it be against the gate of Auvergne and Spain , and beat our man that be at the gate and bulwark , in such wise , that none dare be see till certain defence and repair be make of plank and board to cover our people and keep they from the shot . and at the gate of Italy be make such another heap , and in none other part . when the trench be thus make to the ditch , the enemy make hole in the wall of the ditch outward : [ ii i . 81 . ] wherethorow they shoot infinite with handgunne at our man aswell on the wall as on the bulwark , and slay many of they . then the basha and captain enter into the trench , each to his place after their order and dignity : that be to wit , Mustafa bassa as