and reverence hear it . and when the mass be end , the lord great master make a piteous oration or prayer before saint John Baptist his protector : and above all other word , which be too long to tell , he beseech he meek that it will please he to take the key of that miserable city . the which key he present and lay upon the altar before the image , beseech saint John to take the keep and protection thereof , and of all the religion , as by his grace he have give to he unworthy , the govern unto that day : and by his holy grace to defend they five 17 b from the great power of the enemy that have besiege they . how the woman slave will have set fire in the town . the eight day of July it be know that the turkish woman be slave and servant in many house of the town , have appoint to set fire in their master house at the first assault that shall be make , to the end that the man shall leave their postern and defense to go and save their house and good . and it be find that a woman of Marchopota be a slave , be first mover thereof , the which be take and put to execution . the same day some of our man go out for to skirmish with the Turk , and many of they be slay with shot of our artillery , and of our man but one . how the Turk lay their artillery about the town , and of the manner and quantity of their piece and gunshot . the 18 . day of July , for the beginning and first day they set up a mantellet , under the which they put three or four mean piece , as sacres , wherewith they shoot against the postern of England and Provence . but the mantellet be soon break and cast down , and their piece destroy with the shot of the wall , and they that shoot they be most part slay . as this first mantellet be break , by the great and innumerable people that they have they set all their ordinance on land , and carry it to the place where it shall be bend , or nigh thereby . and the 29 . day of the same month , they set up two other mantellet . one beside a church of sane Cosme and Damian , and another towards the west . and from these mantellet they shoot great piece , as culver - ings , double gun , and great bombard against the wall of England and Spain , to the which mantellet the ordinance of the town give many great stroke , and 18 often break they . and the more to grieve the town and to fear we , they set up many other mantellet in diverse place , almost round about the town , and they be reckon four score : the which number be well lessen by the great quantity of stroke of artillery shoot out of the town from many place . the artillery of the Turk be such as folio w . first there be six great gun , cannon perrier of brass , that shoot a stone of three foot and a half : also there be 15 . piece of iron that shoot stone of five or six span about . also there be 14 . great bombard that shoot stone of eleven span about . also there be twelve basilisk , whereof they shoot but with 8 . that be to weet , four shot against the postern of England and Spain , and two against the gate of Italy : the other two shoot sometime against saint Nicholas tower . also there be 15 . double gun cast bullet as basilisk . the mean shot , as sacres and pasvolan , be in great number . the handgunshot be innumerable and incredible . also there be twelve potgunne of brass that shoot upward , whereof eight be set behind the church of saint Cosme and Damian , and two at saint John de la Fontaine towards the port of Italy , and the other two afore the gate of Auvergne , the which be shoot night and day : and there be three sort of they , whereof the great be of six or seven span about . and the say stone be cast into the town to make murder of people , which be a thing very inhumane and fearful , which manner of shoot be little use among christian man . howbeit by evident miracle , thank be God , the say piece do not great harm , and slay not past 24 . or 25 . person , and the most part woman and child , and they begin to shoot with the say piece from the 19 day of the same month , unto the end of August , and it be account that they shoot 2000 time , more or less . then the enemy be warn by the Jewe that write letter to they of all that be do and say in the town , that the say potgunne do not harm : wherefore they be angry , for they think that they have slay the three part of our people : and they be counsel by he to leave that shoot , for it be but time lose , and powder waste , and then they shoot no more with they . it be of a truth that they shoot with the say potgunne 12 . or 15 . time with bullet of brass or copper , full of wild fire , and when they be in the air , they flame forth , and in fall on the ground , they break , and the fire come out and do some harm . but at the last we know the malice thereof , and the people be wary from come near to they , and therefore they do hurt no more folk . how the captain Gabriel Martiningo come to the succour of Rhodes , and all the slave be in danger to be slay . the 24 . day of the same month a brigantine arrive that be send afore into Candie , wherein come a worthy captain name Gabriel Martiningo with two [ ii i . 80 . ] other captain .