a brief relation of the siege and take of the city of Rhodes , by sultan Soliman the great Turk , translate out of french into english at the motion of the reverend lord Thomas dockwray , great prior of the order of Jerusalem in England , in the year , 1524 . ill faithful to write and reduce in verity historiali , the great siege , cruel oppugnation , and piteous take of the noble and renown city of Rhodes , the key of Christendom , the hope of many poor christian man , withhold in turkic to save and keep they in their faith : the rest and yearly solace of noble pilgrim of the holy sepulchre of Jesus Christ and other holy place : the refuge and refresh of all christian people : have course of merchandise in the party of Levant , i promise to all estate that shall see this present book , that i have leave nothing for fear of any person , nor prefer it for favour . and first i shall show the occasion that move this cruel bloodshedder , enemy of our holy christian faith , sultan Soliman , now be great Turk , to come with a great host by sea and by land , to besiege and assail the space of six month , night and day , the noble and mighty city of Rhodes , the year of the incarnation of our lord Jesus Christ , 1522 . [ the occasion the occasion why the great Turk come to besiege the city of Rhodes . the first and principali cause be that he do consider and see by experience , that there be none other town nor place in Levant that war against he nor keep he in doubt , but this poor rock of Rhodes . And hear the continual complaint of his subject aswell of Syria , as of turquoise , for the domage and prize daily do of their body and good by christian man of war receive into Rhodes : and also of the ship and galley of the religion , he take conclusion in himself , that if he may put the say town in his power and subjection , that than he shall be peaceable lord of all the party of Levant , and that his subject shall complain no more to he . the second , that he may follow the do of his noble predecessor , and show himself very heir of the mighty and victorious lord sultan Selim his father , will to put in execution the enterprise by he leave the year one thousand five hundred twenty and one . the which Selim the great Turk put in all readiness his army to the number of three hundred sail purpose for to send they against Rhodes , if mortality have not happen in his host , and he afterward by the will of our lord be surprise and take with death : wherefore he be in the latter end of his day , ( as some Turk and false christian man that be at this siege show i ) do charge by his testament , or cause to charge his son now be great Turk , that after his death he shall make his two first enterprise , the one against Bellegrado in Hungary , and the other against Rhodes , [ ii i . 73 . ] for to get he honour , and to set his country and subject in rest and surety . the which fatherly motion easy enter into he and be imprint in the heart and young will of the say Solyman , his son , the which soon after the death of his father put in effect the first enterprise , and raise a huge host both by water and by land , and go himself in person against Bellegrado , a right strong place in Hungary . and after take of that he have besiege it the space of two month or thereabouts , for fault of ordinance and victual , it be yield to he by composition the eight day of September , in the year of our lord , one thousand five hundred twenty and one . the say Solyman have this victory , be swell and raise in pride and vainglory , turn his heart against Rhodes . nevertheless , he not ignorant of the strength of it , and consider the quality of the people that be within it , of who he shall be well receive as his predecessor have be aforetime , doubt much , and know not how to furnish his enterprise . for his captain and bassa turn he from it as much as they may by many reason , they know the force of it , save only Mustofa bassa his brother in law , the which counsel and put he in mind to go thither . final , he purpose entire to have it by treason or by force . and also for the same cause and purpose , his father in his day have send a Jewe physician into Rhodes as a spy , to have the better foreign physi - knowledge of it : the say Solyman be inform that t1 ™ 5 be ^ ome he be there yet , wherefore he send he word that he n shall abide there still for the same cause . And give in charge to one of the chief man in Sio , to send unto the say Jewe all thing needful to maintain he . and the same Jewe write to he of Sio , under privy word , all that be do in Rhodes to give knowledge thereof to the great Turk : and the better to hide his treason , the say Jewe make himself to be baptise . and to be the more name to be expert in physic , he do some fair cure to such as be disease , whereby he begin to be well trust , and come in favour with many substantiali folk of the town . among all other thing whereof he advertise the great Turk , one be of a wall that be take down for to be new build at the bulwark of Auvergne , certify he that if he come hasty with his host , he may easy and at unaware surprise the town in such estate as it be at that time . many other advertisement and warn he show the Turk , which shall be declare