hew the wall . And ween to make remedy therefore , and to find mean to drive they from the say barbican with engine of fire and barrel of gunpowder , we slay many of they , but it avail nothing : for the quantity and multitude of people that travel there be so great , 36 that they care not for loss of they . and if we have have man enough within the town , there may have be remedy to have raise they from thence : but consider that our force and total hope be in people , we leave to do many thing that may have be do , and that shall have be good then and other time also , for fault of man of war . at the last it be ponder by sir Gabriel Martiningo , that there be no remedy but to hew the wall for to meet they , and beat they with ordinance and with engine of fire to burn and undo they . than our man begin to hew the wall , and make some hole to shoot at the enemy that sleep not , but do as we do , and shoot at we , and indeed they slay and hurt many of our man . then sir Gabriel Martiningo ordain to make repair within the town at the front where they do cut the wall , to the end that after the wall be cut , the enemy shall know with who to meet . the traverse be make on each side with good artillery great and small : and the say traverse and repair be of the length that the enemy have cut the wall , and begin at the massife of Spain make by the reverend lord great master merry d ’ amboise , and end at the church of saint Salvador . the which traverse and repair the vulgar people call the Mandra , that be to say , the field . the mean time that the repair and traverse be make with all diligence , sir Gabriel Martiningo never cease go to every place to purvey for all thing : and he be on the bulwark of Spain to ordain all thing that be needful , there come a stroke of a handgun from the trench that smite out his eye , and put he in danger of his life , but thank be God , he recover his health within a month and a half . his hurt come ill to pass , for the need that we have of he that time in all thing , and special to the repair of the breach . nevertheless the lord prior of saint Giles ( not ignorant in all such thing ) with other man expert in war , attend to the say repair and traverse , there and elsewhere . the enemy on the other side night and day without rest ( for the great number of labourer that they have hourly and new ready ) hew and undermine the say wall .. and the 20 day of October they put fire in the undermine , ween to have cast down the wall , but they can not : than they will have pull it down with great rope and ancres , but the artillery of the bulwark of Auvergne break their rope , and send they away light . at the last they make a i under the say wall and breach : and the 26 day of the same month they do put fire to the same mine , ween to have overthrow the wall , which it do not , but raise it , and make it to fall almost straight upright , which be more disadvantage to the enemy then profit . than they shoot artillery at it , which in few day beat it down , and they have open and way to come into the town . nevertheless it be not necessary for they as than to enter : for the artillery of our repair beat they in the forepart , and the artillery lie at the two mill at the postern of quosquino , and in that of England , whereas be a basilisk that beat right upon the breach with other piece : and therefore the enemy seek other mean , and begin to raise the earth between our two wall , draw towards the bulwark of England on the one side , and towards Auvergne on the other side , and will have [ ii i . 87 . ] cut the wall further than our traverse be for to come in unbeaten of our artillery . then be the repair enlarge and make great with the wall that be cut , of the height of twelve , and 16 foot in breadth : and so the enemy may go no further forward , but shoot great artillery against our repair , for to break and cast they down , and also they make trench for to come right to the breach , and unto the repair : and certain we look day by day , and hour by hour for to have some assault . the reverend lord great master , the which , as it be say , have leave the bulwark of England the day that 38 the great assault be make , and since that time he move not from thence while they hew the wall , and where as the breach be , because that they be most dangerous and most unquiet place . and continual the say lord keep he behind the say repair with his knight and man of succour , intentive ready and prepare to live and die , and to receive his enemy as they ought to be receive . and he abide three or four day at the say breach , continue since it be make , unto the end , fight with his enemy every day in great peril of his body : for oftentimes he put himself further in the press then need for the danger of his person , but he do it for to hearten and strengthen the courage of his people , be so well willing to defend and die for the faith . how the enemy assail the postern of Provence and Italy , and how they be drive away . by the will of our lord , the enemy always in fear and dread , will give none assault , but continual shoot against