and for y ‘ it be a thing of great weight , and that he have to do and say with many man of diverse nation , and because the time of answer be so short , he may not do that that he demand so soon . howbeit he will speak with his people , and then he will give he a answer . how the Turk begin the assault , and how the commons agree to yield the town . when the great Turk hear the answer of our ambassador , he say nothing , but command his bassa that they shall begin the battle again to 52 the town , the which be do , and then the truce be break , and the shot of the enemy be sharp than it be afore . and on the other side nothing , or very little for fault of powder : for that that there be leave , be keep for some great assault or need . howbeit the say amek bassa keep one of the ambassador , and messire Lopez only enter . the great master see the war begin , and the shot thick than it be afore , and the enemy enter hourly by their trench further into the town , call they that before have say to he , that they will not the town shall be yield , but have rather for to die . and therefore the say lord say that he be content for to die with they , and that they shall dispose they to defend themselves well , or to do their endeavour better than they have do in time past . and to the end that each one of they shall have knowledge of his will ( for as than he speak but to four or five of they that gainsay he ) he make a cry through all the town , that all they that be hold to be at the postern or gate shall give attendance , and not to come away day nor night on pain of death : for afore , the rhodian come but little there . and that the other that be not of the postern , or that be of his succour , shall go to the breach of Spain where the say lord be continual , and not to go away day nor night on ; the abovesaid pain . the say cry make , each one be obedient for a day or twain , howbeit a young rhodian leave his postern and go to his house , which on the next day be hang for break of the lord commandment . notwithstanding that , by little and little the people annoy they , and their heart fail , and leave the postern and breach : in such wise , that the enemy may come in without find great resistance , but of a few that the lord master cause to abide there ( that be to weet ) knight of his succour . and in the night he seek out more people for to keep you watch at the say breach , and pay to they as much as they will . the say lord see himself thus aban - don and leave of his people , he send to ask they again wherefore they do not their endeavour , and why they come not to day , as they say before . which make answer that they see and know well that the town be lose for certain reason that be tell they : by occasion whereof they have gainsay the ordinance of the say lord , and say that they have be wrong inform of diverse thing : and on the other side , that they fear that the Turk will not hold his word . but since they see that there be none other remedy but to abide the adventure and fortune , they say that they put all to the say lord to do what he think good , and that he will see what be best for they . And require the lord to do they so much favour as to let they choose one or two among they for to go to the great Turk with his ambassador for to have surety of he . the which be grant , and two ordinary ambassador be choose for they ; one Nicholas Vergo tie , and the other Piero of saint Cretice , and the foresay Passin shall return with they for to make the say answer . then the great master or they depart ( prolong the time as much as he may ) advise to send a letter to the great Turk , the which his grandfather have write or cause to be write . in the which letter he give his malediction or curse to his child and successor , if they enterprise to besiege Rhodes . the say Robert Perruse bear the say letter , and as he be accustom , he go to acmek bassa for to cause he to have audience , and to present the say letter . and the bassa say he will see the letter : for it be the guise in the great Turk court , that none may speak to he nor give he a letter , but he be advertise first what shall be say , or what shall be write . when the bassa have see the word write in the say letter , he break it and cast it on the ground , and do tread upon it , say many injurious and villainous word to the say judge . And bid he return apace to his great master , and bid he to think on his business , and to make answer to the great lord ( as he have send and command ) or else it shall not be long or he see his dolorous and woeful end . and that same day be take two man of we that bear earth towards the bulwark of England . of who the say acmek cause a officer to cut off their nose , finger and ear , and give they a letter to bear to the lord great master , wherein be great word and threaten . after the say perruse be return , messire Passin be send again to the say bassa , for to know of he if the great Turk will be content with any sum of money for his cost and expense ,