of the content of the promise of the say lord . and by his commandment the say letter be make , whereby he promise to let go the great master with all his knight , stranger and man of the town that will go with their good , without have displeasure of any of his people of the camp , or by the way . when the letter be make , it be deliver to messire Passin . and as touch withdraw of the camp , the say bassa promise again that he will do it , since the great lord will so : howbeit he remove but from the trench , and some of his people go a little way off . and the say bassa demanded in the Turk behalf , that they shall send to he in hostage four and twenty knight , whereof two shall be of the great cross , and two and twenty citizen . and the say lord shall send only a captain with three or four hundred janissary , for to keep the town when the camp be withdraw . and so it be do ; and beside this he give twelve day respite to the lord great master , to prepare he and depart out of Rhodes . and in conclusion all this do , our ambassador return and make the report to the reverend great master of all that they have do and practise with the great Turk , and the say bassa , and give he the letter for to go sure . then the great master with his counsel ordain the four and twenty person , and other of the town . when they be ready , they go to the camp , where they be well entreat four day . during this time , Ferra bassa pass from the main land to the camp , with four and twenty or five and twenty thousand janissary , which by the commandment of the great Turk be go upon the border of the country of the sophy . for the Turk see the people of the camp discourage and will no more to go to the assault , send to the say bassa to come to Rhodes with his people , which will have withstand we sore , as fresh man . and it be the work of God and a wonderful miracle , that they come after that the 58 appointment be make : for if they have come afore , it be to be suppose that the deed have go otherwise , and there have be many stroke give : but i believe that the end shall have be piteous for we , but God will not that the Turk shall have victory upon we as he may have have , see the great advantage that he have in all thing , but he blind he and will not that he shall know his might . and on the other part it may be say and marveil how it be possible always [ ii i . 95 . ] to have overcome our enemy in all assault and skirmish , and at the end to loose the town , it be the will of God that so have please for some cause to we unknown . it be to be think , that lack of man and gunshot , and the enemy so far within the town , and ready to enter at other place , with the treason , have cause the town to be lose . two or three day after the come of the say bassa , his janissary and other of the camp enter into the town , which be on Christmas day , within the time give to we , and then the Turk word be break , if it be his will or not , i can tell . nevertheless there be no sword draw , and in that respect promise be keep . but they make pillage , and enter by force into the house of the castle , and take all that they may and will . after that they have ransack the house , they enter into the church , and peel all that they find , and break the image . and there be no crucifix , nor figure of our lady , nor of other saint , that be leave whole . then with great inhumanity they go into the hospitali of poor and sick folk , call the fermorie , and take all the silver vessel that the sick folk be serve with , and raise they out of their bed , and drive they away , some with great stroke and staff , and some be cast down from the gallery . when these hound have do that act , they go to the church of saint John and take down the tomb of the great master , and seek if there be any treasure hide in they , and they force certain woman and maiden . and all they that be christen and have be Turk afore , be they man , woman or child , and child that the say man have make Christians , they lead into turquoise , which thing be of great importance than any of the other . the morrow after Christmas day , the reverend lord great master go to the great Turk pavilion for to visit he , and to be better assure of his promise , the which lord he make to be well and gracious receive . and he signify unto he by his interpreter , that the case so happen to he be a thing usual and common ; as to loose town and lordship , and that he shall not take overmuch think for it : and as for his promise , he bid that he shall not doubt in any thing , and that he shall not fear any displeasure to his person , and that he shall go with his people without fear . with these word the say lord thank he , and take his leave and depart . finis . lenvoy of the translator . go little book , and woeful tragedy , of the rhodian fearful oppugnation , to all estate complain ruthful ■ of thy estate , and sudden transmutation : excuse i if in thy translation ought be amiss in language or in work , i i submit with their supportation , to be correct , that be so small a clerk .