that he have make for his army . the which answer that such word or offer of silver be not to be say nor present to the great lord on pain of life , and that he set more by honour then by silver . and therefore he bid he return and say to the great master that he shall make answer to the great lord after his demand , to yield or not yield the town . the say Passin make relation of the word of the bassa to the great master : the which for the great sorrow that he have defer always , see himself in such piteous estate . notwithstanding , the say lord put all to the will of our lord , 8c consider that there be no remedy to do otherwise , nor to resist any more his enemy : and be constrain on all side to make the appointment , with great heaviness , inestimable dolour and bewailing , at the last give his voice to yield the town ( with the treatise or offer to he present ) which be the 20 . day of December , the year of our lord a thousand five hundred and two and twenty . a answer to such as will make question for the deliverance of the city of Rhodes . a nd if by any it be demand wherefore the say lord great master have yield the town to the great Turk , request it with treaty and covenant , which be a sign that he fear and will no more fight , but 55 go his way . to this i answer : notwithstanding that the great Turk be advertise by some traitor , and by other that flee into the camp , that the powder almost fail , and that there be but few man of war within the town , yet he believe not , nor give credence of all that be report to he , but think very that we have enough for a great while , and consider that he must tarry till they be waste and spend , whereto behoove time . And see all his estate enter into strange place , and into the land of his enemy , and have be there already six month , ( and not without great danger of his own person ) think on the other side , that take the town by assault , he shall lose many of his folk ; and yet when he have overcome and win the town , they shall fall each upon other in depart of the booty or pillage , doubt final the hazard of war . for these reason and other that may be allege , the great Turk have much rather to have the town by composition and treaty , then otherwise . and it suffice he to drive his old enemy out of the country of Levant , and set the subject of his [ ii i . 94 . ] country in rest and surety . and we of the town that know our weakness , and that we may do no more , it seem better to save so much small people , than we and they to fall into the fury of our enemy , for otherwise can we not have do , but tempt God , and die as in despair . how the city of Rhodes be yield to the great Turk , and of the evil behaviour of certain Turk . but to return to our principali : after that the reverend great master have give his voice to the yield of the town , he send the say Passin again for to bear it to the great Turk . and with he go the two man that be choose of the commons , and they go all three together to the tent of acmek bassa . to who the say Passin first make this piteous answer 56 and conclusion to yield the town . notwithstanding , he say the people have ordain two man among they for to go to the great Turk , to speak of their particular do , and to have some surety of their person , wife , and child , to the end that it be not do to they , as to those of Bellegrado . the say acmek lead the three ambassador towards the great Turk . and when they be enter into the pavilion , the say messire Passin make the report of his ambassade to the say lord , and say that the great master yield he the town under the promise make by his Imperiali majesty , with the treaty promise . of the which promise he hold he sure and certain , and that he will do no less : howbeit , the people have require he to give they licence to go to his majesty for to ask some request of he . then the two citizen beseech the great Turk that he will for surety remove his camp from the town , to the end that they shall have no manner of harm to their body nor good , and that they that will go , shall go , and that they that will abide still , may be well entreat . the great Turk answer by his interpreter to messire Passin , that he accept the town , and promise again upon his faith , and on his honour to the lord great master , that he will perform that he have promise , and send to he by the same Passin that he shall not doubt of the contrary : and if he have not ship enough for to carry his people and their good , that he will let they have of he , and that he will deliver the artillery that be wont to be in the ship of you religion . and as touch the request of the people , he say that he will remove the camp , and that they that will abide , may abide , and they shall be well entreat , and shall pay no tribute in five year , and their child shall not be touch , and who so will go within the say space of five year , they shall go in good time . Theise word end , our ambassador take leave of he , and when they be depart , they speak again with the say acmek bassa for to have a letter