some thing for to please the Turk , aswell for his honour as for to save his person , and be marvellous diligent to make mine at the bulwark of England for to overthrow it . and by account be make 11 mine aswell to the say bulwark as elsewhere , beside they speak of before , and that they have fire . but the most part of the say mine come to no proof though they put fire in they , and many be meet with countermine , and break by our man by the good diligence and solicitude of sir Gabriel du - chef steward of the house of the lord great master , which have the charge of the say countermine at the same bulwark . in the which business he behave himself well and worthy , and spare not his good to cause the people to work and travel , but spend thereof large . how the turk be mind to have go their way , and of the traitor within the town , and of many great assault . the Turks see that by mine they be nothing further , nor may not come to their intention , and have but small store of gunpowder , be in deliberation and mind to have raise the siege , and go their way . and in deed some of they bear their carriage towards the ship : and also certain number of people go out of the trench with their standard straight to the ship . and it be write unto we from the camp how the janissary and other of the host will fight no more : and that they be almost all of one opinion for to go away , save some of the captain of the foresay Mustafa Bassha or Acmek Bassha . and in the mean season the false traitor that be in the town write letter to the camp , give they knowledge of all that 34 be say and do among we . and also a albanese flee to the enemy camp , and warn they not to go , for the gunshot be nigh waste , and that the most part of the knight and people shall be they short . in like sort then write the abovesaid Chanceller sir Andrew de merall , who treason as then be not know : but when it come to the effect of his treason , i shall show the knowledge that he give to the enemy at diverse time . when the basha and captain of the host understand the say warning , they all purpose for to tarry , and cause those tiding of the town to be know over all the army . And begin again to shoot artillery fast than ever they do , for new shot be come into the camp . then Mustafa Bassha be in despair that he can do nothing by mine , by gunshot , nor by assault , he be ready to depart for to go into surey by the great Turk commandment , before his depart he think once again to assay his adventure , and make three assault three day together . the first be on a Saturday the four day of October a hour before night . the other on Sunday in the morning . and the three on Monday after dinner . and the say three assault be make to the bulwark of England . and it be assail but with stone and bag full of artificiali fire . and at these three assault many of our man be hurt with the say fire , and with the stone that come as thick as rain or hail . but in the end the enemy get nothing but stroke , and return into their trench evil content , and murmur , and swear by their Mahomet that Mustafa Bassha shall not make they to mount any more to the say bulwark . and that it be great folly for they to cause they to be slay at the will and fantasy of one man . Theise word say in greek by some of the enemy be hear of our man as they go down from the bulwark . and because ( as it be say ) that the enemy at the assault that be make , come up by the earth and stone that fall from the breach , 35 some of our man advise to dense the barbican , and take the earth out of the ditch , to the end that the enemy shall not easy come upon the wall . and in effect ween that it be well and behooveful to be do , by great diligence night and day by mine they void the barbican , and the most part of the earth that lie in the ditch be bring into the town , the which be hurtful afterward , and be cause that the enemy get the foot of the wall . notwithstanding , they have it but scarce . but this cleanse further the time , and cause they to get it soon than they shall have do if the earth have lie still : but their final intent be to raise the defence of the bulwark , and then pass at their pleasure , and enter into the barbican , as they have do : for the enemy see that the barbican be cleanse , think to get into it by trench , and so they do , howbeit they be certain day let by our handgun shot . the enemy see that they may not come near it , cover their trench with table to save themselves : and then they make a i whereby they may go to the barbican . so by these two mean , afterward they be repair with earth and with a certain wall that they make for to eschew the shot of the bulwark of Auvergne and Spain : and in the mine they find but two gunner , which they slay by force of man . by this manner they be cover on all part and without any danger , pass through and leap into the barbican , and get the foot of the wall ; which be the 17 day of October , a unhappy day for the poor town , and occasion of the ruin thereof , and win of the same . at this point they sleep not , but light and with great delight they begin to pick and