our repair , and speak with our folk and drink one with another . five 49 d how the ambassador of Rhodes speak with the great Turk , and what answer they have . when our ambassador have make reverence to the great Turk , they say that the lord great master of Rhodes have send they to his Imperiali majesty to know what he request , and desire that they may talk together , and how the great master have receive his letter . the great Turk answer they by his truchman , that of demand to speak together , nor writing of letter to the great master he know nothing . howbeit , sith the great master have send to he for to know his will , he bid say to they that the great master shall yield he the town . and in so do he promise by his faith for to let he go with all his knight , and all other that will go with their good , without receive any displeasure of his people of the camp . and if he accept not the say treaty , to certify he that he will never depart from Rhodes till he have take it , and that all his might of turquoise shall die there , rather than he will fail of it , and that there shall neither great nor little escape , but unto the cat they shall be all cut in piece , and say that within 3 . day they shall give he a answer , for he will not that his people shall loose time , and that during the say truce they shall make no repair nor defence within the town . when the great Turk have end his word , our ambassador take their leave of he , and return to the town , and there be give to each of they a rich garment of branch velvet , with cloth of gold of the turkish fashion . then acmek basham take sir Passin , and lead he to his pavilion , and entreat he right well , cause he to abide all that day and night : and in eat and drink they have many discourse of thing do at the siege , question each with other . and among all other thing our ambassador demand of acmek , and pray he to tell for truth how many man die of the camp while the siege be lay . the say 5 ° bassa swear upon his faith and certify , that there be dead of the camp of violent death , that be to say , of gunshot and other way , 64000 . man or more , beside they that die of sickness , which be about 40 . or continue . see e thousand . Rhodes . how one of the ambassador make answer of his message , and how the commons will not agree to yield the town . return we now to our purpose and to the answer that our ambassador bring to the lord great master . the say Robert Perruse make the answer , and tell what the great Turk have say , certify that he will have a answer quick either yea or nay . the which answer after the demand of the great Turk have be purpose and conclude by the whole counsel , and his offer and treaty accept , howbeit the say ambassador have it not to do so soon nor the first time that they go for good reason , but yet they will not defer it , for fear lest he shall repent he . and [ ii i . 92 . ] upon these determination that they will have send the say peruse to bear the answer , come some of the common people of the town to the lord great master , that be with the lord of the counsel , and say that they be advertise of the appointment that he have make with the great Turk , and that he will yield the town with covenant by he take , which they suppose ought not to be do without call of they . and because they be not call to it , they say that they will not agree thereto , and that it be better for they to die , for the great Turk by some way will put they all to death , as be do in Bellegrado in Hungary . how the lord great master send two ambassador for the commons to the great Turk . when the reverend lord great master have hear their word , he say gracious to they , that as touch the acceptation of the great Turks offer , it be needful so to do in the degree that the town be , and the cause wherefore he have do it the counsel have see and discuss , and that it be a thing that may not , nor ought not to be say nor publish in common , for report of it to the enemy by traitor , but be keep still and secret . and moreover , that it be conclude to make a answer short , for to take the great Turk at his word , lest he repent he . for if they have be call , or the answer have be give , it have be overlong business , and in the mean time the Turk may have change his mind , and that that he have do and conclude with the great Turk , the lord of the counsel have well regard and consider in all thing , and for their profit and advantage , as much or more as for that of the religion . and that they will send to the great Turk again other ambassador , the better to know his will , and to be sure of his promise . then the lord great master ordain two other ambassador for to go to the great Turk , which be two Spaniard , the one name sir Raimon market , and the other messire Lopez , at who issue enter sir Passin the first ambassador , and the other two go to the tent of acmek basham , for to lead they to the great Turk . and when they be within the Turk pavilion , and have do he reverence as appertain , our ambassador say that the great master have hear and see his demand to yield the town .