against the Turk army , the town of with a bond of the city in the sum of 12000 ducat . Chio be bind go j make haste and sell such good as i have to Turk ucau ^ fir they come thither , and put all in order , with as much speed safeguard of as i can , fear the come of the Turk navy , the bark of the which , the chief of the city know right well . Aucher . go upon the sudden they call i of great friendship , and in secret tell i , i have no way to save my self but to be go , for say they , we be not able to defend you , that be not able to help our self , for the Turk where he come , take what he • will , and leave what he list , but the chief of the Turk set order y ‘ none shall do any harm to the people or to their good . this be such news to i , that indeed i be at my wit end , and be bring into many imagination how to do , for that the wind be contrary . in fine , i determine to go forth . but the merchant english man and other regard more their gain then the ship , hinder i very much in my purpose of go forth , and make the mariner to come to i to demand their wage to be pay they out of hand , and to have a time [ ii i . 101 . ] to employ the same there . but God provide so for i > that i pay they their money that night , and then against their charge they , that it they will not set the ship forth , captain . i will make they to answer the same in England , with danger of their head . many be marry in England and have somewhat to loose , those do stick to i . i have twelve gunner : the master gunner who be a mad brain fellow , and the owner servant have a parliament between themselves , and he upon the same come up to i with his sword draw , swear that he have promise the owner sir Anthony Aucher , to live and die in the say ship against all that shall offer any harm to the ship , and that he will fight with the whole army of the Turk , and never yield : with this fellow i have much to do , but at the last i make he confess his fault and follow my advice . thus with much labour i get out of the mole of Chio , into the sea by warp forth , with the help of genoueses boat , and a french boat that be in the mole , and be out god send i a speciali gale of wind to go my way . than i cause a piece to be shoot off for some of my man that be yet in the town , and with much a do they come aboard , and then i set sail a little before one of the clock , and i make all the sail i can , and about half a hour past two of the clock there come seven galley into Chio to stay the ship : Turk and the admiral of they be in a great rage because ' she Ga ^ tesco ^ e ‘° be go . whereupon they put some of the best in prison , and take all the man of the three ship which i leave in the port , and put they into the galley . they will have follow after i , but that the town man find mean they do not . the next day come thither a hundred more of galley , and there tarry for their whole company , which be together be about two hundred and 50 sail , take their voyage for to surprise the hand of Malta . the next day after i depart , i have the sight of Candia , but i be two day after or ever i can get in , where i think my self out of their danger . there i continue until the Turk army be pass , who come within the sight of the town . there be preparation make as though the turk have come thither . there be in that hand of Candia many fwe thousand banish man , that live continual in the mountain , they come down to serve , to the number of four or ’ ' five thousand , they be good archer , every one with his bow and arrow , a sword and a dagger , with long hair , master Matthew baker . and boot that reach up to their grine , and a shirt of male , hang the one half before , and the other half behind , these be send away again assoon as the army be pass . they will drink wine out of all measure . then the army be pass , i jade my ship with wine and other thing : and so after i have that which i leave in Chio , i depart for Messina . in the way i find about Zante , certain galliot of Turk , lay aboard of certain vessel of Venice lade with Muscatels : i rescue they , and have but a barrel of wine for my powder and shot : and within a few day after i come to Messina . i have in my ship a spanish pilot call Noblezia , which i take in at Cade at my come forth : he go with i all this voyage into the Levant without wage , of good will that he bear i and the ship , he stand i in good steed until i come back again to Cade , and then i need no pilot and so from thence i come to London with the ship and good in safety , God be praise . and all those mariner that be in my say ship , which be , beside boy , threescore and ten , for the most part be within five or six year after , able to take charge , and do . Richard Chanceller , who first discover Russia , be with i in that voyage , and Matthew Baker , who afterward become the queen majesty chief shipwright .