harm but to the house . after these great and terrible beat , and that the enemy have way to mount upon the town wall , and come to hand with we by traverse of their trench to the fall earth within the breach more sure , and without hurt of our gunshot , shoot through hole that they make in the wall of the ditch without , they cast up much stone and earth , because it shall cover they from the shot of the bulwark of Auvergne . and also they shoot fervent against the bulwark of Spain , for to raise the defence , of the which at the last they raise the most part , reserve only a few gunner below in the i of the say bulwark , which little or nothing damage they . and this be touch the gunshot , whereof i say not the three part , because it be a thing incredible to they that have not see it . for some day they shoot with those great bombard that be on the brim of the ditch , and from the mantellet bend against the wall of England and Spain 20 or 30 time and more . and i believe very that since the creation of the world such artillery , and so great quantity be never bend and lay before any town as have be against Rhodes at this siege . wherefore it be no marvel if the wall be and have be beat down , and if there be breach and cliff in many place . of the mine that the turk make : and how they overthrow part of the bulwark of England . a nd because as it be say before , that the great hope that the enemy have to get the town of Rhodes , be by mine , therefore now after that i have speak of the gunshot and beat , i shall show of the mine that the turk make , the which be in so great quantity , and in so many place , that i believe the 26 1522 . three part of the town be mine : and it be find by account make , that there be about 60 mine , howbeit , thank be God , many of they come not to effect , by occasion of the countermine that they within make , and also trench that the right prudent lord the great master cause to be make deep within the ditch , unto two or three foot of water . the which trench and certain pit that he have cause in the say ditch to be wrought , or the host arrive , serve right well since : for night and day there be man in they to watch and hearken when the enemy mine , for to meet they , and cut their way , as be do many time . and for to speak of the mine that have effect , and damage we , it be to wit , that the four day of September , about four hour after noon , the enemy put fire in two mine , one be between the postern of Spain and Auvergne , which do not hurt but to the Barbican . the other be at the bulwark of England , which be so fell and strong , that it cause most part of the town to shake , and cast down a great part of the say bulwark at the spring of the day : and by the earth and stone that fall into the ditch , the enemy come upon the bulwark with their banner , and fight sore and mighty with our man , not with hand , but with shot of handgunne . the lord great master that be come 15 day or more with his succour to the say bulwark , go with his company to help they that fight . after that they have fight the space of two or three hour , the enemy repel and drive back by our man from the say bulwark , and beat with ordinance on every side , withdraw they with their loss , shame , and damage . and this be the first a thousand victory that our lord give we , and there abide of our enemy a thousand and moor . English when this assault be do , they make another at the bulwark . breach in the wall of Spain , and mount upon it , but the ordinance of the traverse of the wall and of the house make so fair a riddance , that they be very 27 will to withdraw themselves : for at the retreat , and also at their come the say ordinance of the bulwark do they great damage , albeit that they have make some repair of earth . of our man die that day 25 or thereabouts , aswell knight as other . and the same day in the morning depart out of this world Gabriel de pomerolles lieutenant to the lord master , which on a certain day before fall from the wall as he go to see the trench in the ditch , and hurt his breast , and for fault of good attendance he fall into a fever , whereof he die . how the Turks assail the bulwark of England , and how they be drive away . the nine day of the say month , at seven in the morning the enemy put fire in two mine ; one at the postern of Provence , which have none effect : the other be at the bulwark of England , which fell another piece nigh to that that be cast down [ ii i . 83 . ] afore . and the say mine be as fierce as the other , or more , for it seem that all the bulwark go down , and almost all they that be in it run away . and when the standard of the religion come into the say bulwark , the enemy be at the breach ready to have enter : but when they see the say standard , as people lose and overcome , they go down again . then the artillery of the bulwark of quosquino , and of other place , find they well enough , and slay many of they . howbeit , their captain make they to return with great stroke of sword and other weapon , and to remount upon the