Rhodes . and certain day afore they have make another , that be to weet , when the ship of a knight name Menetow go thither , and have with he the clarke of the galley name Jaques truchman , the which under shadow to speak with he , be withhold of the Turk . for the great Turk have command to take he or some other man of the Rhodes to have perfect knowledge in what estate the town be then in every thing . and they of the town ween that the second fire be for to deliver Jaques , the reverend lord great master send one of his galliass , who patron be call messire Boniface of Provence , to know the cause thereof . and when he arrive at the say place of le Fisco , he demand of the Turk wherefore they have make the token of fire . and they say that it be because their lord have send a letter to the great master , but as yet it be not come , and desire he to tarry till it be bring . the patron as wary and wise in the business of the sea , think in himself that the Turk make such prolong to some evil intent , or to surprise his vessel be alone , wherefore he bid they give he the letter speedy , or else he will go his way , and neither tarry for letter nor other thing : and tell they of the evil and dishonest 1522 . ’ deed that they have do the day afore , to withhold the [ ii i . 77 . ] clarke under their word and safeconduct : and therewith he turn his galliass to have go away . the Turk see that , give he the letter , the which he take , and when he be arrive at Rhodes , he present it to the lord great master , which assemble the lord of his counsel , and make it to be read : the tenor whereof be such as follow . the copy of the letter that the great Turk send to the lord great master , and to the people of the Rhodes . sultan Solyman bassa by the grace of God , right mighty emperor of Constantinople , and of himself hold both the land of Persia , Arabia , Syria , Mecha , and Jerusalem ; of Asia , Europe , TEgypt , and of all the sea , lord and possessor : to the reverend father lord Philip , great master of Rhodes , to his counsellor , and to all the other citizen great and small , greeting . send convenient and worthy salutation to your reverence , we give you to weet , that we have receive your letter send unto our imperiali majesty by George your servant , the tenor whereof we do well understand ; and for this occasion we send unto you this our present commandment , to the end that we will that you know sure how by our sentence we will have that isle of Rhodes for many damage and evil deed which we have , and hear from day to day of the say place do to we and our subject , and you with your good will shall hold it of we and do we obeisance , and give the city to my imperiali majesty . and we swear by God that make heaven and earth , and by 26000 . of our prophet , and by the 4 . Misafi that fall from the sky , and by our first prophet Mahomet , that if you do we homage , and yield you with good will upon these oath , all you that will abide in the say place , great and small , shall not need to fear peril nor damage of my imperiali majesty , neither you , your good , nor your man : and who so will go to any other 13 place with his good and household , may so do , and who so will dwell and inhabit in any other place under my imperiali majesty , may remain where they like best , without fear of any person . and if there be any of the principal and worthy man among you that be so dispose , we shall give he wage and provision great than he have have . and if any of you will abide in the say isle , you may so do after your ancient usage and custom , and much better . and therefore if that you will accept these our oath and entreating , send unto we a man with your letter to my imperiali majesty , or else know you that we will come upon you with all provision of war , and thereof shall come as it please God . and this we do , to the end that you may know , and that you may not say , but we have give you warning . and if you do not thus with your good will , we shall vault and undermine your foundation in such manner , that they shall | be tear upside down , and shall make you slave , and cause you to die , by the grace of God , as we have do many , and hereof have you no doubt . write in our court at Constantinople the first day of the month of June . how the Turk come to land in the isle of Lango , and be drive to their ship again by the prior of S . Giles . when the lord great master and his counsel have hear the tenor of the letter , they will give none answer to the great Turk , but that he shall be receive with good stroke of artillery . so that to a foolish demand behoove none answer . and it be very like that he will have nothing . for six day after , that be the 14 . day of the say month of June , the brigantine that go towards Sio to know of the say army , come again and say , that of a truth the say army be come , and that nigh to Lango a isle of the religion , a 100 mile from Rhodes , they have see and tell 30 . sail that be most part galley and 14 fuste : the which vessel set man