chief captain enter the trench direct to the bulwark of England with his people and captain under he . Pery Bassha go to the trench against the gate of Italy with his folk and captain under he . acmek Bassha be in the trench of Auvergne and Spain with the aga of the janizaire and the Beglarby of Romany with he . the Beglarby of Anatolia be in the trench of Provence . Allibey be with his company against the garden of saint Anthony on the north side , and diverse other captain with he , and set his ordinance against the wall of the gate of almain , which be but weak , and set up seven mantellet by the mill towards the west : and by the space of eight or nine day they beat upon the same wall ; which put we in great fear , if they have continue . howbeit the noble lord great master forthwith cause repair to be make within , and plank 8c table to be set to fortify the say weak wall : and abide there from the morning till night , to cause it to be the more haste . the artillery of the gate of almain , and the massif of the gate of the camp and of the palace beat so sore and so often upon the say mantellet that it weary the enemy to make and repair they so often : and they take up the piece , and bear they away . and also they can not well beat the say wall because the brim of the ditch without be almost as high as the wall that they beat . but or they bear the artillery away , they beat the steeple of saint Johns church so , that the most part be break and cast down . the foresaid mantellet be appoint to beat saint Nicholas tower , and by the space of ten or twelve day they shoot sore against it : but they have so sharp and vigorous answer , that there be not one mantellet that abide whole a hour . the captain of the say tower and his folk do such diligence and business in shoot off their piece , that the enemy dare set up no more mantellet by day , nor shoot no more but only by night , while the moon do shine , which be a thing worthy of memory , of marvel , and of praise . at the last when they have beat against the say tower a certain time , see that it further nothing , they take their ordinance from thence , and bear it where they think best . during the shot in the say place , the other captain be not idle nor in a sleep , but without cease night and day they beat the wall of England and Spain , and set fourteen mantellet against it , shoot great bombard , whereof some of the stone be five or six span about , and some other of nine or ten : and within a month and less they cast down the wall almost even smooth with the Barbican . and when the say wall be so beat , they set to beat the bulwark of Spain for to raise the defence : and in their trench they set three great bombard , which shoot stone of eleven span in compass , and with the say piece they beat the say bulwark and wall in such wise , that they make great brack , and the stone and earth that fall , serve the enemy for ladder , so that they may come upon the plain ground . in like sort they raise the defence from the height of the bulwark at the postern of Provence , and set three great piece on the brim of the ditch , which shoot stone of eleven span against the wall , and within a while they make a breach as at the postern of Spain . the artillery of the town do shoot without cease against the mantellet , and break many of they , but they make other as it be say in the night . for they have all thing that belong to they , and need . and out of the postern of England be shoot a gun that break down one of the say mantellet , and hit upon one of the piece , and slay four or five man , and bear away both the leg of the master of the ordinance , which die soon after : whereof the great Turk be very ill content , and say that he have rather have lose one of his basha or captain then the say master . also it be to know that there be three or four mantellet address against the plain ground of Italy , and by continual beat of shot that they make , there be also a breach , and by the earth and stone that be fall , they may come up to it . of the politic repair and defence that the ingenious captain Gabriel Martiningo , make within the town against the breach in the wall . the captain Gabriel Martiningo , prompt , diligent , and expert to give remedy to the needful place , forthwith cause to make the traverse upon the wall whereas the breach be , with good repair , and gun small and great which be set in the say traverse , the which shoot not only at the breach but to the trench , and make great murder of enemy aswell at the assault that they make as otherwhiles . and beside the traverse , the say captain plant small artillery , as harquebuss , and handgunne upon certain house within the town , that stand open against the breach , with good repair : [ ii i . 8 2 . i and from that place great slaughter of Turks be make at the assault . also it be of truth that beside the say mantellet that shoot against the wall of England and Spain with great bombard , be two mantellet in a high place towards the way to the garden of maupas , in the which be certain double gun , as basilisk with hollow stone and wild fire in they , which shoot against the wall into the town at all adventure for to make murder of people : howbeit , thank be God , they do no great