a ambassage from don Ferdinando , brother to the emperor Charles the 5 . unto king Henry the 8 . in the year 1527 . desire his aid against Solyman the great Turk . holin - shed . page . 894 . n the 14 . day of march , 1527 . be conveyed from London to Greenwich by the earl of Rutland and other , the lord Gabriel de Salamanca , earl of Ottonburge , John burgrave of Sylverberge , and John Faber a famous clerk , after bishop of vien , as ambassador from don Ferdi nando , brother to Charles the emperor , new elect king of Hungary and beam , after the death of his brother in law king Lewes , which be slay by Solyman the Turk the last summer . this company be welcome of the high officer , and after bring into the king presence , all the nobility be present ; and there after great reverence make , m . Faber make a notable oration , take his ground out of the gospel , exiit seminator seminare seman suum : and of that he declare how Christ and his disciple go forth to sow , and how their seed be good that fall into the good ground , and bring forth good fruit , which be the christian faith . and then he declare how contrary to that sow , Mahomet have sow seed , which bring forth evil ! fruit . he also show from the beginning , how the Turk have increase in power , what realm they have conquer , what people they have subdue even to that day . he declare further what act the great Turk then live have do ; and in especial , he note the get of Belgrade and of the Rhodes , and the slay of the king of Hungary , to the great rebuke ( as he say ) of all the king christen . he set forth also what power the Turk have , what diversity of company , what captain he have , so that he think , that without a marvellous great number of people , he can not be overthrow . wherefore he most humble beseech the king as saint George knight , and defender of the faith , to assist the king his master in that godly war and virtuous purpose . to this oration the king by the mouth of sir Thomas Moore answer ; that much he lament the loss that happen in Hungary , and if it be not for the war he mean which be between the two great prince , he think the emperor that the Turk will not have enterprise that act : e frenc wherefore he with all his study will take pain , first , to set a unity and peace throughout all Christendom , and after that , both with money and man he will be ready to help towards that glorious war , as much as any other prince in Christendom . after this do , the ambassador be well cherish , and diverse time resort to the court , and have great cheer and good reward , and so the three day of May next follow , they take their leave and depart homeward .