evil hope . but incontinent the lord great master be at the defence of the postern of England , have knowledge of the say loss , and that there be great fight and resistance on both side at the breach of Spain , march thither with the banner of the crucifix , leave the charge of the say bulwark in the hand of the bailiff de la Moree messieur merry Combant . and the lord mount on the wall of Spain , whereas then begin a great skirmish , and every man lay his hand to work , as well to put the enemy out of the breach , as to recover the bulwark that be lose . and the say lord send a company of man into the bulwark by the gate of the mine , or by the Barbican , the which enter at the say gate , and go up , where they find but few Turk . for the artillery of the postern of England , right against the bulwark of Spain , have so well meet and scatter they , that within a while our man have slay all they that be leave . and thus the say bulwark be get and recover again , and with all diligence be make new repair and strength to the say place . and in like sort , the enemy be put from the breach , and few of they escape , and all their banner and sign be leave with we . Surely it may be say , that after the grace of God ( the traverse of Spain and Auvergne , and the small artillery set on the house right against the say breach , as it be say , with the come and presence of the lord great master ) have give we this day victory . as touch the murder of the people , do by the artillery of the bulwark of England and Spain , the quantity be such that a man can not perceive nor see any ground of the ditch . and the stench of the mastiff carrion be so grievous , that we may not suffer it seven or eight day after . and at the last , they that may save themselves do so , and withdraw themselves to the trench : and the reverend lord great master abide victorious of the say place , and in like sort of the other three assault , the which be but little less than that of Spain , for they fight long . but in conclusion , the enemy beat on all side , and in so many sort , with artillery be put back , and vanquish , that there die that day at all the four place fifteen or sixteen thousand . and the slaughter be so great at the plain Italy , of the curse enemy , that the sea be make red with their blood . and on our side also die to the number of a hundred man or more . and of man of dignity in the town , have charge , die sir Francis de Frenolz commander of Romania , which sir Francis be chief captain of the great ship of Rhodes , and he be slay at the plain of Italy , wound with two stroke of harquebuss : it be great damage of his death , for he be a worthy man , perfect , and full of virtue . there die also messieur nastasy de sancta Camilla aforenamed , have two hundred man under he of the lord great master succour . there die also diverse other worthy man that day , and many be maim . among all other that lose any member , messieur John de le touse call pradines , be at the say bulwark , with a stroke of artillery have his arm smite away , in great danger to have lose his life ; howbeit by the help of God he die not . in like sort the same day be hurt sir William s * r Will - Weston abovesaid , captain of the postern of England , and have one of his finger strike away with a harque - gi ^ pos . bush : which knight behave himself right worthy at tear hurt . all the assault . of the Turk part , of great man , be two principali captain slay under the aga of the janissary , and another captain that be come out of surey to the camp certain day before , with six hundred Mameluke , and two or three thousand moor . and of they that be hurt of great man the Beglarby of Anatolia have a stroke with a arrow as he be in the trench of Provence . and many other be wound , who name be not rehearse here , because of shortness . how the great Turk for anger that he can [ ii i - 85 . ] not get the town , will have put his chief captain to death , and how they make 11 mine under the bulwark of England . during this assault , the great Turk be by his pavilion in a place that he have cause to be make , and see all the business , and how his people be so sharp put back , and the victory lose on his side , and be very sore displease , and half in despair : and he send for Mustafa bassa with who he be angry , and chide he bitter , say that he have cause he to come thither , and have make he to believe that he shall take the town in fifteen day , or a month at the further ; and he have be there already three month with his army , and yet they have do nothing . and after these word he be purpose to put he to death in the camp : but the other bassa show he that he ought not to do justice in the land of his enemy , for it will comfort they five 33 c and give they courage . whereby he do moderate his anger , and leave he for that time , and think to send he to Cairo , lest the people there will rebel , by occasion of the captain of Cairo which die a few day before . howbeit he depart not so sudden , and or he go he think to assay if he may do