hereafter . but beside his advertisement , the say great Turk stir and provoke by a false traitor , a Portugal knight of we , that time Chanceller of the say holy religion , a man of great authority , dignity , and understanding , and one of the principali lord of the counsel of the same , name sir Andrew de merall , by little and little be move and kindle to the say enterprise of treason , whereof be no marvel , for it be a great hope and comfort to have such a person for he , that know all the estate and rule of the religion and of the town . and for to declare the occasion of the curse and unhappy will of the say traitor that have be occasion of so great loss and damage , and shall be more at the length , if the divine power set not to his hand . and here it be manifest to be understand of all man , that after the death of the noble and right prudent lord , Fabrice of Cacetto , great master of Rhodes , the say sir Andrew inflame with ambition and covetousness to be great master , and see himself deceive of his hope , by the election make the two and twenty day of January , of the right reverend and illustrate lord , Philip de Villiers lisleadam , before he : from that time he take so great envy and desperation , enmity and evil will , not only against the say lord , but against all the holy religion , that he set all his study and purpose , to betray and sell his religion and the city of Rhodes to the curse misbeliever , forget the great honour and goodness that he have have of the religion , and hope to receive , with many other particular pleasure that the say lord master have do to he . but the devil , unkindness , and wickedness have so blind the eye of his thought , that he in no wise can refrain he , but at every purpose that be speak afore he , he be short and may not dissemble . and one day among other he say before many knight , that he will that his soul be at the devil , and that Rhodes and the religion be lose . and many other foolish and dishonest purpose and word he utter , whereat none take heed , nor thought that he have the courage to do that thing that he have do . howbeit , obstinate as Judas , he put in execution his curse will : for soon after that the tiding of the election be send westward to the say noble lord , the say the merall do send a Turk prisoner of he to Constantinople , under shadow to fetch his ransom . by who he advertise the great Turk and his counsel , of the manner and degree of Rhodes , and in what state and condition the town be in of all manner of thing at that time , and what may happen of it , provoke and stir he to come with a great host to besiege the town . and after the come of the say reverend lord great master , he give other advise to the great Turk , show he that he can never have better time to come , see that the great master be [ ii i . 74 . ] new come , and part of the wall take down , and that all Rhodes be in trouble by occasion of some italian knight , rebel against the lord great master : of the which rebellion he be causer , the better to bring his curse mind to pass : and also give the say great Turk knowledge that all christian prince be busy , war each upon other , and that he shall not doubt but if the rebellion last among they , the town shall be his without fail , as it be see by experience . and for lack of succour of every part , and especial of such as may easy have help we be our neighbour , with their galley and man of war , wherefore it be now in the hand of the enemy of the christian faith . the which monition and reason of the false traitor be understand and ponder by the great Turk and his counsel , it be consider of they not to loose so good occasion and time . wherefore he make most extreme diligence to rig and apparel many ship and vessel of diverse sort , as galliass , galley , pallandre , fuste , and brigantine , to the number of 350 . sail and more . when the prisoner that the say the merall do send into turquoise have do his commission , he return into Rhodes , whereof every man have marvel . and many folk deem evil of his come again , as of a thing unaccustomed , but none dare say any thing , see the say the merall of so great authority and dignity , and he cherish the say prisoner more than he be wont to do . therefore belike he have well do his message , and have bring good tiding to the damnable and . shameful mind of the say traitor de merall . how the great Turk cause the passage to be keep , that none shall bear tiding of his host to Rhodes . the great Turk intend with great diligence to make ready his host both by sea and by land , the better to come to his purpose , and to take the town unwary as he be advertise , think to keep his do as secret as he may , and command that none of his subject shall go to Rhodes for any manner of thing . and likewise he take all the bark and brigantine out of the haven and port in those coast , because they shall give no knowledge of his army . and also he make the passage by land to be keep , that none shall pass . howbeit , so great apparel of a army can not be long keep close : for the spy which the lord great master have send into turquoise , bring tiding to the castle of saint Peter , and to Rhodes , of all that be say and do in turquoise