of the say bulwark ( unware to they ) smite they go and come , and make great murder of the say dog . the say day also the enemy come to the plain of Italy for to assault it ; but when they understand that their fellow have be put back so rude , and with so great slaughter , they be afraid , and so they return again to their trench . how the Turks get the plain ground of Spain . a nd that do , acmek bassa see their business every day go from worse to worse , and that at the assault be but loss of people , without do of any good , and that there be no man that willing will go to it any more , he intend to give no more assault , but to follow his trench , and by they enter covert without loss of a man from the breach to the other end of the town . semblable he intend for to win the plain earth beside Spain : the which to get , he come at pleasure to the foot of the wall , and begin to beat down the plain ground , and to give many skirmish and conflict to our folk that keep it . and there be slay many good man . and at the last , for default of more help and of gunshot , it be leave and give up of our man , and so lose . that do , the enemy come thither as in other place . and this be the three place where they come near to the foot of the wall . and whoso well consider in what estate the poor town be at that time , see their enemy have so great advantage , may well say , and judge , that at length it shall be take , and a lose town . how a genouois come to the gate of the town for to speak for a treaty , and deliverance of the same . a few day after the say journey a christian man that be in the camp , the which by his speech be a Genouois or Siotis , come to the gate of Auvergne , and demand to parley , and after that he be demand what he will have , he say that he have marvel of we why we will not yield our self , see the piteous estate the town be in : and he as a christian man counsel we to yield our self with some agreement : and that if we will look thereto , that some shall be find expedient to do somewhat for our safeguard . and it be very like that he say not such word , nor speak so farforth in the matter , without commission from some of the chief of the camp , or of the great Turk himself . to the which Siotis be answer , that he shall go away with a evil hap , and that it need not to speak of appointment : and that though the enemy have great advantage , there be yet enough wherewith to receive and feast they , if they make any assault . Theise word hear , he go away : and two day after he come again , and demand to speak with a merchant Genouois of the town , name Matthew de Ura , and he be answer that he which he demand , be sick , and may not come , but that he shall deliver the letter , and it shall be give to he . the say Siotis say nay , and that he will give it himself , and speak with he : and say that he have also a letter of the grand signior , for the lord master . upon this he be bid to go his way : and to set he pack , they shoot after he a piece of artillery . the next [ ii i . 89 . ] day after Ballantis albanese that be flee through the breach of Spain to the camp , come from the say genouois propose such word , or like as the other have say , say likewise that the grand signior have send a letter to the lord master . to who no word be speak , nor answer make , for the lord great master as wise and prudent consider that a town that will hear entreating be half lose , defend upon the pain of death sith that Siotis have speak these two time , that none shall be so hardy to speak nor answer they of the camp , without his knowledge and commandment : but see they be such ambassador , they report the word of the say Albanese , or ever the say lord have knowledge of the word of the Siotis . the which word spread through the town put many folk in thought , and will have undo that that the Siotis say : the which be no marvel whereas be much people , for with good will and most often they regard soon to save the life of they and their child , than they do to the honour of the residue . howbeit not one dare speak a word open of that business , but all secret : and some come and speak to certain lord of the great cross for to speak to you lord great master . and in effect some lord speak thereof to he , persuade he that it shall be good to think thereon , see that the town go to loss . to who the say lord show many thing for his honour and the religion : and that no such thing ought to be do or think for any thing in the world , but rather he and they to die . the lord hear this answer , go their way , and then return again to the say lord , advise he more to think well on all thing , and to the salvation of his town and of his religion . and they say moreover , that they doubt that the people will rather have a peace then to die themselves , their wife and child . the lord see that such word be as thing enforce , as who shall say , if thou do it not , we shall do it as wise man and prudent , willing