our repair , and make trench for to pass forward into the town : by the which trench they shoot infinite with harquebuss and handgunne , and slay many of our folk , and special of they that wrought and make the repair that be break and erase . and they put we in such extremity , that we have almost no more slave nor other labour people for to repair that which they break night and day , which be a great hindrance for we , and the begin of our perdition . and if we have much to do in that place , there be not less at the gate of Provence , and at the plain of Italy : for daily they be do either with assault or skirmish , and most at the plain of Italy . howbeit by the help of our lord with the good conduct of the captain of succour of the same place , the prior of Navarre , that be prompt and intentive , and can well encourage his man , the enemy have always the worst , and be 39 drive from the say plain , and from the breach of Provence . how the treason of sir Andrew de merall be know , and of the marvellous assault that the turk make . upon these term and assault , the treason of the chancellor sir Andrew de merall , of who i speak before , be perceive : for a servant of he , name Blasie , be find shoot a quarrel of a crossbow with a letter , whereof he be accuse to the lord great master , which command to take he and examine he by justice , and he confess the shot of that letter and of other before , at the commandment of his master : and say that he have great acquaintance with the turk basha , and that it be not long since he have write a letter to they , warn they that they shall not go , for gunshot begin to fade , and the man be waste by slay and hurt at the assault in great quantity : and if they abide still and give no more assault , at the last the town shall be they . and diverse other thing the servant say of his master , of the which i have speak part before at the beginning , and of the warning that he give to the great Turk for to come . but to return to the plain of Italy . after many battle and assault do in the say place , by continual shot of seventeen great gun that beat the say plain , the repair and traverse be almost break and lose . and by trench the enemy be come join to the breach , and never cease to grate the earth and scrape the earth to cause the repair and traverse to fall : and at the last the most part fall down , and our man be constrain to leave the say plain , save a cantle that be towards the sea , as it be the three part thereof . certain day afore the enemy come to the foot of the plain , and do cut it , and raze the earth , and at the last they pass through unto the town wall : and anon begin to hew and cut as they do at that of Spain . 1522 . the lord great master see that , anon cast down a part of the church of our lady de la victoria , and of a other church of saint Panthalion . and within they begin to make the repair and traverse as at the place of Spain , whereto be make extreme diligence , but not such as the lord will , and as be needful , because there be no labourer for to help . after that the enemy have win the most part of the bulwark of England and the plain of Italy , they purpose to make assault to the say [ ii i . 88 ] plain , and to the breach of Spain , and to enter into our repair to win they for to make a end of we . and for ever to affeeble the repair and for to abash we , the 28 day of November all along the day and night they cease not to shoot great artillery , both from the brim of the ditch with those great piece , cast stone of nine and eleven foot about , and from the mantellet without . and as it be reckon , they shoot the same day and night 150 time or more against our repair and traverse of the wall . and in the morning the 29 day of the same month , the vigil of saint Andrew at the spring of the day , the enemy go through the breach with their banner , and enter into the repair with great number of people than they do at the great battle in September , hardy and furious for to fight with we . but at their come in , the artillery of the traverse , and the handgunne , and the gunshot of the mill find they so well and so sharp , that he that come in , be anon dispatch and overthrow , and there abide above 2000 of the turk slay . the other that come after see their fellow so evil welcome , as people that be astonish and lose , they turn again to their trench : at who the artillery of the mill shoot victorious , and haste they to go apace : and by report from the camp there die six thousand or more that day : the which day may be call very happy , and well fortunate for we , thank be God , for there be none that think to escape that day , but to have die all , and lose the town : howbeit , the pleasure of our lord be by evident miracle to have it otherwise , and the enemy be chase and overcome . and it be to be note that the same day the rain be so great and so strong , that it make the earth to sink a great deal that they have cast into the ditch , for to cover they from the shot of Auvergne . and the say earth be so sink , the artillery