on land in you isle of Lango . then the prior of saint Giles , messire pre John de bidoux commander of the say place , tarry not long from horseback with his knight and people of the isle , and he meet so well with the Turk , that he drive they to their ship , and slay a certain number of they : and of the side of pre John some be hurt , and his horse be slay . when the enemy be enter into their galley , they go to a place call castle judeo on the main land , between the say isle of Lango and the castle of saint Peter . how part of the navy and army of the great Turk come before the city of Rhodes . the 18 . day of the say month of June , these 30 - gally go from the say place , and pass by the cape of Crion , enter the gulf of epime beside Rhodes , and be discover from the shade of the hill of salaco , a castle in the isle of Rhodes . on the morrow they come out of the gulf by plain day , and sail along by the coast , they enter into a haven on main land call Malfata , where they abide three day . than [ ii i . 78 . ] they go from thence , and return to the gulf of epime , where they abide two day and two night . the 24 day of the same month they issue out of epime , and traverse the channel , they come to the isle of Rhodes in a place before a castle call fave , and they go to land , and burn a great field of corn the same day , which be the feast of saint John Baptist our patron . the guard of a castle name Absito in the isle of Rhodes discover and spy the great host , and in great haste bring word to the lord master , and say that the say host , that be in so great number of sail that they . may not be number , be enter into the gulf of epime . the 30 sail that lie in the isle arise in the night , and go to the say host in the gulf . the 26 day of June the say great host arise and go out of epime a hour after the sun rise , and 15 traverse the channel , they come to a place call the Fosse , eight mile from the town . and the 30 first sail turn back towards the cape of saint Martin and other place to watch for ship of christian man , if any pass by to Rhodes . the great host abide still till noon or one of the clock , and then arise , not all , but about 80 or 100 ship , as galley , galliass , and fust : and pass one after another before the town and haven of Rhodes three mile oftj and come to shore in a place nigh to land , call Perambolin , six mile from the town . in the which place the say host abide from that time to the end of that unhappy siege . the number and it name of the vessel that come to besiege Rhodes . the number of the ship be these : 30 galliass , 103 galley , aswell bastard as subtle mahonnet , 15 taffour , 20 fust , 64 great ship , six or seven galleon , and 30 gallere , beside the navy that wait for christian man , if any come to succour we . Theise be the vessel that come at the - first to lay the siege . and sith that the say host come out of Perambolin , there come from Syria 20 other sail , aswell galley as fust . and many other ship come sith , and join with the say army in the time of the say siege . and it be say that there be 400 sail and more . the same day that part of the host come to the say place , the reverend lord great master ordain a great brigandine to send into the west , to certify our holy father the pope , and the christian prince how the Turks army be afore Rhodes . and in the say vessel he send two knight , one of french man name sir Claude dansoyville call Villiers , and sir Loys de Sidonia a Spaniard : and they go to the pope and to the emperor . after the come of the Turks navy into the say place , it be 14 or 15 day or they set any ordinance on land , great or small , or any quantity of man come 16 on shore , whereof we marvel . and it be tell we by some that come out of the camp , and also by the spy that the lord great master have send abroad array as Turks , that they abide the commandment of their great lord , until the host by land be come into the camp . howbeit there come some number for to view the town , but they go privy , for the ordinance of the town shoot without cease . all this while the galley and galliass go and come to land , bring vitaile and people . at the which ship pass nigh the town , be shoot many stroke with bombard , which make some slaughter of our enemy : and when the most part of they be pass , they begin to set ordinance on the land with great diligence . then the lord great master depart from his palace , and lodge he nigh a church call the victory , because that place be most to be doubt : and also that at the other siege the great business and assault be there . how the lord great master make his petition before the image of saint John , and offer he the key of the town . the day before be make many predication and sermon , and the last be in the church of saint John Baptist . when the sermon be do , a pontificali mass be celebrate with all solemnity , and all the relic take down , and the lord great master and all his knight with great devotion