the worthy enterprise of John Foxe a Englishman in deliver 266 . Christians out of the captivity of the Turk at Alexandria , the 3 . of Januarie 1577 . among our merchant here in England , it be a common voyage to traffic into Spain : whereunto a ship , be call the three half moon , man with 38 . man , and well fence with munition , the better to encounter their enemy withal , and have wind and tide , set from Portsmouth , 1563 . and bend her journey towards Seville a city in Spain , intend there to traffic with they . And fall near the strait , they perceive themselves to be beset round with eight galley of the Turk , in such wise , that there be no way for they to fly or escape away , but that either they must yield or else be sink . which the owner perceive , manful encourage his company , exhort they valiant to show their manhood , show they that God be their god , and not their enemy , request they also not to faint in see such a heap of their enemy ready to devour they ; put they in mind also , that if it be God pleasure to give they into their enemy hand , it be not they y ‘ ought to show one displeasant look or countenance thereagainst ; but to take it patient , and not to prescribe a day and time for their deliverance , as the citizen of Bethulia do , but to put themselves under his mercy . and again , if it be his mind and good will to show his mighty power by they , if their enemy be ten time so many , they be not able to stand in their hand ; put they likewise in mind of the old and ancient worthiness of their countryman , who in the hard extremity have always most prevail and go away conqueror , yea , and where it have be almost impossible . such ( quoth he ) have ’ S3 John fox take 1563 . be the valiantness of our countryman , and such have be the mighty power of our god . with other like encouragement , exhort they to behave themselves manful , they fall all on their knee make their prayer brief unto God : who be all rise up again perceive their enemy by their sign and defiance bend to the spoil , who mercy be nothing else but cruelty , whereupon every man take he to his weapon . then stand up one grove the master , be a comely man , with his sword and target , hold they up in defiance against his enemy . so likewise stand up the owner , the master mate , boateswaine , Purser , and every man well appoint . now likewise sound up the drum , trumpet and flute , which will have encourage any man , have he never so little heart or courage in he . then take he to his charge John Foxe the gunner in the dispose of his piece in order to the best effect , and send his bullet towards the Turk , who likewise bestow their piece thrice as fast towards the Christians . but short they draw near , so that the bowman fall to their charge in send forth their arrow so thick among the galley , and also in double their shot so sore upon the galley , that there be twice so many of the Turk slay , as the number of the christian be in all . but the turk discharge twice as fast against the christian , and so long , that the ship be very sore strike and bruise under water . which the Turk perceive , make the more haste to come aboard the ship : which ere they can do , many a Turk buy it dear with the loss of their life . yet be all in vain , and board they be , where they find so hot a skirmish , that it have be better they have not meddle with the feast . for the Englishman show themselves man in deed , in work manful with their brown bill and halberd : where the owner , master , boateswaine , and their company stand to it so 154 lusty , that the Turk be half dismay . but chief the valour be the boateswaine show himself valiant above the rest : fair for he fare among the Turk like a wood lion : for boatswatne - there be none of they that either can or dare stand in his face , till at the last there come a shot from the Turk , which break his whistle asunder , and smite he on the breast , so that he fall down , bid they farewell , and to be of good comfort , encourage they likewise to win praise by death , rather than to live captive in misery and shame . which they hear , in deed intend to have do , as it appear by their skirmish : but the press and store of the Turk be so great , that they be not able long to endure , but be so overpress , that they can not wield their weapon : by reason whereof , they must needs be take , which none [ ii i . 132 . ] of they intend to have be , but rather to have die : except only the master mate , who shrink from the skirmish , like a notable coward , esteem neither the valour of his name , nor account of the present example of his fellow , nor have respect to the misery , whereunto he shall be put . but in fine , so it be , that the turk be victor , whereof they have no great cause to rejoice , or triumph . then will it have grieve any hard heart to see these infidel so violent entreat the christian , not have any respect of their manhood which they have taste of , nor yet respect their own state , how they may have meet with such a booty , as may have give they the overthrow : but no remorse hereof , or any thing else do bridle their fierce and tyrannous deal , but that the Christians must needs to the galley , to serve in new office : and they be no soon in they , but their garment be pull over their ear , and tear from their back , and they set to the oar . i will make no mention of their misery , be now under their enemy rage stripe . i think there be no man will judge their fare good , or their body unlade of stripe , and not pester with too much heat , and * 55 the Englishman cart