order , so that no soldier there spend any more in bread then two souse a day . they be pay at the end of every thirty day with the great travel of that right worshipful venetian gentleman m . Giovanni Antonio Querini , who beside this his ordinary charge be find present in all weighty and dangerous affair to the great encouragement of our soldier . and we make a counterbattery against our enemy for ten day space , with so great rage , that we choke and destroy fifteen of their best piece , also we kill and dispatch of they about thirty thousand at that season , so that they be disappoint at that time of their battery in that place , and be great dismay . but our foresee that we have no great store of powder leave , there be make a restraint , and such order take , that thirty piece shall not shoot off but thirty shot a piece every day , and that in the presence of the captain , who be still present , because the soldier and gunner shall not shoot off in vain . 133 two venetian souse or Soldi amount but to one penny English . the nine and twenty day of may there come towards we from Candia a Fregat or pinnace , the which give we great hope and lightning of aid , increase marvellous every man courage . the turk with great travel and slaughter of both side , have win at the last the counterscarp from we , with great resistance and mortality on both part . whereupon they begin on the other side of the five battery to fill up the ditch , with the earth that they throw down , which be take near the wall of the counterscarp . but all that earth and fall down of the wall make by the shot of their artillery , be carry away of we within the city , all our company labour continual aswell by night as day , until our enemy have make certain loophole in the wall , through the which they flank and scour all the ditch with their harquebus , stop our former course of carry , or go that way any more , without certain and express danger . but m . Giovanni Marmori , a fortifier , have devise a certain kind of join board , the which be carry of the soldier , defend they from the shot of the harquebusier , so that some other quantity of earth , but no great store , be carry also away : in the which place this foresay fortifier be slay , who have do especial good service in all our necessary affair . and our enemy have cast so much earth into the ditch , as fill it up again , and make it a firm way to the wall of the counterscarp , and cast before they the earth by little and little , they make one traverse even unto the wall on two side in all their battery , the which they make thick and strong with woolpack , and other faggot , to assure themselves the better of our flanker . when they have once possess the ditch , that they can not be hurt of we but by chance , they begin forthwith to cast and dig out undermine to undermine the Brey , the turret of Santa Nappa , the commander of Andruzzi , the keep of Campo Santo , the cortaine , and the turrion of the arsenal : so that be able not 134 long to serve our turn enjoy those few flanker , we throw down wildfire into our enemy camp , the which annoy they very sore , because it fire their woolpack , and also their faggot . and for the better encouragement of the soldier , the right honourable Bragadino give to every soldier one ducat , you which can gain or recover any of the former woolpacke , [ ii i . 124 . ] make countermine in all place . to the which charge Maggio the fortifier knight be appoint , who in all our business serve with such diligence and courage , as he be able , or be requisite . but the countermine meet not , save those of the commander of S . Nappa , of Andruzzi , and that of Campo Santo , because they * ^ Ibanois be open , and our man sally out often both by day soldier , soul - and night into the ditch to perceive better the way of dyer of the mine , and to fire the faggot and wool . nor we cease at any time through the unspeakable travel of cave the lord Baglione ( who have the oversight of all these who common matter ) to trouble our enemy intent , by all manner of serve the wit and policy , divide the company for the battery , return both join and plant in all place a garrison of the mdfiottvery * Albanois soldier , who aswell on foot as on horse - skilful y back , show always notable courage and manhood , painful . the first assault . the one and twenty day of June they put fire to the mine of the turret of the arsenal , whereas giambelat Bey take charge , who with great ruin rend in sunder a most great and thick wall , and so open the same , that he throw down more than half thereof , break also one part of the vaimure , make before to uphold the assault . and sudden a great number of the Turk skip upon the ruin thereof , display their ensign , even to the top of the same . captain Pietro Conte with his company be in that ward , the which be much shake and terrify by that sudden ruin . i with my company come first thither , so that they short take the repulse , and although they re - 135 of this noble fit painful venetian gentleman m . Gio . Antonio Querini ( who be afterward hew in sunder by the commandment of Mustafa ) i be entertain very courteous in my travel ! at Corcyra , now call Corfu , he be then there Mag . Castellano or Capitaine of one of the castle . in extremity man have no regard to spare trifle . fresh themselves with new supply five or six time , yet they fail of their purpose . there fight personal the lord Baglione : Bragadino and Querini be arm stand not far off to refresh and comfort our soldier , and the