of venetian money eight liver and two solde , beside the Turk other present which they give to the Turk bassa yearly . when they come thither . the venetian have a rock or crag within a mile of the say town , for the which the Raguseos will give they much money , but they do keep it more for the namesake , then for profit . this rock lie on the southside of the town , and be call two cromo , there be nothing on it but only a 11 cromo . monastery call Sant Jeronimo . the main of the Turk country be border on it within one mile , for the which cause they be in great subjection . this night we be put back by contrary wind , and anchor at Melleda - the 24 be at a anchor under Melleda , we will have go on land , but the wind come so fair that we present set sail and go our course , and leave on the right hand of we the forename hand , and on the left hand between we and the main the hand of Zupanna , and within a mile of that under the main Zupanna . by east , another hand call Isola de Mezo . this hand de have two monastery in it , one call Santa maria de ’ bizo , and the other Sant Nicholo . also there be a three rock with a friary call Sant Andrea : these hand be sant ^ n ^' ea - Boca de Cataro , the town Cataro . Budoa . Antiveri . Marchevetti . the end of Sclavonia and the begin of Albania . Puglia . cape chimaera . CapeOtranto . 11 fano . from the main but two mile , and the channel between Melleda and Zupanna be but four or five mile over by guess , but very deep , for we have at a anchor forty fathom . the two hand of Zupanna and Mezo be well inhabit , and very fair building , but nothing plenty save wine only . this night towards sun set it wax calm , and we sail little or nothing . the 24 we be past Ragusa 14 mile , and there we meet with two venetian ship , which come from Cyprus , we think they will have speak with we , for we be desirous to talk with they , to know the news of the Turk army , and to have send some letter by they to Venice . about noon , we have scant sight of castle novo , which castle a few year past the Turk take from the emperor , in which fight be slay three hundred spanish soldier , beside the rest which be take prisoner , and make galley slave . this castle be hard at the mouth of a channel call Boca de Cataro . the venetian have a hold within the channel call Cataro , this channel go up to Budoa , and further up into the country . about suneset we be over against the hill of Antiveri in Sclavonia , in the which hill the venetian have a town call Antiveri , and the Turk have another against it call Marchevetti , the which two town continual skirmish together with much slaughter . at the end of these hill end the country of Sclavonia , and Albania begin . Theise hill be thirty mile distant from Ragusa . the 27 we keep our course towards Puglia , and leave Albania on the left hand . the 28 . we have sight of both the maines , but we be near than coast of Puglia , for fear of foist . it be between cape chimaera in Albania and Cape otranto in Puglia 60 mile . Puglia be a plain low land , and chimaera in Albania be very high land , so that it be see the further . thus sail our course along the coast of Puglia , we see diverse white tower , which serve for sea - mark . about three of the clock in the after noon , we have sight of a rock call two fano , 48 80 mile from Corfu , and by sun set we discover Corfu . Corfu . thus we keep on our course with a prosperous wind , and make our way after twelve mile every hour . Most part of this way we be accompany with certain fish call in the italian tongue palomide , it be a fish three pahmide . quarter of a yard in length , in colour , eat , and make like a makarell , somewhat big and thick in body , and the tail fork like a half moon , for the which cause it be say that the Turk will not suffer they to be take in all his dominion . the 29 in the morning we be in sight of a hand , which we leave on our left hand call Cephalonia , it be Cephalonia under the venetian and well inhabit , with a fair town encage strong situate on a hill , of the which hill the hand bear her name , it have also a very strong fortress or castle , and plenty of corn and wine , their language be Greeke , it be distant from the main of Morea , thirty Morea . mile , it is ' in compass 80 mile . one hour within night we sail by the town stand on the south cape of Cephalonia , whereby we may perceive their light . there come oftentimes into the creek and river , the Turk foist and galley where at their arrival , the country people do signify unto their neighbour by so many light , as there be foist or galley in the hand , and thus they do from one to another the whole hand over . about three of the clock in the afternoon the wind scant , and we mind to have go to Zante , Zante . but we can not for that night . this hand of Zante be distant from Cephalonia , 12 or 14 mile , but the town of Cephalonia , from the town of Zante , be distant forty mile . this night we go but little forward . the 30 day we remain still turn up and down because the wind be contrary , and towards night the wind mend , so that we enter the channel between Cephalonia , 8c Zante , the which channel be about eight or ten mile over , and these two bear east and by south , and west and by north from the other . the town of Zante lie within a point of the land , five 81 f where we come to a