will come again with all speed . in the mean season , the other seven have provide they of such weapon , as they can get in that house : and John fox take he to a old rusty sword blade , without either hilt or pomell , which he make to serve his turn , in bend the hand end of the sword , in steed 158 the enterprise of John fox of a pomell , and the other have get such spit and glaive as they find in the house . the keeper now be come unto the house , and perceive no light , nor hear any noise , straightway suspect the matter : and return backward , John fox stand behind the corner of the house , step forth unto he : who perceive it to be John fox , say , oh fox , what have i deserve of thou , that thou shall seek my death ? thou villain ( quoth Fox ) have be a bloodsucker of many a christian blood , and now thou shall know what thou have deserve at my hand : wherewith he lift up his bright shine sword of ten year rust , and strike he so main a blow , as therewithal ! his head cleave a sunder , so that he fall stark dead to the ground . whereupon Peter unticaro go in , and certify the rest how the case stand with the keeper : who come present forth , and some with their spit run he through , and the other with their glaive hew he in sunder , cut off his head , and mangle he so , that no man shall discern what he be . then march they towards the road , whereinto they enter soft , where be six warder , who one of they ask , say , who be there ? quoth fox and his company , all friend . which when they be all within , prove contrary : for , quoth fox , my master , here be not to every man a man , wherefore look you play your part . who so behave themselves in deed , that they have dispatch these six quick . then John fox intend not to be bar of his enterprise , and mind to work sure in that which he go about , bar the gate sure , and plant a canon against it . then enter they into the gaoler lodge , where they find the key of the fortress and prison by his bed side , and there have they all better weapon . in this chamber be a chest , wherein be a rich treasure , and all in ducat , which this Peter unticaro , and two more , open , stuff themselves so full as they can , between their shirt and their skin : which John fox 159 will not once touch , and say , that it be his and their liberty which he seek for , to the honour of his god , and not to make a mart of the wicked treasure of the infidel . yet do these word sink nothing into their stomach , they do it for a good intent : so do Saul save the fat ox , to offer unto the lord , and they to serve their own turn . but neither do Saul escape the wrath of God therefore , neither have these that thing which they desire so , and do thirst after . such be God justice . he that they put their trust in , to deliver they from the tyrannous hand of their enemy , he ( i say ) can supply their want of necessary . now these eight be arm with such weapon as they think well of , think themselves sufficient champion to encounter a strong enemy , and coming unto the prison , fox open the gate and door thereof , and call forth all the prisoner , who he set , some to ram up the gate , some to the dress up of a certain galley , which be the best in all the road , and be call the captain of Alexandria , whereinto some carry mast , sail , oar , and other such furniture as do belong unto a galley . at the prison be certain warder , who John fox and his company slay : in the kill of who , there be eight more of the Turk , which perceive they , and get they to the top of the prison : unto who John fox , and his company , be fain to come by ladder , where they find a hot skirmish . for some of they be there slay , some wound , and some but scar , and not hurt . as John fox be thrice shoot through his apparel , and not hurt , Peter unticaro , and the other two , that have arm they with the ducat , be slay , as not able to wield themselves , be so pester with the weight and uneasy carry of the wicked and profane treasure : and also diverse Christians be aswell hurt about that skirmish , as Turk slay . among the Turk be one thrust through , who ( let we not say that it be ill fortune ) fall off from the top 160 of the prison wall , and make such a low , that the inhabitant thereabouts ( as here and there scatter stand a house or two ) come and daw he , so that they understand the case , how that the prisoner be pay their ransom : wherewith they raise both Alexandria which lie on the west side of the road , and a castle which be at the city end , next to the road , and also a other fortress which lie on the northside of the road : so that now they have no way to escape , but one , which by man reason ( the two hold lie so upon the mouth of the road ) may seem impossible to be a way for they . So be the red sea impossible for the Israelite to pass through , the hill and rock lie so on the one side , and their enemy compass they on the other . So be it impossible , that the wall of Jericho shall fall down , be neither undermine , nor yet ram at with engine , nor yet any man wisdom , policy , or help set or put thereunto . such impossibility can our God make possible . he that hold the lion jaw from rent Daniel asunder , yea , or yet from once touch he to his hurt : can not he hold the roar canon of this hellish force ? he that keep the fierce rage in the hot burn oven , from the three child , that