the true report of the siege and take of Famagusta , of the antique writer call Tamassus , a city in Cyprus 1571 . in the which the whole order of all the skirmish , battery , mine , and assault give to the say fortress , may plain appear . english out of italian by William malim . to the right honourable and his singular good lord , and only patron the earl of Leicester , baron of Denbigh , knight of the honourable order of the garter , one of the queen majesty most honourable privy council etc William malim wish long health with increase of honour . t have be a natural instinct ( right honourable and my especial good lord ) ingraff in noble personage heart , much approve and confirm also by custom , for they to seek from time to time , by some mean in their life , by the which they after their death may deliver over their name to their posterity : lest otherwise with their body , their fame also altogether may perchance be bury . upon the which consideration we read many notable and famous thing to have be erect in time past of noble personage ( have have wealth at will ) in such sort , that not only certain ruin of the same sumptuous work build so many hundred year past , do still remain , but also the most part of those prince , the author of they , do continual by they dwell in our memory . as the pyramid make at Memphis , or near the famous river of Nilus , by the great expense of the king of Egypt : the tower call Pharia , make in the hand of Pharos by king Ptolemy : the wall of Babylon , make or at the least reedify by 118 queen Semiramis : Diana church at Ephesus build by all the noble person of Asia : Mausolus tomb or sepulchre , make by his wife queen of Caria : colossus Solis place at Rhodes , i remember not by what prince charge , but make by the hand of care Lindius scholar to Lysippus : and the image of Jupiter , make of ivory by the hand of the skilful workman Phydias . the which monument make of barbarous and heathen prince to redeem themselves from oblivion deserve both for the magnificence , and perfect workmanship of the same , to be account in those day as the seven wonder of the world . since the which time , a easy , ready , and light way , be also of more continuance than the former , have be find out , namely , letter , which be first invent by the caldies and Egyptians , as we read , and augment since by other , to our great benefit , and now last of all ( not long time pass ) the same to have be commit to printer press , to the great perfection of the same : man being first inforce to write their act and monument in beast skin dry , in bark of tree , or otherwise perchance as unready . by the which benefit of letter ( now reduce into print ) we see how easy a thing it be , and have be for noble person , to live for ever by the help of learned man . for the memory of those two worthy and valiant captain Scipio and Hannibal have be long before this present quite forget , except Titus Livius , or some such learned historiographer have write of they in time . and Alexander Magnus himself that great conqueror have nothing be speak of , have not Q . Curtius , or some other like by his learned stile revive the remembrance of he , and call back again his do to his posterity . for the which cause we see common in all age learned man to be much make of by noble personage , as that rare pattern of learning Aristotle to have be great honour of that former renown monarch Alexander : who affirm open , that he be more bind to his master Aristotle , then to king Philip his father , because the one have well frame his mind , the other only his body . many other like example i can allege at this present , if i know not unto who i now write , or in what : for your honour be skilful in history , and so familiar acquaint with the matter it self , that be in still entertain learned man with all courtesy , i shall seem to light a candle at noon tide , to put you in remembrance of the one , or to exhort you to do the other , daily be accustom to perform the same . Crassus say that in Tully first book , de oratore : that a lawyer house be the oracle of the whole city . but i can just witness , that for these five year last pass , since my return from my travel beyond the sea , that your lodging in the court ( where i through your undeserving goodness to my great comfort do daily frequent ) have be a continual receptacle or harbour for all learned man come from both the eye of the realm , Cambridge , and Oxford ( of the which university your lordship be Chanceller ) to their great satisfaction of mind , and ready dispatch of their suit . especial for preacher and minister of true religion : of the which you have be from time to time not only a great favourer , but a earnest furtherer , and protector : so that these two nursery of learning ( in one of the which i have before this spend part of my time , that i may speak bold what i think ) shall wrong your honour great , and much forget themselves , if by all mean possible they shall not hereafter ( as at this present to their small power many well learned gentleman of they do ) labour and travel in show of themselves thankful , to reverence and honour your lordship , and honest their own name : who study certain will sudden decay and fall flat , if they be not hold up by such noble prop , and have not some sure ankerhold in their distress to lean unto . how ready daily your travel be , and have long be beside to benefit all other person , in who any spark of virtue or honesty remains , i need not labour to express , the world 1 20 know already the same . but whosoever they be , that in all their life time have a especial care by all mean to profit as many as they be able , and hurt none , do not only a laudable act , but lead a perfect and very godly life . whereupon Strabo affirm this most true to be speak of they : mortales tum demum deum imitor , cum benefici fuerint . that be , mortali man then special to follow the nature of God , when they be beneficial and bountiful to other . great commendation undoubted it bring to any noble personage , that as the moon , that light and brightness which she receive of the sun , be wont present to spread abroad upon the face of the earth