captain of the castle with the ordinance , that be plant upon the buttery destroy many of our enemy , when they give the assault , the which endure five hour together : so that of turk be slay very many , and of our side between they that be slay and hurt one hundred : most part of the which number be cast away by a mischance of our wildfire , the which be unadvised and negligent handle , burn up many of our own company . there die at that present the earl Gio . Francisco Goro , the captain Barnardino Agubio : and by the throw of stone Hercole Malatesta , captain Pietro Conte , with other captain and standerdbearer , be very sore hurt . the night follow arrive in Cyprus a pinnace from Candia , which bring news of most certain aid , great increase both the mirth and courage of we all , so that we make soon after , with the help of the captain Marco Crivellatore , and Maggio the knight , certain retreat flank to all the place beat down , and whereas they suspect that the enemy have dig up any mine , with hogshead , chest , tike , and sack stuff full of moist earth ( the grecian with all speed have already bring almost all that which they have ) > because they have dispatch their Canveis about necessary use , they bring their hang , cortaine , carpet , even to their very sheet , to make and stuff up their foresay sack , a very good and ready way to make up again their vaimure , the which be throw down with the fury of the artillery , which never stint , so that we make up again still that in the night , the which be throw down and break in the day , sleep very seidome : all the soldier stand always upon the wall , visit continual of the 136 governor of the city , which sleep at no time , but in provident the extreme heat of the day , have no other time oarefull to take their rest , because the enemy be at hand , give we continual alarm , not suffer we long to seidome skepe breath . all the night at any time , the second assault . muchiessein - j . ... - dangerous ' i ' he nine and twenty day of the same month season . a they set the i make towards the Brey on fire , the which mine be dig in stone , which break and cleave all thing in piece , and cause great ruin , make a easy way for the enemy to assault we , who with a outrageous fury come to the top , whereas Mustafa their general be altogether present , which assault be receive , and stay at the begin of sma ^ the earl Hercole Martiningo with his garrison , and at . the so be repulse by our company , who fight with - time g0 „ e out any advantage of covert , the vaimure be help much . throw down by the mine . there be slay of our company captain Meani the sergeant major of our army , captain Celio de Fuochi , captain Erasmo da Fermo : and captain Soldatello , Antonio d ’ Ascoli , captain Gio . d ’ Istria , standard bearer , with many other officer , be sore wound , there die also 30 other of our common soldier . at the arsenal they be beat back with great damage of our enemy , and small hurt to we . five only of our [ ii i . 125 . ] part be slay there , whereas captain Giacomo de Fabriano also be kill , and i be wound in my left leg with a harquebus shoot . the which assault that certain continue six hour , the bishop of Limisso stand woman in - up there , encourage the soldier . where also th ” be find present stout woman , who come thither or man 0 with weapon , stone , and water , to help the soul - kind , i see diour . our enemy understand how great hin - sufficient trial derance they have receive at these two assault , change their mind , and begin again with great fury than ever they have before accustom to lay Saline . 137 it be account a good warlike shift , to leave that to our enemy with hindrance , which we can not any long keep , and use to our own commodity . battery to all place , and into our retreat , so that they labour more speedy than ever they do , make seven other fort more , under the castle , and take away the artillery from they which be far off , plant of it somewhat near , to the number of fourscore , they batter the hold with so great rage , that on the eight day of July , with the same night also be number five thousand canon shoot , and after that sort they overthrow to the ground the vaimure , that scarce with great travel and pain we can repair they again , because our man that labour about they be continual slay by their ordinance , and by reason of the endless tempest of the shot of their harquebusier . and our man begin to decrease . for the Turk cause we to retire from our breye , by the violence of their artillery and mine , in such sort , that there be no more stand leave for our soldier , because we make our vaimure more thick , our stand begin to wax narrow , the which present we of necessity enlarge with board as a scaffold to the vaimure , whereby we may have more elbow room to fight . captain Maggio also make one mine under the say Brey , to the intent , that we be not able any long to keep it , the same may be leave to our enemy to their great hindrance . the three assault . to the say Brey the nine day of July they give the three assault , to the turrion of Santa Nappa , to that of Andruzzi , to the cortaine , to the keep of the arsenal : the which assault have continue more than six hour , they be beat back in four place , but we leave the Brey to their great loss , and we also : because we be assault , our company be not able to manage their