the voyage of m . John lock to Jerusalem . n my voyage to Jerusalem , i embark my self the 26 of march 1553 in the good ship call the Matthew Gonson , which be bind for Livorno , or Legorne and Candia . it fall out that we touch in the begin of April next ensue at Cade in Andalozia , where the Spaniard , accord to their accustom manner with all ship of extraordinary goodness and burden , pick a quarrel against the company , mean to have forfeit , or at the least to have arrest the say ship . and they 76 grow so malicious in their wrongful purpose , that i be utter out of hope of any speedy release , to the end that my intention shall not be overthrow , be enforce to take this course follow . notwithstanding this hard beginning , it fall out so lucky , that i find in the road a great ship call the Cavalia of Venice , wherein after agreement make with the patron , i ship my self the 24 . of may in the say year 1553 , and the 25 by reason of the wind blow hard and contrary , we be not able to enter the strait of Gibraltar , but be put to the coast of Barbary , where we anchor in the main sea 2 . league from shore , and continue so until two hour before sun set , and then we weigh again , and turn our course towards the strait , where we enter the 26 day aforesaid , the wind be very calm , [ ii i . 102 . ] but the current of the strait very favourable . the same day the wind begin to rise somewhat , and blow a further gale , and so continue at northwest until our arrive at Legorne the three of June . and from thence ride over land unto Venice , i prepare for my voyage to Jerusalem in the pilgrim ship . i John lock , accompany with master Anthony Rastwold , with diverse other , Hollanders , Zelanders , almains and french pilgrim enter the good ship the ship fila call fila Cavena of Venice , the 16 of July 1553 . and the 17 in the morning we weigh our anchor and sail towards the coast of Istria , to the port of Rovigno , and Rovignlo a the say day there come aboard of our ship the Percevena port in Istria . of the ship name Tamisari , for to receive the rest of all the pilgrim money , which be in all after the rate of 55 . crown for every man for that voyage , after the rate of five shilling starling to the crown : this do , he return to Venice . the 19 day we take fresh victual aboard , and with the boat that bring the fresh provision we go on land to the town , and go to see the church of sancta Eufemia , where we see the body of the say . saint Eufemia . the 20 day we depart from rovignio , and about monte de noon we have sight of monte de Ancona , and the hill ncona . of paimatiaj or eise of Sclavonia both at one time , and by report they be 100 mile distant from each other , and more . the 21 we sail still in sight of Dalmatia , and a little before noon , we have sight of a rock in the midst of the 11 pomo . sea , call in italian , il Porno , it appear a far off to be in shape like a sugarloafe . also we see another Sant Andrea , rock about two mile compass call Sant Andrea : on this rock be only one monastery of friar : we sail between they both , and leave saint Andrea on the left hand of we , and we have also ken of another hand Lissaanlland . call Lissa , all on the left hand , these three hand lie east and west in the sea , and at sun set we have pass they . il pomo be distant from Sant Andrea 18 mile , and saint Andrea from Lissa io mile , and Lissa from Lezina hand . another hand call Lezina , which stand between the main of Dalmatia and Lissa , ten mile . this hand be inhabit , and have great plenty of wine and fruit and hereagainst we be becalm . the 22 we have sight of another small hand call Catza . Catza , which be desolate and on the left hand , and on Pelagosa . the right hand , a very dangerous hand call Pelagosa , this be also desolate , and lie in the midst of the sea between both the maines : it be very dangerous and low land , and it have a long ledge of rock lie out six mile in to the sea , so that many ship by night be cast away upon they . there be between Catza and Pelagosa 30 mile , and these two hand be distant from Venice 400 mile . there be also about twelve mile Augusta . eastward , a great hand call Augusta , about 14 mile in length , somewhat hilly , but well inhabit , and fruitful ! of vine , corn and other fruit , this also we leave on the left hand : and we have hitherto keep our course from rovignio east southeast . this hand be under the signiory or government of Ragusa , it be distant from Ragusa 50 mile , and there be by that hand a great , 78 name Meleda , which be also under the government of Mekda . Ragusa , it be about 30 mile in length , and inhabit , and have good port , it lie by east from Augusta , and over against this hand lie a hill call monte s . monte sant Angelo , upon the coast of Puglia in Italy , and we have - angplo . sight of both land at one time . the 23 we sail all the day long by the bowline alongst the coast of Ragusa , and towards night we be within 7 or 8 mile of Ragusa , that we may see the white wall , but because it be night , we cast about to the sea , mind at the second watch , to bear it again to Ragusa , for to know the news of the Turk army , but the wind blow so hard and contrary , that we can not . this city of Ragusa pay tribute to the Turk Ragusa pale yearly fourteen thousand Sechinos , and every Sechino t0 be