with these hostage , which be then come for that purpose of the article of peace , require by they of their general , their life , armour , and good , five . piece of ordinance , three of the best horse , and safe passage from thence unto Candia accompany with their galley , and last of all , that the grecian inhabit the island , may dwell there still quiet , and enjoy peaceable their own good and possession , live still Christians just turkish hereafter , as they have do before . all the which deal , to request and article be agree upon , grant , and speakeandnot subscribe unto by the hand of Mustafa . forthwith dainty to pro - be send galley , and other vessel into the haven , so mouse , and that our soldier immediate begin to embark them - neve to per - self , of the which the great part be already go firm the same . aboard , the nobility and our chief captain also be likewise very desirous to depart . the 15 . of August in the morning , the worthy Bragadino send i with a letter unto Mustafa , by the which he signify , that the same night he will come unto he to deliver up the key of the city , and that he will leave in the hold the honourable gentleman Tiepolo , pray he therefore , that while he shall have just cause thus to be abroad , that there may be 144 no harm do at home , and in the city . the Turk from our truce take until that time , practise with we all familiar , and without any suspicion of sinister or double deal , they have show we much courtesy both in word and deed . Mustafa himself by word of mouth present answer i to this letter , in this sort , that i shall return , and make relation to this noble man Bragadino , who have send i , that he shall come over to he at his own pleasure , for he be very desirous both to see and know he , for his great worthiness and prowess , that he have try to be in he , and in the other of his captain and soldier , of who manhood and courage he will honourable report , where soever he come , as occasion shall serve thereunto : and to conclude , that he shall nothing doubt of any thing : because in no manner of condition he will suffer any [ ii i . 128 . ] violence to be do to those , which remain behind within the city . so i speedy return make true report of the same : and towards night about four of the clock , the right honourable Bragadino accompany with the lord Baglione , with signior Aluigi Martinengo , with the right worshipful signior Gio . Antonio Querini , with the right worshipful signior Andrea Bragadino , with the knight of haste , with the captain Carlo Ragonasco , with captain Francisco Straco , with captain Hector of Brescia , with captain Girolomo di sacile , and with other gentleman and fifty soldier , the governor and noble man with their sword , and the soldier with their harquebuss come forth of their hold , and go unto the pavilion of Mustafa , of who , all they at the beginning be courteous receive , and cause to sit down by he , he reason and discourse with they of diverse thing , a certain time , and draw they from one matter to another , at the last upon a sudden pick a quarrel unto they , especial burden that noble Bragadino with a untruth , lay to his charge y ‘ he have cause certain of his slave in the time that the truce continue between they , to be put to death . the five 14s king the property of true fortitude be , not to be break with sudden terror . Mustafa , cousin germane to you thief , which hang on the left side of our saviour at his passion . which thing be most false . so that he be angry therewith , sudden step forth , and command they to be bind . thus they be unarm ( not suffer at that time to enter into his pavilion , with their former weapon ) and bind , be lead one by one into the market place , before his pavilion , be present cut and hew in sunder in his presence , and last of all from that worthy and noble Bragadino ( who be bind as the rest , and be command twice or thrice to stretch forth his neck , as though he shall have be behead , the which most bold he do without any spark of fear ) his ear be cut off , and cause he to be stretch out most vile upon the ground , Mustafa talk with he , and blaspheme the holy name of our saviour , demand he , where be now thy Christ , that he help thou not ? to all the which no answer at all be give of that honourable gendeman . the earl Hercole Martinengo , which be send for one of the hostage , who be also bind , be hide by one of Mustafas eunuch until such time as his fury be pass , afterward his life be grant he , he be make the eunuch slave . three grecian which be under his pavilion be leave untouched . all the soldier which be find in the camp , and all sort of Christians to the number of three hundred , be sudden slay , they nothing mistrust any such treason , or tyranny . the christian soldier which be embark a iide before , be link and fetter with iron chain , make slave , all thing be take from they , and strip into their shirt . the second day after this murder be commit , which be the 17 . of August , Mustafa enter the first time into the city , and cause the valiant and wise governor Tiepolo to be hang , who remain behind , wait the return of signior Bragadino . i be in the city at that present , when other of my countryman be thus miserable slay and make slave , hide my self in certain of the grecian house the space of five day , 146 and they not be able to keep i in covert any long for fear of the great penalty , which be proclaim