Teda be a certain wood which burn easy , and savour unpleasant , of the which there be great store in Sicilia . • sometime it be use for a torch . no necessary thing to be do be leave unattempted on either part . man courage oft abate , but hope seidome be eat , but a small quantity of bread , and bean , and we drink water and vinegar together , whereof be not much leave . when that we perceive that our enemy have dig and cast up three mine in the commander of the gate , they labour in all place more diligent than ever they do before , bring into the ditch , over against the battery of the cortaine , a hill of earth , as high as the wall : and already they come to the wall above the counterscarp over against the turrion of the arsenal , 141 wont to travel , but by night only . a letter or supplication exhibit by 1571 . and have make one commander complete , fence with share , like unto plough share , in proportion and height correspondent to we . within the city be remain but five hundred italian soldier , who be not hurt , yet very faint and weary by their long watch and pain , in fight in in July the those fervent and burn heat , which be in those heat be so ex - part - and the great and better part also of the ilandlhatthe grecian be by this time slay , whenas the chief of inhabitant those citizen remain do full resolve themselves ( than thereof be not which be about the twenty day of July ) to present a supplication in write to that noble gentleman Bragadino proveditore , desire and beseech he , that see their ci tie and fortress be thus batter and bring to extremity , without sufficient aid to defend the same , without substance or sustenance , have no hope of the cypriot - succour , or any new supply , they have spend and con -^ ragad ^ w it sum not only their good , but also their life for the ’ defence of they , and in testify of their dutiful service towards the noble and royal state of the signiory of Venice , that it may now please he , and the rest of the honourable governor , that be present , and put in trust , have a careful eye unto some honourable condition , to have now at the last a respect to the credit and honour of their long travel wife , and the safeguard of their poor child , which otherwise be short very like to be a prey to their bloudthirst and raven the answer enemy . to the which letter or supplication speedy of the firm answer be make by the forename honourable braga - e ere ' dino , comfort they , that they shall by no mean abate their courage , and that short he look for succour from the signiory , diminish as much as he may , the fear which they have conceive in their heart , dispatch and send away sudden from Cyprus into [ il i . 127 . ] Candia , a pinnace to certify the duke and governor there , in what extremity they be . the Turk by this time have end their mine , and set they on fire , the 29 . of July : in the which space our man , accord as they 142 be wont to do , renew and make up again the vaimure ruin before by the ordinance , and have no other stuff leave to advance they with , make sack of it stand with reason , kersie , unto the which the noble Tiepolo diligent look . the three mine of the commander do great damage to we , have throw down the great part of the earth , whereas the governor Randacchi be slay . ™ a " ingthe the mine of the arsenal overthrow all the rest of the great , to let turrion , have garrison of our remain . smolder and choke one whole the ss soldier , the two flanker only still the five assault . the enemy travel much to become master of those foresay flanker , and to sally forth by the other battery , and this assault last from three of the clock in the after noon until night , where , and at what time be slay very many of our enemy . in this assault signior Giacomo Strambali , among the rest , show much worthiness , as he have do before in other conflict . the sixth and last assault . the next morning follow , at the break of the day , they assail all place , the which assault continue more than six hour , with very little hurt on our side , because our enemy fight more cold then they be wont to do , annoy of we continual on the sea side with their galley , shoot in all their assault and battery continual cannon shoot in all part of the city , as near as they may . after our necessity oft have defend and repulse this assault , and perceive timetyess thing bring to a narrow strait than they be that , whick wont to be at , we have leave in all the whole city our will cm - but seven barrel of powder , the governor of the tinual city full determine to yield up themselves and the spurn city , with honourable condition . wherefore the first asamst " of August in the after noon , they take a truce , one 143 be come for that purpose from Mustafa the general , with who they conclude the next morning follow to give two hostage a piece , until such time as both army be agree . for our hostage ( by the appointment of the right honourable Bragadino ) be send forth the earl Hercole Martinengo , and signior Matteo Colsi a citizen of Famagusta , and from our enemy come into the city the lieutenant of Mustafa , giannezeribe and the aga of the giannizzer , the which be meet , e ^ tw - ke6 even unto e gate city , of signior Baglione that ’ / Iga de two hundred harquebusier : we also be meet giannizeri be in like manner with great pomp with horseman and the captain of harquebusier , with the son also of Mustafa in person , the Turk who make very much of they . and be ’ the lord Baglione imparld