they have bend their course . and the Christians have depart from thence on the one day in the morning , and seven galley of the Turk come thither that night , as it be certify by those who follow fox , and his company , . fear lest they shall have be meet with . and then they come a foot to Naples , where they depart a sunder , every man take he to his next way home . from whence John fox take his journey unto room , where he be well entertain of a Englishman , who present his worthy deed unto the pope , who reward he liberal , , and give he his letter unto the king of Spain , where he be very well entertain of he there , who for this his most worthy enterprise give he in fee twenty penny a day . from whence , be desirous to come into his own country , he come thither at such time as he convenient can , which be in the year of our lord God , 1579 . who be come into England , go unto the court , and show all his travel unto the council : who consider of the state of this man , in that he have spend and lose a great part of his youth in thraldom and bondage , extend to he their liberality , to help to maintain he now in age , to their right honour , and to the encouragement of all true heart Christians . 164 the copy of the certificate for John fox , and his company , make by the prior , and the brethren of Gallipoli , where they first land . we the prior , and father of the covent of the amerciate , of the city of Gallipoli , of the order of preacher do testify , that upon the 29 of January last pass , 1577 , there come in to the say city a certain gay from Alexandria , take from the Turk , with two hundred fifty and eight Christians , whereof be principal master John fox , a Englishman , a gunner , and one of the chief that do accomplish that great work , whereby so many Christians have recover their liberty . in token and remembrance whereof , upon our earnest request to the same John fox , he have leave here a old sword , wherewith he slay the keeper of the prison : which sword we do as a monument and memoriali of so worthy a deed , hang up in the chief place of our covent house . and for because all thing aforesaid , be such as we will testify to be true , as they be orderly pass , and have therefore good credit , that so much as be above express be true , and for the more faith thereof , we the prior , and father aforesaid , have ratify and subscribe these present . give in gallipoly , the three of February 1577 . i friar Vincent Barba , prior of the same place , confirm the premise , as they be above write . i friar Albert Damaro , of Gallipoly , subprior , confirm as much . i friar Anthony celleler of Gallipoly , confirm as aforesaid . i friar Bartiemew of Gallipoly , confirm as above say . i friar Francis of Gallipoly , confirm as much . [ the bishop 165 the bishop of Rome his letter in the behalf of John fox . be it know unto all man , to who this writing shall come , that the bringer hereof John fox Englishman , a gunner , after he have serve captive in the Turk galley , by the space of fourteen year , at length , through God his help , take good opportunity , the three of Januarie last pass , slay the keeper of the prison , ( who he first strike on the face ) together with four and twenty other Turk , by the assistance of his fellow prisoner : and with 266 . Christians ( of who liberty he be the author ) launch from Alexandria , and from thence arrive first at Gallipoly in Candie , and afterwards at Tarento in Apulia : the write testimony and credit of which thing , as also of other , the same John fox have in public table from Naples . upon Easter eve he come to roam , and be now determine to take his journey to the spanish court , hope there to obtain some relief towards his live : wherefore the poor distress man humble beseech , and we in his behalf do in the bowel of Christ , desire you , that take compassion of his former captivity , and present penury , you do not only suffer he free to pass throughout all your city and town , but also succour he with your charitable alm , the reward whereof you shall hereafter most assure receive , which we hope you will afford to he , who with , tender affection of pity we commend unto you . at Rome , the 20 of April 1577 . Thomas Grolos Englishman bishop of Astraphen . Richard Silleum prio angliae . Andreas Ludovicus register to our sovereign lord the pope , which for the great credit of the premise , have set my seal to these present . at Rome , the day and year above write . Mauricius Clement the governor and keeper of the english hospitali in the city . 166 the king of Spain his letter to the lieutenant , for the place of John fox in the office of a gunner . to the illustrious prince , Vespasian Gonsaga Colonna , our lieutenant and captain general of our realm of Valentia . Having consideration , that John fox Englishman have serve we , and be one of the most principali , which take away from the Turk a certain galley , which they have bring to Tarento , wherein be two hundred , fifty , and eight christian captive : we licence he to practise , and give he the office of a gunner , and have ordain , that he go to our say realm , there to serve in the say office in the galley , which by our commandment be late make . and we do command , that you cause to be pay to he eight ducat pay a month , for the time that he shall serve in the say galley as a gunner , or till we can otherwise provide for he , the say eight ducat monthly of the money which be already of our provision , present and to come , and to have regard of those which come with he . from escuriall the ten of August , 1577 . i the king . Juan del gado . and under that a confirmation of the council .