knife take from we that night . the five , . we sail by the bowline , and out of the Candia . top we have sight of the hand of Candia , and towards noon we may see it plain , and towards night the wind wax calm . the sixth towards the break of day we see two small Gezi . Hands call Gozi , and towards noon we be between they : the one of these hand be fifteen mile about , and the other io mile . in those hand be nourish store of cattle for butter and cheese . there be to the Candia . cape Spada . c Salomon . number of fifty or sixty inhabitant , which be Greeks , and they live chief on milk and cheese . the hand of Candia be 700 mile about , it be in length , from cape Spada , to cape Salomon , 300 mile , it be as they say , able to make one hundred thousand fight man . we sail between the Gozi , and Candia , and they be distant from Candia 5 or 6 mile . the candiot be strong 84 man , and very good archer , and shoot near the mark . this island be from Zante 300 mile . the seven we sail all along the say hand with little wind and unstable , and the eight day towards night we draw to the east end of the hand . the 9 and 10 we sail along with a prosperous wind and see no land . the two in the morning , we have sight of the hand of Cyprus , and towards noon we be thwart the cape call Ponta Malota , and about four of the clock we Ponta , be as far as Baffo , and about sun set we pass Cavo Bianco , and towards nine of the clock at night we double cavo de la get , and anchor afore Limisso , j but the wind blow so hard , that we can not come cavo de la near the town , neither dare any man go on land . and atte - the town be from cavo de le get twelve mile distant . the 12 . of August in the morning we go on land to Limisso : this town be ruinate and nothing in it Limisso . worth writing , save only in the mid of the town there have be a fortress , which be now decay , and the wall part overthrow , which a turkish rover with certain galley do destroy about 10 . or 12 . year past . this day walk to see the town , we chance to see in the market place , a great quantity of a certain vermin call in the italian tongue Cavalette . it be as i can Cavalette , be learn , both in shape and bigness like a grasshopper , for i can judge but little difference . of these many year 7 ^ 7 of they have have such quantity y * they destroy all their Cyprus . corn . they be so plague with they , y ‘ almost every year they do well nigh loose half their corn , whether it be the nature of the country , or the plague of God , that let they judge that best can define . but that there may no default be lay to their negligence for the destruction of they , they have throughout the whole land a constitute order , that every farm or or husbandman ( which be even as slave buy and sell to their lord ) shall every year pay accord to his territory , a the pilgrim go to the greek church . measure full of the seed or egg of these forename Cavalette , the which they be bind to bring to the market , and present to the officer appoint for the same , the which officer take of they very straight measure , and write the name of the presenter , and put the say egg or seed , into a house appoint for the same , and have the house full , they beat they to powder , and cast they into the sea , and by this policy they do as much as in they lie for the destruction of they . this vermin breed or engender at the time of corn be ripe , and the corn be have away , in the clod of the same ground do the husbandman find you nest , or , as i may rather term they , case of the egg of the same vermin . their nest be much like to the key of a hasel - nut tree , when they be dry , and of the same length , but somewhat big , which case be break you shall see the egg lie much like unto ant egg , but somewhat lesser . thus much i have write at this time , because i have no more time of knowledge , but i trust at my return to note more of this island , with the commodity of the same at large . the 13 . day we go in the morning to the greek church , to see the order of their ceremony , and of their communion , of the which to declare the whole order with the number of their ceremonious cross , it be to long . wherefore lest i shall offend any man , i leave it unwritten : but only that i note well , that in all their communion or service , not one do ever kneel , nor yet in any of their church can i ever see any grave image , but paint or portray . also they have store of lamp alight , almost for every image one . their woman be always separate from the man , and general they be in the low end of the church . this night we go aboard the ship , although the wind be contrary , we do it because the patron shall not find any lack of we , as sometime he do : when as tarry upon his own busi ness , he will colour it with the delay of the pilgrim . the 14 . day in the morning we set sail , and lose sight of the island of Cyprus , and the 15 . day we be likewise at sea , and see no land : and the 16 . day towards night , we look for land , but we see none . but because we suppose our self to be near our port , we take in all our sail except only the foresail and the missen , and so we remain all that