, to the refresh and comfort of all inferior and natural thing bear life : so for he , to bestow all that favour and credit , which he have get at the prince hand , to the help and relief of the worthy and needy . great be the force ( my right honourable lord ) of true virtue , which cause man , as Tully write in his book de Amicitia , to be love and honour oft of those person , which never see they . whereof i never have better proof ( i take God and my one conscience to witness , the which i declare also to certain of my friend assoon as i return ) then at my last be at Constantinople , in the year of our lord master 1564 , whereas i oft resort ( as occasion serve ) to the right honourable christian ambassador , while i make my p abide there ( namely unto monsieur Antonio Petrimol , lieger there for the french king , signior m . victor braga - dino , for the signiory of Venice , signior Lorenzo Giustiniano , for the state of Scio , or Chios , and signior albertacio delli alberti , for the duke of Florence ) hear they often report and speak very honorable of your lordship , partly for your other good inclination of nature , but especial for your liberality , and courteous entreat of diverse of their friend and countryman , which upon sundry occasion have be here in this our realm . so that to conclude , all man just favour your honourable deal and desert : and i for my part have reverence and honour 121 scio lose . the same evermore both here at home , and elsewhere abroad , wish often to have have some just occasion to pay part of that in good will , which my slender ability will never suffer i full to discharge . for unto who shall i soon present any thing any way , especial concern matter do abroad , then unto your lordship , by who i be much cherish abroad in my travel , and maintain since my return here at home ? for the which cause i have enterprise ( hope great of your lordship favour herein ) to clothe and set forth a few italian news in our english attire , be first move thereunto by the right worshipful m . D . Wilson master of her majesty request , your honour assure trusty friend , a great and painful furtherer of learning , who i , and many other for diverse respect ought to reverence : who remember that i have be at Cyprus , be willing that my pen shall travel about the christian and turkish affair , which there late have happen : persuading himself , that somewhat thereby i may benefit this our native country . against who reasonable motion i can not great wrestle , hazard rather my slender skill in attempt and perform this his request task , than he through my refusal shall seem to want any jot of my good will . in offer up the which news , although i shall present no new thing to your honour , because you be so well acquaint with the italian copy , as i know : yet i trust your lordship will not mislike , that the same which be both pleasant to read , and so necessary to be know for diverse of our captain and other our countryman , which be ignorant in the italian tongue , may thus now show it self abroad , cover under the wing of your lordship protection . certain it move i much to remember the loss of those three notable hand , to the great discomfort of all Christendom , to those hellish Turk , horseleech of christian blood : namely Rhodes besiege on saint John Baptists day , and take on Johns day the Evangelist , be the 27 of December 1522 . Scio or Chios be 122 lose since my be there , take of Piali bassa with 80 galley , the 17 of April 1566 . and now last of all not only Famagusta the chief hold and fortress in Cyprus Cyprus lose . to have be lose of the venetian the 15 of August last past 1571 ( the chief governor and captain of they be hew in sunder by the commandment of that tyrant Mustafa bassa ) but all the whole hand also to be conquer by those cruel turk , ancient profess enemy to all christian religion . in the which evil success ( come to we as i take it for our offence ) as i lament the generail loss : so i be sure pensive to understand by this too true a report of the vile death of two particular noble gentleman of Venice , signior m . Lorenzo Tiepolo , and signior m . Giovanni Antonio Querini : of both the which i in my travail be very courteous use , the former of they be then ( as now also he be in this overthrow ) governor of Baffo in Cyprus , the other captain of one of the castle at Corcyra in Greece , now call Corfu . but thing past be past amendment , and they can never die more honourable , then in the defence of their country . beside that the late blow , which the turk have receive since this their fury , in token of God wrath against they , do much comfort every christian heart . Moreover this uniform preparation which be certain conclude , and forthwith look for , by very many christian prince ( will God by all general ) against these barbarous mahometist : who cruelty and beastly behaviour i partly know , and be able to judge of , have be in Turkey among they more than eight month together . who unfaithfulness also and breach of promise , as the venetian manly courage in defence of themselves , and their fortress , your honour may easy read in this short treatise and small handful of leaf , i have set down also a short description of the hand of Cyprus , for the better understanding of the whole matter . the which i not only most humble beseech your honour now favourable to accept as a earnest penny of more to 123 come , and of my present good will : but with your accustom goodness towards i , to defend the same against such person , who tongue too ready roll sometime against other man painful travel , persuade themselves to purchase the soon some credit of learning with the rude sort , by control and overdaintie sift of other man labour task . for i know in all age to be find as well basilisk as elephant . thus nothing doubt of your ready aid herein , as i assure trust of your honour favourable acceptation of this my poor present , wish long life with the increase of God holy spirit to your lordship and to all your most honourable family ( unto who i have whole dedicate my self by my own choice and election for ever ) i , crave pardon for my former boldness , most humble thus take my leave . from lambhith the 23 of march . Ann . 1572 . your honour most humble and faithful servant for ever , William malim .