night . the 17 . day in the morning , we be by report of the mariner , some six mile from Jaffa , but it prove contrary . but because we will be sure , we come to a anchor seven mile from the shore , and send the skiffe with the pilot and the master gunner , to learn the coast , but they return , not have see tree nor house , nor speak with any man . but when they come to the sea side again , they go up a little hill stand hard by the brink , whereon as they think they see the hill of Jerusalem , by the which the pilot know ( after his judgement ) that we be past our port . and so this place where we ride be , as the mariner say , about 50 . mile from Jaffa . this coast all alongst be very low , plain , white , sandy , and desert , for which cause it have few mark or none , so that we ride here as it be in a gulf between two cape . the 18 . day we abide still at anchor , look for a gale a great curto return back , but it be contrary : and the 19 we rant - set sail , but the currant have more force than the wind , we be drive back , insomuch , that the ship be under sail , we cast the sound lead , and ( notwithstanding the wind ) it remain before the ship , there we have muddy ground at fifteen fathom . the same day about 4 . of the clock , we set sail again , and sail west alongst the coast with a fresh side - wind . it chance by fortune that the ship cat leap into they a cat fall sea , which be down , keep her self very valiant read . above water , notwithstanding the great wave , still swim , the which the master know , he cause the skiff with half a dozen man to go towards she and fetch she again , when she be almost half a mile [ ii i . 106 . ] from the ship , and all this while the ship lie on stay . i hardly believe they will have make such haste and mean if one of the company have be in the like peril . they make the more haste because it be the patron cat . this i have write onelyto note the estimation that cat be in , among the italian , for general they esteem their cat , as in England we esteem a good spaniel . the same night about ten of the clock the wind calm , and because none of the ship know where we be , we let fall a anchor about 6 mile from the place we be at before , and there we have muddy ground at twelve fathom . the 20 it be still calm , and the current so strong still one way , that we be not able to stem the stream : moreover we know not where we be , whereupon doubt whither we be pass , or short of our port , the master , pilot , and other officer of the ship enter into counsel what be best to do , whereupon they agree to send the boat on land again , to seek some man to speak with all , but they return as wise as they go . than we set sail again and sound every mile or half mile , and find still one depth , so we not know where we be , come again to a anchor , seven or eight mile by west from the place we be at . thus still doubt where we be , the boat go on land again , and bring news that we be short 80 mile of the place , whereas we think we have be overshoot by east fifty mile . thus in these doubt we lose four day , and never a man in the ship able to tell where we be , notwithstanding there be diverse in the ship they with with bat bad be there before . then say the pilot , that on land ™ at hi ® come to the shore , by chance he see two wayfare man , which be moor , and he cry to they in turkish , insomuch that the moor , partly for fear , and partly for lack of understanding , ( see they to be christian ) begin to fly , yet in the end with much a do , they stay to speak with they , which man when they come together , be not able to understand each 88 1553 - oth , but our man make to they the sign of the cross on the sand , to give they to understand that they be of the ship that bring the pilgrim . then the moor know ( as all the country else do ) that it be the use of Christians to go to Jerusalem , show they to be yet by west of Jaffa . thus we remain all that night at anchor , and the far west that we sail , the less water we have . the 21 we set sail again , and keep our course Northeast , but because we will not go along the shore by night , we come to a anchor in four and twenty fathom water . then the next morning be the 22 we set sail again , and keep our course as before , and about three of the clock in the afternoon we have sight of the two tower of Jaffa , and about five of they the two clock , we be with a rock , call in the italian tongue , Scolio di Santo Petro , on the which rock they $ Santg say he fish , when Christ bid he cast his net on the Petro . right side , anfd catch so many fish . this rock be now almost wear away . it be from Jaffa two or three mile : here before the two tower we come to a anchor . then the pilgrim after supper , in salutation of the holy land , sing to the praise of God , te deum laudamus , with magnificat , and Benedictus , but in the ship be a friar of Santo Francisco , who for anger because he be not call and warn , will not sing with we , so that he stand so much upon his dignity , that he forget his simplicity , and neglect his devotion to the holy land for that time