, and the keeper of this fountain have for every tree a Bizantin , which be twelve solde Venice , and a Bizantin be six penny sterling . he that have that to farm , with a sterltn & fair and profitable garden thereto belong , pay every year to saint mark , fifteen hundred crown . the street of the city be not pave , which make it with the quantity of the garden , to seem but a rural habitation . but there be many fair building in the city , there be also monastery both of Franks and greek . the cathedral church be call Santa Sophia , in the which a there be a old tomb of jaspis stone , all of one piece , chirch - of make in form of a carriage coffer , twelve span long , Nicosia . five 97 g [ ii i . i io . ] Limisso , six span broad , and seven span high , which they say be find under ground . it be as fair a stone as ever i have see . the seven day we rid to a greek friary half a mile without the town . it be a very pleasant place , and the friar feast we according to their ability . Theise friar be such as have be priest , and their wife die they must become friar of this place , and never after eat flesh , for if they do , they be deprive from say mass : neither , after they have take upon they this order , may they marry again , but they may keep a single woman . Theise greekish friar be very continent and chaste , and sure i have seidome see ( which i have well note ) any of they fat . the 8 . day we return to arnacho , and rest there . the 9 after midnight my company rid to the hill call Monte de la Croce ( but i not dispose will not go ) which hill be from arnacho 15 . italian mile . upon the say hill be a certain cross , which be , they say , a holy cross . this cross in time past do by their report of the island , hang in the air , but by a certain earthquake , the cross and the chapel it hang in , be overthrow , so that never since it will hang again in the air . but it be now cover with silver , and have 3 . drop of our lord blood on it ( as they say ) and there be in the midst of the great cross , a little cross make of the cross of Christ , but it be close in the silver , you must ( if you will ) believe it be so , for see it you can . this cross hang now by both end in the wall , that you may swing it up and down , in token that it do once hang in the air . this be tell i by my fellow pilgrim , for i see it not . the 10 . at night we go aboard by warning of ' the patron : and the 11 . in the morning we set sail , and creep along the shore , but at night we anchor by reason of contrary wind . the 12 . we set sail towards Limisso , which be from Salines 50 . mile , and there we go on land that night . the 13 . and 14 . we remain still on land , and the 15 . the patron send for we ; but by reason that one of our company be not well , we go not present , but we be force afterward to hire a boat , and to overtake the ship ten mile into the sea . at this Limisso all the venetian ship lade wine for their provision , and some for to sell , and also vinegar . they lade also great store of Carrobi : for all the country thereabouts adjoin - Carrobi . king , and all the mountain be full of Carrobi tree , they lade also cotton wool there . in the say town we do see a certain foul of the land ( whereof there be many in this island ) name in the italian tongue vulture . it be a foul that be as big as a swan , vulture . and it live upon carrion . the skin be full of soft down , like to a fine fur , which they use to occupy when they have evil stomach , and it make good digestion . this bird ( as they say ) will eat as much at one meal as shall serve he forty day after , and within the compass of that time care for no more meat . the country people , when they have any dead beast , they carry it into the mountain , or where they suppose the say vulture to haunt , they see the carrion do immediate greedy seize upon it , and do so ingraft their talent , that they can speedy rise again , by reason whereof the people come and kill they : sometime they kill they with dog , and sometime with such weapon as they have . this foul be very great and hardy , much like a eagle in the feather of her wing and back , but under her great feather she be only down , her neck also long and full of down . she have on the neck bone , between the neck and the shoulder , a heap of feather like a tassel , her thigh unto her knee be cover with down , her leg strong and great , and dare with her talent assault a man . they have also in this island a certain small great plenty bird , much like unto a wagtail in feather and make , fat these be so extreme fat that you can perceive nothing ’ else in all their body : these bird be now in season . they take great quantity of they , and they use to pickle they with vinegar and salt , and to put they in pot and send they to Venice and other place of Italy for present of great estimation . they say they send almost 1200 . Jarres or pot to Venice , beside those which be consume in the island , which be a great number . these be so plentiful that when there be no ship , you may buy they for 10 . carchy , which coin be 4 . to a venetian Soldo , which be penny farthing the dozen , and when