a brief description of the hand of Cyprus : by the which not only the venetian title why they have so long enjoy it , but also the turk , whereby now he claim it , may plain appear . estgjlhe hand of Cyprus be environ with diverse sea : f ° r westward it be wash with the sea call smhshi pamphilium : southward , with the sea TEgyptium : on the east part , with the sea Syrium : and northward , with the sea call Cilicium . the which hand in time pass have diverse name : call once Acamantis , as Sabellicus witness . Philonides make mention , that it be call sometime cerasis . Xenogoras write , that it be name Aspelia , Amathusa , and Macaria . there be in time past fifteen city or famous town in it , but now very few , among the which Famagusta be the chief and strong , situate by the sea side . there be also Nicosia , which be wont , by the traffic 124 of merchant , to be very wealthy : beside the city of Baffo , Arnica , Saline , Limisso , Melipotamo , and episcopia . Timosthenes affirm , that this hand be in compass 429 mile : and Arthemidorus write the length of the same to be 162 mile , measure of it from the east to the west , betwixt two promontory name Dinaretta and Acamanta . this hand be think to be very rich , abundant of wine , oil , grain , pitch , rozin , alum , salt , and of diverse precious stone , pleasant , profitable , and necessary for man use , and much frequent of merchant of Syria , unto the which it lie very near . it have be , as Pliny write , join sometime with Syria , as Sicilia have be also with Italy . it be a long time subject unto the roman , after to the persian , and to the sultan of . / Egypt . the selfsame hand be sometime also English , be conquer by king Richard the first , in his voyage to Jerusalem in the year of our lord 1192 . who ( as Polydore write in his fourteenth book of our english history ) be prohibit by the cypriotte from arrival there , invade and conquer the same soon after by force : and have leave behind he sufficient garrison to keep the same , depart from thence to Ptolemayda : who afterward exchange the same with guy of Lusignan , that be the last christen king of Jerusalem , for the same kingdom . for the which cause the king of England be long time after call king of Jerusalem . and last of all , the venetian have enjoy it of late a long time , in this order follow . in the year of our lord 1470 , John king of the say hand , son to Janus of Lusignan , have by Helen his wife , which be of the imperial house of Paleologus , one daughter only call Charlotta , and a bastard call James : the which James be afterward consecrate bishop of Nicosia . This Charlotta be marry first to the king of Portugal , of who he have no issue , so that he be dead , lewes duke of Savoy ( to who she be the second time marry ) son to Lewes the second of that name ( unto 125 who the say hand by the right of this his wife Charlotta do appertain ) have the possession of the same . James the bastard assoon as his father be dead , of a bishop become a soldier , and with a army win the hand , make it his own by force . this duke of Savoy hear these news , with a number of well appoint soldier , arrive short after in Cyprus , and recover again the hand , compel the bastard to fly forthwith over to the sultan of / Egypt . who make himself his subject , in time so wrought and temper the matter , that the sultan in person at his request pass over into Cyprus , besiege duke Lewes in the castle of Nicosia , and at length compel he to depart , leave his kingdom . so that this bishop become again king of this hand : who short after cleave to the venetian have make a league of friendship with they , marry by their consent one Catherina the daughter of Marco Cornaro , which Catherine the senate of Venice adopt unto they soon after as their daughter . this bishop not long after sicken , and die , leave this his wife with child , who live not long after his father death . by the which mean the venetian make themselves the next heir to Catherina by the law of adoption , take unto they the possession of this kingdom , and have keep and enjoy the same almost this hundred year . now this great Turk call sultan Selim in the right of the sultan of / Egypt , who his grandfather ( call also sultan Selim ) conquer , pretend a right title unto it , and now , as you may understand by read of this short treatise , have by conquest obtain the same . who i pray the everliving God , if it be his holy will , short to root out from thence . 126 be not ignorant ( gentle reader ) how hard a matter it be for any one man to write that , which shall please and satisfy all person , we be common of so diverse opinion and contrary judgement : again Tully affirm it to be a very difficult thing , to find out any matter which in his own kind may be in all respect perfect . wherefore i trust by your own judgement i ought of reason to be the soon pardon ( my translation be precise tie to my author mean ) if any thing herein beside be think to be want : i have learn by the way how cumbrous a thing it be to turn the selfsame matter out of the italian language into our country speech . but who so do what he possible can be bind to no more . and i now at the request of other ( who put i in mind , that i be not only bear unto my self ) have accomplish that in the end , which i promise and be require . with what pain and diligence , i refer i [ ii i