to the worshipful m . William winter . t may please your worship to understand , that as concern the voyage to Chio , what great profit will be get , both for merchant , and also for owner of ship ( as it be well know in those day when the Matthew Gonson , the Trinity Fitzwilliams , and the saviour of Bristol , with diverse other ship which trade thither yearly , and make their voyage in ten or twelve month , and the long in a year ) m . Francis Lambert , m . John brook , and m . Drauer can true inform you hereof at large . and by reason that we have not trade into those part these many year , and the Turk be grow mighty , whereby our ship do not trade as ir5 Gaspar Campion married - in Chio 24 year . they be wont , i find that the venetian do bring those commodity hither , and do sell they for double the value that we our self be accustom to fetch they . wherefore , as i be inform by the above name man , that there be none so fit to furnish this voyage as your self : my request be that there may be a ship of convenient burden prepare for this voyage , and then i will satisfy you at large what be to be do therein . and because the Turk , as i say before , be wax strong , and have put out the christian ruler , and place his own subject , we may doubt whether we may so peaceable trade thither as we be wont : therefore i dare undertake to obtain a safeconduct , if my charge may be bear to go and come . of the way how this may be do , m . lock can satisfy you at large . Moreover , i can inform you more of the trade of that country , than any other , for that i have , be in those part these thirty year , and have be marry in the very town of Chio full four and twenty year . Furthermore , when one of our ship come thither , they bring at the least six or eight thousand carsy , so that the custom thereof be profitable for the prince , and the return of they be profitable to the common people : for in barter of our ware , we take the commodity which the poor of that town make in their house : so that one of our ship bring the prince and country more gain than six ship of other nation . the want of this our trade thither be the only cause why the christian ruler be displace : for when they pay not their yearly tribute , they be put out by force . touch the ship that must go , she must observe this order , she must be a ship of countenance , and she must not touch in any part of Spain , for the time be dangerous , nor take in any lade there : but she must lade in England , either good of our own , or else of stranger , and go to Genoa or Legorno , where we may be well entreat , and from thence she must make her money to buy wine , by ex - 116 change to Candia , for there both custom and exchange be reasonable : and not do as the Math . Gonson and other ship do in time past , who make sale of their [ ii i . 117 . ] ware at Messina for the lade of their wine , and pay for turn their white money into gold after four and five in the hundred , and also do hazard the loss of ship and good by carry away their money . thus by the aforesaid course we shall trade quiet , and not be subject to these danger . also from Legorno store ° f h ™ ? 5 to Castilia de la mar , which be but 16 mile from Naples , j * fas ~ and the ready way to Candia , you may lade hoop , mare for which will cost carolin of Naples 27 and a half the Candia . thousand , which be ducat two and a half of Spain . and in Candia for every thousand of hoop you shall have a but of malmsey clear of all charge . insomuch that a ship of the burden of the Matthew Gonson will carry four hundred thousand hoop , so that one thousand ducat will lade she , and this be a usual trade to Candia , as m . Michael lock can testify . Furthermore , it be not unknown to you , that the oil which we do spend in England for our cloth , be bring out of Spain , and that very dear , and in England we can sell they under 28 pound and 30 pound the ton : i say we may have good oil , and better cheap in diverse place within the strait . wherefore if you think good to take this voyage in hand , i will inform you more particular when you please . in the mean time i rest your worship to command . you at your pleasure jasper Campion .