be new flanker make , also traverse call butteriss make upon the cortaine , with one trench of Turves two foot high and broad , the which be make on that side of the wall of the city , which be already batter with the shot of the Turk , with certain loop hole for our harquebusier , by the which they defend the counterscarp . two noble personage Bragadino and Baglione personal take this charge on they , by the which mean the christian affair pass in very good order . all the bread for our soldier be make in one storehouse , of the which the noble gentleman Lorenzo 130 Tiepolo captain of * Baffo have charge , who refuse no pain , where he think his travel may prevail . in the castle be place that famous gentleman Andrea Bragadino , who with a diligent guard have charge on that part of the castle principal , next unto the sea side , trim and dig out new flanker for the better defence of the * arsenal . a valiant knight name Foito be appoint master of the ordinance , who be slay within few day after in a skirmish , who garrison the noble Bragadino proveditore before name present deliver over to i . three other captain be appoint over the wildfire with twenty footman for every one of they , choose out of the army , to use and execute the same as occasion shall serve . the best piece of ordinance be bring forth unto that side of the town , where the battery be look for to be make : and they make privy fence to cover the better their cannon shoot withal . there be no want in the Christians to annoy their enemy in issue often out of every side against they , aswell to hinder their determination , as to hurt they otherwise at diverse time . they also render to we the like . for three hundred of the inhabitant of Famagusta one time issue out of the city , arm only with their sword and target , with so many italian harquebusier also in their company , receive great damage , because the trench of the enemy be make about so thick , although at the same present we compel they to fly , and slay also many of they : yet they increase to such number , that they kill present thirty , and hurt there threescore of our company . for the which cause order be take , that our man shall no more come forth of their hold , commit themselves to manifest peril to bid their enemy the base . the Turk in process of time by little and little with their trench , come at length to the top of the counterscarp , and have furnish their fort the nineteenth day of May , begin their battery with ten fort , have 131 A . D . 1571 . * Baffo of the ancient writer name Paphos , in the which city there be a sumptuous church dedicate to Venus . * arsenal in Constantinople and Venice be the place for munition and artillery to lie in . threescore and fourteen piece of great artillery within their custody , among the which there be four basilisk ( for so they term they ) of a immeasurable greatness , and begin to batter from the gate Limisso unto the arsenal , and lay five battery against the town , the one against the great high turret of the arsenal , which be batter with five piece of ordinance mount upon that fort of the rock , the other against the cortaine it self of the arsenal , batter by one fort with eleven piece : another against the keep of Andruzzi with two commander , or cavalier , which be above with one fort of eleven other piece : another battery against the turret of saint Nappa , the which be batter with four basilisk . the gate of Limisso , which have one high commander or cavalier alone , and a Brey and cortaine without be batter by the fort with three and thirty piece of artillery , whereas Mustafa himself general of the Turk army take the charge in person . at the first they seem not to care much to spoil the wall , but shoot still into the city , [ ii i . 123 . ] and against our ordinance , which great gall they . whereupon they , who be within the city , aswell our soldier , as the grecian , assoon as the battery begin , withdraw themselves , come and dwell by the wall of the city , whereas they continue from that time to the end of the siege . the noble Bragadino lodge in the keep of Andruzzi , Baglioni in that ward of saint Nappa . the honourable Tiepolo in that which be call Campo Santo . wherefore they be present at all that be do , both encourage , and punish the soldier accord to their desert . the right worshipful Luigi Martiningo be appoint chief over the ordinance , who answer all man expectation of he , with great courage divide the charge thereof unto six other inferior captain , who take order and care for that company , and for the provision of thing necessary for the gunner : one company of the grecian be appoint to every gate of the city for to attend upon 132 the service of the artillery . the valiant captain Francisco Bagone ward at the keep , and at the great commander of the arsenal . captain Pietro Conte attend upon the cortaine , at the commander of the volti , and at the keep of Campo Santo . i for my part attend upon the commander of Campo Santo , and upon the commander of Andruzzi , and of the cortaine , unto the turret of Santa Nappa . the earl Hercole Martiningo attend upon the commander of Santa Nappa , and to the whole cortaine , unto the gate of Limisso . Horatio captain of Veletri attend upon the Brey and cortaine towards the bulwark . upon the high commander of Limisso , which be more trouble than all the rest , attend the captain Roberto Malvezzi . at the same time , when the battery begin ( by the commission of the honourable Bragadino ) victual be appoint , and give to all the soldier , aswell grecian , as italian , and gunner : namely wine , pottage , cheese , and bacon : all the which thing be bring to the wall as need do require in very good