pike in good order , by reason of the narrowness of the stand where they be , be willing to retire in that order , as the lord Baglione have prescribe unto they , and can not , 138 i57i - cast themselves at the last into a confuse order , and retire , they be mingle among the Turk : so that fire be give to our mine , the same ( with a terrible sight to behold ) slay present of our enemy more than one thousand , and above one hundred of we . there be slay Roberto Malvezzi , and captain Marchetto de Fermo be grievous wound . at the assault of the arsenal be slay captain David noce master of the camp , and i my self be hurt by the race of a cannon shot . this assault continue five hour , and the citizen of Famagusta show great courage in every place , with their woman also , and young stripling . the Brey be so deface by reason of this my set on fire , that no body any more attempt to recover the same : because there be no apt place remain to stay upon . the left flank only remain still , whereas another mine be make . the gate of Limisso be over against this foresay Brey , and somewhat low , which be always open , have make to the same a portali , with a Percollois annex to it , the which Percollois by the cut of a small cord , be a present defence to the gate , and our soldier give their attendance by that gate to bring in the batter earth , which fall in the ditch from the rampaire : and when they see that their enemy in four day come not thither , they begin to entrench above the Brey , and by the flanker above they suffer no ™ person to pass out of the gate , the which thing at bring great suspicion unto our enemy , because they dangerous be often time assail of our company . time not only muck come - the four assault . fort the common soulwherefore they come the fourteen day of July dier , but also to assault the gate of Limisso , and lay their increase battery to all other place , they come and plant their ensign even before the gate , whereas the lord Baglione , endation ^ ' and signior Luigi be in readiness , who have take upon all man . 139 they to defend that gate of the city . who assoon as they have encourage their soldier , sally swift forth , kill , and put to flight the great part of they , and at the last give fire to the mine of the flank slay four hundred Turk , and signior Baglione at the same time win a ensign of our enemy , wrest it violent out of one of the ensign bearer hand . the day follow they give fire to the mine of the cortaine , the which thing not [ ii i . 126 . ] fall out great to their purpose , they follow not their prepare assault . wherefore they begin to fortify , and advance high their traverse in the ditch , for their better assurance against they shall give the assault : and they have empty and carry away all the earth near unto the counterscarf , where they lodge in their pavilion , so that we can not descry they . they shoot seven piece of artillery upon the wall of the counterscarp so covert , that they be not see : two from the Brey of the turrion of Santa Nappa , one from Andruzzi , and two other all along the battery of the cortaine . and they come with certain board cover with raw and green e hide , under which they bring their man to dig in the vaimure , we be nothing behind or forgetful to cast wildfire among they , and sometime to issue forth of our sally call postern , to offend their pioner , although to our great hindrance . and we still repair the vaimure by all mean possible , with buff skin , be moist and wet , throw in also earth , shread , and cotton with water , be well bind together with cord : all the woman of Famagusta gather themselves together into company in every street ( be guide of one of their monk call Caloiero ) resort daily to a certain place appoint , to labour , gather and provide for the soldier , stone and water , the which be keep for all assault in half butt to quench the fire , which the turk throw among they . 140 have have no great success in take of the gate , they find out a new way , never hear of before , in gather together a great quantity of certain wood call Teglia , which easy burn , and smell very evil , the which they throw before the former gate of the city , and faggot fasten to the same , with certain beam besmear with pitch , kindle sudden so great a fire , as be not possible for we to quench the same , although we throw upon it whole butt of water , which be throw down from a high commander , which butt present break in sunder . this fire continue four day , wherefore we be enforce by reason of the extreme heat and stinch , to withdraw our self further inward , and they descend towards their low flanker , begin other mine , so that the gate be shut up , because it can be no long keep open , and sudden ( a thing marvellous to be speak ) the stand of the Brey be repair , and make up again , they plant one piece over against the gate , the which of we with stone , earth and other thing , be sudden bury up . by this time we be drive to a exigent , all our provision within the city stoop very low , save only hope , the noble courage of the governor and captain , and the stout readiness of the soldier : our wine , and flesh as well forsake . powder as unpowder be spend , nor there be any Saguntina cheese to be get , but upon a unreasonable price , our fame . company have eat up their horse , ass , and cat , for lack of other victualis : there be nothing leave to teglia in latin call