anchor , at nine of the clock at night . John lock , the 31 about six of the clock in the morning , i and five Hol - £ ve Hollander go on land , and host at the ‘ tand ’ 5 ° n house of Pedro de Venetia . after breakfast we go * to see the town , and pass along we go into some of the greek church , wherein we see their altare , image , and other ornament . this do , we go to Santa Maria a monastery of friar call sancta maria de la Croce , de la Croce , these be western Christians , for the greek have nothing to do with they , nor they with the greek , for they differ very much in religion . there be but 2 . friar in this friary . in this monastery we see the the tomb of tomb that m . T . Cicero , be bury in , with Terentia m . T . Cicero . Antonia , his wife . this tomb be find about six year since , when the monastery be build , there be in time past a street where the tomb stand . at the find of the tomb there be also find a yard under ground , a square stone somewhat long than broad , upon which stone be find a write of two several hand write , the one as it seem , for himself , and the other for his wife , and under the same stone be [ ii i . 104 . ] find a glass somewhat proportion like a urinali , but that it be eight square and very thick , wherein be the ash of the head and right arm of Mar . T . Cicero , for as story make mention he be behead as i remember at Capua , for insurrection . and his wife have get his head and right arm , ( which be bring to roam to the emperor ) go from Rome , and come to Zante , and there bury his head and arm , and write * or , Ave . upon his tomb this style m . T . Cicero . * have . then follow in other letter , et tu Terentia Antonia , which difference of letter declare that they be not write the detcrip - both at one time . the tomb be long and narrow , and deep , wall on every side like a grave , in the bottom ' whereof be find the say stone with the write on it , and the say glass of ash , and also another little glass of the same proportion , wherein , as they say , be the tear of his friend , that in those day they do use to gather and bury with they , as they do use in Italy and Spain to tear their hair , to bury with their friend . in the say tomb be a few bone . after dinner we rest until it draw towards evening by reason of the heat . and about four of the clock we walk to another friary a mile out of the town call Sant Elia , these be white friar , there be two , but $ ant Elia , but one be dead , not six day since . this friary have a i friar ' garden very pleasant , and well furnish with orange , lemon , pomegranate , and diverse other good fruit . the way to it be somewhat ragged , up hill and down , and very stony , and in winter very dirty . it stand very pleasant in a clift between two hill , with a good prospect . from thence we ascend the hill to the castle , which be situate on the very top of a hill . this castle be very strong , in compass a large mile descrip - and a half , which be victual , ( as it be never unfurnish ) and man with man of trust , it may defend Zante . it self against any prince power . this castle take the just compass of the hill , and no other hill near it , it be so steep down , and so high and ragged , that it will tire any man or ever he be half way up . very nature have fortify the wall and bulwark : it be by nature four square , and it command the town and port . the venetian have always their Podesta , or governor , with his two counselor resident therein . the town be well inhabit , and have great quantity of householder . the hand by report be threescore and ten mile about , it be able to make twenty thousand fight man . they say they have always five or six hundred horseman ready at a hour warning . they 2 % Turk say the Turk have assay it with ioo . galley , but he can never bring his purpose to pass . it be strange to i how they shall maintain so many man in this hand , for their best sustenance be wine , and the rest but miserable . the first of August we be warn aboard by the » 3 patron , and towards evening we set sail , and have sight the castle of of a castle call Torneste , which be the Turk , and be Tomeste . ten mile from Zante , it do belong to the venetian , but they have now lose it , it stand also on a hill on the twelve turk sea side in Morea . all that night we bear into the sea , ^ Modonand because we have news ' at Zante of twelve of the Turk Conn and galley » that come from Rhodes , which be about candla . Modon , Coron , and Candia , for which cause we keep at the sea . the second of August we have no sight of land , but keep our course , and about the three watch the wind Modon . scant , so that we bear with the shore , and have sight Coron . of Modon and Coron . cavo Matta - the three we have sight of Cavo Mattapan , and all ? a - that day by reason of contrary wind , which blow somewhat hard , we lay a hull until morning . the four we be still under the say cape , and ' so continue that day , and towards night there grow a contention in the ship among the Hollander , and it have like to have be a great inconvenience , for we have all our weapon , yea even our