. 121 . ] to they which be skilful in the italian tongue , or may the better judge , if it please they to try the same , cast aside this exampier . i speak it not arrogant , i take God to witness : but man painful travel ought not light to be condemn : nor sure at any time be wont to be of the learned , or discreet . by who gentle acceptation if these my present do be now support , i will persuade my self that i have reap sufficient fruit of my travel . unto who with all my heart i wish prosperous success in all their affair . Ann . Dom . 1572 . W . m . [ in turcha 127 um deus , succurre tuis , miseresce tuorum , et subeat gentis te nova cura tuus . quem das tantorum finem , rex magne , laborum ? in nos vibrabit tela quousque Satan ? ant rhodum , mox ind ^ Chium , nunc denique cyprum , turcharum cepit sanguinolenta manus . Mustafa foedifragus part grassatur in omnes , et veneta cypriam strage cruentat humum . nec finem imponit sceleri , molli tue furorem , nec nisi potato sanguine pastus abit . qualis , quae nunquam nisi plena tum ^ nsque cruore sanguisuga obsessam mittit hirudo cutem . torturam sequitur tortura , cruorque cruorem , et caedem admissam caedis alius amor . saevit inop animi , nec vel se temperate ipse , vel manus indomitum nostra domare potest . at tu , magne pater , tumidum disperde tyrannum , nec sine mactari semper ovile tuum . Exulet hoc monstrum , ne sanguine terra redundet . excutiantque novum Cypria regna jugum . » et quod Christicolae foedus pepigere Monarchae , id faustum nobis omnibus esse velis . tu pugna illorum pugnas , and bella secunde . captiv6sque tibi subde per arma Scythas . sic tua per totum fundetur gloria mundum , Unus sic christus fiet , and una fides . gulielmus malim . 128 the true report of all the success of Famagusta , make by the earl Nestor Martiningo , unto the renown prince the duke of Venice . he sixteenth day of February , * 1571 , the fleet which have bring the aid unto Famagusta , depart from thence , whereas be find in all the army , but four thousand footman , eight hundred of they choose soldier , and three thousand ( account the citizen and other of the village ) the rest two hundred in number be * in Italy and other place the date of the year of the lord be always change the first of January , or on new year day , and from that day reckon upon : although we he ere in England , especial the temporali lawyer for certain cause be not wont to alter the same unacustomated till the annunciation of our lady . soldier of Albania . after the arrival of the which succour , the fortification of the city go more diligent forward of all hand , than it do before , the whole garrison , the grecian citizen inhabit the town , the governor and captain not withdraw themselves from any kind of labour , for the better encouragement and good example of other , both night and day search the watch , to the intent with more careful heed take they may beware of their enemy , against who they make no sally out of the city to skirmish but very seidome , especial to understand when they may learn the intent of the enemy . while we make this diligent provision within the city , the turk without make no less preparation of all thing necessary , fit to batter the fortress withal , as in bring out of Caramania and Syria with all speed by the sea , many woollpack , a great quantity of wood and timber , diverse piece of artillery , engine , and other thing expedient for their purpose . at the begin of April Halli bassa land there with fourscore galley or thereabouts in his company , who [ ii i . 122 . ] bring thither that , which of our enemy be desire , who soon after depart from thence , and leave behind he thirty galley , which continual transport soldier , munition , fresh victual , and other necessary , five 129 i * carumusa - lini be vessel like unto the french ga - bard , sail daily upon the river of Bourdeaux , which sail w * a mizzen or triangle sail . * Maone be vessel like unto you great hulk , which come hither from Denmark , some of the which carry 7 or 8 hundred ton a piece , flat and broad , which sail some of they with seven misens of piece . * palandrie be great flat vessel make like feriboat to transport horse . Nicosia , otherwise call Nicosia . signior braga - dino be proveditore , that be , governor , and signior baghone general of the christian army . beside a great number of * caramusalin , or brigandine , great hulk call * Maones , and large broad vessel term of they * palandrie , which continual pass to and fro between Cyprus and Syria , and other place thereabouts , which they do with great speed , stand in fear of the christian army . and about the midst of the same month the Turk cause to be bring out of the city of Nicosia , which they have win a little before , fifteen piece of artillery , and raise their army from whence they be before , make ditch and trench necessary , encamp themselves in garden , and towards the west part of Famagusta near a place call Precipola . the five and twenty day of the same month they raise up mount to plant their artillery upon , and cause trench to be make for harquebusier , one very nigh another , approach still very near the city , in such order , as be almost impossible to stay the same , forty thousand of their pioner continual labour there the most part of all the night . the intent of the enemy be then know , and in what part of the city he mind most to plant his battery , we take diligent heed on the other part , to repair and fortify all place necessary within . for the which cause we place a great watch in that way , which be cover with a counterscarp , and in the sally of their privy postern , for the defence of the say counterscarp , there