there be store of ship , 2 . penny the dozen , after TheFamagus - that rate of their money . they of the limit of fama - tans observe gUsta do keep the statute of the Frenchman which sometime do rule there . and the people of Nicosia observe the order of the genouese , who sometime also do rule they . all this day we lie in the sea with little wind . the 16 . we meet a venetian ship , and they will to speak with we , and we with they , make towards each other , but by reason of the evil stirrage of the other ship , we have almost board each other to our great cavo Bianco , danger . towards night we anchor under Cavo Bianco , but because the wind grow fair , we set sail again present . the 17 . 18 . 19 and 20 . we be at sea with calm summer weather , and the 20 . we have some rain , and another cion , see another cion in the element . this day also we a ship call see atlj speak with a venetian ship call el Bonna , el Bonna . l j r a - bind for Cyprus . the 21 . we sail with a reasonable gale , and see no a great tem - land until the 4 . of November . this day we have rain , pest ' thunder , lightning , and much wind and stormy weather , but God be praise we escape all danger . the 4 . of November , we have first sight of the island Candia , Gozi . of Candia , and we fall with the island call Gozi , by Antony Gel - South of Candia . this day depart this present life , ber depart one of our company name Anthony Gelber of Prussia , this life . who only take his surfeit of Cyprus wine . this night we determine to ride a try , because the wind be contrary , and the weather troublesome . 100 the 5 . we have very rough stormy weather . this day be the say Anthony Gelber sow in a Chavina fill with stone and throw into the sea . by reason of the freshness of the wind we will have make towards the shore , but the wind put we to the sea , where we endure a great storm and a troublesome night . the 6 . 7 . and 8 . we be continual at the sea , and this day at noon the wind come fair , whereby we recover the way which we have lose , and sail out of sight of Candia . the 9 we sail all day with a prosperous wind after [ ii i . in . ] 14 . mile a hour : and the 10 . in the morning , we have sight of Cavo Matapan , and by noon of Cavo Gallo , cavo mata - in Morea , with which land we make by reason of contrary Ga ^ wind , likewise we have sight of Modon , under the which Modon . place we anchor . This Modon be a strong town , and build in the sea , and join on the north side to the land . it have a little castle build into the sea , with a peer for little ship and galley to harbour in . it have on the south side of the channel , the island of sapientia , sapientia . with other little island all disinhabit . the channel lie southwest and Northeast between the island and Morea , which be firm land . This Modon be build by the venetian , but as some say it be take from they by force of the Turk , and other say by composition : in like case Coron , and Napolis de Romania , which corm . be also in Morea . this night the flemish pilgrim be drink will have slay the patron because ne anchor here . the r 1 . day we set sail again , and as we pass by Modon , we salute they with ordinance , for they that pass by this place , must salute with ordinance , ( if they have ) or else by strike their top sail , for if they do not , the town will shoot at they . this day towards 2 . of the clock we pass by the island of Prodeno , prodeno . which be but little , and desert , under the Turk . about 2 . hour before night , we have sight of the island of ioi Zante and Zante and Cephalonia , which be from Modon one Cephalonia . hundred mile . the 12 . day in the morning , with the wind at west , castle for - double between castle Torneste , and the island of Turk ^ ante . this castle be on the firm land under the Turk . wonderful e ' this night we anchor afore the town of Zante , where we that night go on land , and rest there the 13 . 14 . and 15 . at night we be warn aboard by the patron . this night the ship take in victual and other necessary . cavo s . the 16 . in the morning we set sail with a prosperous Maria on the wonderful ; nj a ( j ^ g n , we have sight of cavo de santa maria Albania . in Albania , on our right hand , and Corfu on the left Corfu island , hand . this night we anchor before the castle of Corfu , and go on land and refresh our self . the descrip - the 18 . by mean of a friend we be licence to ^ cfofCorfu enter the castle or fortress of Corfu , which be not only ’ of situation the strong i have see , but also of edification . it have for the inner ward two strong castle situate on the top of two high crag of a rock , a bow shoot distant the one from the other : the vocke be unassaultable , for the second ward it have strong wall , with rampier and trench , make as well as any art can devise . for the three ward and uttermost , it have very strong wall with rampire of the rock it self cut out by force , and trench about with the sea the bulwark of the uttermost ward be not yet finish , which be in number but two : there be continual in the castle seven hundred soldier . also it have continual four ward , to wit , for the land entry one