prisoner unto a haven near Alexandria . also with too much cold : but i will go to my purpose , which be , to show the end of those , be in mere misery , which continual do call on God with a steadfast hope that he will deliver they , and with a sure faith that he can do it . nigh to the city of Alexandria , be a haven town , and under the dominion of the Turk , there be a road , be make very fensible with strong wall , whereinto the Turk do customable bring their galley on shore every year , in the winter season , and there do trim they , and lie they up against the spring time . in which road there be a prison , wherein the captive and such prisoner as serve in the galley , be put for all that time , until the sea be calm and passable for the galley , every prisoner be most grievous lade with iron on their leg , to their great pain , and sore disable of they to any labour take . into which prison be these Christians put , and fast ward all the winter season . but ere it be long , the master and the owner , by mean of friend , be redeem : the rest abide still by the misery , while that they be all ( through reason of their ill usage and worse fare , miserable starve ) save one John fox , who ( as some man can abide hard and more misery , then other some can , so can some likewise make more shift , and work more devise to help their state and live , then other some can do ) be somewhat skilful in the craft of a Barbour , by reason thereof make great shift in help his fare now and then with a good meal . insomuch , till at the last , God send he favour in the sight of the keeper of the prison , so that he have leave to go in and out to the road , at his pleasure , pay a certain stipend unto the keeper , and wear a lock about his leg : which liberty likewise , six more have upon like sufferance : who by reason of their long imprisonment , not be fear or suspect to start aside , or that they will work the Turk any mischief , have liberty to go in and out at the say road , in such manner , as this John fox 156 the enterprise of John fox do , with iron on their leg , and to return again at night . in the year of our lord 1577 . in the winter season , the galley happy come to their accustom harbour , and be discharge of all their mast , sail , and other such furniture , as unto galley do appertain , and all the master and mariner of they be then nest in their own home : there remain in the prison of the say road two hundred threescore and eight Christian prisoner , who have be take by the Turks force , and be of sixteen sundry nation . among which there be three Englishman , whereof one be name John fox of Woodbridge in Suffolk , the other William Wickney of Portsmouth , in the county of Southampton , and the three Robert moor of Harwich in the county of Essex . which John fox have be thirteen or fourteen year under their gentle entreatance , and be too too weary thereof , mind his escape , weigh with himself by what mean it may be bring to pass : and continual ponder with himself thereof , take a good heart unto he , in hope that God will not be always scourge his child , and never cease to pray he to further his pretend enterprise , if that it shall redound to his glory . not far from the road , and somewhat from thence , at one side of the city , there be a certain victual house , which one Peter unticaro have hire , pay also a certain fee unto the keeper of the road . This Peter unticaro be a Spaniard bear , and a christian , and have be prisoner about thirty year , and never practise any mean to escape , but keep himself quiet without touch or suspect of any conspiracy : until that now this John Foxe use much thither , they break one to another their mind , concern the restraint of their liberty and imprisonment . so that this John fox at length open unto this unticaro the devise which he will fain put in practice , make privy one moor to this their intent . which three debate of this matter 157 A . D . 1577 - Januarie . at such time as they can compass to meet together : insomuch , that at seven week end they have sufficient conclude how the matter shall be , if it please God to far they thereto : who make five moor privy to this their devise , who they think they may safe trust , determine in three night after to accomplish their deliberate purpose . whereupon the same John fox , and Peter unticaro , and the other six appoint to meet all together in the prison the next day , be the last day of December : where this John fox certify the rest of the prisoner , what their intent and devise be , and how and when they mind to bring their purpose to pass : who thereunto persuade they without much a do to further their devise . which the same John fox see , deliver unto they a sort of file , which he have gather together for this purpose , by the mean of Peter unticaro , charge they that every man shall be ready discharge of his iron by eight of the clock on the next day at night . on the next day at night , this say John fox , and his six other companion , be all come to the house of Peter unticaro , pass the time away in mirth for fear of suspect , till the night come on , so that it be time for they to put in practise their devise , send Peter unticaro to the master of the road , in the name of one of the master of the city , with who this keeper be acquaint , and at who request he also will come at the first : who desire he to take the pain to meet he there , promise he , that he will bring he back again . the keeper agree to go with he , will the warder not to bar the gate , say , that he will not stay long , but