no land because we have very little wind , and that not very favourable . the 22 . at noon the boatswain send some of the mariner into the boat , ( which we toe astern from Jaffa ) for certain necessary belong to the ship , wherein the mariner find a certain fish in proportion like a dace , about 6 . inch long ( yet the mariner say they have see the like a foot long and more ) the which fish have on every side a wing , and towards the tail two other lesser as it be fin , on either side one , but in proportion they be wing and of a good length . Theise wing grow out between the gills and the carcase of the same fish . they be call in the italian tongue Pesce columbini , for in deed , the wing be spread it be like to a fly dove , they say it will fly far , and very high . so it seem that be weary of her flight , 92 she fall into the boat , and not be able to rise again die there . the 23 . 24 . and 25 . we sail our direct course with a small gale of wind , and this day we have sight of the island of Cyprus . the first land that we discover be a headland call Cavo de la Griega , and about mid - cavo de la night we anchor by north of the cape . this cape be grie &- a high hill , long and square , and on the east corner it have a high cop , that appear unto those at the sea , like . a white cloud , for towards the sea it be white , and it lie into the sea Southwest . this coast of Cyprus be high decline towards the sea , but it have no cliff . the 26 . we set sail again , and towards noon we come into the port of Salini , where we go on land and lodge that night at a town one mile from thence call arnacho di Salini , this be but a village call in italian , Casalia . this be distant from Jaffa 250 . italian mile . the 27 . we rest , and the 28 . we hire horse to [ H . i . 108 . ] ride from arnacho to Selina , which be a good mile . the Salmi . 1 , ■ .. • 1 • arnacho dt salt pit be very near two mile in compass , very plain and level , into the which they let run at the time of Casalia . rain a quantity of water come from the mountain , which water be let in until the pit be full to a certain mark , which when it be full , the rest be convey by a trench into the sea . this water be let run in about October , or soon or late , as the time of the year do afford . there they let it remain until the end of July or the midst of August , out of which pit at that time , in stead of water that they let in they gather very fair white salt , without any further art or labour , for it be only do by the great heat of the sun . This the venetian have , and do maintain to the use of saint mark , and the venetian ship that come to this hand be bind to cast out their ballast , and to lade with salt for Venice . also there may none in all the hand buy salt but of these man , who maintain these pit for saint mark . this place be watch by night with 6 . horse - six horseman man to the end it be not steal by night . also under to watch the venetian dominion no town may spend any salt , sa but they must buy it of saint mark , neither may any man buy any salt at one town to carry to another , but every one must buy his salt in the town where he dwell . neither may any man in Venice buy more salt than he spend in the city , for if he be know to carry but one ounce out of the city and be accuse , he lose a ear . the most part of all the salt they have in Venice come from these Salines , and they have it so plentiful , that they be not able , never a year to gather the one half , for they only gather in July , August , and September , and not full these three month . yet notwithstanding the abundance that the ship carry away yearly , there remain heap like hill , some heap able to lade nine or ten ship , and there be heap of two year gather , some of three and some of nine or ten year make , to the value of a great sum of gold , and when the ship do lade , they never take it by measure , but when they come at Venice they measure it . this salt as it lie in the pit be like so much ice , and it be six inch thick : they dig it with axe , and cause their slave to carry it to the heap . this night at midnight we ride to Famagusta , which be eight league from Selina , which be 24 English mile . the 29 about two hour before day , we alight at Famagusta . Famagusta , and after we be refresh we go to see the town . this be a very fair strong hold , and the strong and great in the hand . the wall be fair and new , and strong rampire with four principali bulwark , and between they turrion , respond one to another , these wall do the venetian make . they have also on the haven side of it a castle , and the haven be chain , the city have only two gate , to say , one for the land and another for the sea , they have in the town continual , be it peace or war , 800 soldier , and forty and six gunner , beside captain , petty captain , governor and general . the land gate have always fifty soldier , pike and gunner with their harness , watch thereat night and day . at the sea gate five and twenty , upon the wall every night do watch fifteen man in watch house , for every watch house five man , and in