the market place 30 soldier continual . there may no soldier serve there above 5 . year , neither will they without friendship suffer they to depart afore 5 . year be expire , and there may serve of all nation except greek . they have every pay , which be 45 . day , 15 Mozenigos , which be 15 shilling sterling . Mozenigo . their horseman have only six solde Venetian a day , sell of and provender for their horse , but they have also cer - enice - taine land therewith to blow and sow for the maintenance of their horse , but true i marvel how they live be so hardly feed , for all the summer they feed only upon chop straw and barley , for hey they have none , and yet they be fair , fat and serviceable . the venetian send every two year new ruler , which they call Castellani . the town have allow it also two galley Castellani . continual arm and furnish . the 30 in the morning we rid to a chapel , where they say saint Katherine be bear . this chapel be saint kathe - in old Famagusta , the which be destroy by english - fama - man , and be clean overthrow to the ground , to this g ^ ta . day desolate and not inhabit by any person , it be of a great circuit , and there be to this day mountain of fair , great , and strong building , and not only there , but also in many place of the island . Moreover when er coin they dig , plow , or trench they find sometime old ere ancient coin , some of gold , some of silver , and some of copper , yea and many tomb and vault with sepulcher in they . this old Famagusta be from the other , four mile , and stand on a hill , but the new town on a plain . Thence we return to new Famagusta again to dinner , and towards evening we go about the town , and in the great church we see the tomb of king Jaques , which be the last king of Cyprus , and [ ii i . 109 . ] Cornari , a family of Venice marl to king Jaques , no victual must be sell out of the city of Famagusta . be bury in the year of Christ one thousand four hundred seventie and three , and have to wife one of the daughter of Venice , of the house of Cornari , the which family at this day have great revenue in this island , and by mean of that marriage the venetian challenge the kingdom of Cyprus . the first of October in the morning , we go to see the relief of the watch . that do , we go to one of the greek church to see a pot or jar of stone , which be say to be one of the seven jar of water , the which the lord God at the marriage convert into wine . it be a pot of earth very fair , white enamel , and fair wrought upon with draw work , and have on either side of it , instead off handle , ear make in form as the painter make angel wing , it be about a ell high , and small at the bottom , with a long neck and correspondent in circuit to the bottom , the belly very great and round , it hold full twelve gallon , and have a taphole to draw wine out thereat , the jar be very ancient , but whether it be one of they or not , i know not . the air of Famagusta be very unwholesome , as they say , by reason of certain marsh ground adjoin unto it . they have also a certain yearly sickness reign in the same town , above all the rest of the island : yet nevertheless , they have it in other town , but not so much . it be a certain redness and pain of the eye , the which if it be not quick help , it take away their sight , so that yearly almost in that town , they have about twenty that lose their sight , either of one eye or both , and it come for the most part in this month of October , and the last month : for i have meet diverse time three and four at once in company , both man and woman . their live be better cheap in Famagusta then in any other place of the island , because there may no kind of provision within their liberty be sell out of the city . the second of October we return to arnacho , where we rest until the sixth day . this town be a pretty 96 * 553 - village , there be thereby towards the sea side diverse great nine monument , that there have be great overthrow of in Cyprus . building , for to this day there be no year when they find not , dig under ground , either coin , cave , and sepulchre of antiquity , as we walk , do see many , so that in effect , all alongst the sea coast , throughout the whole island , there be much ruin and overthrow of building : for as they say , it be disinhabit six Cyprus 36 . and thirty year , before saint Helen time for lack of water . and since that time it have be ruinate and cluofwater overthrow by Richard the first of that name , king of Cypr . ruin - England , which he do in revenge of his sister ravish - “ t by Richard mean come to Jerusalem , the which enforcement be * • do to she by the king of Famagusta . the sixth day we rid to Nicosia , which be from arnacho Nicosia . seven Cyprus mile , which be one and twenty italian mile . this be the ancient city of the island , and be wall about , but it be not strong neither of wall nor situation : it be by report three Cyprus mile about , it be not thorough inhabit , but have many great garden in it , and also very many date tree , and plenty of pomegranate and other fruit . there dwell all the gentility of the island , and there have every cavalier or conte of the island a habitation . there be in this dfiuntaine city one fountain rent by saint mark , which be bind every eight day once , to water all the garden city . in the town