the manner of the enter of Soliman the great Turk , with his army into Aleppo in Syria , march towards Persia against the great sophy , the four day of November , 1553 , note by master Anthony Jenkinson , present at that time . 0here march before the grand signior , otherwise call the great Turk , 6000 espere , otherwise call light horseman very brave , clothe all in scarlet . after , march 10000 man , call Nortans , which be tributary to the great Turk , clothe all in yellow velvet , and hat of the same , of the Tartary fashion , two foot long , with a great role of the same colour about their forehead , rich deck , with their bow in their hand , of the turkish fashion . after they march four captain , man of arm , call in turkish Saniaques , clothe all four in crimson 105 velvet , every one have under his banner twelve thousand man of arm well arm with their morion upon their head , march in good order , with a short weapon by their side , call in their language , Simiterro . after come 16000 janissary , call the slave of the grand signior , all a foot , every one have his harquebus , who be his guard , all clothe in violet silk , and apparel upon their head with a strange form , call Cuocullucia , fashion in this sort : the enter in of the forehead be like a skull make of white velvet , and have a train hang down behind , in manner of a french hood , of the same colour , and upon the forepart of the say skull , just in the mid of his forehead there be stand bolt upright like a trunk of a foot [ il i . 113 . ] long of silver , garnish most rich with goldsmith work , and precious stone , and in the top of the say trunk a great bush of feather , which wave up and down most brave when he march . after this , there come 1000 page of honour , all clothe in cloth of gold , the half of they carry harquebuss , and the other half turkish bow , with their truss of arrow , march in good order . then come three man of arm well arm , and upon their harness coat of the Turk fashion , of Libard skin , and murrion upon their head , their spear charge , and at the end of their staff hard by you head of the spear , a horse tail die in a bloody colour , which be their ensign : they be the challenger for the Turk own person . after they come seven page of honour in cloth of silver , upon seven white horse , which horse be cover with cloth of silver , all embroider and garnish with precious stone , emerald , diamond , and ruby most rich . after they also come six more page of honour , clothe in cloth of gold , every one have his bow in his hand , and his fawchine of the Turk fashion by his side . 106 immediate after they come the great Turk himself with great pomp and magnificence , use in his countenance and gesture a wonderful majesty , have only on each side of his person one page clothe with cloth of gold : he himself be mount upon a goodly white horse , adorn with a robe of cloth of gold , embroider most rich with the most precious stone , and upon his head a goodly white tuck , contain in length by estimation fifteen yard , which be of silk and linen weave together , resemble something calicut cloth , but be much more fine and rich , and in the top of his crown , a little pinnach of white ostrich feather , and his horse most rich apparel in all point correspondent to the same . after he follow six goodly young lady , mount upon fine white hacknei , clothe in cloth of silver , which be of the fashion of man garment , embroider very rich with pearl and precious stone , and have upon their head cap of goldsmith work , have great flacket of hair , hang out on each side , die as red as blood , and the nail of their finger die of the same colour , every of they have two eunuch on each side , and iide bow in their hand , after a antic fashion . after march you great bassa chief conductor of the whole army , clothe with a robe of dollymant crimson , and upon the same another short garment very rich , and about he fifty janissary afoot , of his own guard , all clothe in crimson velvet , be arm as the great Turks own janissary . then after ensue three other bassa , with slave about they , be afoot , to the number of three thousand man . after come a company of horseman very brave , and in all point well arm , to the number of four thousand . all this aforesaid army , most pompous to behold , which be in number four score and eight thousand man , encamp about the city of Aleppo , and the grand 107 A . D . 1553 signor himself be lodge within the town , in a goodly castle , situate upon a high mountain : at the foot whereof run a goodly river , which be a branch of that famous river Euphrates . the rest of his army pass over the mountain of Armenia call now the mountain of carnarie , which be four day journey from Aleppo , appoint there to tarry the come of the grand signior , with the rest of his army , intend to march into Persia , to give battle to the great sophy . So the whole army of the grand signior , contain as well those that go by the mountain , as also those that come to Aleppo in company with he , with horseman and footman , and the conductor of the camel and victual , be the number of 300000 . man . the camel which carry munition and victual for the say army , be in number 200000 .