, say that first they ought to have call he year they do begin , because he be a friar , and have be there , and know the order . the 23 we send the boat on land with a messenger to messenger the Padre guardian of Jerusalem . this day it be notify unto i by one of the ship that have be Mahomet be a slave in turquoise , that no man may wear green in clothe in this land , because their prophet Mahomet go in green . greene - this come to my knowledge by reason of the Scrivanello , who have a green cap , which be forbid he to wear on the land . the 24 . 25 . and 26 we tarry in the ship still look for the come of the Padre guardian , and the 26 at night we have a storm which last all the next day . the guardian the 27 in the morning , come the Cadi , you Subassi , of Jerusalem and the meniwe , with the Padre guardian , but they can ‘ ja ^ with not cotne at we by reason of the stormy weather : in the Cady , and the afternoon we assay to send the boat on land , Subassi . but the weather will not suffer we . then again towards night the boat go a shore , but it return not that night . the same day in the afternoon we see in the element , a cloud with a long tail , like unto the tail a cloud call of a serpent , which cloud be call in italian cion , the the italian tail of this cloud do hang as it be into the sea : and dangerous we see watef under the say cloud ascend , as it ' be like a smoke or mist , the which this cion draw up to it . the mariner report to we that it have this property , that if it shall happen to have light on any part of the ship , that it will rend and wretch sail , mast , shroud and ship and all in manner like a with : on the land , tree , house , or whatsoever else it light on , it will rend and wretch . Theise marA conjuration , riner do use a certain conjuration to break the say [ il i . 107 . ] tail , or cut it in two , which as they say do prevail . they do take a black haft knife , and with the edge of the same do cross the say tail as if they will cut it in twain , say these word , hold thou cion , eat this , and then they stick the knife on the ship side with the edge towards the say cloud , and i see it therewith vanish in less than one quarter of a hour . but whether it be then consume , or whether by virtue of the enchantment it do vanish i know not , but it be go . hereof let they judge that know more than i . this afternoon we have no wind , but the sea very stormy , insomuch that neither chest , pot , nor any thing else can stand in the ship , and we be drive to keep our meat in one hand , and the pot in the other , 90 and so sit down upon the hatch to eat , for stand we can not , for that the sea in the very port at a anchor go so high as if we have be in the bay of Portugal with stormy weather . the reason be , as the mariner say to i , because that there meet all the wave from all place of the strait of Gibraltar , and there break , and that in most calm there go great sea , whether the wind blow or not . the 28 . the weather grow somewhat calm , we go on land and rest our self for that day , and the next day we set forward towards the city of Jerusalem . what i do , and what place of devotion i visit in Jerusalem , and other part of the holy land , from this my departure from Jaffa , until my return to the say port , may brief be see in my Testimoniali , under the hand and seal of the vicar general of mount Zion , which for the contentment of the reader i think good here to interlace . universis and singulis praesente littera inspecturis salutem in domino nostro Jesus christo . Attestamur vobis ac aliis quibuscunque , qualiter honorabilis vir Johannes Lok civis Londoniensis , filius honorabilis viri Guilhelmi Lok equitis aurati , ad sacratissima terrae sanctae loca personaliter se contulit , sanctissimum domini nostri Jesus christi sepulchrum , e quo die tertia glorious a mortuis resurrexit , sacratissimum Calvariae montem , in quo pro nobis omnibus cruci affixus mori dignatus est , Zion etiam montem ubi coenam illam mirificam cum discipulis suis fecit , and ubi spiritus sanctus in die sancto Pentecostes in discipulos eosdem in linguis igneis descendit , olivetique montem ubi mirabiliter coelos ascendit , intemeratae virginis Mariae Mausoleum in Josaphat vallis medio situm , bethaniam quoque , Bethlehem civitatem David in qua de purissima virgin maria natus est , ibique inter animalia reclinatus , pluraque loca alia tam in Jerusalem civitate sancta terre Judaeae , quam extra , a modernis peregrinis visitari solita , devotissimi visitavit , 91 the pilgrim return from Jerusalem . mount Carmel . Pesce columbini . pariterque adoravit . in quorum fidem , ego frater Antonius de Bergamo ordinis fratrum minorum regularis observantiae , provinciae divi anthonii sacri conventus montis Zion vicarius ( licet indignus ) necnon aliorum locorum terrae sanctae , apostolica authoritate comissarius and rector , have Sigillo maiori nostri officii nostraque subscription muniri volui . Datum hierosolymis apud sacratissimum domini coenaculum in saepe memorato monte Zion , anno domini millesimo quingentesimo , quinquagesimo tertio , die vero sexto mensis septembris . frater antonius qui supra . the 15 . of September be come from our pilgrimage , we go aboard our ship , and set sail , and keep our course west towards the island of Cyprus , but all that night it be calm , and the 16 . the wind fresh , and we pass by mount Carmel . the 17 . the wind be very scant , yet we keep the sea , and towards night we have a gust of rain whereby we be constrain to strike our sail , but it be not very stormy , nor last very long . the 18 . 19 20 . and 21 . we keep still the sea and see