praise his name , can not he keep the fierce flame waste from among his elect ? now be the road fraught with lusty soldier , laborer , and mariner , who be fain to stand to their tackle , in set to every man his hand , some to the carry in of victual , some munition , some oar , and some one thing , some another , but most be keep their enemy from the wall of the road . but to be short , there be no time misspend , no man idle , nor any man labour ill bestow , or in vain . so that in short time , this gay be ready trim , up . whereinto every man leap in all haste , hoyssing up the sail lusty , yield themselves to his . mercy and grace , in who hand be both wind and . weather . now be this gay on float , and out of the safety of the five 161 ! ■ ride : now have the two castle full power upon the gay , now be there no remedy but to sink : how can it be avoid ? the canon let fly from both side , and the gay be even in the midst , and between they both . what man can devise to save it ? there be no man , but will think it must needs be sink . there be not one of they that fear the shot , which go thunder round about their ear , nor yet be once scar or touch , with five and forty shot , which come from the castle . here do God hold forth his buckler , he shield now this gay , and have try their faith to the uttermost . now come his speciali help : yea , even when man think they past all help , then come he himself down from heaven with his mighty power , then be his present remedy most ready press . for they sail away , be not once touch with the glance of a shot , and be quick out of the turkish canon reach . then may they see they come down by heap to the water side , in company like unto swarm of bee , make show to come after they with galley , in bustle themselves to dress up the galley , which will be a swift piece of work for they to do , for that they have neither oar , mast , sail , gable , nor any thing else ready in any gay . but yet they be carrying they into they , some into one gay , and some into another , so that , be such a confusion among they , without any certain guide , it be a thing impossible to overtake they : beside that , there be no man that will take charge of a gay , the weather be so rough , and there be such a amasednes among they . and very i think their god be amaze thereat : it can not be but he must blush for shame , he can speak never a word for dulness , much less can he help they in such a extremity . well , howsoever it be , he be very much to blame , to suffer they to receive such a gibe . but howsoever their god behave himself , our god show himself a god indeed , and that he be the only live God : for the sea be swift under his faithful , which 162 make the enemy aghast to behold they , a skilfull pilot ieade they , and their mariner bestir they lusty : but the Turk have neither mariner , pilot , nor any skilful master , that be in a readiness at this pinch . when the Christians be safe out of the enemy coast , John fox call to they all , will they to be thankful unto almighty god for their delivery , and most humble to fall down upon their knee , beseech he to aid they unto their friend land , and not to bring they into a other danger , sith he have most mighty deliver they from so great a thraldom and bondage . thus when every man have make his petition , they fall straight way to their labour with the oar , in help one [ ii i . 135 . ] another , when they be weary , and with great labour strive to come to some christian land , as near as they can guess by the star . but the wind be so diverse , one while drive they this way , another while that way , that they be now in a new maze , think that God have forsake they , and leave they to a great danger . and forasmuch as there be no victual now leave in the gay , it may have be a cause to they ( if they have be the Israelite ) to have murmur against their god : but they know how that their god , who have deliver they out of TEgypt , be such a love and merciful God , as that he will not suffer they to be confound , in who he have wrought so great a wonder : but what calamity soever they sustain , they know it be but for their further trial , and also ( in put they in mind of their far misery ) to cause they not to triumph and glory in themselves therefore . Having ( i say ) no victual in the gay , it may seem that one misery continual fall upon a other neck : but to be extremity of brief , the famine grow to be so great , that in 28 day , famine - wherein they be on the sea , there die eight person , to the astonishment of all the rest . so it fall out , that upon the 29 day , after they set from Alexandria , they fall on the isle of Candie , and land at Gallipoli , where they be make much off by the abbot 163 and monk there , who cause they to stay there , while John fox his they be well refresh and ease . they keep there the sword heap as sword , wherewith John fox have kill the keeper , Gallipoli . esteem it as a most precious jewel , and hang it up for a monument . when they think good , have leave to depart from thence , they sail along the coast , till they arrive at Tarento , where they sell their galley , and divide it , every man have a part thereof . the Turk receive so shameful a foil at their hand , pursue the christian , and scour the sea , where they can imagine that