against such transgressor and concealer , i ofired , and give my self slave to one sangiaccho deal by | our , promise he five hundred * zechin for my run - * t . echini , be some , with who i remain in the camp . the Friday follow ( be the Turk sabbath day ) this worthy coin in ve - and patient gentleman Bragadino be lead still in the nice , every one presence of that unfaithful tyrant Mustafa , to the of the which be battery make unto the ci tie , whereas he be compel to carry two basket of earth , the one upon his nce ^ tf ^ ur ? back , the other in his hand slavelike , to every sundry many , iasome - battrie , be enforce also to kiss the ground as oft as what better . • he pass by he , be afterward bring unto the sea side , where he be place in a chair to lean and stay upon , be winch up in that chair , and fasten unto byraltom . the maineyard of a galley , and hoist up with a crane , to show he to all the christian soldier and slave ( which be in the haven already ship ) he be afterward let down , and bring to the market place , the torment take of his clothes from he , and tack he unto the pillory , whereas he be most cruel flay quick ; with so great constancy and faith on his part , that he never lose or abate any jot of his steadfast courage , be so far from any faint , that he at that present with most stout heart reproach they , and speak much shame of his most traitorous deal in break of his faithful promise . at the last without any kind of alteration of his constancy , he recommend his soul unto almighty God , give up the ghost . when he have thus end his life ( thank be to God ) his skin be take and fill with straw , be command forthwith to be hang upon the bowsprit of a * foist , and to be carry alongst the coast of Syria by the sea side , that all the port town may see , and understand who he be . this be now so much as i be able to declare to your highness by that i see my self , and can remember 147 he death answerable to his former life . * a foist be as it be a bri - gandine , be somewhat large than half a galley , much use of the turkish Cursaros , or as we call they pirate or rover . ople : the which they call in the turkish language Stanboli . ad . i57i > while that i be in the fortress : that also which by true relation of other i can understand , and see also my self in the camp , while i be slave , i will likewise brief utter unto you . the enemy army be in num - [ ii i . 129 . ] ber two hundred thousand person of all sort and quality . of soldier which take pay there be 80 . thousand , beside the which number , there be 14 . thousand of giannizzer take out from all the hold of Syria , Caramania , Anatolia , and part of they also which * the gate of come from the * gate of the great Turk . the venture ^ Isas th6 sword be 60 . thousand in number . the much to say reason , why there be so many of this sort , be because as Constantin - Mustafa have disperse a rumour through the Turk dominion , that Famagusta be much more wealthy and rich , than the city of Nicosia be : so for that cause , and by the commodious and easy passage from Syria over into Cyprus , these venture be easy induce to come thither . in 75 . day ( all the which time the battery GliVenturieri still continue ) 140 . thousand iron pellet be shoot of , number , and see . the chief personage which be in their army near unto Mustafa , be these follow : the bassa of Aleppo , the bassa of Anatolia , musafe bassa of Nicosia , the bassa of Caramania , the aga of the giannizzer , giambelat * bey , the sangiaccho of Tripoli , the * begliarbei of Greece , the bassa of Scivassi and of Marasco , Ferca Framburaro , the * sangiaccho of Antipo , Soliman Bey , three sangiaccho of Arabia , Mustafa Bey generail of the venturer , fergat governor of Malathia , the Framburaro of diverie , the sangiaccho of Arabia and other sangiaccho of lesser credit , with the number of fourscore thousand person beside , as by the muster make by his commission may well appear . the Framburaro which be at Rhodes , be appoint and leave governor at Famagusta , and the report be that there shall be leave in all the island of Cyprus , twenty thousand person , with two thousand horse , many of the which i see , be very lean and evil appoint for 148 aa spada , be a kind of venture soldier , who common be wont to follow the army in hope of the spoil . Aleppo , a famous city near unto Antiochia , otherwise call in greek , 17x16 - iroxis , the city of the sun . * bey in the turkish language , signify knight withus . service . it seem also a thing not impertinent to the * begliarbei matter , to signify to you , how i , by the especial grace of dgftfiethlord God , be deliver out of their cruel hand , i have # g ^' accho pay within two and forty day ( all the which time i be - u that ^ erson slave ) five hundred zechin for my ransom to he , w * the who prisoner i be , by the mean of the consul for Turk , that the french merchant , a ligier then at Tripoli , who he and vernetha little before come from Tripoli in Syria unto Cyprus , into ountrey ^ the Turk camp . yet for all that i have pay this God suffer sum of money to he , he will not so set i at much to be liberty , but feed i up still with fair word , and pro - t0 his miss i