, for the sea entry another , and two other ward . artillery and other munition of defence always ready plant it have sufficient , beside the store remain in their storehouse . the venetian hold this for the key of all their dominion , and for strength it may be not the island of less . this island be very fruitful and plentiful of wine plntifall ^ and corn very good , and olive great store . this island be part from Albania with a channel , in some place T02 eight and ten , and in other but three mile . Albania be under the Turk , but in it be many Christians . all the horseman of Corfu be albanese ; the island be not above 80 . or 90 . mile in compass . the 19 20 . and 21 . we remain in the town of Corfu . the 22 . day we go aboard and set sail , the wind be very calm we toe the ship all that day , and towards sun set , the castle send a Fragatta unto we , to give we warning of three foist come mi hang after we , for who come we prepare and watch all night , but they come not . the 23 . day in the morning be calm , we toe out of the strait , until we come to the old town , whereof there be nothing stand but the wall . there be also a new church of the greek call Santa maria di Cassopo , and the town name be call Cassopo . it Cassopo . be a good port . about noon we pass the strait , and draw towards the end of the island , have almost no wind . this night after supper , by reason of a certain a dangerous Hollander that be drink , there arise in the ship such tumult in the a troublesome disturbance , that all the ship be in a s ^ ’ uproar with weapon , and have it not be rather by god help , and the wisdom and patience of the patron , more than by our procurement , there have be that night a great slaughter . but as God will , there be no hurt , but only the beginner be put under hatch , and with the fall hurt his face very sore . all this night the wind blow at southeast , and send we forward . the 24 . in the morning we find our self before a island call Saseno , which be in the entry to Valona , Saseno . and the wind prosperous . Valona . the 25 . day we be before the hill of Antiveri , and about sun set we pass Ragusa , and three hour [ ii i . 112 . ] within night we anchor within Meleda , have Sclavonia Meleda . or Dalmatia on the right hand of we , and the wind Southwest . 103 in the hand of Lesina , be take store of Sardinas . the gulf of Quernero . rovignio . Parenzo . s . Nicolo a hand . the 26 in the morning we set sail , and pass the channel between Sclavonia and Meleda , which may be eight mile over at the most . this hand be under the raguse . at after noon with a hard gale at west and by north we enter the channel between the hand Curzola and the hill of Dalmatia , in the which channel be many rock , and the channel not past 3 mile over , and we anchor before the town of Curzola . this be a pretty town wall about and build upon the sea side , have on the top of a round hill a fair church . this hand be under the venetian , there grow very good vine , also that part towards Dalmatia be well people and husband , especial for wine . in the say hand we meet with the venetian army , to wit , ten galley , and three foist . all that night we remain there . the 27 we set sail and pass along the hand , and towards afternoon we pass in before the hand of Augusta , and about sun set before the town of Lesina , whereas i be inform by the italian , they take all the Sardinas that they spend in Italy . this day we have a prosperous wind at southeast . the hand of Lesina be under the venetian , a very fruitful hand adjoin to the main of Dalmatia , we leave it on our right hand , and pass along . the 28 in the morning we be in the gulf of Quernero , and about two hour after noon we be before the cape of Istria , and at sun set we be at anchor afore rovignio which be also in Istria and under the venetian , where all ship venetian and other be bind by order from Venice to take in their pilot to go for Venice . all the summer the pilot lie at rovignio , and in winter at Parenzo , which be from rovignio 18 mile by west . the 29 we set sail and go as far as Parenzo , and anchor there that day , and go no further . the 30 in the morning we row to Sant Nicolo a little hand hard by uninhabited , but only it have a monastery , and be full of olive tree , after mass we 104 return and go aboard . this day the patron hire a bark to embark the pilgrim for Venice , but they depart not . in the afternoon we go to see the town of Parenzo , it be a pretty handsome town , under the venetian . after supper we embark our self again , and that night we sail towards Venice . the first of December we pass a town of the vene - cmrk stand - tians , stand on the entery to the palude or marsh tnsati ^ of Venice : which town be call Caorle , and by contrary marsh * 0 } wind we be drive thither to take port . this be 60 Venice . mile from Parenzo , and forty from Venice , there our remained that night . the second two hour before day , with the wind at southeast , we sail towards Venice , where we arrive arrival ( God be praise ) at two of the clock after dinner , and at five ™ ™ 1 - landed about four , we be keep so long from land , because we dare not land until we have present to the provider de la sanita , our letter of health .