that he will first bring i unto his servant ^ government , which abut upon a piece of the famous them ^ river of Euphrates , and afterward dismiss i . the necessity oft which malice and falsehood of his i perceive , deter - time sharp - mined with my self to give he the slip , and to fly ; so en ^ ™ n i wait my time , and repair often to the city , at tk length meet with a small fisher boat , of the which a poor grecian be owner and master , with who in one night with two only oar and a small sail make of two shirt , i pass over from Cyprus unto Tripoli , be in very great danger of drown , whereas i remain in covert in the house of certain Christians , until the five and twenty of September , at what time i depart from thence in a little french ship call Santa vittor , which come into these part , and as we ride , we touch at a part of Cyprus westward , call Capo dell gat , where as i come on land , and talk with certain of the inhabitant of the village , who be then by chance a hawk , demand of they , how they be entreat of the Turk , and after what sort the island be till : to the which they answer , that they can not possible he nature be in worse pickle than they be at that present , not every commoenjoy that quiet which be their own , be make ditie be soon vifiaines and slave , and almost always carry away the understand by bastinado , so that now ( they say ) they know by trial too perfect the pleasant and peaceable government of enjoy of the christian , wish and pray God that they may the same . 149 * Candia , of the old writer call Creta in latin , YiKO . top . rrox . l ' s in Greek , because it have once a 100 city in it , now there remain but only 4 . thus common name , Candia , la Cania , Retima , and Scythia . [ il i . 130 . ] short return . And concern the tillage of the island they make answer moreover , that no part of it be plow or labour , save only that mountain which be towards the west , and that because they be little trouble with the cruelty of the Turk , but as for the plain and east part of the island , there be small seed sow therein , but become in a manner desert , there be leave but few inhabitant , and less store of cattle there . afterwards we depart from thence arrive in * Candia , i for my part be clothe in sackcloth , whereas soon after by the great courtesy of the right honourable signior Latino Orsino , i be new apparel accord , friendly welcome , and my necessity relieve . from whence i short after sail in a cypriotte ship ( thanks be to almighty God ) arrive in this city in health , and be safe come home now at the honourable foot of your highness . the captain of the christian slay in Famagusta . the lord Estor Baglione . the lord Aluigi Martinengo . the lord Federico Baglione . the knight of asta vicegovernor . the capitaine David Noce master of the camp . the capitaine meani of Perugia sergeant major . the earl Sigismond of Casoldo . the earl Francisco of Lobi of Cremona . the captain Francisco Troncavilla . the captain Hannibal Adamo of Fermo . the captain Scipio of the city of Castello . the captain Charles Ragonasco of Cremona . the captain Francisco Siraco . the captain Roberto Malvezzo . the captain Caesar of Adversa . the captain Bernardin of Agubio . the captain Francisco bugon of Verona . the captain James of Fabiano . 150 the captain Sebastian deal sole of Florence . the captain Hector of Brescia , the successor to the captain Caesar of Adversa . the captain Flaminio of Florence , successor unto Sebastian deal sole . the captain Erasmus of Fermo , successor to the captain of Cernole . the captain Bartholomew of Cernole . the captain John Battista of rivarole . the captain John Francisco of Venice . the name of Christians make slave . the earl Herocles Martinengo , with Julius Caesar Ghelfo a soldier of Bressa . the earl Nestor Martinengo , which flee . the captain Marco crivellatore . the lord Herocles Malatesta . the captain Peter Conte of Montalberto . the captain Horatio of Veletri . the captain Aluigi Pezano . the conte James of Corbara . the captain John of Istria . the captain Soldatelli of Agubio . the captain John of Ascoli . the captain Antony of the same town . the captain Sebastian of the same town . the captain Salgano of the city of Castello . the captain marcheso of Fermo . the captain John Antonio of Piacenza . the captain carletto Naldo . the captain Lorenzo Fornaretti . the captain Barnardo of Brescia . the captain Barnardino Coco . [ David noce . the captain Simon Bagnese , successor to the captain the captain Tiberio Ceruto , successor unto Conte Sigismond . the captain Joseph of Lanciano , successor unto captain Francisco Troncavilla . the captain Morgante , successor to captain Hannibal . the lieutenant , successor unto the captain Scipio . the standerdbearer , successor to captain Roberto . the captain Ottavio of Rimini , successor to the captain Francisco Bugon . the captain Mario de Fabiano , successor to captain Jacomo . the captain Francisco of Venice , successor unto captain Antonio . the captain Matteo of Capua . the captain John Maria of Verona . the captain Mancino . the fortifier . John marmori , slay . the knight Maggio , slave . turkish captain at Famagusta . MUstafa general . the bassa of Aleppo . the bassa of Anatolia , slay . musafe bassa of Nicosia . the bassa of Caramania . the aga of the giannizer . giambelat bey . the sangiaccho of Tripoli , slay . the begliarbei of Greece . [ ii i . 131 . ] the bassa of Scivassi and Marasco . Ferca Framburaro . the sangiaccho of Antipo , slay . Soliman bey , slay . three sangiaccho of Arabia , slay . Mustafa bey , general of the venturer , slay . fergat , ruler of Malathia , slay . the Framburaro of diverie , slay .