our subject ( of what degree or quality soever they be ) that none of they direct , or indirect , do visit , haunt , frequent or trade , traffic , or adventure by way of merchandise into , or from any of the dominion of the say grand signior , or other place abovesaid by water or by lan de ( other than the say Edward , Thomas , Richard and William , their executor or administrator , or such as shall admit , and nominate as be aforesaid ) without express licence , agreement , and consent of the say governor , and company or the more part of they , whereof the say governor always to be one , upon pain of our high indignation , and of forfeiture and loss , as well of the ship and ship , with the furniture thereof , as also of the good , merchandize , and thing whatsoever they be of those our subject which shall attempt , or presume to sail , traffic , or adventure , to or from any the dominion , or place abovesaid , contrary to the prohibition aforesaid : the one half of the same forfeiture to be to the use of we , our heir and successor , and the other half to the use of the say 197 a . d i58l . Edward , Thomas , Richard and William , and the say company , and further to suffer imprisonment during our pleasure , and such other punishment as to we , for so high contempt , shall seem meet and convenient . and further of our grace speciali , certain knowledge , and mere motion we have condescend and grant , and by these patent for we our heir and successor , do condescend and grant to the say Edward , Thomas , Richard and William , their executor and administrator , that we our heir and successor during the say term , will not grant liberty , licence or power to any person or person whatsoever , contrary to the tenor of these our letter patent , to sail , pass , trade , or traffic into or from the say dominion of the say grand signior or any of they , without the consent of the say Edward , Thomas , Richard and William , and such as shall name or appoint as afore be say , or the most of they . and that if at any time hereafter during the say term , you say Edward , Thomas , Richard and William , or the survivor of they , shall admit or nominate any of our subject to be partner and adventurer in the say trade to the number of 12 . or under as afore be say , that than we our heir and successor at the instance and petition of the say Edward , Thomas , Richard and William , or the survivor of they in our chancery to be make , and upon the sight of these present , will grant and make to the say Edward , Thomas , Richard and William , or to the survivor of they , and to such person as so shall be nominate or appoint by their speciali name , surname , and addition as be aforesaid , new letter patent under the great seal of England in due form of law with . like agreement , clause , prohibition , proviso and article ( mutatis mutandi ) as in these our letter patent be contain , for , and during the residue of the say term of seven year then remain unexpire . and that the sight of these present shall | be sufficient warrant to the lord chancellor , or lord keeper of the great seal for the time be , for the 198 1581 . make , seal and pass of such new letter patent , without further writ or warrant for the same to be require , have , or obtain . and the say Edward Osburne , Thomas smith , and Richard staper , and William garret and such other as shall so nominate and appoint , as be aforesaid , to be of their trade or company , shall yearly during 6 . of the last year of the say 7 . year , lade out of this our realm , and bring home yearly , for , and in the feat and trade of merchandize aforesaid , so much good and merchandize , as the custom , and subsidy inward and outward , shall amount in the whole to the sum of [ ii i . 149 . ] 500 li . yearly . so that the say Edward Osborne , Thomas smith , Richard staper , and William garret and the say person so to be nominate as be aforesaid , or any of they , or their ship or ship be not bar , stay , restrain or let by any reasonable occasion from the say trade or traffic , and so that the say ship or ship do not perish by any misfortune , or be spoil by the way in their voyage . and further , the say Edward Osborne , Thomas smith , Richard staper , and William garret , and such other as shall be appoint as aforesaid to be of their say trade or company , shall give notice unto the lord admiral of England , or to some of the principali officer of the admiralty for the time be , of such ship or ship as they shall set forth in the same voyage , and of the number of mariner appoint to go in the same ship or ship , by the space of fifteen day before the set or go forth of the same ship or ship . and also the say Edward Osborne , Thomas smith , Richard staper and William garret , and such other as shall be by they the say Edward and Richard , nominate to be of the say trade , shall and will at the set « forth of their ship , or ship , for the same voyage , permit and suffer the master of the ordinance of we , our heir and successor , or some other , our or their principali officer of the ordinance , 199 to take a view of the number and quantity of such