ship shall be drive on shore in peril of shipwreck , our beg and judge , and other our subject shall succour they , and such ware , and good of they as shall be recover from the loss , shall be restore to they , and no man shall wrong they . 7 item , if the people of the aforesaid queen , their interpreter and merchant , shall for traffic sake , either by land or sea repair to our dominion pay our lawful toll and custom , they shall have quiet passage , and none of our captain or governor of the sea , and ship , nor any kind of person , shall either in their body , or in their good and cattle , any way molest they . 8 item , if any Englishman shall grow in debt , and so owe money to any other man , and thereupon do absent himself that he can not be find , let no man be arrest or apprehend for any other man debt , except he be the surety . 186 9 item , if any Englishman shall make his will and testament , to who soever by the same he shall give his good , the party shall have they accord , and if he die intestate , he to who the consuli or governor of the society shall say the good of the dead be to be give , he shall have the same . io item , if the Englishman or the merchant and interpreter of any place under the jurisdiction of England shall happen in the buy and sell of ware , by promise or otherwise to come in controversy , let they go to the judge , and cause the matter to be enter into a book , and if they will , let they also take letter of the judge testify the same , that man may see the book and letter , whatsoever thing shall happen , and that accord to the tenor thereof the matter in controversy and in doubt may be end : but if such thing be neither enter in book , nor yet the person have take letter of the judge , yet he shall admit no false witness , but shall execute the law accord to justice , and shall not suffer they to be abuse . 11 item , if any man shall say , that these be christian have speak any thing to the derogation of our holy faith and religion , and have slander the same , in this matter as in all other , let no false witness in any case be admit . 12 item , if any one of they shall commit any great crime , and fly thereupon can be find , let no man be arrest , or detain for another man fact , except he be his surety . 13 item , if any slave shall be find to be a Englishman , and their Consuli or governor shall sue for his liberty , let the same slave be diligent examine , and if he be find in deed to be English , let he be discharge and restore to the Englishman . 14 item , if any Englishman shall come hither either to dwell or traffic , whether he be marry or marry , he shall pay no poll or head money . 15 item , if either in Alexandria , Damascus , Samos , 187 A . D . i58o . Tunis , Tripoli in the west , the port town of . / Egypt , or in any other place , they purpose to choose to themselves consul or governor , let they do so , and if they will alter they at any time , and in the room of the former consul place other , let they do so also , and no man shall restrain they . 16 item , if their interpreter shall | be at any time absent , be occupy in other serious matter , let the thing then in question be stay and differ till his coming , and in the mean time no man shall trouble they . 17 item , if any variance or controversy shall arise among the Englishman , and thereupon they shall appeal to their consul or governor , let no man molest they , but let they free do so , that the controversy begin may be finish accord to their own custom . 18 item , if after the time and date of this privilege , any pirate or other free governor of ship trade the sea shall take any Englishman , and shall make sale of he , either beyond the sea , or on this side of the sea , the matter shall | be examine according to justice , and if the party shall | be find to be English , and shall receive the holy religion , then let he free be discharge , but if he will still remain a christian , let he then be restore [ ii i . 145 . ] to the Englishman , and the buyer shall demand their money again of they who sell the man . 19 item , if the ship of war of our Imperiali highness shall at any time go forth to sea , and shall find any english ship lade with merchandise , no man shall hinder they , but rather shall use they friendly , and do they no wrong , even as we have give and grant article , and privilege to the french , venetian , and other king and prince our confederate , so also we have give the like to the english : and contrary to this our divine law and privilege , let no man presume to do any thing . 20 item , if either their great or small ship shall in the course of their voyage , or in any place to which 188 1581 . come , be stay or arrest , let no man continue the same arrest , but rather help and assist they . 21 item , if any thief and robber shall by force take away any of their ship , and merchandise , let the same thief and robber be seek , and search for with all diligence , and let they be punish most severe . 22 last of all the beglerbeg , and zanziacbeg , our captain , our slave and servant of captain use the sea , and our judge , customer and governor of ship call reiz , and free reiz , all these , accord to the tenor of this privilege and article , shall | be bind to do accord : and , as long as the queen of England on her part shall due keep and observe this league and holy peace , express in this privilege , we also for our imperial part , do charge and command the same so long to be straight keep and observe . give at Constantinople , in the 988 . year of our most holy prophet , in the begin of the month of June , and in the year of Jesus 1580 .