her majesty letter to the Turk or grand signior 1581 . promise redress of the disorder of Peter baker of Ratcliff , commit in the Levant . this be baker of Ratcliff , who with the bark call the roe , rob certain grecian in the Levant . ELizabeth by the divine grace of the eternal God , of England , France and Ireland most sacred queen , and of the most christian faith , against all the profaner of his most holy name the zealous and mighty defendor , etc to the most renown and imperious Caesar , sultan Murad can , emperor of all the dominion of turquoise , and of all the east monarchic chief above all other whosoever , most fortunate year with the success of all true happiness . as with very great desire we wish and embrace the love and amity of foreign prince , and in the same by all good duty and mean we seek to be confirm : so to we there may be nothing more grievous and dislike , then that any thing shall happen through the default of our subject , which any way may bring our faith and fidelity into suspicion : although we be not ignorant how many good prince by the like misadventure be abuse , where the do of the subject be impute to the want of good government . but such matter of importance and so well approve we may not omit : such be to we the sacred estimation of our honour , and of our Christian profession , as we will the same shall appear aswell in the conclude of our promise and agreement , as in the faithful perform of the same . the matter which by these our letter we special behold , be a most injurious and grievous wrong which of late come unto our understanding , that shall be do unto certain of your subject by certain of our subject , as yet not apprehend : but with all severity upon their apprehension they be to be award for the same . and as the deed in it self be most wicked , so be it much more intolerable , by how much it do infringe the credit of our faith , violate the force of our authority , and impeach the estimation of our word faithful give unto your imperiali dignity . in which so great a disorder if we shall not manifest our hatred towards so wicked and evil dispose person , we may not only most just be reprove in the judgement of all such as true favour justice , but also of all prince the patroness of right and equity , may no less be condemn . that therefore consider , which of our part be ordain in this cause which may be to the good like of your highness , we be most especial to request of your imperiali majesty , that through the default and disorder of a sort of evil and wicked dispose person , you will not withdraw your gracious favour from we , neither to hinder they traffic of our subject , which by virtue of your highness sufferance , and power of your licence be permit to trade into your dominion and country , or that either in their person or good they be prejudice in their travel by land or by water , promise unto your greatness most faithful , that the good whereof your subject by great wrong and violence have be spoil , shall whole again be restore , if either by the life or possession of the robber it may any way be bring to pass : and that hereafter ( as now be teach by this [ ii i . 14 . 6 . ] evil example ) we will have speciali care that none under the title of our authority shall be suffer to commit any the like wrong or injury . neither they which have commit these evil part have any power under your highness safeconduct grant unto our subject , but from some other safeconduct , whether it be true or feign , we know not , or whether they buy it of any person within the government of Marseils : but under the colour thereof they have do that , which the truth of our deal do utter abhor . notwithstanding howsoever it be , we will sure measure their evil proceed with most sharp and just correction , and that it shall repent they of the impeachment of our honour , as also it shall | be a example of our indignation , that other may dread at all time to commit the like offence . wherefore that our amity may be continue , as if this unfortunate hap have never chance , and that the singular affection of our subject towards your imperiali majesty vow , and daily more and more desire , may be conserve and defend , we thereunto do make our humble suit unto your greatness : and for so great goodness towards we and our people grant , do most humble pray unto the almighty creator of heaven and earth , ever to maintain and keep your most renown majesty in all happiness and prosperity . date at our palace of Greenwich the 26 . of June , anno 1581 .