a great lover , such as be in England in ancient house . there be also the chapel of the sepulchre , and in the mid thereof be a canopy as it be of a bed , with a great sort of ostrich egg hang at it , with tassel of silk and lamp . behind the sepulchre be a little chapel for the chaldean and syrian . upon the right hand come into the church be the tomb of Baldwine king of France , and of his son : and in the same place the tomb of mel - chisedech . there be a chapel also in the same church erect to saint Helen , through which we go up to the place where Christ be crucify : the stair be fifty step high , there be two altar in it : before the high altar be the place where the cross stand , the hole whereof be trim about with silver , and the depth of it . be half a man arm deep : the rent also of the mountain be there to be see in the crevice , wherein a man may put his arm . 211 s . Helen chapel . upon the other side of the mount of Calvarie be the place where Abraham will have sacrifice his son . where also be a chapel , and the place pave with stone of diverse colour . there be also the house of Annas the high priest , and the olive tree whereunto Christ be bind when he be whip . also the house of Caiphas , and by it the prison where Christ be keep , which be but the room of one man , and have no light but the open of the door . without Jerusalem in the valley of Josaphat be a church under the ground , like to the shroud in Paul , where the sepulchre of the virgin mary be : the stair be very broad , and upon the stair go down be two sepulchre : upon the left hand lie Josaphat , and upon the right hand lie Joachim and Anna , the father and mother of the virgin mary . go out of the valley of Josaphat we come to mount Olivet , where Christ pray unto his father before his death : and there be to be see ( as they tell i ) the water and blood that fall from the eye of Christ . a little high upon the same mount be the place where the apostle sleep , and watch not . at the foot of the mount be the place where Christ be imprison . upon the mountain also be the place where Christ stand when he weep over Jerusalem , and where he ascend into heaven . now have see all these monument , i with my company set from Jerusalem , the 20 day of August , and come again to Joppa the 22 of the same month , where we take ship present for Tripoli , and in four day we come to Mecina the place where the ship lie that come for Tripoli . the city of Tripoli be a mile and a half within the land , so that no ship can come further than Mecina : so that night i come thither , where i lie nine day for passage , and at last we embark our 212 1581 . self in a good ship of Venice call the new nave Ragasona . we enter the ship the second of September , the four we set sail , the seven we come to Selina , which be 140 mile from Tripoli : there we stay four day to take in more lade , in which mean time i fall sick of a ague , but recover again , i praise God . Selina be a ruinate city , and be destroy by the Selina . Turk ten year past : there be in it now but seventeen person , woman and child . a little from this city of Selina be a salt piece of ground , where the water grow salt that rain upon it . Thursday the 21 of September , we come to missagh , missagh a and there we stay eight day for our lade : the 18 inn of September before we come to missagh , and within ten cmrtts - mile of the town , as we lay at a anchor , because the wind be contrary , there come a great boat full of man to board we , they make a excuse to seek for four man which ( they say ) our ship have take from they about Tripoli , but our captain will not suffer any of they to come in to we . the next morning they come to we again with a great gay , man with 500 man at you least , whereupon our captain send the boat to they with twelve man to know their pleasure : they say they seek for 4 man , and therefore will talk with our master : so than the master mate be send they , and he they keep , and go their way : the next morning they come again with he , and with three other galley , and then will needs speak with our captain , who go to they in a gown of crimson damask , and other very brave apparel , and five or six other gentleman rich apparel also . they have the turk safe conduct , show it to the captain of the galley , and lay it upon his head , charge he to obey it : so with much ado , and with the gift of 100 piece of gold we be quit of they , and have our man again . that day as aforesaid , we come to missagh , and there Candie . 213 stay eight day , and at last depart towards Candie , with a scant wind . the 11 day of October we be board with four galley , man with 1200 man , which also make a sleeveless arrant , and trouble we very much , but our captain passport , and the gift of 100 chekin discharge all . Zante , the 27 of October we pass by Zante with a merry wind , the 29 by Corfu , and the three of November we arrive at Istria , and there we leave our great ship , and take small boat to bring we to Venice . the 9 of November i arrive again at Venice in good health , where i stay nine day , and the 25 of the same month i come to Augusta , and stay there but one day . the 27 of November i set towards Nuremberg where i come the 29 , and there stay till the 9 of December , and be very well entertain of the english merchant there : and the governor of the town send i and my company sixteen gallon of excellent good wine . from thence i go to Frankford , from Frankford to Collen , from Collen to Arnam , from Arnam to utreight , from utreight to dort , from dort to Antwerp , from Antwerp to Flushing , from flush to London , where i arrive upon twelve eve in safety , and give thank to God , have finish my journey to Jerusalem and home again , in the space of nine month and five day .