the first voyage or journey , make by master Laurence Aldersey , merchant of London , to the city of Jerusalem , and Tripoli , etc in the year 1581 . pen and set down by himself . depart from London the first day of April , in the year of our lord 1581 , pass through the nether - land and up the river Rhine by Colen , and other city of Germany . and upon Thursday , the third day of May , i come to Augusta , where i deliver the letter i have to master Jenise , and master Castler , who i find very willing to pleasure i , in any thing that i can or will reasonable demand . he first furnish i with a horse to Venice , for my money , and then take i with he a walk , to show i the ci tie , for that i have a day 202 to tarry there , for he that be to be my guide . he the descrip - shewed i first the statehouse , which be very fair , and . beautiful : than he bring i to the fine garden , and orchard , that ever i see in my life : for there be in it a place for canary bird , as large as a fair chamber , trim with wire both above and beneath , with fine little branch of tree , for they to sit in , which be full of those canary bird . there be such a other for turtle dove : also there be two pigeon house joining to they , have in they store of turtle dove , and pigeon . in the same garden also be six or seven fishpond , all rail about , and full of very good fish . also , seven or eight fine fountain , or water spring , of diverse fashion : as for fruit , there want none of all sort , as orange , fig , raisin , walnut , grape , beside apple , pear , fillbird , small nut , and such other fruit , as we have in England . then do he bring i to the water tower of the same city , that by a sleight and devise have the water bring up as high , as any church in the town , and to tell you the strange devise of all , it pass my capacity . than he bring i to another fair garden , call the shooter hose , where be butt for the long bow , the cross bow , the stone bow , the long piece , and for diverse other exercise more . after this , we walk about the wall of the city , where be a great , broad , and deep ditch , upon one side of the town , so full of fish , as ever i see any pond in my life , and it be reserve only for the state of the city . and upon the other side of the city be also a deep place all green , wherein deer be keep , and when it please the state to hunt for their pleasure , thither they resort , and have their course with grayhound , which be keep for that purpose . the five of May , i depart from Augusta towards Venice . Venice , and come thither upon Whitsunday , the thirteenth of the same month . it be needless to speak of the height of the mountain that i pass over , and 203 [ ii i . i 5 i . ] the number of i ewe in Venice . of the danger thereof , it be so well know already to the world : the heighth of they be marvelous , and i be the space of six day in pass they . i come to Venice at the time of a fair , which last fourteen day , wherein i see very many , and fair show of ware . i come thither too short for the first passage , which go away from Venice about the seven or eight of may , and with they about three score pilgrim , which ship be cast away at a town call Estria , two mile from Venice , and all the man in she , save thirty , or thereabouts , lose . within eight day after fell corpus christi day , which be a day among they of procession , in which be show the plate and treasure of Venice , which be esteem to be worth two million of pound , but i do not account it worth half a quarter of that money , except there be more than i see . to speak of the sumptuousness of the cope and vestment of the church , i leave , but the truth be , they be very sumptuous , many of they set all over with pearl , and make of cloth of gold . and for the Jesuit , i think there be as many at Venice , as there be in Colen . the number of Jewesis there think to be 1000 , who dwell in a certain place of the city , and have also a place , to which they resort to pray , which be call the Jew synagogue . they all , and their offering use to wear red cap , ( for so they be command ) because they may thereby be know from other man . for my further knowledge of these people , i go into their synagogue upon a Saturday , which be their sabbath day : and i find they in their service or prayer , very devout : they receive the five book of Moses , and honour they by carry they about their church , as the papist do their cross . their synagogue be in form round , and the people sit round about it , and in the midst , there be a place for he that read to the rest : as for their apparel , all of they wear a large white lawn over their 204 garment , which reach from their head , down to the ground . the psalm they sing as we do , have no image , nor use any manner of idolatry : their error be , that they believe not in Christ , nor yet receive the new testament . this city of Venice be very fair , and great to be commend , wherein be good order for all thing : and also it be very strong and populous : it stand upon the main sea , and have many island about it , that belong to it . to tell you of the duke of Venice , and of the signiory : there be one choose that ever bear the name of a duke , but in truth he be but servant to the signiory , for of himself he can do little : it be not otherwise with he , then with a priest that be at mass upon a festival day , which put on his golden garment , seem to be a great man , but if any man come unto he , and crave some friendship at his hand , he will say , you must go to the master of the parish , for i can not pleasure you , otherwise then by prefer of your suit : and so it