[ ii i . 141 . ] the charter of the privilege grant to the english , and the league of the great Turk with the queen majestic in respect of traffic , date in June 1580 . A . D . i $ 8o . 180 181 A . D . 1580 . [ ii i . 142 . ] the interpretation of the letter , or privilege of [ ii i . 143 . ] the most mighty and musumanlike emperor zuldan Murad can , grant at the request of Elizabeth by the grace of the most mighty God , and only creator of heaven and earth , of England , France and Ireland queen , confirm a peace and league betwixt both the say prince and their subject . e most sacred musulmanlike emperor , by the infinite and exceed great power , by the everlasting and wonderful clemency , and by the unspeakable help of the most mighty and most holy God , creator of all thing , to be worship and fear with all pureness of mind , and rever ence of speech , the prince of these present time , the only monarch of this age , able to give sceptre to 183 the potentate of the whole world , the shadow of the divine mercy and grace , the distributer of many kingdom , province , town and city , prince , and most sacred emperor of Mecca , that be to say , of God house , of Medina , of the most glorious and bless Jerusalem , of the most fertile Egypt , jeman and Jovan , Eden and Canaan , of Samos the peaceable , and of Hebe , of Jabza , and Pazra , of zeruzub and Halepia , of Caramaria and Diabekirvan , of Dulkadiria , of Babylon , and of all the three Arabia , of the Euzians and Georgians , of Cyprus the rich , and of the kingdom of Asia , of ozakior , of the tract of the white and black sea , of Grecia and Mesopotamia , of Africa and Goleta , of Alger , and of Tripoli in the west , of the most choice and principali Europe , of Buda and Temeswar , and of the kingdom beyond the Alps , and many other such like , most mighty Murad can , the son of the emperor Zelim can , which be the son of Zoleiman can , which be the son of Zelim can , which be the son of paiizid can , which be the son of meheme can , etc we most mighty prince Murad can , in token of our Imperiali friendship , do signify and declare , that now of late Elizabeth queen of England , France and Ireland , the most honourable queen of Christendom ( to who merchant we wish happy success ) send her letter by her worthy servant William hareborne unto our stately and most magnificent porch replenish with justice , which be a refuge and sanctuary to all the prince of the world , by which letter her majesty signify , that whereas heretofore certain of her subject have repair to our say stately porch , and have show their obedience to the same , and for that cause have desire that leave and liberty may also be grant unto they , to come and go for traffic sake too and from our dominion , and that our imperial commandment may be give , that no man shall presume to hurt or hinder they , in any of their abode or passage by sea or land , and whereas she request that we will grant to all 184 her subject in general , this our favour , which before we have extend only to a few of her people : therefore as we have enter into amity , and most holy league with the most excellent king and prince our confederate , show their devotion , and obedience or service towards our stately porch ( as namely the french king , the venetian , the king of Polonia and other ) so also we have contract a inviolable amity , peace and league with the aforesaid queen . therefore we give licence to all her people , and merchant , peaceable and safe to come unto our Imperiali dominion , with all their merchandise and good without any impeachment , to exercise their traffic , to use their own custom , and to buy and sell accord to the fashion of their own country . and further her majesty signify unto we , that certain of her people have heretofore be take prisoner , and be detain in captivity , and require that they may be set at liberty , and that as we have grant unto other prince our confederate , privilege , and Imperiali decree , concern our most inviolable league with they , so it will please our imperial majesty to grant and confirm the like privilege , and princely decree to the aforesaid queen . wherefore accord to our humanity and gracious ingraft disposition , the request of her majesty be accept of we , and we have grant unto her majesty this privilege of we agreeable to reason and equity . and we straight command all our beglerbeg , and zanziacbeg our servant , and our Reyz , that be to say , our judge , and all our customer in all place , haven and passage , that as long as this league and amity with the condition , and article thereof , be keep and observe on the behalf of the aforesaid queen . 1 Oure Imperiali commandment and pleasure be , that the people and subject of the same queen , may safe and secure come to our princely dominion , with their good and merchandise , and lading , and other commodity by sea , in great and small vessel , and by land with their carriage 185 and cattle , and that no man shall hurt they , but they may buy and sell without any hindrance , and observe the custom and order of their own country . [ ii i . 144 . ] 2 item , if the aforesaid people and merchant shall at any time in the course of their journey and deal by any mean take , they shall be deliver and enlarge , without any excuse or cavillation . 3 item , if their ship purpose to arrive in any of our port and haven , it shall | be lawful for they so to do in peace , and from thence again to depart , without any let or impediment . 4 item , if it shall happen that any of their ship in tempestuous weather shall be in danger of loss and perish , and thereupon shall stand in need of our help , we will , and command that our man and ship be ready to help and succour they . 5 item , if they shall | be willing to buy any victual for their money , no person shall withstand they , but they shall buy the same without any disturbance to the contrary . 6 item , if by any casualty their