, when the bassa see i up before the rest of the company , he send one to dismount i , and to strike i , whereupon i turn i to the bassa , and make a long leg , say , grand mercy signior : and after a while we be horse upon little ass , and send away , with about fifty light horseman to be our conduct through the wilderness , call , Deserta foelix , who make we good sport by the way with their pike , gun , and falchion . Rama . that day be saint Laurence day , we come to Rama , which be ten italian mile from Joppa , and there we stay that night , and pay to the captain of the castle every man a chekin , which be seven shilling and two penny sterling . so than we have a new guard of soldier , and leave the other . the house we lodge in at Rama have a door so low to enter into , that i be fain to creep in , as it be upon my knee , and within it be three room to lodge traveller that come that way : there be no bed , except a man buy a mat , and lie it on the ground , that be all the provision , without stool or bench to sit upon . our victual be bring we out of the town , as hen , egg , bread , great store of fruit , as pom - granates , fig , grape , oringe , and such like , and drink we draw out of the well . the town it self 208 1581 - is so ruinate , that i take it rather to be a heap of stone than a town . then the next morning we think to have go away , but we can not be permit that day , so we stay there till two of the clock the next morning , and then with a fresh guard of soldier we depart towards Jerusalem . we have not rid five english mile , but we be encounter with a great number of the arabian , trope of who stay we , and will not suffer we to pass till they ara ~ have somewhat , so it cost we for all our guard above ’ twenty shilling a man betwixt Joppa and Jerusalem . these arabian trouble we oftentimes . our truchman that pay the money for we be strike down , and have his head break because he will not give they as much as they ask : and they that shall have rescue both he and we , stand still , and dare do nothing , which be to our cost . be come within sight of Jerusalem , the manner be arrival to kneel down , and give God thanks , that it have “ the please he to bring we to that holy place where he ' himself have be : and there we leave our horse , and go on foot to the town , and be come to the gate , there they take our name , and our father name , and so we be permit to go to our lodging . the governor of the house meet we a mile out of the town , and very courteous bid we all welcome , and bring we to the monastery . the gate of the city be all cover with iron , the entrance into the house of the Christians be a very low and narrow door , bar or plate with iron , and then come we into a very dark entry : the place be a monastery : there we lie , and diet of free cost , we fare reasonable well , the bread and wine be excellent good , the chamber clean , and all the meat [ ii i . 153 . ] well serve in , with clean linen . we lie at the monastery two day , Friday and Saturday , and then we go to Bethlem with two or three of the friar of the house with we : in the way thither we see many monument , as : five 209 oh the monument in and about Jerusalem . the mountain where the angel take up Abacuch by the hair , and bring he to Daniel in the lion den . the fountain of the prophet Jeremie . the place where the wise man meet that go to Bethlem to worship Christ , where be a fountain of stone . be come to Bethlem we see the place where Christ be bear , which be now a chapel with two altar , whereupon they say mass : the place be build with grey marble , and have be beautiful , but now it be partly decay . near thereto be the sepulchre of the innocent slay by Herod , the sepulchre of Paul , of Jerome , and of Eusebius . also a little from this monastery be a place under the ground , where the virgin mary abode with Christ when Herod seek he to destroy he . we stay at Bethlem that night , and the next day we go from thence to the mountain of Judea , which be about eight mile from Jerusalem , where be the ruin of a old mohasterie . in the mid way from the monastery to Jerusalem be the place where John Baptist be bear , be now a old monastery , and cattle keep in it . also a mile from Jerusalem be a place call Inventio sanctae crucis , where the wood be find that make the cross . in the city of Jerusalem we see the hall where Pilate sit in judgement when Christ be condemn , the stair whereof be at room , as they tell we . a little from thence be the house where the be bear . there be also the piscina or fishpool where the sick folk be heal , which be by the wall of Jerusalem . but the pool be now dry . the mount of Calvaria be a great church , and within the door thereof , which be little , and bar with iron , and five great hole in it to look in , like the hole 210 virgin mary of tavern door in London , they sit that be appoint to receive our money with a carpet under they upon a bank of stone , and their leg a cross like tailor : have pay our money , we be permit to go into the church : right against the church door be the grave where Christ be bury , with a great long stone of white marble over it , and rail about , the outside of the sepulchre be very foul , by mean that every man scrape his name and mark upon it , and be ill keep . within the sepulchre be a partition , and in the further part thereof be a place like a altar , where they say mass , and at the door thereof be the stone whereupon the angel sit when he say to marry , he be rise , which stone be also roll to the door of the sepulchre . the altar stone within the sepulchre be of white marble , the place able to contain but four person , right over the sepulchre be a devise or lantern for light , and over that