be with the duke of Venice , if any man have a suit , come to he , and make his complaint , and deliver his supplication , it be not in he to help he , but he will tell he , you must come this day , or that day , and then i will prefer your suit to the signiory , and do you the best friendship that i may . Furthermore , if any man bring a letter unto he , he may not open it , but in the presence of the signiory , and they be to see it first , which be read , perhaps they will deliver it to he , perhaps not . of the signiory there be about three hundred , and about fourty of the privy counsel of Venice , who usual be array in gown of crimson satin , or crimson damask , when they sit in counsel . in the city of Venice , no man may wear a weapon , except he be a soldier for the signiory , or a scholar of Padua , or a gentleman of great countenance , and yet he may not do that without licence . 205 the excess of as for the woman of Venice , they be rather monster , the woman of then woman . every shoemaker or tailor wife will Venice . have a gown of silk , and one to carry up her train , wear their shoe very near half a yard high from the ground : if a stranger meet one of they , he will sure think by the state that she go with , that he meet a lady . i depart from this city of Venice , upon midsummer day , be the four and twenty of June , and think that the ship will the next day depart , i stay , and lie a shippeboord all night , and we be make believe from time to time , that we shall this day , and that day depart , but we tarry still , till than his embark - fourteenth of July , and then with scant wind we set ing at Venice say } ej anj sail that day and that night , not above or erusaem . miies . anj upon the sixteen day at night , the wind turn flat contrary , so that the master know not what to do : and about the five hour of the night , which we reckon to be about one of the clock after midnight , the pilot descry a sail , and at last perceive it to be a galley of the Turk , whereupon we be in great fear . the master be a wise fellow , and a good sailor , begin to devise how to escape the danger , and to loose little of our way : and while both he , and all of we be in our dump , God send we a merry gale of wind , that we run threescore and ten league before it be twelve a clock the next day , and in six day after we be seven league past Zante . and upon Monday morning , be the three and twenty of the same month , we come in the sight of Candia which day the wind come contrary , with great blast , and storm , until the eight and twenty of the same month : in which time , the mariner cry out upon i , because i be a english man , and say , i be no good christian , and wish that i be in the midst of the sea , say , that they , and the ship , be the worse for i . i answer , true it may well be , for i think my self the 206 worst creature in the world , and consider you your self also , as i do my self , and then use your discretion . the friar preach , and the sermon be do , i be demand whether i do understand he : i answer , yea , and tell the friar himself , thus you say in your sermon , that we be not all good Christians , or else it be not possible for we to have such weather : to which i answer , be you well assure , that we be not indeed all good Christians , for there be in the [ ii i . 152 . ] ship some that hold very unchristian opinion : so for that time i satisfy he , although ( they say ) that i will not see , when they say the procession , and honour their image , and pray to our lady , and saint mark . there be also a gentleman , a italian , which be a passenger in the ship , and he tell i what they say of i , because i will not sing , salve Regina , and have Maria , as they do : i tell they , that they that pray to so many , or seek help of any other , then of God the father , or of Jesus Christ his only son , go a wrong way to work , and rob God of his honour , and wrought their own destruction . all this be tell the friar , but i hear nothing of it in three day after : and then at evening prayer , they send the purser about with the image of our lady to every one to kiss , and i perceive it go another way from he , and will not see it : yet at last he fetch his course about , so that he come to i , and offer it to i as he do to other , but i refuse it : whereupon there be a great stir : the patron and all the friar be tell of it , and every one say i be a lutheran , and so call i : but two of the friar that be of great authority , seem to bear i better good will then the rest , and travel to the patron in my behalf , and make all well again . the second day of August we arrive in Cyprus , at Cyprus . a town call missagh : the people there be very rude , and like beast , and no better , they eat their meat sit 207 upon the ground , with their leg a cross like tailor , their bed for the most part be hard stone , but yet some of they have fair mattrace to lie upon . Joppa . upon Thursday the eight of August we come to Joppa in a small bark , which we hire betwixt missagh and Selina , and can not be suffer to come on land till noon the next day , and then we be permit by they the bassa of great bassa , who sit upon the top of a hill to see we Joppa . send away , be come on land , we may not enter into any house for victual , but be to content our self with our own provision , and that which we buy to carry with we be take from we . i have a pair of stirrup , which i buy at Venice to serve i in my journey , and try to make they fit for i