come to welcome our ambassador , accompany with the ermine , that be , the king customer , and also the french Consuli , with diverse of the chief of the city , and offer he as much friendship as he can or will desire : for he do offer to attend 25 ° upon we , and tow we if need be to the castle . the 21 we depart from thence , and that day pass by port signora again . this hand of Metelin be part of Asia , and be near to Anatolia . the 22 we pass by a head land call Baberno , and be also in Asia . and that day at night we pass by the isle of Tenedo , part of Asia , and by another hand call Maure . and the same day we pass through the straight of Galipoli , and by the castle , and also by the town of Galipoli it self , which stand in Europa . and that night we be in sight of Marmora which be near Anatolia , and part of Asia . the 23 in the morning we be thwart of Araclia , and that night we anchor in Silauria . the 24 in the morning the merchant and the pilot be set on land to go to the city about the ambassador business , but there A . D . I583 - baberno . Tenedo . Maure . Galipoli . marmora . Araclia . Silauria . they can not land because we have the wind fair . that place of some be call Ponte grande , and be four Ponte grande . and twenty mile on this side of Constantinople , and because of the wind , they follow in the skiff until they come to a place call Ponte picola , and there Ponte plcola . be a little bridge , it stand eight turkish mile from Constantinople , there the merchant and the pilot land . at this bridge be a house of the great Turk with a fair garden belong unto it , near the which be a point call Ponta S . Stephano , and there the p ° nte s - shippe anchor that day . the 26 day the ship come fhano . to the seven tower , and the 27 we come near . the 29 there come three galley to bring we up further : [ ii i . 169 . ] and when the ship come against the great Turks the arnvall palace , we shoot off all our ordinance to the number of ° f the Susan at four and thirty piece . then land our Ambassa - onstawtm - dour , and then we discharge four and twenty piece , who be receive with more than fifty or threescore ople . man on horseback . the nine of April he present the great bassa with six clothes , four can of silver double gilt , and one piece of fine holland , and to three other bassa , that be to say , the second bassa , which be a geld man , and his name be Mahomet bassa , to 25 * the ambassador give a present to the great bassa . the ambassador entertainment with the bassa . a . d . J583 - . the three who marry the great Turks sister , and to the four who they call Abraham bassa , to every one of these he give four clothes . now , before the great bassa , and Abraham bassa , at their return from the court ( and as we think at other time , but at a man half that time for a certain ) there come a man in manner naked go of a fool > who give a great shout three or four Bassa ^^^ timesj cry very hollow , the place rebound with the sound , and this man , say they , be a prophet of Mahomet , his arm and leg naked , on his foot he do wear wooden patten of two sort , in his hand , a flag , or streamer set on a short spear paint , he carry a mat and bottle , and other trumpery at his back , and sometime under his arm , on his head he have a cap of white camel hair , flat like a helmet , write about with letter , and about his head a linen roll . other servingman there be with the say bassa , with red attire on their head , much like french hood , but the long flap somewhat small towards the end , with scufy or plate of mettle , like unto the chape of a ancient arm sword , stand on their forehead like other janissary . Theise bassa entertain we as follow : first , they bring we into a hall , there to stand on one side , and our ambassador and gentleman on the other side , who sit they down on a bench cover with carpet , the ambassador in the midst ; on his left hand sit our gentleman , and on his right hand the Turk , next to the door where their master go in and out : the common sort of Turk stay in the court yard , not suffer to come near we . when our ambassador have sit half a hour , the bassa ( who sit by themselves in a inner small room ) send for he ; to who the ambassador and his gentleman go : they all kiss his hand , and present return ( the ambassador only except , who stay there , and a turk chaus with he ) with the ambassador and his gentleman go in also so many of our man as there 252 William HAREBORNE ’ S ambassage a . d . 1583 . be present to carry in , but these neither kiss his hand nor tarry . after this i go to visit the church of Santa Sophia , which be the chief church when it santa Sophia . be the christian , and now be the chief see and church of primacy of this Turk present : before i enter i be will to put off my shoe , to the end i shall not profane their church , i be a christian . the pillar on both side of the church be very costly description and rich , their pulpit seemly and handsome , two be ° ft , le ' trchurc , l common to preach in , the three reserve only for their Paschall . the ground be cover with mat , and the wall hang with tapestry . they have also lamp in their church , one in the middle of the church of exceed greatness , and another