at the full with any thing that may become natural in this realm , he whatsoever he be that can bring it about , may deserve immortali fame in this our common wealth , and such a devise be offer to the parliament and refuse , because they deny to endow he with a certain liberty , some other have obtain the same before , that practise to work that effect by radish seed , which only make a trial of small quantity , and that go no further , to make that oil in plenty : and now he that offer this devise be a merchant , and be dead , and withal the devise be dead with he . it be write by one that write of Africa , that in Egypt in a city call Muhaisira there be many mill employ in make of oil of the seed of a herb call sesamum . Pena and Lobell , physician , write in our time , that this herb be a cod herb full of oily seed , and that there be plenty of this seed bring out of Egypt to diverse city in Italy . if this herb will prosper in this realm , our merchant may easy bring of it , etc 9 have herein thus trouble you by raise to your mind the consideration of certain thing , it shall not be impertinent to tell you that it shall not be amiss that you note all the order of the degree of labour use in Turkey , in the art of clothe , and to see if any way they excel in that profession our people of these part , and to bring notice of the same into this realm . io and if you shall find that they make any cloth of 237 Suf ply of the want of oil . leo Africanus ; lib . 8 . any kind not make in this realm , that be there of great use , than to bring of the same into this realm some mowster , that our people may fall into the trade , and prepare the same for turquoise : for the more kind of cloth we can devise to make , the more ample vent of our commodity we shall have , and the more sale of the labour of our poor subject that else for lack of labour become idle and burdenous to the common weal , and hurtful to many : and in England we be in our clothing trade to frame our self accord to the desire of foreign nation , be it that they desire thick or thin , broad or narrow , long or short , white or black . 11 but with this proviso always , that our cloth pass out with as much labour of our people as may be , wherein great consideration ought to be have : for ( if vent may so admit it ) as it be the great madness in the world for we to vent our wool not clothe , so be it madness to vent our wool in part or in the whole turn into broad cloth , if we may vent the same in kersey : for there be great difference in profit to our people between the clothing of a sack of wool in the one , and the like sack of wool in the other , of which i wish the merchant of England to have as great care as he may for the universali benefit of the poor : and the turn of a sack of wool into bonnet be better than both etc and also not to carry out of the realm any cloth white , but die if it may be , that the subject of this realm may take as much benefit as be possible , and rather to seek the vent of the clothes die with the natural colour of England , than such as be die with foreign colour . 12 and if of necessity we must be force to receive certain colour from foreign part , for that this climate will not breed they , i wish that our merchant procure anile and such other thing to be plant in like climate where now it grow , in diverse other place , that this realm may have that bring in for as base price as be possible , and that fall out with one place we may receive the same from another , and not buy the same 238 at the second or the three hand etc for if a commodity that be to be have of mere necessity , be in one hand , it be dear purchase . i how many several colour be die be to be learn of our dyer before you depart . 2 than how many of those colour England do die of her own natural home material and substance , and how many not . 3 then to bring into this realm herb and plant to become natural in our soil , that may die the rest of the colour , that present of our own thing here grow we can not yet die , and this from all foreign place . 4 there be a wood call Logwood or Palo Campechio , it be cheap and yield a glorious blue , but our workman can not make it sure . this wood you must take with you , and see whether the silk diers or wool diers in Turkey can do it , with this one you may enrich your self very much , and therefore it be to be endeavour earnest by you . it may bring down the price of woad and of anile . other some thing to be remember . if you can find out at Tripoli in Syria or elsewhere a vent for the cap call in Barbary , bonetto colorado rugio , which be a red scottish cap as it be without brim , you shall do your country much good : for as a sack of wool turn into fine Devonshire kersy do set many more people on work then a sack spin for broad cloth in a gross thread , so a sack of wool turn into those bonnet do set many more poor people on work , than a sack turn into kersey , by reason of the knit . and therefore if you can endeavour that , you work great effect . and no doubt that a marvellous vent may be find out of they into Africa by the way of Alexandria , and by alcayer southeast and southwest thence . 2 and by the vent of our knit hose of woollen yarn , worsted yarn , and of linen thread , great benefit to 239 this may be learn at Alger . our people may arise , and a great value in fine kersey and in those knit ware may be couch in a small room in the ship . and for these thing our people be grow apt , and by endeavour may be draw to great trade . 3 saffron the best of the universali world grow in this realm , and forasmuch as it be a thing that require much labour