in another part of the church of clean gold , or double gild , full as big as a barrel . round about the church there be a gallery build upon rich and stately pillar . that day i be in both the chapel , in one of the which lie the Turk father , and five of his son in tomb right costly , with their turbent very white and clean , shift ( as they say ) every Friday , they be not on their head , but stand on mould make for that purpose . at the end , over , and about their tomb be belt , like girdle , beset with jewel . in the other chapel be four other of his son , and one daughter , in like order . in the first chapel be a thing four foot high , cover with green , beset with mother of pearl very rich . this be a relic of Mahomet , and stand on the left side of the head of the great Turks tomb . Theise chapel have their floor cover , and their wall hang with tapestry of great price , i can value the cover and hang of one of the chapel , at no less than five hundred pound , beside their lamp hang rich gild . Theise chapel have their roof curious wrought with rich stone , and gild . and there lie the book of their law for every man to read . the 11 day of April the ship come to the key of the custom custom house . 253 the ambassador present the admiral UchaK . the Susan gp from the customhouse . the AdmiraU depart to the sea . [ ii i . 170 . ] the ambassadors repair to the great Turks court . house . the 16 the ambassador and we his man go to the captain bassa , who be admiral of the sea , his name be Uchali , he will not receive we into his house , but into his galley , to deliver our present , which be as follow : four piece of cloth , and two silver pot gild and grave . the poop or stern of his gay be gild both within and without , and under his foot , and where he sit be all cover with very rich tapestry . our ambassador and his gentleman kiss his hand , and then the gentleman be command out , and our ambassador sit down by he on his left hand , and the chaus stand before he . our man may walk in the gay fore and after , some of we tarry , and some go out again . the gay have seven piece of brass in her prow , small and great , she have thirty bank or oar on either side , and at every bank or oar seven man to row . the 18 day the ship go from the key . and 21 the admiral take his leave of the great Turk , be bind to the sea with six and thirty galley , very fair beautify with gild and paint , and beset with flag and streamer , all the which galley discharge their ordinance : and we for his farewell give he one and twenty piece . than he go to his house with his galley , and the 22 he go to the sea , and the castle that stand in the water give he fourteen or sixteen piece : and when he come against the Turks seraglio he shoot off all his caliver and his great piece , and so he go his way . the 24 our ambassador go to the court , who entertainment with the order thereof follow . when we come first on land there be way make for we by two or three bassa and diverse chause on horseback with their man on foot , to accompany , our ambassador to the court . also they bring horse for he and his gentleman for to ride , which be very rich furnish : and by the way there meet with we other chause to accompany we to the court . 254 William HAREBORNE ’ S ambassage a . d . 1583 - when we come there we pass through two gate , at the second gate there stand very many man with horse attend on their master . when we come within that gate we be within a very fair court yard , in compass twice so big as Paul churchyard . on the right hand of the say court be a fair gallery like a alley , and within it be place rail and such other provision . on the left side be the like , half the court over : it be divide into two part , the innermost fair than the other . the other part of that side be the place where the council do usual sit , and at the inner end of that be a fair place to sit in , much like unto that place in Paul churchyard , where the mayor and his brethren use to sit , thither be our ambassador bring , and set in that place . within that say place be another like open room , where he do eat . assoon as we come enterin , we be place in the innermost alley of the second room , on the left side of the court , which ambassador be spread with carpet on the ground fourscore or man . fourscore and ten foot long , with a hundred and fifty several dish set thereon , that be to say , mutton boil and roast , rice diverse dress , fritter of the fine fashion , and dish dainty dight with pretty pap , with infinite other , i know not how to express they . we have also roast hen with sundry sort of fowl to i unknown . the gentleman and we sit down on the ground , for it be their manner so to feed . there be also greek and other set to furnish out the room . our drink be make with rose water and sugar and spice brew together . those that do serve we with it have a great bag tie over their shoulder , with a broad belt like a arm belt full of plate of copper and gilt , with part of the say bag under his arm , and the mouth in his hand : than he have a devise to let it out when he will into cup , when we call for drink . the ambassador when he have eat , pass by we , with 2ss the chause aforesaid , and sit he down in a inner room . this place where he sit