be against the gate where we come in , and hard by the council chamber end , somewhat on the left side of the court , this be at the east end of the court , for we come in at the west . all this time our present stand by we until we have dine , and dinner once end , this be their order of take up the dish . certain be call in , like those of the black guard in the court of England , the turk call they moglan . Theise come in like rude and raven mastiff , without order or fashion , and make clean riddance : for he who hungry eye one dish can not fill turn two , one into the other , and thus even on the sudden be make a clean riddance of all . then come certain chause and bring our gentleman to sit with the ambassador . immediate come officer and appoint janiser to bear from we our present , who carry they on the right side of the court , and set they hard by the door of the privy chamber , as we call it : there all thing stand for the space of a hour . thus the ambassador and his gentleman sit still , and to the southward of they be a door whereas the great Turk himself go in and out at , and on the south side of that door sit on a bench all his chief lord and gentleman , and on the north side of the west gate stand his guard , in number as i guess they a thousand man . Theise man have on their head round cap of mettle like skull , but sharp in the top , in this they have a bunch of ostrich feather , as big as a brush , with the corner or edge forward : at the low end of these feather be there a small feather , like those that be common wear here . some of his guard have small staff , and most of they be weapon with bow and arrow . here they wait , during our abode at the court , to guard their lord . after the ambassador with his gentleman have sit a hour and more , there come three or four chause , and bring they into the great Turk as6 William HAREBORNE ’ S ambassage a . d . 1583 - presence . at the privy chamber door two noble man take the ambassador by each arm one , and put their finger within his sleeve , and so bring he to the great Turk where he sumptuous sit alone . he kiss his hand and stand by until all the gentleman be bring before he in like manner , one by one , and lead backwards again his face towards the Turk ; for they may neither tarry nor turn their back , and in like manner return the ambassador . the salutation that the noble man do , be take they by the hand . all this time they tread on cloth of gold , most of the noble man that sit on the south side of the privy chamber sit likewise on cloth of gold . many officer [ ii i . 171 . ] or janissary there be with staff , who keep very good order , for no Turk whatsoever may go any further than they will he . at our ambassador enter they follow that bear his present , to say , twelve fine Turk be broad clothes , two piece of fine holland , ten piece of plate double gilt , one case or candlestick , the case whereof be very large , and three foot high and more , two very great can or pot , and one lesser , one basin and ewer , two poppinjaye of silver , the one with two head : they be to drink in : two bottle with chain , three fair mastiff in coat of red cloth , three spaniel , two bloodhound , one common hunt hound , two greyhound , two little dog in coat of silk : one clock value at five hundred pound sterling : over it be a forest with tree of silver , among the which be dear chase with dog , and man on horseback follow , man draw of water , other carry my oar on barrow : on the top of the clock stand a castle , and on the castle a mill . all these be of silver . and the clock be round beset with jewel . all the time that we stay at the council chamber door they be tell or weigh of money to send into Persia for his soldier pay . there be carry out a hundred and three and thirty bag , and in every bag , as it be tell we , one thousand ducat , which amount five 257 r to three hundred and thirty thousand * , and in sterling english money to fourscore and nineteen thousand pound . the captain of the guard in the mean time go to the great Turk , and return again , than they of the court make obeisance to he , bow down their head , and their hand on their breast , and he in like order resalute they : he be in cloth of silver , he go and come with two or three with he and not more . than we go out at the first gate , and there we be command to stay until the captain of the guard be pass by and all his guard with he , part before he and part behind he , some on horseback and some on foot , but the most part on foot carry on their shoulder the money before mention , and so we pass home . there be in the court during our abode there , for the most part a fool resemble the first , but not naked as be the other at the bassa : but he turn he continual , and cry Hough very hollow . the three of May i see the Turk go to the church : he have more than two hundred and fifty horse before and behind he , but most before he . there be many empty horse that come in no order . many of his nobility be in cloth of gold , but himself in white satin . there do ride behind he six or seven youth , one or two whereof carry water for he to drink as they say . there be many of his guard run before he and behind he , and when he alight , they cry Hough very hollow , as the aforesaid fool .