a letter write in spanish by sir Edward Osborne , to the king of Alger , the 20 . of July , 1584 . in the behalf of certain english captive there detain . the same in english . right high and mighty king , may it please your highness to understand , that the most high and most mighty majesty of the grand signior have confirm certain article of privilege with the most excellent majesty of our queen of England , that her subject may free go and come , and traffic by sea and land in the dominion of his most mighty majesty , as appear more at large by you say article , whereof we have send the copy unto m . Joh . Tipton our commissary , to show the same unto your highness . against the tenor of which article , one of our ship which come from Patras which be in Morea , lade with corant and other merchandize which be buy in those part , be sink by 2 . galley of your ci tie of Alger , and the great number of the man thereof be slay and drown in the sea , the residue be detain as slave : a act very contrary to the meaning of the aforesaid article and privilege : which be the occasion that by these present we beseech your highness very humble , that since it have please the most mighty majesty of the grand signior to favour we with the say 269 A . D . i584 . a english ship sink by two galley of Alger . privilege , it will please your highness in like manner to assist we in the same , grant we by your authority , your aid and favour , accord as our hope be , that these poor man so detain in captivity , as be aforesaid , may be set at liberty , and return into their country . and likewise that your highness will send to give order to the captain , master and people of your galley , that from henceforth they will suffer we to use . our 0 traffic with six ship yearly into turquoise unto the dominion of the grand signior in peace and safety , [ il i . 176 . ] that they do not withstand those our say privilege , every one of our foresay ship carry with they a passport of his most high and most mighty majesty to be know by . and for that your so singular favour and courtesy which in so do we shall receive , we on our part with all bind duty unto your highness , will seek to honour you in that behalf , accord as the say master John Tipton ( to who we refer our self touch all other circumstance ) shall moor at large inform your highness , who most excellent person and estate , we pray and beseech almighty God to prosper and increase with all felicity and honour . from the city of London , the 20 . of July , 1584 . at the service of your highness , for and in the name of our whole company trade into turquoise , i mayor of London , Edward Osburne .