stand on the poop , see this readiness , and the ship go very soft , because of the calmness of the wind , he call to they on the south side , where the viceroy be , and say unto he : have you war with we ? if you have , it be more than we know ; but by your provision it seem so : if you have , shoot in god name , and spare not , but they hold all fast and shoot not . then the viceroy himself hold up a paper , and say he have a letter for our captain , and desire we to stay for it . than we answer and say we will not , but will he to send it by the marseilians boat , and our man also . all this while , our trumpet , drum and flute sound , and so we pass out in the face of they all . when they perceive that they can lay no hold on we , they present send to the the effect of town for our man , who within less than three hour thettceroy after ey send aboard with the say letter , wherein he captain of desire our captain and his company not to take it in ill the Susan . part , for he mean they no harm , but will have see 248 William HAREBORNE ’ S ambassage a . d . ..... I583 ' our ship . his letter do import these and such like fair speech : for it altogether contain courteous salutation , say that he may bold come into any port [ ii i . 168 . ] within his hand , and that he and his will show he what friendship they may : and that the injury that be offer be do at the request of the shepherd and poor people of the country , for the more safeguard of their flock , and because it be not a thing usual to have any such ship to come into that port , with many other deceitful word in the say letter . than our effect ° f ambassador write unto he another letter to answer ambassa - that , and give he thank for his man that he have send ° rs anmere ' he , and also for his good will , and send he a present . this do , we shoot off half a dozen piece , hoist our sail , and depart on our voyage . then the purser and the rest of our man that have be in hold , tell we that they do see the captain , and other gentleman of the hand , have their buskin and stocking tear from their leg , with labour in the bush day and night to make that sudden provision . the 12 of February we see a hand of Africa side call Galata , where they use Galata . to drag out of the sea much coral , and we see likewise Sardinia , which be a hand subject to Spain . the 13 Sardinia . in the morning we be hard by Sardinia . the 15 we do see a hand near Sicilia , and a hand on Africa side Fauagniana . call Cysimbre . the same day likewise we see a hand Cisimbri . call Pantalaria , and that night we be thwart the Pantalaria . middle of Sicilia . the 16 at night we be as far as Sicilia . Capo Passaro , which be the southeast part of Sicilia . the C . Passaro . 24 we be put into a port call Porto de Conte , in a porto de Conte hand call Cephalonia : it be a out hand in the m cephalma - dominion of Grecia , and now at this present govern by the signory of Venice , as the rest of Grecia be under the Turk , for the most part . the 27 we come from thence , and that day arrive at Zante which be also in Zante . Grecia : for at this present we enter the part of Grecia . the second of march we come from Zante ; and the same day be thwart of a hand call , Prodeno : and Prodeno . 249 Cerigo . c Malto . Menelaus . Bellapola . both Milos . Falconara . Antemila . Fermenia , Zea . Negroponte . Andri . psara . Sarafo . signora , a port in Metelin . porto Delfin . the city of Chio . a by . ermine , or customer . the 4 we be thwart of a hand call sapientia . there stand a fair town and a castle on the main over against it , call Modon . the same day by reason of contrary wind we put back again to Prodeno , because we can not fetch sapientia . the nine we come from thence , and be as far as sapientia again . the ten we be as far shoot as Cavo Matapan ; and that day we enter the archipelago , and pass through between Cerigo and Cavo Malio . This Cerigo be a hand where one Menelaus do sometime reign , from who be steal by Paris fair Helena , and carry to Troy , as ancient record do declare . the same day we have sight of a little hand call Bellapola , and do likewise see both the Milos , be hand in they . Archipelago . the 11 in the morning we be hard by a hand call Falconara , and the hand of Antemila . the 12 in the morning we be between Fermenia and Zea , be both hand . that night we be between Negroponte and Andri , be likewise hand . the 13 in the morning we be hard by Psara and Sarafo , be hand nine or ten mile from Chio , and can not fetch Chio . so we put room with a port in Metelin call signora , and about nine of the clock at night we anchor there . the 15 we come from thence , the sixteenth we put into Porto Delfi . the port be 9 English mile to the northward of the city of Chio , ( and it may be twelve of their mile ) this night we stay in the say port , be in the hand of Chio . then go our merchant and one or two with he to the city of Chio . and when then by , who be the governor of the hand ( and be in their language a duke ) have commune with the merchant , and those that be with he , and understand of our arrival within his dominion , the day follow he arm his galley , and