the voyage of the Susan of London to Constantinople , wherein the worshipful m . William Harborne be send first ambassador unto sultan Murad can , the great Turk , with who he continue as her majesty ligier almost six year . he 14 of November 1582 , we depart from Blackewall , bind for the city of Constantinople , in the tall ship call the Susan of London : the master whereof be Richard Parsons , a very excellent and skilful man in his faculty . but by occasion of contrary weather we spend two month before we can recover the kowe in the isle of wight . where the 14 of [ ii i . 166 . ] January follow we take in the worshipful m . l ^ nuar1 fa William hareborne her majesty ambassador to the jottreteent • Turk , and his company , and sail thence to Yarmouth in the foresay isle of wight . the 19 we put from wight . the 26 we do see Cavo de Sant Vincente . the same day we be thwart of cavo santa maria . the 27 we pass by Tariffa , and Gibraltar . the 28 in the morning we pass by Velez Malaga : and that night be thwart of cavo de gate . the 29 at night we have sight of cavo de Palos . the 30 in the morning we do see the high land of Denia , in the kingdom of Valentia , and that night we have sight of the hand Formentera . the 31 in the morning appear the hand of Cabrera . the first of February we put into a port in Mallorca , call porto de sant 0 Pedro : where they will have evil entreat we for and ? • , come into the harbour : we think we may malkrctt ' have be as bold there as in other place of christian - c Vincente . c santa maria . Tariffa . Velez Malaga . C . de gate . C . de Pahs . Denia . ' Formentera . Cabrera . February the 243 the ship dome , but it prove far otherwise . the first man man gee on we meet on ] and be a simple shepherd , of who we demand whether we may have a sheep or such like to refresh our self , who tell we yea . and by such conference have with he , at the last he come aboard once or twice , and have the best cheer that we can make he : and our ambassador himself talk with he , and still he make we fair promise , but nothing at all mean to perform the same , as the end show . in the mean time come in a ship of Marseils , the master whereof do know our ambassador very well , with who our ambassador have conference , and with his merchant also . they come from Alger in Barbary , which be under the government of the great Turk . they do present our ambassador with a ape , wherefore he make very the Ambassa - much of they , and have they often aboard . by they dour betray . i suppose , he be bewray of his purpose as touch his message , but yet still we have fair word of the shepherd aforesaid , and other . so that upon their word , our purser and another man go to a town which be three or four mile from the port , and there be well entertain , and have of the people very fair speech , and such small thing as can be get upon the sudden , and so return to the ship that day . than we be embolden , and think all have be well , accord to their talk . the next day , February then be the six day of February , two of our Gentlesixth . man , with one of our merchant , and the purser , and one of the ambassador man go to the town aforesaid , think to do as the purser and the other have do before , but it prove contrary : for at their come thither they have fair word a while , and have bread and wine , and such necessary for their money , until such time as they be beset with man , and the majorcans never show in their countenance any such matter , but as the manner of all the people in the dominion of Spain be , for the most part to 244 be treacherous to we , if they think they have any advantage . for upon the sudden they lay hand on they , and put they in hold , as sure as may be in such a simple town . then be they well guard with man both day and night , and still delude with fair word , and they say to our man it be for no hurt , but that the viceroy of the hand will come aboard to see the ship . but they present send the purser to the town of Majorca , where he be examine by the viceroy very straight , what their ship and captain be , and what voyage they intend , but he confess nothing at all . in the mean time they in the town be likewise straight examine by a priest and other officer upon their oath : who for their oath sake declare the whole estate of their voyage . the ambassador man be a french man , and therefore be suffer to go to the ship on a message , but he can tell the ambassador none other news , but that the viceroy will come aboard the ship , and that our man shall come with he , but they have another meaning . for the Marseilian merchant be stay in like manner in the town , only to make a better show unto we . but in the mean time , be there three or four day , there come man unto we every day , more or less , but one day especial there come two man on horseback , who we take to be officer , be lusty man , and very well horse . Theise man desire to speak with our captain ( for all thing that pass there be do in the name of our captain John Gray ) for it be say by we there , that he be captain of one of her majesty ship : wherefore all thing pass in his name : and the ambassador not see in any thing but rather conceal , and yet do all , because of his tongue and good indite in that language . for he himself go on land clothe in