velvet , and talk with these man , and with he ten or twelve lusty fellow well weapon , each one have 245 a . d 1583 - the english man be surprise . the Spaniard a boarespeare or a Cali ver , the captain John grey come to the sea be one of they , and our boat lie by very wary keep and ready . for then we begin to suspect , taine . because the place be more frequent with man than it be wont . the man on horseback be in doubt to come near , because he come so well weapon . but they bid he welcome , and give he great salutation in word as their manner be : and demand why he come so strong , for they say he need not to fear any man in the hand . answer be make , that it be the manner of english captain to go with their guard in strange place . than they tell our [ ii i . 167 . ] ambassador ( think he to be the captain ) that they be send from the viceroy to know what they do lack , for they promise he beef or mutton , or any thing that be in the hand to be have , but their purpose be to have get more of our man if they can , and they say that we shall have our man again the next day : with such pretty delusion they feed we still . than our ambassador do write a letter to the viceroy in her majesty name , and in our captain John Gray name , and not in his own , and send it by they , desire he to send his man , and not to trouble he in his voyage , for he have give he not such cause , nor any of he . so these man depart with great courtesy in word on both part . and in all this time we do see man on horseback and on foot in the wood and tree more than they be accustom to be , but we can perceive nothing thereby . the next day , or the second , come either four or six of the best of they as we think ( the viceroy except ) and very many man beside in the field , both on foot and on horse , but come not near the Spaniard the water side . and those in like order desire to cparlegame ta spea ^ e captain , and that when he come on pare ' land the trumpet may sound : but than the ambassador , who they think to be captain , will not go , nor suffer the trumpet to be sound ( for that 246 William HAREBORNE ’ S ambassage a . d . . 1583 . he think it be a trap to take himself , and more of his company . but do send one of the principali of the merchant to talk with they . and the captain John Gray go also with he , not be know of the Spaniard , for he go as a soldier . thus they receive of those man the like word as they have of the other before mention , who say we shall have our man again , for they mean we no hurt . than our theambana - ambassadour do write another letter , and send it mrw ^ th by they to the viceroy , in like order as he do before , tot e ker ° y ' but he receive no answer of any of they . in all this time they have privy gather together the principali man of the hand , and have labour day and night to bring down ordinance , not make any show of their treachery towards we . but the same night follow , ' we see very many light pass in the wood among the tree . and in the morning when the watch be break up , be Saturday the nine of February , at fair day tf light , one of our man look forth , and see stand e ruary ‘ on land the carriage of a piece : then be one command to go into the top , and there he do descry two or three piece , and also many man on the shore , with diverse weapon that they bring . than they sudden take four or five brass piece , and place they on either side of the harbour where we shall go out , and hide they with stone and bush that we shall not see they . now i think the harbour not to be above the eight part of a mile over . thus perceive their meaning which be most plain : we agree to take up our anchor and go out , and leave our man there , have none other way to take . than our ambassador entreat the master of the Marseilian , his friend , to go on land with his boat , and to know the truth : who satisfy his request . and at his return he tell we that it be very true , that they will lay hold of we if they can . than we weigh our anchor : but have little wind , we tow the ship forward with the boat . the viceroy himself be at the water side with more than 247 five hundred man on both side of the harbour as we think . and when we come out with our ship as the ship far as their ordinance , our ambassador and the captain pareth ^ tode * n their armour , the master command of the fend herself . company , and trim of the sail , the pilot stand on the poop , attend to his charge , with other very well furnish , and every man in order about their business very ready , they on land on the contrary part have a very fair piece mount on the north side open in all our sight , as the ship pass by , they traverse that piece right with the main mast or afterquarter of the ship , and a gunner stand by , with > a lint - stocke in his hand , about fourteen or fifteen foot long , be ( as we think ) ready to give fire . our whole noise of trumpet be sound on the poop with drum and flute , and a minion of brass on the summer deck , with two or three other piece , always by our gunner traverse mouth to mouth with they on land , still look when they on land shall shoot , for to answer they again . the pilot