remembrance for master S . to give he the better [ ii i . 161 . ] occasion to inform himself of some thing in England , and after of some other thing in turquoise , to the great profit of the common weal of this country . write by the foresaid master Richard Hakluyt , for a principali english factor at Constantinople 1582 . ince all man confess ( that be not barbarous breed ) that man be bear as well to seek the common commodity of their country , as their own private benefit , it may seem folly to persuade that point , for each man mean so to do . but wherein man shall seek the common commodity , and what way , and by what mean that be to be bring about , be the point or sum of the matter , since every good man be ready to employ his labour . this be to be do by a infinite sort of mean , as the number of thing be infinite that may be do for common benefit of the realm . and as the chief thing so to be do be diverse , so be they to be do by diverse man , as they be by wit and manner of education more fit , or less fit , for this and for that . and for that of many thing that tend to the common benefit of the state , some tend more , and some less , i find that no one thing , after one other , be great than clothe , and the thing incident to the same . And understand that you be off right good capacity , and become a factor at Constantinople , and in other part in turquoise , i find no man fit of all the english factor there , than you . and therefore i be so bold to put you in mind , and to tell you wherein with some endeavour you may chance to do your country much good , and give a infinite sort of the poor people occasion to pray for you here throughout the realm : this that i mean be in matter of cloth , etc 231 1 thirst , you can deny but that this realm yield encage ? the most fine wool ! , the most soft , the most strong wool , the most durable in cloth , and most apt of nature of all other to receive die , and that no island or any one kingdom so small do yield so great abundance of the same : and that no wool be less subject to moth , or to fret in press , than this , as the old parliament robe of king , and of many noble peer to be show may plain testify . 2 there be no commodity of this realm that may set so many poor subject on work , as this do , that do bring in so much treasure , and so much enrich the merchant , and so much employ the navy of this realm , as this commodity of our wool do . ample and full vent of this noble and rich commodity be it that the common weal of this realm do require . Spain now abound with Wools , and the same be clothe . turquoise have wool , and so have diverse province of Christendom and of heatheness , and cloth be make of the same in diverse place . 1 but if England have the most fine , and the most excellent wool of the world in all respect ( as it can be deny , but it have ) 2 if there may be add to the same , excellent artificiali , and true make , and excellent die , 3 then no doubt but that we shall have vent for our clothes , although the rest of the world do abound much more with wool than it do , and although their workmanship and their die be in every degree equal with we of England , unless the labour of our people employ that way , and the material use in die shall be the cause of the contrary by dearth . but if foreign nation turn their wool , inferior to we , into true and more excellent make cloth , and 232 shall die the same in true , sure , and more excellent and more delectable colour , then shall they sell and make ample vent of their clothes , when the english cloth of better wool shall rest unsold , to the spoil of the merchant , of the clothier , and of the breeder of the wool , and to the turn to bag and wallet of the infinite number of the poor people employ in clothe in several degree of labour here in England . which thing weigh , i be to tell you what thing i wish you in this realm , and after in turquoise , to endeavour from time to time , as your laisure may permit the same . before you go out of the realm , that you learn : i r i ' oh know wool , all kind of clothes make in this a realm , and all other employment of wool , home or foreign , be you same in feel cloak , feel hat , in the red knit cap for Barbary , call bonetto rugio colorado , or whatsoever , etc all the deceit in clothmaking ; as the sort together of wool of several nature , some of nature to shrink , some to hold out , which cause cloth to cockle and lie uneven . the evil sort of thread of good or bad wool , some tootoo hard spin , some tootoo soft spin deliver to be weave . the fault in weave . the fault in walk , row , and Burling , and in rack the clothes above measure upon the teintors : all which fault may be learn of honest man , which fault be to be know to the merchant , to be shun and not to be use . 2 then to learn of the dyer to discern all kind of colour ; as which be good and sure , and which will not hold : which be fair , which not ; which colour by the dearth of the substance be dear , and which by reason of the cheapness of the material with which they be die , be cheap colour . 233 [ ii i . 162 . ] 3 then to take the name of all the material and substances use in this city or in the realm , in die of cloth or silk . to learn to know they , as which be good , which bad . and what colour they die . and what price they be of . and of they which bee the natural of this realm , and in what part of the realm they be to be have . and of all the foreign material use in die to know the very natural place of they , and the plenty or the scarceness of each of they