in diverse sort , and set the people on work so plentiful , i wish you to see whether you can find out ample vent for the same , since it be go out of great use in those part . it be a spice that be cordial , and may be use in meat , and that be excellent in die of yellow silk . this commodity of saffron grow fifty mile from Tripoli in Syria , on a high hill call in those part Garian , so as there you may learn at that port of Tripoli the value of the pound , the goodness of it , and the place of the vent . but it be say that from that hill there pass yearly of that commodity fifteen mode lade , and that those region notwithstanding lack sufficiency of that commodity . but if a vent may be find , man will in Essex about Saffronwalden and in Cambridge shire revive the trade for the benefit of the set of the poor on work . so will they do in Hereford shire by wale , where the best of all England be , in which place the soil yield the wild saffron common , which show the natural inclination of the same soil to the bear of the right saffron , if the soil be manure and that way employ . 4 there be a wall town not far from Barbary , call hub , towards the south from the famous town Telensin , about six mile : the inhabitant of which town in effect be all dyer . and it be say that thereabouts they have plenty of anile , and that they occupy that , and also that they use there in their die , of the saffron aforesaid . the truth whereof , in the southerly port of the Mediteran sea , be easy learn in your passage to Tripoli , or in return from thence homeward you may understand it . it be report at Saffronwalden that a 240 pilgrim purpose to do good to his country , steal a head of saffron , and hide the same in his palmer staife , which he have make hollow before of purpose , and so he bring this root into this realm , with venture of his life : for if he have be take , by the law of the country from whence it come , he have die for the fact . if the like love in this our age be in our people that now become great traveller , many knowledge , and many trade , and many herb and plant may be bring into this realm that may do the realm good . and the roman have that care , bring from all coast of the world into Italy all art and science , and all kind of beast and fowl , and all herb , tree , busk and plant that may yield profit or pleasure to their country of Italy . and if this care have not be heretofore in our ancestor , then have our life be savage now , for than we have not have wheat nor rye , pease nor bean , barley nor oat , pear nor apple , vine nor many other profitable and pleasant plant , bull nor cow , sheep nor swine , horse nor mare , cock nor hen , nor a number of other thing that we injpy , without which our life be to be say barbarous : for these thing and a thousand that we use more the first inhabitor of this hand find not here . and in time of memory thing have be bring in that be not here before , as the damask rise by doctor Linaker king Henry the seven and king Henry the eight physician , the Turkey cock and hen about fifty year past , the artichowe in time of king Henry the eight , and of late time be procure out of Italy the musk rise plant , the plum call the Perdigwena , and two kind more by the lord Cromwell after his travel , and the Abricot by a french priest one wolf gardener to king Henry the eight : and now within these four year there have be bring into England from Vienna in Austria diverse kind of flower call Tulipas , and those and other procure thither a little before from Constantinople by a excellent man call m . Carolus Clusius . and it be say that since we trade to Zante five 241 queen that the plant that bear the Coren be also bring into this realm from thence ; and although it bring not fruit to perfection , yet it may serve for pleasure and for some use , like as our vine do , which we can well spare , although the climate so cold will not permit we to have good wine of they . and many other thing have be bring in , that have degenerate by reason of the cold climate , some other thing bring in have by negligence be lose . the archbishop of canterbury Edmund Grindall , after he return out of Germany , bring into this realm the plant of Tamariske from thence , and this plant he have so increase that there be here thousand of they ; and many people have receive great health by this plant : and if of thing bring in such care be have , then can not the first labour be lose . the seed of tobacco have be bring hither out of the west Indies , it grow here , and with the herb many have be ease of the reume , etc each one of a great number of thing be worthy of a journey to be make into Spain , Italy , Barbary , Egypt , Zante , Constantinople , the west Indies , and to diverse other place near and further off then any of these , yet forasmuch as the poor be not able , and for that the rich settle at home in quiet will not , therefore we be to make suit to such as repair to foreign kingdom , for other business , to have some care herein , and to set before their eye the example of these good man , and to endeavour to do for their part the like , as their speciali business may permit the same . thus give you occasion by way of a little remembrance , to have a desire to do your country good , you shall , if you have any inclination to such good , do more good to the poor ready to starve for relief , then ever any subject do in this realm by building of almshouse , and by give of land and good to the relief of the poor . thus may you help to drive idleness the mother of most mischief out 242 William HAREBORNE ’ S ambassage a . d . . 1583 - of the realm , and win you perpetuali fame , and the prayer of the poor , which be more worth than all the gold of Peru and of all the west Indies .