. these thing superficial learn in the realm before you go , you be the fit in foreign part to serve your country , for by this mean you have a enterie into the thing that i wish you to travel in . what you shall do in turquoise , beside the business of your factorship . 1 tporasmuch as it be report that the woollen JT clothes die in turquoise be most excellent die , you shall send home into this realm certain mowster or piece of show to be bring to the dyer hall , there to be show , partly to remove out of their head , the tootoo great opinion they have conceive of their own cunning , and partly to move they for shame to endeavour to learn more knowledge to the honour of their country of England , and to the universali benefit of the realm . 2 you shall devise to amend the die of England , by carry hence a apt young man bring up in the art , or by bring one or other from thence of skill , or rather to devise to bring one for silk , and another for wool and for woollen cloth , and if you can work this by ordinary mean , than to work it by some great bassa mean , or if your own credit there be not sufficient by mean of your small abode in those party , to work it by the help of the french ambassador there resident , for which purpose you may insinuate your self into his 234 acquaintance , and otherwise to leave no mean unsought that tend to this end , wherein you be to do as circumstance may permit . 3 then to learn to know all the material and substance that the Turk use in die , be they of herb , simple or compound , be they plant , bark , wood , berry , seed , grain , or minerali matter , or what else soever . but before all other , such thing as yield those famous colour that carry such speciali report of excellence , that our merchant may bring they to this realm by ordinary trade , as a right mean for the better vent of our clothes . 4 to know the use of those , and where the natural place of they and of each of they be , i mean the place where each of they grow or be breed . 5 and in any wise , if anile that colour blue be a natural commodity of those part , and if it be compound of a herb , to send the same into this realm by seed or by root in barrel of earth , with all the whole order of sow , set , plant , replant , and with the compound of the same , that ' it may become a natural commodity in this realm as woad be , to this end that the high price of foreign woad ( which devour yearly great treasure ) maybe bring down . so shall [ ii i . 163 . ] the merchant buy his cloth less dear , and so he shall | be able to occupy with less stock , be able to afford cloth cheap , make more ample vent , and also become a great gainer himself , and all this to the benefit of this realm . 6 to do the like with herb and plant , or tree that in die be of any excellent use , as to send the same by seed , berry , root , etc : for by such mean saffron be bring first into this realm , which have set many poor on work , and bring great wealth into this realm . thus may sumack , the plant wherewith the most excellent black be die in Spain , be bring out of Spain , and out of the hand of the same , if it will grow in this more cold climate . for thus be woad bring into this 335 realm , and come to good perfection , to the great loss of the french our old enemy . and it do marvellous import this realm to make natural in this realm such thing as be special in the die of our clothes . and to speak of such thing as colour blow , they be of great use , and be ground of the most excellent colour , and therefore of all other to be bring into this realm , be it anile or any other materiali of that quality . 7 and because yellow and green be colour of small price in this realm , by reason that oide and greenwee wherewith they be die be natural here , and in great plenty , therefore to bring our clothes so die to common sale in turquoise be to the great benefit of the merchant , and other poor subject of this realm , for in sale of such our own natural colour we consume not our treasure in foreign colour , and yet we sell our own trifle dear perhaps . 8 the wool be natural , and excellent colour for die become by this mean here also natural , in all the art of clothe then we want but one only speciali thing . for in this so temperate a climate our people may labour the year throughout , whereas in some region of the world they can work for extreme heat , as in some other region they can work for extreme cold a good part of the year . and the people of this realm by the great and bless abundance of victuali be cheap feed , and therefore may afford their labour cheap . and where the clothier in Flanders by the flatness of their river can make walkmille for their clothes , but be force to thicken and dress all their clothes by the foot and by the labour of man , whereby their clothes be raise to a high price , we of England have in all shire store of mill upon fall river . and these river be in temperate zone be not dry up in summer with drought and heat as the river be in Spain and in hot region , nor freeze up in winter as all the river be in all the north region of the world : so as our mill 236 remembrance for a factor may go and work at all time , and dress clothes cheap . than we have also for scour our clothes earth and clay , as walker clay , and the clay of Oborne little inferior to soap in scour and in thick . then also have we some reasonable store of alum and Copporas here make for die , and be like to have increase of the same . than we have many good water apt for die , and people to spin and to do the rest of all the labour we want not . so as there want , if colour may be bring in and make natural , but only oil : the want whereof if any man can devise to supply