Notes concern the trade of Alger . he money that be coin in Alger be a piece of gold call Asiano , and doublaes , and two doubla make a Asiano , but that for all thing which Doubla there . the asper there be not so good by half and more , as that in Constantinople ; for the chekin of gold of 270 e Doubla be most use , be sell by doublaes , be fifty of their asper 1584 . the turk make at Constantinople be at Alger worth a 150 . asper , and at Constantinople it be but 66 . asper . the pistolet and royal of plate be most currant there . the say pistolet go for 130 . asper there : and the piece of 4 . royal go for 40 . asper , but oftentimes be sell for more , as man need they to carry up into turquoise . their Asianos and Doublaes be piece of course gold , worth here but 40 . S . the ounce , so the same be currant in no place of turquoise out of the kingdom of Alger , neither the asper , for that they be less than other be , for they coin they in Alger . the custom to the king be inward 10 . per centum , the custom . to the Turk , to be pay of the commodi tie it self , or as it shall be rate . there be another custom to the ermine , of one and a half per centum , which be to the justice of the Christians : the good for this custom be rate as they be for the king custom . have pay custom inward , you pay none outward for any commodity that you do lade , more than a reward to the gate keeper . the weight there be call a cantare for fine ware , as the weight . metal refine , and spice etc which be here 120 . ll subtle . mettle not refine , as lead , iron , and such gross ware , be sell by a great cantare , which be half as big again : so it be 180 . il subtle of we here . the measure of corn be by a measure call a the measure . Curtia , which be about 4 . bushel of our measure , and corn be plentiful there and good cheap , except when there happen a very dry year . the sure lodging for a christian there be in a the sure Jew house : for if he have any hurt , the Jew and M & ngfir of his good shall make it good , so the Jew take great ckrisaan ' care of the christian and his good that lie in his house , for fear of punishment . 271 a Englishman call Thomas Williams , which be m . John tiptons man , lie about trade of merchandise in the street call the Soca of the Jew . this be another officer . other small custom you pay beside , which may be at two in the hundred : and fir consullage you pay two in the hundred . [ ii i . 177 . ] note concern the trade in Alexandria . Lexandria in Egypt be a free port , and when a man come within the castle , present the Ermyn send aboard to have one come and speak with he , to know what good be aboard : and then he will set guard aboard the ship to see all the good discharge . and then from the ermine you go to the * buy , only for that he will inquire news of you , and so from thence to the consul house where you lie . the venetian have a consul themselves . but all other nation go to the french nation consul , who will give you a chamber for your self apart , if you will so have it . the custom inward of all commodity be ten in the hundred , and the custom be pay in ware also that you buy : for the same ware in barter you pay also ten in the hundred , at the lade of the ware . but if you sell for money , you pay no more custom but the ten aforesaid , and one and a half in the hundred , which be for the custom of the good you lade for the say money , for more custom you pay not . but for all the money you bring thither , you pay nothing for the custom of the same . and if you sell your ware for money , and with the same money buy ware , you pay but two in the hundred for the custom thereof . and if you steal any custom , if it be take , you pay double custom for that you steal . the weight of Alexandria be call Pois forforeine , which be a kintal in that place , which make at Marseils 109 . U . of Marseils weight , at 15 ounce the pound , which be 103 . ll of 16 . ounce to the livre . there 272 be another weight call Pois Gerrin , which be 150 . ll of Marseils weight , by which be sell all thing to eat : but spice be sell by the former weight . - from Alexandria to Cairo be three day journey , , Cairo three but you must take a janissarie with you : and to go ie j ^ wy up thither by water it be 8 . day journey . royal or dria jand Spain be currant money there , and be the best money you can carry . and 4 . royal be worth 13 . Medins , and 2 . Medins , be 3 . asper . pistolet and crown of France and dollar will go , but of all royal be best . rice be not permit to go out of the land , but be keep for a victuali . but with a present to the buy and ermine some may pass . all sort of spice be garble after the bargain be make , and they be moor which you deal withal , which be good people and not ill dispose . and after you be search and have leave to pass , you must present depart out of the port , and if you do not , they will search you again . and you must depart in the day , for in the night the castle will not suffer you to depart . the duty to the consul be 2 . in the hundred , for his aid , and meat and drink and all . and the port of Alexandria be good when one be within it with good anchor and cable . silver be better currant than gold in Alexandria , but both be good . common the Caravans come thither in October from Mecca to Cairo , and from thence to Alexandria , where the merchant be that buy the spice , and therefore the spice be bring most to Alexandria , where each christian nation remain at the consul house . yet oftentimes the Christians go up to Cairo to buy drug and other commodity there , as they see cause . and the commodity there vendible be all sort of kersy , but the most part blow , and of clothes all colour except mingle colour and black . Pepper be usual sell for 24 . ducat the quintal , five 273 sister ginger for 14 . ducat . you must take canvas to make bag to put your commodity in from Alexandria , for there be none . there be also fine flax , and good store of buff hide .