the voyage of master Henry Austell by Venice and thence to Ragusa over land , and so to Constantinople : and from thence by Moldavia , Polonia , Silesia and Germany to Hamburg , etc of June we take ship at he 9 0 Harewich and the next day land at the [ ii i . 195 . ] Hamburg . Brunswig . halberstat . Ramekins in the isle of Walcheren with very stormy weather , and that night go to middleburch in the same island . the twelve we take ship for holland , and the 13 . we land at Schiedam : and the same day go to Delft by boat , and so that night to the Hage . the 17 . we take ship at Amsterdam , and the 18 . we land at Enckhuysen . the 19 we take ship and by the Zuydersee we pass that day the ulie , and so into the main sea ; and the next day we enter into the river of Hamburg call the Elbe . the 21 . we come to anchor in the same river before a town of the bishop of Breme call Staden , where they pay a certain toll , and special for wine , and so that night we land at Hamburg , where we stay three day . the 24 . we depart from Hamburg in the company of Edward parish merchant , and that day we bait at Wyntson , and so . over the heath we leave Lunenburg on the left hand , and travail all that night . the 25 . we meet with master Sanders upon the heath , and pass by a town of the duke of Lunenborg call Geffherne , and from thence through many water , we lay that night within a english mile of brunswig . the 27 . we lay at halberstat , which be a great town subject to the bishop of that town . 320 the 28 . we bait at erinsleiben : and there we enter into the duke of Saxon his country : and the same night we lie at a town call Eisleben , where Eisleben . Martine Luther be bear . the 29 . we pass by Mansfield , where there be many copper mine : and so that night go to coppermine . Neuburg upon the river of Sala ; and at that time there be a great fair . the 30 . we bait at a proper town call Jena Jena . upon the same river , and the same night we lie at Cone upon that river . the first of July we bait at Salfeld : and the same great wood of day we enter first into the great wood of fir tree , rre tree ' and that night to grevandal ; the second to dinner to neustat . the 3 . day to dinner at Bamberg : and before we Bamberg . come to the town we pass the river of main that run towards Arnfurt , and that night to Forchaim . the 4 . we come to Nurenberg , and there stay Nurenberg . two day . the 6 . to bed to Blayfield . the 7 . we pass without Weissenburg to dinner at Monhaim , and that night we pass the river of Danubius at Tonewertd , and so to bed to nurendof . the 8 . we come to Augspurg , otherwise call Augspurg . Augusta , upon the river of Lech . the 9 we lay at Landsberg upon the say river , in the duke of bavar country . the 10 . to dinner at Svanego , and that night to hamber against the mountain , where the small toy be make . the 11 . to dinner to Parcberk , and that night to Sefelt in the archduke of Austria his country . the 12 . to dinner at Inspruck , and that night to bed at landeck , where there be a toll , and it be the place where Charles the five and his brother Ferdinand do meet . and there be a table of brass with latin letter in memory thereof . five 321 ten the 13 . we pass by stizen , and dine at Prisena , and so that night to clusen . the 14 . to dinner at bolsan and to bed at Neumark , and by the way we pass the dangerous place , where so many murder have be commit . the border of the 15 . to dinner at Trent : that day we enter lta ^ - the border of Italy , that night to Lenigo . the 16 . to dinner at Grigno , where the last toll of the emperor be : and so we come by Chursa , which be a strait passage . and the keeper thereof be draw up by a cord into his hold . and that night we go to Capana to bed in the country of the venetian . the 17 . to dinner at castle Franco : by the way we stay at Tarviso , and there take coach , and that night come to Mestre to bed . Venice . the 18 . in the morning we come to Venice , and there we stay 15 . day . in which time the duke of Venice call Nicholas de Ponte die , and we see his burial . the senator be continual shut up together , as the manner be , to choose a new duke , which be not yet choose when we depart from thence . the 2 . of August at night we do embark our self upon the frigate of Cattaro , a haven near Ragusa . the 3 . we come to a town in Istria call Citta nova . the 4 . we come to Parenzo , and so that night to Forcera of the bishop . the 5 . we pass by Rovigno : and a little beyond we meet with 3 . galies of the venetian : we pass in the sight of Pola ; and the same day pass the gulf that part Istria from Dalmatia . the 6 . of August we come to Zara in Dalmatia , a strong town of the venetian : and so that night to Sebenico , which stand in a marvelous goodly haven , with a strong castle at the entry thereof . the 7 . we come to Lezina , and go not on shore , but travel all night . the 8 . we pass by a very well seat town call Curzola , which stand in a island of that name . 322 the 9 in the morning betimes we land at Ragusa , Ragusa . and there stay three day , where we find many friendly gentleman . the 11 . be provide of a janizary we depart from Ragusa in the company of half a dozen merchant of that town : and within 6 . mile we enter into the country of Servia . So travel in barren Servia . and craggy mountain for the space of four day , [ ii i . 196 . ] we come by a small town of the Turk call Chiernisa , be the 14 . of the month ; and there Chiernisa . we part from the merchant .. the 16 . we dine in a Cavarsara in a town call Focea , be then great infect with the plague . or , * Fochia . the 17 . we lay by a town call Taslizea . the 20 . we come to Novibazar . Hovibazar . the 21 . we part from thence , travail still in a country very ill inhabit , and lie in you field . the 22 . we pass within sight of Nicaea . or , Nissa . the 23 . we pass in sight of another town call circui : and about those place we begin to leave the mountain , and to enter into a very fair and fertile country , but as evil inhabit as the other , or worse . the 27 . we come to Sophia , where we stay three Sophia . day , be our janissary home : and by good chance we lie in a merchant house of Ragusa , that come in company with we from Novibazar ; and also we have in company , ever since we come from Focea , a Turk which be a very good fellow , and he keep company with we till we come very near Constantinople . the first of September we come to Philippopoli , Philippopoli . which seem to be a ancient town , and stand upon the river of stanuch . the 4 . we come to Andrinopoli , a very great and Andrinopolis . ancient town , which stand in a very large and champion country , and there the great Turks mother do lie , be a place , where the emperor of the Turk be wont to lie very much . the 5 . we lay in one of the great Cavarzaras , that 323 be build by Mahomet Bassha with so many goodly commodity . the 6 . we lay in another of they . sisveri . the 8 . we come