among they . when i awake , and find my self alone dare not call nor hallow for fear least the wild moor shall hear i , because they hold this opinion , that in kill a christian they do god good service : and muse with my self what be best for i to do , if i shall go forth , and the wild moor shall hap to meet with i , they will kill i : and on the other side , if i shall return back to Tripoli without any wood or company , i shall be most miserable use : therefore of two evil , rather i have to go forth to the lose of my life , than to turn back and trust to their mercy , fear to be use as before i have see other : for understand by some of my company before , how Tripoli and the say wood do lie one off another , by the north star i go forth at adventure , and as God will have it , i come right to the place where they be , even about a hour before day : there altogether we rest and give our camel provender , and assoon as the day appear , we . ride all into the wood : and i see no wood there , but a stick here and a stick there , about the bigness of a man arm grow in the sand , it cause i to marveile how so many camel shall be load in that place . the wood be juniper , we need no axe nor edge tool to cut it , but pluck it up by strength of hand root and all , which a man may easy do , and so gather it together , a little at one place and so at another , and jade our camel , and come home about seven of the clock that 3 ° 3 eighteen captive runaway from Tripoli . the judgement of God upon blasphemer . £ 11 . i . 189 . ] the green dragon . night follow : because i fall lame , and my camel be tire , i leave my wood in the way . there be in Tripoli that time a venetian , who name be Benedetto Venetiano , and seventeen captive moor of his company , which run away from Tripoli in a boat , and come in sight of a island call Malta , which lie fourty league from Tripoli right north , and be within a mile of the shore , and very fair weather , one of their company say , in dispetto de dio adesso venio a pilliar terra , which be as much to say : in the despite of God i shall now fetch the shore , and present there arise a mighty storm , with thunder and rain and the wind at north , their boat be very small , so that they be enforce to bear up room , and to shear right afore the wind over against the coast of Barbary from whence they come , and row up and down the coast , their victual be spend , the 21 . day after their departure they be enforce through the want of food to come ashore , think to have steal some sheep : but the moor of the country very crafty perceive their intent , gather together a threescore horseman , and hide themselves behind a sandy hill , and when the Christians be come all a shore , and pass up half a mile into the country , the moor ride betwixt they and their boat , and some of they pursue the christian , and so they be all take and bring to Tripoli , from whence they have before escape : and present the king command that the foresay Benedetto with one more of his company shall lose their ear , and the rest shall be most cruel beat , which be present do . this king have a son which be a ruler in a island call Gerbi , whereunto arrive a english ship call the green dragon , of the which be master one m . blonket , who have a very unhappy boy in that ship , and understand that whosoever will turn Turk shall be well entertain of the king son , this boy do run a shore , and voluntary turn Turk . Shortly after the king son come to 3 ° 4 Tripoli to visit his father , and see our company , he great fancy Richard Burges our purser , and James smith : they be both young man , therefore he be very desirous to have they to turn Turk , but they will not yield to his desire , say : we be your father slave , and as slave we will serve he . than his father the king send for they , and ask they if they will turn Turk ? and they say : if it please your highness , Christians we be bear , and so we will remain , and beseech the king that they may not be enforce thereunto . the king have there before in his house a son of a yeoman of our queen guard , who the king son have enforce to turn Turk , his name be John Nelson : he the king cause to be bring to these young man , and then say unto they : will not you bear this your countryman company , and be Turk as he be ? and they say , that they will not yield thereunto during life . but it fall out , that within a month after , the king son go home to Gerbi again , be six score mile from Tripoli , and carry our two foresaid young man with he , which be Richard Burges , and James smith : and after their departure from we , they send we a letter , signify that there be no violence show unto they as yet , but within three day after they be violent use , for that the king son demand of they again , if that they will turn Turk ? then answer Richard Burges , a christian i be , and so i will remain . then the king son very angry say unto he : by Mahomet thou shall present be make Turk . then call he for his man , and command they to make he Turk , and they do so , and circumcise he , and will have have he speak the word that thereunto belong , but he answer they stout that he will not : and although they have put on he the habit of a Turk , yet say he , a christian i be bear , and