may see what trust a christian man may put in a infidel promise , who be a king , pardon a man now , as you have hear , and within a hour after hang he for the same cause before a whole multitude : and also promise our factor their oil custom free , and at their go away make they pay the uttermost penny for the custom thereof . a Frenchman and when that roman sonning see no remedy but turnedTurke , shou | j die , he protest to turn Turk , hope ™ fe ^ and after - thereby to have save his life . then say the Turk , if ward be thou will turn Turk , speak the word that thereunto hang . belong : and he do so . then say they unto he , now thou shall die in the faith of a Turk , and so he do , as the Turk report that be at his execution . and the forename patron Norado , whereas before he have liberty and do nothing , he then be condemn slave 300 * 5 $ 4 - perpetuali , except there be payment make of the foresay sum of money . then the king condemn all we , who be in number six and twenty , of the which , two be hang ( as you have hear ) and one die the first day we come on shore , by the visitation of almighty God : and the other three and twenty he condemn slave perpetual unto the great Turk , and the ship and good be confiscate to the use of the great Turk : and then we all fall down upon our knee , give God thank for this sorrowful visitation , and give our self whole to the almighty power of God , unto who all secret be know , that he of his goodness will vouchsafe to look upon we . here may all true christian heart see the wonderful work of God show upon such infidel , blasphemer , whoremaster , and renegade Christians , and so you shall read in the end of this book , of the like upon the unfaithful king and all his child , and of as many as take any portion of the say good . but first to show our miserable bondage and slavery , every jive and unto what small pittance and allowance we be ™ en tie , for every five man have allowance but five asper ot ofbreadaday . bread in a day , which be but two penny English : and our lodging be to lie on the bare board , with a very simple cape to cover we , we be also forcible and most violent shave , head and beard , and within three day after , i and six more of my fellow , together with fourscore italian and Spaniards be send forth in a galeot to take a greekish carmosell , which come into Africa to steal negro , and go out of Tripoli unto that place , which be two hundred and fourty league thence , but we be chain three and three to a oar , and we row naked above the girdle , and the boatswain of the galley walk abaft the mast , and his mate afore the mast , and each of they a bull pissell dry in their hand , and when their devilish choler rise , they will strike the christian for no cause : and [ ii i . 188 . ] 301 the christian send 3 . time a week 30 . mile to fetch wood . they allow we but half a pound of bread a man in a day without any other kind of sustenance , water except . and when we come to the place whereas we see the carmosell , we be not suffer to have neither needle , bodkin , knife , or any other weapon about we , nor at any other time in the night , upon pain of one hundred bastinade : we be then also cruel manackle in such sort , that we can not put our hand the length of one foot asunder the one from the other , and every night they search our chain three time , to see if they be fast rivet : we continue fight with the carmosell three hour , and then we take it , and lose but two of our man in that fight , but there be slay of the greek five , and fourteen be cruel hurt , and they that be sound , be present make slave , and chain to the oar : and within fifteen day after we return again into Tripoli , and then we be put to all manner of slavery . i be put to hew stone , and other to carry stone , and some to draw the cart with earth , and some to make mortar , and some to draw stone , ( for at that time the Turk build a church : ) and thus we be put to all kind of slavery that be to be do . and in the time of our be there , the moor that be the husbandman of the country , rebel against the king , because he will have constrain they to pay great tribute than heretofore they have do , so that the soldier of Tripoli march forth of the town to have join battle against the moor for their rebellion , and the king send with they four piece of ordinance , which be draw by the captive twenty mile into the country after they , and at the sight thereof the moor flee , and then the captain return back again . than i and certain christian moor be send twelve mile into the country with a cart to load timber , and we return again the same day . now the king have 18 . captive , which three time a week go to fetch wood thirty mile from the town : 302 and on a time he appoint i for one of the 18 . and we depart at eight of the clock in the night , and upon the way as we ride upon the camel , i demand of one of our company , who do direct we the way ? he say , that there be a moor in our company which be our guide : and i demand of they how Tripoli and the wood bare one off the other ? and he say , east Northeast , and west Southwest . and at midnight or near thereabouts , as i be ride upon my camel , i fall asleep , and the guide and all the rest ride away from i , not think but i have be