the voyage make to Tripoli in Barbary , in the year 1583 . with a ship call the Jesus , wherein the adventure and distress of some Englishman be true report , and other necessary circumstance observe . write by Thomas Sanders . he voyage be set forth by the right worshipful sir Edward Osborne knight , chief merchant of all the turkish company , and one master Richard staper , the ship be of the burden of one hundred ton , call the Jesus , she be bud at farmne a river by Portsmouth . the owner be master Thomas Thomson , Nicholas Carnaby , and John Gilman . the master be one ache Hellier of Blackwall , and his mate be one Richard morris of that place : their phot be one Anthony Jerado a Frenchman , of the province of Marseils : the purser be one William Thomson our owner son : the merchant factor be roman sonning a Frenchman , and Richard skeg servant unto the say master staper . the owner be bind unto the merchant by charter party thereupon , in one thousand mark , that the say ship by god permission shall go for Tripoli in Barbary , that be to say , first from Portsmouth to Newhaven in Normandy , from thence to saint Lucar , otherwise call saint Lucas in Andeluzia , and from thence to Tripoli , which be in the east part of Africa , and so to return unto London . but here ought every man to note and consider the work of our god , that many time what man do determine God do disappoint . the say master have some occasion to go to farmne , take with he the pilot and the purser , and return again by mean of a perry of wind , the boat wherein they be , be drown , with the say master , the purser , and all the company : only the say pilot by experience in swim save himself : 292 these be the beginning of our sorrow . after which the say master mate will not proceed in that voyage , and the owner hear of this misfortune , and the unwillingness of the master mate , do send down one Richard nm ma ! ter deimond , and ship he for master , who do choose ch ° sen - for his mate one Andrew Dier , and so the say ship depart on her voyage accord : that be to say , about the 16 of October , in An . 1583 . she make sail from Portsmouth , and the 18 day then next follow she arrive at Newhaven , where our say last master dei - new mond by a surfeit die . the factor then appoint master te • the say Andrew Dier , be then master mate , to be their master for that voyage , who do choose to be his mate the two quarter master of the same ship , to wit , Peter Austine , and Shillabey , and for Purser be ship one Richard Burges . afterwards about the 8 day of November we make sail forth ward , and by force of weather we be drive back again into Portesmouth , where we renew our victual and other necessary , and then the wind come fair . about the 29 day then next follow we depart thence , and the first day of December by mean of a contrary wind , we be driven ' to Plymouth . the 18 day then next follow , we make forthward again , and by force of weather we be drive to Falmouth , where we remain until the first day of January : at which time the wind come fair , we depart thence , and about the 20 day of the say month we arrive safe at saint Lucar . and about the 9 day of march next follow , we make sail from thence , and about the 18 day of the same month we come to Tripoli in Barbary , where we be very well entertain by the king of that country , and also of the commons . the commodity of that place be ’ sweet oil : the king there be a merchant , and the rather ( willing to prefer himself before his commons ) request our say factor to traffic with he , and promise they that if they will take his oil at his [ n . i . 185 . ] own price , they shall pay no manner of custom , and 293 another ship of Bristol come to Tripoli . they take of he certain ton of oil : and afterward perceive that they may have far better cheap notwithstanding the custom free , they desire the king to licence they to take the oil at the pleasure of his commons , for that his price do exceed they : whereunto the king will not agree , but be rather content to abate his price , insomuch that the factor buy all their oil of the king custom free , and so jade the same aboard . in the mean time there come to that place one mile Dickenson in a ship of Bristol , who together with our say factor take a house to themselves there . Oure french factor roman sonning desire to buy a commodity in the market , and want money , desire the say mile Dickenson to lend he a hundred chikinoe until he come to his lodging , which he do , and afterward the same sonning meet with mile Dickenson in the street , and deliver he money bind up in a napkin : say , master Dickenson there be the money that i borrow of you , and so thank he for the same : he doubt nothing less than falsehood , which be seidome know among merchant , and special be together in one house , and be the more detestable between Christians , they be in turquoise among the heathen . the say Dickenson do not tell the money present , until he come to his lodging , and then find nine chikinoe lack of his hundred , which be about three pound , for that every Chikino be worth seven shilling of english money , he come to the say roman sonning and deliver he his handkerchief , and ask he how many chikinoe he have deliver he ? Sonnings answer , a hundred : Dickenson say no : and so they protest and swear on both part . but in the end the say roman sonning do swear deep with detestable oath and curse , and pray God that he may show his work on he , that other may take ensample thereby , and that he may be hang like a dog , and never come into