cease shoot : they shoot unto we in the whole , nine and thirty shoot , without the hurt of any man . and when our merchant come a shore , the king command present that they with the rest of our company that be with they , shall be chein four and four , to a hundred weight of iron , and when we come in with the ship , there come present above a hundred turk aboard of we , and they search we , and strip our very clothes from our back , and break open our chest , 297 and make a spoil of all that we have : and the christian caitiff likewise that come a board of we make spoil of our good , and use we as ill as the Turk do . and our master mate have a Geneva bible in his hand , there come the king chief gunner , and take it out from he , who show i of it , and i have the language , go present to the king treasurer , and tell he of it , say , that sith it be the will of God that we shall fall into their hand , yet that they shall grant we to use our conscience to our own discretion , as they suffer the Spaniard and other nation to use they , and he grant we : then i tell he that the master gunner have take away a bible from one of our man : the treasurer go present and command he to deliver up the bible again , which he do : and within a little after he take it from the man again , and i show the treasurer of it , and present he command he to deliver it again : say , thou villain , will thou turn to Christianity again ? for he be a renegado , which be one that first be a christian , and afterward become a Turk , and so he deliver i the bible the second time . and then i have it in my hand , the gunner come to i , and speak these word , say , thou dog , i will have the book in despite of thou , and take it from i , say : if thou tell the king treasurer of it any more , by Mahomet i will be revenge of thou . notwithstanding i go the three time unto the king treasurer , and tell he of it , and he come with i , say thus unto the gunner : by the head of the great Turk , if thou take it from he again , thou shall have a hundred bastinade . and forthwith he deliver i the book , say , he have not the value of a pin of the spoil of the ship , which be the better for he , as hereafter you shall hear : for there be none , neither Christian nor Turk that take the value of a pennyworth of our good from we , but perish both body and good 298 within seventeen month follow , as hereafter shall plain appear . then come the guardian bassa , which be the keeper of the king captive , to fetch we all a shore , and then i remember the miserable estate of poor distress captive , in the time of their bondage to those infidel , go to my own chest , and take out thereof a jar of oil , and fill a basket full of white Ruske to carry a shore with i , but before i come to the Banio , the turkish boy have take away almost all my bread , and the keeper say , deliver i the jar of oil , and when thou come to the [ ii i . 187 . ] Banio thou shall have it again , but i never have it of he any more . but when i come to the Banio , and see our merchant and all the rest of our company in chain , and we all ready to receive the same reward , what heart in the world be there so hard , but will have pity our cause , hear or see the lamentable greeting there be betwixt we : all this happen the first of May , 1584 . and the second day of the same month , the king the english - with all his counsel sit in judgement upon we . the araigud . first that be have forth to be arraign , be the factor , and the master , and the king ask they wherefore they come not a shore when he send for they . And roman sonning answer , that though he be king on shore , and may command there , so be he as touch those that be under he : and therefore say , if any offence be , the fault be whole in my self , and in no other . then forthwith the king give judgement , that the say roman sonning shall be hang over the north - east bulwark : from whence he convey the forename patron Norado , and then he call for our master Andrew Dier , and use few word to he , and so condemn he to be hang over the wall of the westermost bulwark . 299 then fall our other factor ( name Richard skeg ) upon his knee before the king , and say , i beseech your highness either to pardon our master , or else suffer i to die for he , for he be ignorant of this cause . and then the people of that country favour the say Richard skeg beseech the king to pardon they both . so then the king speak these word : behold , for thy sake , i pardon the master . then present the Turk shout , and cry , say : away with the master from the presence of the king . and then he come into the Banio whereas we be , and tell we what have happen , and we all rejoice at the good hap of master skeg , that he be save , and our master for his sake . but afterward our joy be turn to double sorrow , for in the mean time the king mind be alter : for that one of his counsel have advise he , that unless the master die also , by the law they can not confiscate the ship nor good , neither captive any of the man : master Dier whereupon the king send for our master again , and give condemn to anotijer judgement after his pardon for one cause , a bulwark ^ which be that he shall be hang . here all true Christians