England again , if he do 294 not deliver unto the say Dickenson a hundred chikinoe . and here behold a notable example of all blasphemer , curser and swearer , how God reward he accord : for many time it come to pass , that God show his miracle upon such monstrous blasphemer , to the ensample of other , as now hereafter you shall hear what befall to this roman sonning . there be a man in the say town a pledge , who name be patron Norado , who the year before have do this sonning some pleasure there . the foresay patron Norado be indebt unto a Turk of that town , in the sum of four hundred and fifty crown , for certain good send by he into Christendom in a ship of his own , and by his own brother , and himself remain in Tripoli as pledge until his say brother return : and , as the report go there , after his brother arrival into Christendom , he come among lewd company , and lose his brother say ship and good at dice , and never return unto he again . the say patron Norado be void of all hope , and find now opportunity , consult with the say sonning for to swim a seaboorde the island , and the ship be then out of danger , shall take he in ( as after be confess ) and so to go to Tolon in the province of Marseilis with this patron Norado , and there to take in his lade . the ship be ready the first day of May , and have her sail all aboard , our say factor do take their leave of the king , who very courteous bid they farewell , and when they come aboard , they command the master and the company hasty to get out the ship : the master answer that it be unpossible , for that the a conspiracy practise by the french factor , to deceive a turkish merchant of 4 50 crown . wind be contrary and overblow . and he require we upon forfeiture of our band , that we shall do our endeavour to get she forth . then go we to warp out the ship , and present the king send a boat aboard of we , with three man in she , command the say sonning to come a shore : at who come , the 295 king demand of he custom for the oil : Sonnings answer he that his highness have promise to deliver they custom free . but notwithstanding the king weigh not his say promise , and as a infideli that have not the fear of God before his eye , nor regard of his word , albeit he be a king , he cause the say sonning to pay the custom to the uttermost penny . and afterward will he to make haste gway , say , that the janissary will have the oil ashore again . these janissary be soldier there under the great Turk , and their power be above the king . and so the say factor depart from the king , and come to the waterside , and call for a boat to come aboard , and the begin he bring with he the foresay patron Norado . the ' fromes and company inquisitive to know what man that be , occasion of all sonning answer , that he be his countryman , a their misery . passenger : i pray God say the company , that we come not into trouble by this man . then say Sonnings angry , what have you to do with any matter of i ? if any thing chance otherwise then well , i must answer for all . now the Turk unto who this patron Norado be [ ii i . 186 . ] indebt , miss he ( suppose he to be aboard of our ship ) present go unto the king , and tell he that he think that his pledge patron Norado be aboard of the english ship , whereupon the king present send a boat aboard of we , with three man in she , command the say sonning to come a shore , and not speak any thing as touch the man , he say that he will come present in his own boat , but assoon as they be go , he will we to warp forth the ship , and say that he will see the knave hang before he will go a shore . and when the king see that he come not a shore , but still continue warp away the ship , he straight command the gunner of the bulwark next unto we , to shoot three shoot without ball . than we come all to the say sonning , and ask of he what the matter be that we be shoot at , he say 296 that it be the janissary who will have the oil a shore again , and will we to make haste away , and after that he have discharge three shot without ball , he command all the gunner in the town to do their endeavour to sink we , but the turkish gunner can not once strike we , wherefore the king send present to the Banio : ( this Banio be the prison whereas all the captive lay at night ) and promise if that there be any that can either sink we , or else cause we to come in again , he shall have a hundred crown , and his liberty . with that come forth a Spaniard call Sebastian , which have be a old servitor in Flanders , and he say , that upon the performance of that promise , he will undertake either to sink we , or to cause we to come in again , and thereto he will gage his life , and at the first shot he split our rudder head in piece , and the second shoot he strike we under the water , and the three shot he shoot we through our foremast with a colver shot , and thus he have rend both our rudder and mast , and shoot we under water , we be enforce to go in again . this Sebastian for all his diligence herein , have neither his liberty , nor a hundred crown , so promise by the say king , but after his service do be commit again to prison , whereby may appear the regard that the Turk or infideli have of his word , although he be able to perform . it , yea more , though he be a king . then our merchant see no remedy , they together with five of our company go a shore , and then they