and on the four day of June next follow the king lose 150 . camel , which be take from he by the wild moor : and on the 28 . day of the say month of June , one Geffrey Maltese , a renegado of Malta , run away to his country , and steal a brigandine which the king have build for to take the Christians withal , and carry with he twelve Christians moor which be the king captive . afterwards about the ten day of July next follow , the king ride forth upon the great and fair mare that may be see , as white as any swan : he have not ride fourty pace from his house , but on a sudden the same mare fall down under he stark dead , and i with six moor be command to bury she , skin , shoe and all , which we do . and about three month after our delivery , 308 master Barton , with all the residue of his company , depart from Tripoli to Zante , in a vessel , call a Settea , of one Marcus Segoorus , who dwell in Zante , and after our arrival at Zante we remain fifteen day there aboard our vessel , before we can have Platego ( that be , leave to come a shore ) because the plague be in that place , from whence we come : and about three day after we come a shore , thither come another Settea of Marseils bind for Constantinople . then do master Barton , and his company , with two more of our company , ship themselves as passenger in the same Settea , and go to Constantinople . but the other nine of we that remain in Zante , about three month after , ship our self in a ship of the say Marcus Segoorus , which come to Zante , and be bind for England . in which three month , the soldier of Tripoli kill the say king . and then the king son , accord to the custom there , go to Constantinople , to surrender up all his father treasure , good , captive , and concubine , unto the great Turk , and take with he our say purser Richard Burges , and James smith , and also the other two Englishman , which he the say king son have enforce to become Turk , as be aforesaid . and they the say Englishmen find now some opportunity , conclude with the christian captive which be go with they unto Constantinople , be in number about one hundred and fifty , to kill the king son , and all the Turk which be aboard of the galley , and privy the say Englishmen convey unto the say christian captive , weapon for that purpose . and when they come into the main sea , toward Constantinople ( upon the faithful promise of the say christian captive ( these four Englishman leap sudden into the crossia , that be , into the midst of the galley , where the canon lie , and with their sword draw , do fight against all the foresay Turk , and for want of help of the say christian captive , who false break their promise , the say master blonket boy be kill , and the say James smith , and 3 ° 9 two Englishman ship to Constantinople with m . Barton . the soldier of Tripoli kill the king . two galley of Venice take the king of Tripoli his galley , and kill the king son , and all the Turk in it , and release all the Christians be in number 150 . our Pursser Richard Burges , and the other Englishman , be take and bind into chain , to be hang at their arrival in Constantinople : and as the lord will be , about two day after , pass through the gulf of Venice , at a island call Cephalonia , they meet with two of the duke of Venice his galley , which take that galley , and kill the king son , and his mother , and all the Turk that be there , in number 150 . and they save the christian captive , and will have kill the two Englishmen because they be circumcise , and become turk , have not the other christian captive excuse they , say , that they be enforce to be turk , by the king son , and show the venetian also , how they do enterprise at sea to fight against all the turk , and that their two fellow be slay in that fight . then the venetian save they , and they , with all the residue of the say captive , have their liberty , which be in number 150 . or thereabouts , and the say galley , and all the Turk treasure be confiscate to the use of the state of Venice . and from thence our two Englishman travel homeward by land , and in this mean time we have one more of our company , which die in Zante , and afterward the other eight ship themselves at Zante , in a ship of the say Marcus Segorus , which be bind for England : and before we depart thence , there arrive the ascension , and the George Bonaventure of London in Cephalonia , in a harbour there , call Arrogostoria , who merchant agree with the merchant of our ship , and so jade all the merchandise of our ship into the say ship of London , who take we eight in as passenger , and so we come home , and within two month after our arrival at London , our say purser Richard Burges , and his fellow come home also : for the which we be bind to praise almighty God , during our life , and as duty bind we , to pray for the preservation of our most gracious queen , for the great care her majesty have over we , her poor subject , in seek and procure of our 310 deliverance aforesaid : and also for her honourable privy counsel , and i especial for the prosperity and good estate of the house of the late decease , the right honourable the earl of Bedford , who honour i must confess , most diligent at the suit of my father now depart , travel herein : for the which i rest continual bind to he , who soul i doubt not , but be already in the heaven in joy , with the almighty , unto which place he vouchsafe to bring we all , - that for our sin suffer most vile and shameful death upon the cross , there to live perpetual world without end , amen .