to Siliveri , which by report be the last town that remain Christian . the 9 of September we arrive at the great and Constantin - most stately city of Constantinople , which for the situation and proud seat thereof , for the beautiful and commodious haven , and for the great and sumptuous building of their temple , which they call Moschea , be to be prefer before all the city of Europe . and there the emperor of the Turk then live , who name be Amurat , keep his court and residence , in a marvelous goodly place , with diverse garden and house of pleasure , which be at the least two english mile in compass , and the three part thereof join upon the sea : and on the north - east part of the city on the other side of the water over against the city be the town of Pera , where the most part of the Christians do lie . and there also we do lie . and on the north part of the say town be the arsenal , where the galy be build and do remain : and on the southside be all the ordinance , artillery , and house of munition . note that by the way as we come from Ragusa to Constantinople , we leave on our right hand the country of Albania , and Macedonia , and on the left hand the country of Bosnia , Bulgaria , and the river of Danubius . the 14 . of September be the Turk Beyram , that be , one of their chief feast . the 15 . we go to the black sea call Pontus Pompey Euxinus , and there upon a rock we see a pillar of ptll - white marble that be set up by Pompeius : and from thence we pass to the other side of the water , upon the shore of Asia and there we dine . the 25 . we depart from Constantinople . the 29 . we come to a ancient town call cher - chisea , that be to say , fourty church , which in the 324 old time be a very great city , now full of scatter building . the 4 . of October we come to Prouaz , one day Prouaz . journey distant from Varna upon the black sea Varna . the 9 we come to Saxi upon the river of Danubius . the 10 . we pass , the say river which in that place be about a mile over , and then we enter into the country of * Bogdania : they be Christians but subject to the Turk . the 12 . we come to Palsin upon the river Prut . Pahmufon the 14 . we come to Yas the principali town of Bogdania , where Peter the Vayvoda prince of that country keep his residence , of who we receive great courtesy , and of the gentleman of his court : and he cause we to be safe conduct through his say country , and convey without cost . the 17 . we come to Stepanitze . the 19 we come to Zotschen , which be the last town Sotschen . of Bogdania upon the river of Neister , that part the say country from Podolia . the 20 . we pass the river of Nyester and come to [ ii i - J97 - ] Camyenetz in the country of Podolia , subject to the Nyester a king of Poland : this be one of the strong town by Qa ^ enetz nature and situation that can be see . the 21 . we come to Skala . skala . the 22 . to Slothone , or Sloczow . the 24 . to Leopolis which be in Russia alba , and so be Leopolis , or the most part of the country betwixt Camyenetz and it . Leunpurg . and it be a town very well build , well govern , full of traffic and plentiful ! : and there we stay five day . the 30 . we bait at Grodecz , and that night at Grodecz . Vilna . Vilna . the 31 . we dine at Mostiska , and that night at Rodmena . the first of November in the morning before day we pass without the town of Jaroslaw , where they say be Jaroslaw . one of the great fair in all Poland , and chief of horse , and that night to Rosdnoska . 32 Cracovia . lead mine . Bendzin . salt dig out of mountain in Poland . bitom . oppelen . schurgasse . Brigk . Breslaw . the second to dinner at lanczut , at night to Retsbou . the third to Sendxizow , at night to Tarnow , and that night we meet with the palatine Laski . the four to Vonuez , and that night to Brytska . the five to Kuhena . the 6 . to Cracovia the principali city of all Poland : at which time the king be go to Lituania : for he do make his residence one year in Poland , and the other in Lituania . Cracovia stand on the river of Vistula . the 9 we depart from Cracovia , and that night we come to a village hard by a town call Ilkusch , where the lead mine be . the 10 . we pass by a town call slawkow : where there be also lead mine , and bait that day at Bendzin , which be the last town of Poland towards Silesia ; and there be a toll . note that all the country of Poland , Russia alba , podolia , Bogdania , and diverse other country adjoin unto they , do consume no other salt but such as be dig in Sorstyn mountain near to Cracovia which be as hard as any stone ; it be very good , and go further than any other salt . that night we lie at bitom , which be the first town of Silesia . the 12 . we pass by a great town call Strelitz , and that night we lie at Oppelen upon the river of Odera . the 13 . we pass by schurgasse , and that night we lie without the town of Brigk : for we can not be suffer to come in by reason of the plague which be in those part in diverse town . the 14 . we pass by olaw , and that night we come to the city of Breslaw , which be a fair town , great , well build and well seat upon the river of Odera . the 16 . we bait at Neumargt . the 17 . we pass by Lignizt and by Hayn , and that night to Buntzel . the 18 . we pass by Naum burg through Gorlitz 326 upon the river of Neiss , and that night lie without Reichenbach . the 19 we pass by baudzen and Cannitz , and that night to Rensperg . the 20 . we pass by Hayn , by Strelen , where we shall have pass the river of Elbe , but the boat be not there , so that night we lie at a town call Mulberg . the 21 . we pass the say river , we go by Belgern , by Torga , by dumitch ; and at night to Bretsch . the 22 . we pass the Elbe again at Wittenberg , which be a very strong town , with a good universi tie : and that day we pass by coswig . the 23 . we pass through Zerbst in the morning , and that night to Magdeburg , a very strong town , and well govern as we do hear . the most part of the country , after we be come one day journey on this side breslawe to this place , belong to the duke of A . D . 1585 . Magdeburg . saxon the 24 . we pass by a castle of the mark of Brandenburg call wolmerstat , and that night we lie at Garleben . the 25 . we lay at Soltwedel . the 26 . at Berg . the 27 . we bait at Lunenborg , that night we lie at Lunenburg . Winson . the 28 . we come to Hamborg , and there stay one Hamburg . week . the 5 . of December we depart from Hamborg , and pass the Elbe by boat be much freeze , and from the river go on foot to Boxtchoede , be a long dutch mile off , and there we lie ; and from thence pass over land to Emden . thence have pass through Friseland and holland , [ ii i . 198 . ] the 25 . be Christmas day in the morning we come to Delft : where we find the right honourable the earl of Leicester with a goodly company of lord , knight , gentleman , and soldier . 327 the 29 . to the Briel , and there stay eight day for passage . the five of January we take ship . the 7 . we land at Gravesend , and so that night at London with the help of almighty God .