so i will remain , though you force i to do otherwise . and than he call for the other , and command five 305 u A . D . i584 . the king son have a captive that vias son to one of the queen majesty guard , that be force to turn Turk . the first motion for those Englishman delwerie . he to be make Turk perforce also : but he be very strong , for it be so much as eight of the king son man can do to hold he , so in the end they circumcise he , and make he Turk . now to pass over a little , and so to show the manner of our deliverance out of that miserable captivity . in may aforesaid , short after our apprehension , i write a letter into England unto my father dwell in Tavistoke in Devonshire , signify unto he the whole estate of our calamity : and i write also to Constantinople to the english ambassador , both which letter be faithful deliver . but when my father have receive my letter , and understand the truth of our mishap , and the occasion thereof , and what have happen to the offender , he certify the right honourable the earl of Bedford thereof , who in short space acquaint her highness with the whole cause thereof , and her majesty like a most merciful princess tender her subject , present take order for our deliverance . whereupon the right worshipful sir Edward Osborne knight direct his letter with all speed to the english ambassador in Constantinople , to procure our delivery : and he obtain the great Turk commission , and send it forthwith to Tripoli , by one master Edward Barton , together with a justice of the great Turk , and one soldier , and another Turk , and a greek which be his interpretor , which can speak beside greek , turkish , italian , spanish and english . and when they come to Tripoli , they be well entertain . and the first night they do lie in a captain house in the town : all our company that be in Tripoli come that night for joy to master Barton and the other commissioner to see they . then master Barton say unto we , welcome my good countryman , and love entertain we , and at our departure from he , he give we two shilling , and say , serve God , for to morrow i hope you shall be as free as ever you be ; we all give he thanks and so depart . the next day in the morning very early , the king 306 have intelligence of their come , send word to the keeper , that none of the Englishman ( mean our company ) shall go to work . than he send for master Barton and the other commissioner , and demand of the say master Barton his message : the justice answer , that the great Turk his sovereign have send they unto he , signify that . he be inform that a certain english ship , call the Jesus , be by he the say king confiscate , about twelve month since , and now my say sovereign have here send his especial commission by we unto you , for the deliverance of the say ship and good , and also the free liberty and deliverance of the Englishman of the same ship , who you have take and keep in captivity . and further than same justice say , i be authorize by my say sovereign [ ii i . 190 . ] the great Turk to see it do : and therefore i command you by virtue of this commission , present to make restitution of the premise or the value thereof : and so do the justice deliver unto the king the great engfab - turke commission to the effect aforesaid , which come - man released - mission the king with all obedience receive : and after the peruse of the same , he forthwith command all the english captive to be bring before he , and then will the keeper to strike off all our iron , which do , the king say , you Englishmen , for that you do offend the law of this place , by the same law therefore some of your company be condemn to die as you know , and you to be perpetuali captive during your life : notwithstanding , see it have please my sovereign lord the great Turk to pardon your say offence , and to give you your freedom and liberty , behold , here i make delivery of you to this english gentleman : so he deliver we all that be there , be thirteen in number , to master Barton , who require also those two young man which the king son have take with he . then the king answer that it be against their law to deliver they , for that they be turn Turk : and touch the ship and good , the king say , that he have sell she , 3 ° 7 the plague and punishment that happen to the king and his people . the king lose 150 . camel , take by the wild moor . but will make restitution of the value , and as much of the good as come unto his hand , and so the king arise and go to dinner , and command a Jew to go with master Barton and the other commissioner , to show they their lodging , which be a house provide and appoint they by the say king . and because i have the italian and spanish tongue , by which their most traffic in that country be , master Barton make i his cater to buy his victual for he and his company , and deliver i money needful for the same . thus be we set at liberty the 28 . day of April , 1585 . now to return to the king plague and punishment , which almighty God at his will and pleasure send upon man in the sight of the world , and likewise of the plague that befall his child and other aforesaid . first when we be make bondman , be the second day of May 1584 . the king have 300 . captive , and before the month be expire , there die of they of the plague 150 . and whereas there be 26 . man of our company , of who two be hang , and one die the same day that we be make bondslave : that present month there die nine more of our company of the plague , and other two be force to turn Turk as before be rehearse :