at a birth . five mile southward of Cairo be a place call Matarea , where the balm be refine : and therefore some will say , that the tree which bear the balm grow in the say place , wherein they be deceive : for the say tree grow two day journey from Mecca , in a place call Bedrihone , which yield balm in great plenty , but savage , wild , and without virtue , and therefore the moor carry the same within little chest from Bedrihone to Matarea , where the tree be replant ( be it by virtue of the soil , or the water , air , or any other thing whatsoever ) it suffice that here they bear the true balm and liquour so much in these day esteem of . in this place of Matarea there be certain little house , with most goodly garden , and a chapel of antiquity , where the very moor themselves affirm , that the mother of the bless Christ flee from the fury of wicked Herode there save her self with the child , wherein that say of the prophet be fulfil , ex jEgypto vocavi filium meum . the which chapel in the year of our lord one thousand five hundred and four , the magnifico Daniel Barbaro first consuli of that place go to visit , and cause it to be renew and reedify , so that in these day there resort thither many Christians , who oftentimes bring with they a priest , to say mass there . also about a harquebus - shotte from Matarea be a spire of great height like to that at room , and more beautiful to behold . near unto the old Cairo be yet twelve storehouse of great antiquity , but now very much decay , and these till late day serve to keep corn for behoof of the kingdom , concern which many be of opinion , that the founder hereof be Joseph the son of Jacob , for consideration of the seven dear year . also pass high up by the bank of Nilus , there be to be see a fair city overflow with water , the which at such time as Nilus flow lie under water , but when the water return to the mark , there plain appear princely palace , and stately pillar , be 338 of some call Thebes , where they say that Pharaoh be one Thebes . resident . Moreover three day journey high up be two great image of speckle marble , all whole , and somewhat sink into the earth , be thing wonderful to consider of , for the nose of either be two span and a half long , and the space from one ear to the other contain ten span , the body be correspondent to their head , and grave in excellent proportion , so that they be shape of marvellous hugeness , and these they call the wife , and the daughter of Pharaoh . of the patriarch of Greece . in Cairo be two patriarch , one of the greek , and another of the jacobite . the greek patriarch call gioechni , be about the age of one hundred and thirteen year , be a very good and holy man . they say , that when sultan Gauri of Egypt reign , there be do this miracle follow : this good patriarch be envy at by the Jew of the country , for none other cause , but for his good work , and holy life , it happen ( i say ) that be in disputation with certain of the hebrew inn presence of the sultan , and reason of their law and faith , it be say unto he by one of these miscreant : sith thou believe in the faith of Christ , take and drink this potion which i will give thou ; and if thy Christ be true Messiah and true God , he will ( say he ) deliver thou from danger . to who the ancient patriarch answer , that he be content : whereupon that curse Jewe bring he a cup of the most venomous and deadly poison that can be find , which the holy patriarch have perceive , say : in the name of the father , of the son , and of the holy ghost . : and have so say he drink it quite up ; which do , he take a drop of pure water , put it into that very cup , and give it unto the Jewe , say unto he , i in the name of my Christ have drink thy poison , and therefore in the name of thy expect Messiah , drink this water of i within thy own cup . whereupon the Jewe 339 take the cup out of the hand of the patriarch , and have drink the water , within half a hour burst a sunder . and the patriarch have none other hurt , save that he become somewhat pale in sight , and so remain ever after . and this miracle ( which merit to be call no less ) be do to the great commendation of the holy patriarch in the presence of a thousand person , and namely of the sultan of Egypt : who see the despite of the Jew , unto their own cost and confusion compel they to make the conduct , which with so many engine come into the castle from Nilus above mention . and this triumphant patriarch not long since be alive , and in perfect health , which God continue long time . [ il i . 203 . ] of the preparation of the carovan to go to Mecca . as touch the carovan which go to Mecca , it be to be understand , that the mahometans observe a kind of Lent continue one whole moon , and be a movable ceremony , which sometime fall high , sometime low in the year call in their tongue Ramazan , and their feast be call Bairam . during this time of Lent all they which intend to go unto Mecca resort unto Cairo , because that twenty day after the feast the carovan be ready to depart on the voyage : and thither resort a great multitude of people from Asia , Grecia , and Barbaria to go on this voyage , some move by devotion , and some for traffic sake , and some to pass away the time . now within few day after the feast they which go