treasure and strength . this king have diverse magason full of treasure , as gold , and silver , and every day he increase it more and more , and it be never diminish . also he be lord of the mine of ruby , satire and spinel . near unto his royal palace there be a inestimable treasure whereof he make no account , for that it stand in such a place that every one may see it , and the place where this treasure be , be a great court wall round about with wall of stone , with two gate which stand open every day . and within this place or court be four gild house cover with lead , and in every one of these be certain heathenish idol of a very great valour . in the first house there be a stature of the 425 A . D . 1563 - 81 . 26 . crown king at his command . fifteen hundred thousand man in one camp . fate open serpent . the riches open the king open Pegu . image of a man of gold very great , and on his head a crown of gold beset with most rare ruby and safire , and round about he be 4 . little child of gold . in the second house there be the stature of a man of silver , that be set as it be sit on heap of money : who stature in height , as he sit , be so high , that his highness exceed the height of any one roof of a house ; i measure his foot , and find that they be as long as all my body be in height , with a crown on his head like to the first . and in the third house , there be a stature of brass of the same bigness , with a like crown on his head . in the 4 . and last house there be a stature of a man as big as the other , which be make of Gansa , which be the metal they make their money of , and this metal be make of copper and lead mingle together . this stature also have a crown on his head like the first : this treasure be of such a value as it be , stand in a open place that every man at his pleasure may go and see it : for the keeper thereof never forbid any man the sight thereof . i say as i have say before , that this king every year in his feast triumph : and because it be worthy of the note , i think it meet to write thereof , which be as follow . the king ride on a triumphant cart or wagon all gild , which be draw by 16 . goodly horse : and this cart be very high with a goodly canopy over it , behind the cart go 20 . of his lord and noble , with every one a rope in his hand make fast to the cart for to hold it upright that it fall not . the king sit in the middle of the cart ; and upon the same cart about the king stand 4 . of his noble most favour of he , and before this cart wherein the king be , go all his army as aforesaid , and in the middle of his army go all his nobility , round about the cart , there be in his dominion , a marvellous thing it be to see so many people , such riches and such good order in a people so barbarous as they be . this king of Pegu have one principal wife which be keep in a Seralio , he have 300 concubine , of who it be report that he have 426 90 . child . this king sit every day in person to hear the suit of his subject , but he nor they never speak one to another , but by supplication make in this order . the king sit up aloft in a great hall , on the order of a tribunali seat , and low under he sit all his baron justiceround about , than those that demand audience enter into a great court before the king , and there set they down on the ground 40 . pace distant from the king person , and among those people there be no difference no difference in matter of audience before the king , but all alike , and there they sit with their supplication in their hand , - in cmtrwer - which be make of long leaf of a tree , these leaf siet or inn be 3 . quarter of a yard long , and two finger broad , which justice . be write with a sharp iron make for y ‘ purpose , and in those leaf be their supplication write , and with their supplication , they have in their hand a present or gift , accord to the weightiness of their matter . then come you secretary down to read these supplication , take they and read they before the king , and if the king think it good to do to they that favour or justice that they demand , than he command to take the present out of their hand : but if he think their demand be not just or accord to right , he command they away without take of their gift or present . in the Indies there be not any merchandise that be good to bring to Pegu , unless it be at some time by chance to bring opium of Cambaia , and if he bring money he shall lose by it . now the commodity that come from s . Tome be the only merchandise for that place , which [ ii i . 257 . ] be the great quantity of cloth make there , which they commodi - use in Pegu ; which cloth be make of bombast weave and paint , so that the more that kind of cloth be pegU . wash , the more lively they show their colour , which be a rare thing , and there be make such account of this kind of cloth which be of so great importance , that a small bale of