Venice , and we 444 freight a bark together to go for Basora for 70 . ducat , and with we there go other merchant , which do ease our fraught , and very commodious we come to Basora and there we stay 40 . day for provide a carovan of bark to go to Babylon , because they use not to go two or 3 . bark at once , but 25 . or 30 . because in the night they can go , but must make they fast to the bank of the river , and then we must make a very good and strong guard , and be well provide of armour , for respect and safeguard of our good , because the number of thief be great that come to spoil and rob the merchant . and when we depart for Babylon we go a little with our sail , and the voyage be 38 . or 40 . day long , but we be 50 . day on it . when we come to Babylon we stay there 4 . month , until the carovan be ready to go over the wilderness , or desert for Aleppo ; in this city we be 6 . merchant that accompany together , five venetian and a Portugal ; who name be as follow , Messer Florinasa with one of his kinsman , Messer Andrea de Polo , the Portugal and m . Francis Berettin and i , and so we furnish our self with victual and bean for our horse for 40 . day ; and we buy horse and mule , for that they be very good cheap there , i my self buy a horse there for 11 . aken , and sell he after in Aleppo for 30 . ducat . also we buy a tent which do we very great pleasure : we have also among we 32 . camel lade with merchandise : for the which we pay 2 . ducat for every camel lade , and for every 10 . camel they make 11 , for so be their use and custom . we take also with we 3 . man to serve we in the voyage , which be use to go in those voyage for five d d . a man , and be bind to serve we to Aleppo : so that we pass very well without any trouble : when the camel cry out to rest , our pavilion be the first that be erect . the carovan make but small journey about 20 . mile a day , and they set forward every morning before day two hour , and about two in the afternoon they sit down . 445 A . D . 1563 - 81 . a order how to provide to go over the desert from Babylon to Aleppo . $ 6 . day journey over thewildernes . a order how to provide for the go to Jerusalem , we have great good hap in our voyage , for that it rain : for which cause we never want water , but every day find good water , so that we can not take any hurt for want of water . yet we carry a camel lade always with water for every good respect that may chance in the desert , so that we have no want neither of one thing , nor other that be to be have in the country . for we come very well furnish of every thing , and every day we eat fresh mutton , because there come many shepherd with we with their flock , who keep those sheep that we buy in Babylon , and every merchant mark his sheep with his own mark , and we give the shepherd a Medin , which be two penny of our money , for the keep and feed our sheep on the way , and for kill of they . and beside the Medin they have the head , the skin , and the entrails of every sheep they kill . we six buy 20 . sheep , and when we come to Aleppo we have 7 . alive of they . and in the carovan they use this ofder , that the merchant do lend flesh one to another , because they will not carry raw flesh with they , but pleasure one another by lend one one day , and another another day . from Babylon to Aleppo be 40 . day journey , of the which they make 36 . day over the wilderness , in which 36 . day they neither see house , tree , nor people that inhabit it , but only a plain , and no sign of any way in the world . the pilot go before , and the carovan follow after . and when they sit down all the carovan unlade and sit down , for they know the station where the well be . i say , in 36 . day we pass over the wilderness . for when we depart from Babylon two day we pass by village inhabit until we have pass the river Euphrates . and then within two day of Aleppo we have village inhabit . in this carovan there go always a captain that do justice unto all man : and every night they keep watch about the carovan , and come to Aleppo we go to Tripoli , whereas master Florin , and master Andrea Polo , 446 and i , with a friar , go and hire a bark to go with we to Jerusalem . depart from Tripoli , we arrive at Jaffa : from which place in a day and half we go to Jerusalem , and we give order to our bark to tarry for we until our return . we stay in Jerusalem 14 . day , to visit those holy place : from whence we return to Jaffa , and from Jaffa to Tripoli , and there we ship our self in a ship of Venice call the Bagazzana : and by the help of the divine power , we arrive safe in Venice the five of November 1581 . if there be any that have any desire to go into those part of India , let he not be astonish at the trouble that i have pass : because i be entangle in many thing : for