the air with con - 370 tinuall smoke , this pitch be throw with such force , that be hot it fall like as it be sprinkle over all the plain , in such abundance that the plain be always full of pitch : the moor and the arabian of that place say , that that hole be the mouth of hell : and in truth , it be a thing very notable to be mark : and by this pitch the whole people have great benefit to pitch their bark , which bark they call Daneck and Saffin . when the river of Tigris be well replenish with water , you may pass from Babylon to Basora in eight or nine day , and sometime more and sometime less : we be half so much more which be 14 or 15 day , because the water be low : they may sail day and night , and there be some place in this way where you pay so many medin on a bail : if the water be low , it be 18 day journey . Basora . A . D . 1563 - 81 . this hole whereout come this pitch be most true , and the coat pitch run into the valley or hand where the pitch rest , y the water run into the river Euphrates , and it make all the river to be as it be brackish with the smell of pitch and brimstone . BAsora be a city of the arabian , which of old time be govern by those arabian call Zizarii , but Zizarii , a now it be govern by the great Turk where he keep ancient people - an army to his great charge . the arabian call Zizarii have the possession of a great country , and can be overcome of the Turk , because that the sea have divide their country into a hand by channel with the ebb and flow of the sea , and for that cause the Turk can bring a army against they , neither by sea nor by land , and another reason be , the inhabitant of that hand be very strong and warlike man . a day journey before you come to Basora , you shall have a little castle or fort , which be set on that point of the land where the river of Euphrates and Tigris meet together , and the castle at the castle be call Corna : at this point , the two river make a of Coma the monstrous great river , that run into the sea , which ^ erEu ' , be call the gulf of Persia , which be towards the south : Tigris do Basora be distant from the sea fifteen mile , and it be meet . a city of great trade of spice and drug which come 371 from ormus . also there be great store of corn , rice , and date , which the country do yield . i ship ormus be then my self in Basora to go for ormus , and so we sail barren through the persian sea six hundred mile , which be the the ^ arld ^ distance , from Basora to ormus , and we sail in small e ’ ship make of board , bind together with small cord or rope , and in stead of calk they lie between every board certain straw which they have , and so they sow board and board together , with the straw between , wherethorow there come much water , and they be very dangerous . depart from Basora we pass 200 mile with the sea on our right hand , along the gulf , until at length we arrive at a hand call Carichii a Carichii , from whence we sail to ormus in sight of hand in you the persian shore on the left side , and on the right side gulfeofPersia . towards Arabia we discover infinite hand . ormus . ormus be / ARmus be a hand in circuit five and twenty or thirty always re - miles , and it be the barren and most dry hand abun ^ nce ^ f * n a wor ^ ’ because that in it there be nothing to victuali and and , but salt water , and wood , all other thing neces - yet there be sary for man life be bring out of Persia twelve none that . mile off , and out of other hand near thereunto ad - 1 ^^^^ j ° yn ’ ns ’ in suc ^ abundance and quantity , that the city ’ be always replenish with all manner of store : there be stand near unto the water side a very fair castle , in the which the captain of the king of Portugal be always resident with a good band of Portugal , and before this castle be a very fair prospect : in the city dwell the marry man , soldier and merchant of every nation , among who there be moor and great trade Gentiles . in this city there be very great trade for all oh ” ^ sort spice > drug , silk , cloth of silk , brocardo , and diverse other sort of merchandise come out of Persia : and among all other trade of merchandise , the trade of horse be very great there , which they carry from thence into the Indies . this hand have a moor 372 king of the race of the persian , who be create and make king by the captain of the castle , ’ in the name of the king of Portugal ! . at the creation of this king i be there , and see the ceremony that they use in it , which be as follow . the old king be dead , the captain of the Portugal choose another of the blood royal , and make this election in the castle with great ceremony , and when he be elect , the captain swear he to be true and faithful to the king of Portugal , as his lord and governor , and then he give he the sceptre regal . after this with great feast and pomp , and with great company , he be bring into the royal palace in the city . this king keep a good train , and have