service of the mosquita , and the other two sepulchre of Fatma , and Alli , where every one may go and touch at his pleasure , and take of the earth for devotion , as many do . [ ii i . 212 . ] of thing without the city . without the city and on every side be most fair garden , with many fountain of most sweet water , infinite pond , abundance of fruit , with much 362 honest live , so that this place be very pleasant and delightful . this city have three gate , one of which be a hospitali cause to be build by Cassachi , call the rose , who be wife to sultan Soliman grandfather to this emperor . the say hospitali have nought else worthy mention , save that it be fair build , and have large revenue belong thereunto , and nourish many poor people . a mile from the city be certain house whereof they affirm one to be the same , where Mahumet in his life - time dwell . this house have on every side very many fair date tree , among which there be two which grow out of one stock exceed high , and these , they say , their prophet graft with his own hand : the fruit thereof be always send to Constantinople , to be present unto the grand signior , and be say to be that bless fruit of the prophet . Nere unto the date tree be a fair fountain of clear and sweet water , the which by a conduct pipe be bring into the city of Medina . also there be a little mosquita , wherein three place be count holy , and great reverence : the first they affirm , that their prophet make his first prayer in , after he know God : the second be that whither he go when he will see the holy house of Abraham , where when he sit down to that intent , they say the mountain open from the top to the bottom to show he the house , and after close again as before : the three holy place be in the midst of the say mosquita , where be a tomb make of lime and stone foursquare , and full of sand , wherein , they say , be bury that bless camel which Mahumet be always wont to ride upon . on the other side of the city be other tomb of holy Mahumetans , and every one of they have a tomb build upon four pillar , among which three be the companion of Mahumet , to wit , abu - bacar , ottoman , and Omar ; all which be visit of the pilgrim as holy place . 363 [ the offer the offer of the vesture unto the sepulchre . the carovan be come to Medina two hour before day , and rest there till the evening , the captain then with his company and other pilgrim set forward , with the great pomp possible : and take with he the vesture which be make in manner of a pyramid , with many other of gold and silk , depart , go through the midst of the city , until he come to the mosquita , where have pray , he present unto the tomb of his prophet ( where the eunuch receive hand , be ready ) the vesture for the say tomb : and certain eunuch enter in take away the old vesture , and lie on the new , burn the old one , and divide the gold thereof into equal portion . after this be present other vesture for the ornament of the mosquita . also the people without deliver unto the eunuch each man somewhat to touch the tomb therewith , which they keep as a relic with great devotion . this ceremony be end , the captain rest in Medina two day , to the end the pilgrim may finish their devotion and ceremony : and after they depart to Jambor . a good day journey thence be a steep mountain , over which be no passage , save by one narrow path call Demir Capi , which be in time past call the iron gate . of this gate the mahometans say , that ally the companion and son in law of Mahumet , be here pursue by many Christians , and come unto this mountain , not see any way whereby to flee , draw out his sword , and strike the say mountain , divide it in sunder , and pass through save his life on the other side . Moreover , this Alli among the persian be have in great reverence than Mahumet , who affirm , that the say Alli have do great thing and more miraculous than Mahumet , and therefore they esteem he for God almighty his fellow . but to return to our matter , the captain with the carovan within two day after return for Cairo , and come to Ezlem , find there a captain with threescore horse 364 come thither to bring refreshment to the say captain of the pilgrimage , as also to sell unto the pilgrim some victual . from thence they set forward , and commi hang to Birca within two league of Cairo , there be the master of the house of the Bassha of Cairo with all his horseman come thither to receive he , with a sumptuous and costly banquet make at the cost of the bassa for the captain and his retinue , who after he be well refresh depart towards the castle of Cairo to salute the bassa , who receive he with great joy and gladness in token of good will presents he with a garment of cloth of gold very rich : and the captain take the Koran out of the chest present it to the bassa , who have kiss it , commands to lay it up again . some there be which affirm , that be arrive at Cairo , they kill that goodly camel which carry the Koran , and eat he ; which be nothing so : for they be so superstitious to the contrary , that to gain all the world they will not kill he . [ ii i . 213 . ] but if by casualty he shall die , in this case happy and bless they think themselves , which can get a morsel to eat . and thus much concern the voyage of the captain of the carovan of Cairo .