boat go together in company , and when they have sail six and thirty mile , they arrive at the place where the sholde be , and at that place the wind blow so forcible , that they be force to go through , not have any other refuge to save themselves . the flat bottomed boat go safe thorough , where as the small ship if they miss the aforesaid channel , stick fast on the sholde , and by this mean many be lose : and come back from the Indies , they go not that way , but pass by the channel of Manar as be abovesaid , who channel be oazy , and if the ship stick fast , it be great chance if there be any danger at all . the reason why this channel be not more sure to go thither , be , because the wind that reign or blow between Zeilan and Manar , make the channel so shallow with water , that almost there be not any passage . from Cao Comori to the hand of Zeilan be 120 . mile overthwart . zeilan . zeilan be a hand , in my judgement , a great deal big than Cyprus : on that side towards the Indies lie westward be the city call Columba , which be a 398 1563 - 81 . hold of the Portugal , but without wall or enemy . it have towards the sea a free port , the lawful king of [ ii i . 226 . ] that hand be in Columbo , and be turn Christian and maintain by the king of Portugal , be deprive of his kingdom . the king of the gentile , to who this kingdom do belong , be call Madoni , which have two son , the first name Barbinas the prince ; and the second ragine . this king by the policy of his young son , be deprive of his kingdom , who because he have entice and do that which please the army and soldier , in despite of his father and brother be prince , usurp the kingdom , and become a great warrior . first , this hand have three king ; the king of Cotta with his conquer prisoner : the king of Candia , which be a part of that hand , and be so call by the name of Candia , which have a reasonable power , and be a great friend to the Portugal , which say that he live secret a christian ; the three be the king of Gianifampatan . in thirteen year that this ragine govern this hand , he become a great tyrant . in this hand there grow fine cinnamon , great store of pepper , great store of nut and arochoe : there they make great store of Cairo to make cordage : it cair0 be a bring forth great store of crystal cat eye , or stuu ^ t , iatt ^ Ochi de gati , and they say that they find there some fa ruby , but i have sell ruby well there that i bring which be the with i from Pegu . i be desirous to see how they a gather the cinnamon , or take it from the tree that it tree ‘ grow on , and so much the rather , because the time that i be there , be the season which they gather it in , which be in the month of April , at which time the Portugal be in arm , and in the field , with the king of the country ; yet i to satisfy my desire , although in great danger , take a guide with i and go into a wood three mile from the city , in which wood be great store of sinamome tree grow together among other wild tree ; and this sinamome tree be a small tree , and not very high , and have leaf like to our bay tree . 399 the cut in gather of cinnamon . a rare thing . in the month of march or April , when the sap go up to the top of the tree , than they take the cinnamon from that tree in this wise . they cut the bark of the tree round about in length from knot to knot , or from joint to joint , above and below , and then easy with their hand they take it away , lay it in the sun to dry , and in this wise it be gather , and yet for all this the tree die not , but against the next year it will have a new bark , and that which be gather every year be the best sinamome : for that which grow two or three year be great , and not so good as the other be ; and in these wood grow much pepper . Negapatan . from the hand of Zeilan man use to go with small ship to Negapatan , within the firm land , and seventie two mile off be a very great city , and very populous of Portugal and Christians of the country , and part Gentiles : it be a country of small trade , neither have they any trade there , save a good quantity of rice , and cloth of bombast which they carry into diverse part : it be a very plentiful country of victual , but now it have a great deal less ; and that abundance of victual cause many Portugal to go thither and build house , and dwell there with small charge . this city belong to a noble man of the kingdom of bezeneger be a gentle , nevertheless the Portugal and other Christians be well entreat there , and have their church there with a monastery of saint Francis order , with great devotion and very well accommodate , with house round about : yet for all this , they be among tyrant , which always at their pleasure may do they some harm , as it happen in the year of our lord God one thousand five hundred , sixty and five : for i remember very well , how that the nayer , that be to say , the lord of the city , send to the citizen to demand of they certain arabian horse