that i go very poor from Venice with 1200 . ducat employ in merchandise , and when i come to Tripoli , i fall sick in the house of master Regaly Oratio , and this man send away my good with a small carovan that go from Tripoli to Aleppo , and the carovan be rob , and all my good lose save four chest of glass which cost i 200 . ducat , of which glass i find many break : because the thief think it have be other merchandise , break they up , and see they be glass they let they all alone . and with this only stock i adventure to go into the Indies : and thus with change and rechange , and by diligence in my voyage , God do bless and help i , so that i get a good stock . i will not be unmindful to put they in remembrance , that have a desire to go into those part , how they shall keep their good , and give they to their heir at the time of their death , and how this may be do very secure . in all the city that the Portugal have in the Indies , there be a house call the school of sancta misericordia comissaria : the governor whereof , if you give they for their paine ยง , will take a copy of your will and testament , which you must always carry about you ; and chief when you go into the Indies . in the country of the moor and gentile , in those voyage always there 447 A . D . 1563 - 81 . [ ii i . 244 . ] the author returns to Venice 1581 . a very good order that they have in those country for the recover of the good of the dead . go a captain to administer justice to all Christians of the Portugal . also this captain have authority to recover the good of those merchant that by chance die in those voyage , and they that have not make their will and register they in the aforesaid school , the captain will consume their good in such wise , that little or nothing will be leave for their heir and friend . also there go in these same voyage some merchant that be commissary of the school of sancta misericordia , that if any merchant die and have his will make , and have give order that the school of misericordia shall have his good and sell they , than they send the money by exchange to the school of misericordia in Lisbon , with that copy of his testament , then from Lisbon they give intelligence thereof , into what part of Christendom soever it be , and the heir of such a one come thither , with testimoniali that they be heir , they shall receive there the value of his good : in such wise that they shall not loose any thing . but they that die in the kingdom of Pegu loose the third part of their good by ancient custom of the country , that if any Christian die in the kingdom of Pegu , the king and his officer rest heir of a third of his good , and there have never be any deceit or fraud use in this matter . i have know many rich man that have dwell in Pegu , and in their age they have desire to go into their own country to die there , , and have depart with all their good and substance without let or trouble . in pegu the fashion of their apparel be all one , as well the noble man , as the simple : the only difference be in the fineness of the cloth , which be cloth of bombast one fine than another , and they wear their apparel in this wise : first , a white bombast cloth which serve for a shirt , than they gird another paint bombast cloth of fourteen brase , which they bind up betwixt their leg , and on their head they wear a small tock of three brace , make in guise of a mitre , 448 and some go without tock , and carry ( as it be ) a hive on their head , which do not pass the low part of his ear , when it be lift up : they go all bare footed , but the noble man never go on foot , but be carry by man in a seat with great reputation , with a hat make of the leaf of a tree to keep he from the rain and sun , or otherwise they ride on horseback with their foot bear in the stirrup . all sort of woman order of whatsoever they be , wear a smock down to the girdle , woman and from the girdle downward to the foot they wear a cloth of three brase , open before ; so strait that they can go , but they must show their secret as it be aloft , and in their go they fain to hide it with their hand , but they can by reason of the straitness of their cloth . they say that this use be invent by a queen to be a occasion that the sight thereof may remove from man the vice against nature , which they be great give unto : which sight shall cause they to regard woman the more . also the woman go bare footed , their arm lade with hoop of gold and jewel : and their finger full of precious ring , with their hair roll up about their head , . many of they wear a cloth about their shoulder in stead of a cloak . now to finish that which i have begin to write , i say , that those part of the Indies be very good , because that a man that have little , shall make a great deal thereof ; always they must govern themselves that they be take for honest man . for why ? to such there shall never want help to do well , but he that be vicious , let he tarry at home and not go thither , because he shall always be a beggar , and die a poor man .