chain of a infinite number of hand , of which many be inhabit with wild people , and they call those hand the hand of Andemaon , and they call their people i ” the hand savage or wild , because they eat one another : also these hand have war one with another , for they have a „ other . small bark , and with they they take one another , and so eat one another : and if by evil chance any ship be lose on those hand , as many have be , there be not one man of those ship lose there that escape uneaten or unslain . Theise people have not any acquaintance with any other people , neither have they trade with any , but live only of such fruit as those hand yield : and if any ship come near unto that place or coast as they pass that way , as in my voyage it happen as i come from Malacca through the channel of Sombrero , there come two of their bark near unto our ship lade with fruit , as with mouce which we call Adam apple , with fresh nut , and with a fruit call Inani , which fruit be like to our turnip , but be very sweet and good to eat : they will not come into the ship for any thing that we can do : neither will they take any money for their fruit , but they will truck for old shirt or piece of old linen breech , these 403 rag they let down with a rope into their bark unto [ il i . 228 . ] they , and look what they think those thing to be ’ worth , so much fruit they will make fast to the rope and let we hale it in : and it be tell i that at sometime a man shall have for a old shirt a good piece of amber . the commodity that grow in the kingdom of as si . the great trade that be at Malacca . Sumatra . this hand of Sumatra be a great hand and divide and govern by many king , and divide into many channel , where through there be passage : upon the headland towards the west be the kingdom of Assi govern by a moor king : this king be of great force and strength , as he that beside his great kingdom , have many foist and galley . in his kingdom grow great store of pepper , ginger , Benjamin : he be a utter enemy to the Portugal , and have diverse time be at Malacca to fight against it , and have do great harm to the borough thereof , but the city always withstand he valiant , and with their ordinance do great spoil to his camp . at length i come to the city of Malacca . the city Malacca . MAlacca be a city of marvellous great trade of all kind of merchandise , which come from diverse part , because that all the ship that sail in these sea , both great and small , be bind to touch at Malacca to pay their custom there , although they unlade nothing at all , as we do at Elsinor : and if by night they escape away , and pay not their custom , than they fall into a great danger after : for if they come into the Indies and have not the seal of Malacca , they pay double custom . i have not pass further than Malacca towards the east , but that which i will speak of here be by good information of they that have be there . the sail from Malacca towards the east be not common for all man , as to China and Japan , and so 404 forward to go who will , but only for the king of Portugal and his noble , with leave grant unto they of the king to make such voyage , or to the jurisdiction of the captain of Malacca , where he expect to know what voyage they make from Malacca thither , and these be the king voyage , that every year there de - parteth from Malacca 2 . galleon of the king , one of they go to you moluccos to lade clove , and the at themoluc - oth go to Banda to lade nutmeg and mace , these two galleon be lade for the king , neither doe ' they carry any particular man good , save the portage of the mariner and soldier , and for this cause they be not voyage for merchant , because that go thither , they shall not have where to lade their good of return ; and beside this , the captain will not carry any merchant for either of these two place . there go small ship of the moor thither , which come from the coast of Java , and change or guild their commodity in the king - dom of Assa , and these be the mace , clove , and the kingdom nutmeg , which go for the strait of Mecca . the of Assa . voyage that the king of Portugal grant to his noble be these , of China and Japan , from China to Japan , and from Japan to China , and from China to the Indies , and the voyage of Bengala , Maluco , and Sonda , with the lade of fine cloth , and every sort of bombast cloth . Sonda be a hand of the moor near to the coast of Java , and there they lade pepper for China . the ship the ship of that go every year from the Indies to China , be call the ship of drug , because she carry diverse drug of e cambaia , but the great part of her lade be silver . from Malacca to China be eighteen hundred mile : and from China to Japan go every year a ship of great importance lade with silk , which for return of their silk bring bar of silver which they truck in China . the distance between China and Japan be four and twenty hundred mile , and in this way there be diverse hand not very big , in which the friar of saint Paul , by