which be over against tanasary , with great scarcity of victual , and that by the say of the pilot and two Portugal , hold then firm that we be in front of the aforesaid harbour , we determine to go thither with our boat and fetch victual , and that the ship shall stay for we in a place assign . we be twenty and eight person in the boat that go for victual , and on a day about twelve of the clock we go from the ship , assure our self to be in the harbour before night in the aforesaid port , we row all that day , and a great part of the next night , and all the next day without find harbour , or any sign of good land , and this come to pass through the evil counsel of the two Portugal that be with we . for we have overshoot the harbour and leave it behind we , in such wise that we have lose the land inhabit , together with the shippe ^ and we eight and twenty man have no manner of victuali with we in the boat , but it be the lord will that one of the mariner have bring a little rice with he in the boat to barter away for A . D . 1563 - 81 . taper wine good to cure the french disease . 413 [ ii i . 232 . ] Tavay under the king of Pegu . some other thing , and it be not so much but that three or four man will have eat it at a meal : i take the government of this rice , promise that by the help of God that rice shall be nourishment for we until it please God to send we to some place that be inhabit : and when i sleep i put the rice into my bosom because they shall not rob it from i : we be nine day row alongst the coast , without find any thing but country uninhabited , and desert hand , where if we have find but grass it will have seem sugar unto we , but we can not find any , yet we find a few leaf of a tree , and they be so hard that we can not chew they , we have water and wood sufficient , and as we row , we can go but by flow water , for when it be ebb water , we make fast our boat to the bank of one of those island , and in these nine day that we row , we find a cave or nest of tortoise egg , wherein be one hundred forty and four egg , the which be a great help unto we : these egg be as big as a hen egg , and have no shell about they but a tender skin , every day we sod a kettle full of those egg , with a handful of rice in the broth thereof : it please God that at the end of nine day we discover certain fisher man , a fish with small bark , and we row towards they , with a good cheer , for i think there be never man more glad than we be , for we be so sore afflict with penury , that we can scarce stand on our leg . yet accord to the order that we set for our rice , when we see those fisher man , there be leave sufficient for four day . the first village that we come to be in the gulf of Tavay , under the king of Pegu , whereas we find great store of victual : then for two or three day after our arrival there , we will eat but little meat any of we , and yet for all this , we be at the point of death the most part of we . from Tavay to Martavan , in the kingdom of Pegu , be seventie two mile . we jade our boat with victual 414 1563 - 81 - which be abundant sufficient for six month , from whence we depart for the port and city of Martavan , where in short time we arrive , but we find not our ship there as we have think we shall , from whence present we make out two bark to go to look for she . and they find she in great calamity , and need of water , be at a anchor with a contrary wind , which come very ill to pass , because that she want her boat a month , which shall have make her provision of wood and water , the ship also by the grace of God arrive safe in the aforesaid port of Martavan . the city of Martavan . we find in the city of Martavan ninety Portugal of Merchants and other base man , which have fall at difference with the retor or governor of the city , and all for this cause , that certain vagabond of the Portugal have slay five falchine of the king of Pegu , which chance about a month after the king of Pegu be go with a million and four hundred thousand man to conquer the kingdom of Zion . they have for custom in this country and kingdom , the king be wheresoever his pleasure be to be out of his kingdom , that every fifteen day there go from Pegu a carovan of Falchines , with every one a basket on his head full of some fruit or other deli - Martavan a title under the king of Pegu . a custom that these people have when the king be in the tvarre . cate of refreshing , and with clean clothes : it chance that this carovan pass by Martavan , and rest themselves there a night , there happen between the Portugal and they word of despite , and from word to blow , and because it be think that the Portugal have the worse , the night follow , when the Falchines be a sleep with their company , the Portugal go and cut off five of their head . now AlawlnPegu there be a law in Pegu , that whosoever kill a man , ktlltn he shall buy the shed blood with his money