the voyage and travel of m . Cassar Frederick , merchant of Venice , into the east India , and beyond the Indies . wherein be contained the custom and rite of those country , the merchandise and commodity , aswell of gold and silver , as spice , drug , pearl , and other jewel : translate out of italian by m . Thomas hickocke . Cassar Frederick to the reader . have ( gentle reader ) for the space of eighteen year continual coast and travel , as it be , all the east Indies , and many other country beyond the Indies , wherein i have have both good and ill success in my travel : and have see and understand 365 Caesar Frederick travel eighteen year in the east Indies . many thing worthy the note , and to be know to all the world , the which be never as yet write of any : i think it good ( see the Almighty have give i grace , after so long peril in pass such a long voyage to return into my own country , the noble city of Venice ) i say , i think it good , as brief as i can , to write and set forth this voyage make by i , with the marvellous thing i have see in my travel in the Indies : the mighty prince that govern those country , their religion and faith that they have , the rite and custom which they use , and live by , of the diverse success that happen unto i , and how many of these country be abound with spice , drug , and jewel , give also profitable advertisement to all those that have a desire to make such a voyage . and because that the whole world may more commodious rejoice at this my travel , 1 have cause it to be print in this order : and now i present it unto you ( gentle and love reader ) to who for the variety of thing herein contain , i hope that it shall be with great delight receive . and thus God of his goodness keep you . a voyage to the east Indies , and beyond the Indies , etc “ the author go from Venice to Cyprus and Tripoli . n the year of our lord God 1563 , i Caesar Frederick be in Venice , and very desirous to see the east part of the world , ship my self in a ship call the Gradaige of Venice , with certain merchandise , govern by m . Jacomo Vatica , which be bind to Cyprus with his ship , with who i go : and when we be arrive in Cyprus , i leave that ship , and go in a lesser to Tripoli in Soria , where i stay a while . afterwards i take my journey to Aleppo , and there i acquaint my self with merchant of Armenia , and moor , that 366 be merchant , and consort to go with they to ormus , and we depart from Aleppo , and in two day journey and a half , we come to a city call Bir . of the city call Bir . by | our be a small city very scarce of all manner of victual , and near unto the wall of the city run the river of Euphrates . in this city the merchant divide themselves into company , accord to their merchandise that they have , and there either they buy or make a boat to carry they and their good to Babylon down the river Euphrates , with charge of a master and mariner to conduct the boat in the voyage : these boat be in Euphrates . a manner flat bottomed , yet they be very strong : and for all that they be so strong , they will serve but for one voyage . they be make accord to the sholdnesse of the river , because that the river be in many place full of great stone , which great hinder and trouble those that go down the river . Theise boat serve but for one voyage down the river unto a village call feluchia , because it be impossible to bring they up the river back again . at Feluchia the merchant pluck their boat in piece , or else sell they for a small price , for that at by | our they cost the merchant forty or fifty chicken a ' piece , and they sei they at Feluchia for seven or Feluchia a eight chicken a piece , because that when the merchant on return from Babylon back again , if they have mar - ' chandise or good that owe custom , than they make their return in forty day through the wilderness , pass that way with a great deal lesser charge than the other way . and if they have not merchandise that owe custom , than they go by the way of mosul , mosul . where it cost they great charge both the carovan and company . from by | our where the merchant embark [ ii i . 214 . ] themselves to Feluchia over against Babylon , if the river have good store of water , they shall make their voyage in fifteen or eighteen day down the river , and if the water be low , and it have not rain , than it be 367 much trouble , and it will be forty or fifty day journey down , because that when the bark strike on the stone that be in the river , than they must unlade they , which be great trouble , and then lade they again when they have mend they : therefore it be not necessary , neither do the merchant go with one boat alone , but with two or three , that if one boat split and be lose with strike on the sholde , they may have another ready to take in their good , until such time as they have mend the break boat , and if they draw the break boat on land to mend she , it be hard to defend she in the night from the great multitude of arabian that will come down there to rob you : and in the river every night , when you