and it last fifty day , but they 395 do not fish every year in one place , but one year in one place , and another year in another place of the same sea . when the time of this fish draw near , than they send very good diverse , that go to discover where the great heap of oyster be under water , and right against that place where great store of oyster be , there they make or plant a village with house and a Bazaro , all of stone , which stand as long as the fish time last , and it be furnish with all thing necessary , and now and then it be near unto place that be inhabit , and other time far off , accord to the place where they fish . the fisherman be all Christians of the country , and who so will may go to fish , pay a certain duty to the king of Portugal , and to the church of the friar of saint Paul , which be in that coast . all the while that they be fish , there be three or four fuste arm to defend the fisherman from rover . it be my chance to be there one time in my passage , and i see the [ ii i . 225 . ] order that they use in fish , which be this . there be three or four bark that make consort together , which be like to our little pilot boat , and a little less , there go seven or eight man in a boat : and i have see in a morning a great number of they go out , and anchor in fifteen or eighteen fathom of water , which be the ordinary depth of all that coast . when they be at anchor , they cast a rope into the sea , and at the end of the rope , they make fast a great stone , and then there be ready a man that have his nose and his ear well stop , and anoint with oil , and a basket about his neck , or under his left arm , than he go down by the rope to the bottom of the sea , and as fast as he can he fill the basket , and when it be full , he shake the rope , and his fellow that be in the bark hale he up with the basket : and in such wise they go one by one until they have lade their bark with oyster , and at evening they come to the village , and then every company make their mountain or 396 heap of oyster one distant from another , in such wise that you shall see a great long row of mountain or heap of oyster , and they be not touch until such time as the fish be end , and at the end of the fish every company sit round about their mountain or heap of oyster , and fall to open of they , which they may easy do because they be dead , dry and brittle : and if every oyster have pearl in they , it will be a very good purchase , but there be very many that have no pearl in they : when the fish be end , than they see whether it be a good gather or a bid : there be certain expert in the pearl pary who they call Chitini , which set and make the price arepiseil mor pearl accord to their carract , beauty , and good - carac ° s which ness , make four sort of they . the first sort they weigh , be the round pearl , and they be call Aia of portu - every car act gale , because the Portugal do buy they . the second be atnes ’ sort which be not round , be call Aia of Bengala . that prize they the three sort which be not so good as the second , have a in - they call Aia of Canara , that be to say , the kingdom strument of of bezeneger . the four and last sort , which be the least and worst sort , be call Aia of Cambaia . thus which be make the price be set , there be merchant of every country by degree for which be ready with their money in their hand , to sort you so that in a few day all be buy up at the prize set accord to the goodness and caract of the pearl . in this sea of the fish of pearl be a hand call Manar , which be inhabit by Christians of the country which first be Gentiles , and have a small hold of the Portugal be situate over against Zeilan : and between these two hand there be a channel , but not very big , and have but a small depth therein : by reason whereof there can any great ship pass that way , but small ship , and with the increase of the water which be at the change or the full of the moon , and yet for all this they must unlade they and put their good into small vessel to lighten they before they can pass that 397 way for fear of sholde that lie in the channel , and after lade they into their ship to go for the Indies , and this do all small ship that pass that way , but those ship that go for the Indies eastwardes , pass by the coast of Coromandel , on the other side by the land of Chilao which be between the firm land and the hand manor : and go from the Indies to the coast of Coromandel , they loose some ship , but they be empty , because that the ship that pass that way discharge their good at a hand call Peripatane , and there land their good into small flat bottomed boat which draw little water , and be call take , and can run over every shall without either danger or loss of any thing , for that they tarry in Peripatane until such time as it be fair weather . before they depart to pass the sholde , the small ship and flat bottomed