they from the servitude of sin and from idolatry , in which before time they be drown , and how he give unto they the house of Abraham wherein they shall be hear , and likewise the mountain of pardon , by mean whereof they may obtain grace and remission of their sin : add , that the merciful God , who be a liberali giver of all good thing , command his secretary Abraham to build he a house in Mecca , where his successor may make their prayer unto he and be hear , at which time all the mountain in the world come together thither with sufficiency of stone for build hereof , except that little and low hill , which for poverty can not go to discharge this debt , for the which it become sorrowful , [ ii i . 210 . ] weep beyond all measure for the space of thirty year , at the end whereof the eternal God have pity and compassion upon this poor mountain , say unto it : weep no more ( my daughter ) for thy bitter plaint have ascend up into my ear , therefore comfort thy self : for i will cause all those that shall go to visit the house of my friend Abraham , that they shall not be absolve from their sin , unless they first come to do thou reverence , and to keep in this place their holy feast . and this i have command unto my people by the mouth of my friend and prophet Mahumet . This say , 357 he exhort they unto the love of God , and to prayer and alm . the sermon be do at the sunsetting they make 3 . prayer , namely , the first for the Serifo , the second for the grand signior with his host , and the three for all the people : to which prayer all with one voice cry say ; amni ja alla , amni ja alla , that be to say , be it so lord , be it so lord . thus have have the Santones blessing and salute the mountain of pardon , they return the way they come unto Mina , whereof we have make mention . in return at the end of the plain be the abovesaid 4 . pillar , to wit , two on each side of the way , through the midst whereof they say it be needful that every one pass , say , that who so pass without lose all that merit which in his pilgrimage he have get . also from the mountain of pardon until they be pass the say pillar none dare look backward , for fear least the sin which he have leave in the mountain return to he again . be past these pillar every one light down , seek in this sandy field 50 . or 60 . little stone , which be gather , and bind in a handkerchief they carry to the abovesaid place of Mina , where they stay 5 . day , because at that time there be a fair free and frank of all custom . and in this place be other 3 . pillar , not together , but set in diverse place , where ( as their prophet say ) be the three apparition which the devil make unto Abraham , and to Ishmael his son ; for among they they make no mention of Isaac , as if he have never be bear . so they say , that the bless God have command Abraham his faithful servant to sacrifice his first beget Ishmael , the old Abraham go to do accord to god will , and meet with the infernal enemy in the shape of a man , and be of he demand whither he go , he answer , that he go to sacrifice his son Ishmael , as God have command he . against who the devil exclaim say : oh dote old man , sith God in thy old age have marvelous give thou this son ( in who all nation shall | be bless ) wherefore give credit unto 358 vain dream , will thou kill he who so much thou have desire , and so entire love . but Abraham shake he off proceed on his way , whereupon the devil see his word can not prevail with the father attempt the son , say ; Ishmael , have regard unto thy self betimes in this thing which be so dangerous . wherefore ? answer you child . because ( say the devil ) thy dote father seek to take away thy life . for what occasion , say Ishmael ? because ( say the enemy ) he say , that God have command he . which Ishmael hear he take up stone and throw at he , say , Auzu billahi minal scia itanil ragini , which be to say , i defend i with God from the devil the offender , as who will say , we ought to obey the commandment of God and resist the devil with all our force . but to return to our purpose , the pilgrim during their abode there go to visit these three pillar , throw away the little stone which before they gather , while they repeat the same word which they say , that Ishmael say to the devil , when he withstand he . from hence half a mile be a mountain , whither Abraham go to sacrifice his son , as be abovesaid . in this mountain be a great den whither the pilgrim resort to make their prayer , and there be a great stone natural separate in the midst ; and they say , that Ishmael , while his father Abraham be busy about the sacrifice , take the knife in hand to prove how it will cut , and make trial divide the stone into two part . the five day be expire , the captain arise with all the carovan , and return again to Mecca , where they remain other five day . and while these rest , we will treat of the city and port of Grida upon the red sea of Grida . THereford we say that from Mecca to Grida they make two small day journey : and because in those place it be ill travel in the daytime by reason of the great heat of the sun , therefore they depart in the 359 grida a port near Mecca . evening from Mecca , and in the morning