of 4i . ’ ’ wool and bombast black and red like to Moocharies . of the city of Chaul , and of the palmer tree . beyond this hand you shall find Chaul in the firm land ; and they be two city , one of the Portugal , and the other of the moor : that city which the Portugal have be situate low than the other , and govern the mouth of the harbour , and be very strong wall : and as it be a mile and a half distant from this be the city of Moores , govern by their king Zamalluco . in the time of war there can any great ship come to the city of the moor , because the Portugal with their ordinance will sink they , for that they must perforce pass by the castle of the Portugal : both the city be port of the sea , and be great city , and have unto they great traffic and trade of merchandise , of all sort of spice , drug , silk , cloth of silk , sandal , Marsine , Versine , Porcelane of China , velvet and scarlet that come from Portugal , and from Mecca : with many other sort of merchandise . there come every year from Cochin , and from Cananor ten or fifteen great ship 378 lade with great nut cure , and with sugar make of the self same nut call Giagra : the tree whereon these nut do grow be call the palmer tree : and throughout all the Indies , and especial from this place to goa there be great abundance of they , and it be like to the date tree . in the whole world there be not a tree more profitable and of more goodness than this tree be , neither do man reap so much benefit of any other tree as they do of this , there be not any part of it but serve for some use , and none of it be worthy to be burn . with the timber of this tree they make ship without the mixture of any other tree , and with the leaf thereof they make sail , and with the fruit thereof , which be a kind of nut , they make wine , and of the wine they make sugar and Placetto , which wine they gather in the spring of the year : out of the middle of the tree where continual there go or run out white liquor like unto water , in that time of the year they put a vessel under every tree , and every evening and morning they take it away full , and then distil it with fire it make a very strong liquor : and then they put it into butt , with a quantity of Zibibbo , white or black and in short time it be make a perfect wine . after this they make of the nut great store of oil : of the tree they make great quantity of board and quarter for building . of the bark of this tree they make cable , rope , and other furniture for ship , and , as they say , these rope be better than they that be make of hemp . they make of the bow , bedsted , after the Indies fashion , and Scavasches for merchandise . the leaf they cut very small , and weave they , and so make sail of they , for all manner of ship , or else very fine mat . and then the first rind of the nut they stamp , and make thereof perfect Ockam to calk ship , gr ^ at and small : and of the hard bark thereof they make spoon and other vessel for meat , in such wise that there be no part thereof throw away or cast to the fire . when these mat be green they be full 379 A . D . 1563 - 81 . great ordinance make in piece , and yet serviceable . [ ii i . 219 . ] the chief place the Portugal have in the Indies . of a excellent sweet water to drink : and if a man be thirsty , with the liquor of one of the mat he may satisfy himself : and as this nut ripen , the liquor thereof turn all to kernel . there go out of Chaul for Mallaca , for the Indies , for Macao , for Portugal , for the coast of melinde , for ormus , as it be a infinite number and quantity of good and merchandise that come out of the kingdom of Cambaia , as cloth of bombast white , paint , print , great quantity of indigo , opium , cotton , silk of every sort , great store of Boraso in past , great store of Fetida , great store of iron , corn , and other merchandise . the moor king Zamalluco be of great power , as one that at need may command , and have in his camp , two hundred thousand man of war , and have great store of artillery , some of they make in piece , which for their greatness can not be carry to and fro ; yet although they be make in piece , they be so commodious that they work with they marvellous well , who shot be of stone , and there have be of that shot send unto the king of Portugal for the rareness of the thing . the city where the king Zamalluco have his be , be within the land of Chaul seven or eight day journey , which city be call abneger . threescore and ten mile from Chaul , towards the Indies , be the port of dabul , a haven of the king Zamalluco : from thence to goa be a hundred and fifty mile . goa . goa be the principali city that the Portugal have in the Indies , wherein the viceroy with his royal court be resident , and be in a hand which may be in circuit five and twenty or thirty mile : and the city with the borough be reasonable big , and for a city of the Indies it be reasonable fair , but the hand be far more fair : for it be as it