many hold of the Portugal , as onor , mangalor , barzelor , and Cananor . the hold or fort that you shall have from goa to Cochin that belong to the Portugal , be call onor , which 390 be in the kingdom of the queen of Battacella , which be tributary to the king of bezeneger : there be no trade there , but only a charge with the captain and company he keep there . And pass this place , you shall come to another small castle of the Portugal call mangalor , and there be very small trade but only for a little rice : and from thence you go to a little fort call barzelor , there they have good store of rice which be carry to goa : and from thence you shall go to a city call Cananor , which be a harquebus shoot distant from the chief city that you king of Cananor have in his kingdom be a king of the gentile : and he and he be very naughty and malicious people , always have delight to be in war with the Portugal , and [ ii i . 223 . ] when they be in peace , it be for their interest to let their merchandise pass : there go out of this kingdom of Cananor , all the cardamomum , great store of pepper , ginger , honey , ship lade with great nut , great quantity of Archa , which be a fruit of the bigness of nutmeg , which fruit they eat in all those part of the Indies and beyond the Indies , with the leaf of a herb which they call bettell , the which be like unto our ivy leaf , BetteUisa but a little lesser and thin : they eat it make in plaster with the lime make of oistershel , and through country . the Indies they spend great quantity of money in this composition , and it be use daily , which thing i will not have believe , if i have not see it . the customer get great profit by these herb , for that they have custom for they . when this people eat and chew this in their mouth , it make their spittle to be read like unto blood , and they say , that it make a man to have a very good stomach and a sweet breath , but sure in my judgement they eat it rather to fulfil their filthy lust , and of a knavery , for this herb be moist and hot , and make a very strong expulsion . from Cananor you go to Cranganor , which be another small fort of the Portugal in the land of the king of Cranganor , which be another king of the gentile , and a country of small 391 within Cochin be the kingdom of pepper . the pepper that the Portugal bring , be not so good as that which go por Mecca , which be bring hither by you strait . importance , and of a hundred and twenty mile , full of thief , be under the king of Calicut , a king also of the gentile , and a great enemy to the Portugal , which when he be always in war , he and his country be the nest and rest for strange thief , and those be call moor of Carposa , because they wear on their head long red hat , and these thief part the spoil that they take on the sea with the king of Calicut , for he give leave unto all that will go a rove , liberal to go , in such wise , that all along that coast there be such a number of thief , that there be no sail in those sea but with great ship and very well arm , or else they must go in company with the army of the Portugal . from Cranganor to Cochin be 15 mile . Cochin . COchin be , next unto goa , the chief place that the Portugal have in the Indies , and there be great trade of spice , drug , and all other sort of merchandise for the kingdom of Portugal , and there within the land be the kingdom of pepper , which pepper the Portugal lade in their ship by bulk , and not in sack : the pepper that go for Portugal be not so good as that which go for Mecca , because that in time past the officer of the king of Portugal make a contract with the king of Cochin , in the name of the king of Portugal , for the prize of pepper , and by reason of that agreement between they at that time make , the price can neither rise nor fall , which be a very low and base price , and for this cause the villain bring it to the Portugal , green and full of filth . the moor of Mecca that give a better price , have it clean and it dry , and better condition . all the spice and drug that be bring to Mecca , be steal from thence as Contrabanda . Cochin be two city , one of the Portugal , and another of the king of Cochin : that of the Portugal be situate near unto the sea , and that of the king of 392 Cochin be a mile and a half up high in the land , but they be both set on the bank of one river which be very great and of a good depth of water which river come out of the mountain of the king of the pepper , which be a king of the gentile , in who kingdom be many Christians of saint Thomas order : the king of Cochin be also a king of the gentile and a great faithful friend to the king of Portugal , and to those Portugal which be marry , and be citizen in the city Cochin of the Portugal . and by this name of Portugal throughout all the Indies , they call all the Christians that come out of the west , whether they be italian , Frenchman , or alman , and all they that marry in Cochin do get a office accord to the trade he be off : this