these man have always great care that they afford good pennyworth , especial to those that have no knowledge . this they do , because they will not loose their credit : and when those mar - a honest care of heathen people . chant that have knowledge in jewel buy any , if they buy they deer , it be their own fault and not the broker : yet it be good to have knowledge in jewel , by reason that it may somewhat ease the price . there be also a very good order which they have in buy of jewel , which be this ; there be many merchant that stand by at the make of the bargain , and because they shall not understand how the jewel be sell , the broker and the merchant have their hand under a cloth , and by touch of finger and nip the joint they know what be do , what be bid , and what be ask . so that the stander by know ffgersUndera not what be demand for they , although it be for a cloth . Bargainee make with the nip of thousand or 10 . thousand ducat . for every joint and every finger have his signification . for if the merchant that stand by shall understand the bargain , it will breed great controversy among they . and at my be in Pegu in the month of August , in anno 1569 . have get well by my endeavour , i be desirous to see my own country , and i think it good to go by the way of saint Tome , but then i shall tarry until march . in which journey i be counsel , yea , and full resolve to go by the way of Bengala , with a ship there ready to depart for that voyage . and then we depart from Pegu to Chatigan a great harbour or port , from whence there go small ship to Cochin , 435 before the fleet depart for Portugal , in which ship i be full determine to go to Lisbon , and so to Venice . when i have thus resolve my self , i go a board of the ship of Bengala , at which time it be this Touffon the year of ToufFon : concern which touffon you m 4 » extra - be to understand , that in the east Indies often time , ° stormpat sea be not storm as in other country ; but every [ ii i . 240 . ] 10 . or 12 . year there be such tempest and storm , that it be a thing incredible , but to those that have see it , neither do they know certain what year they will come . the Toufim unfortunate be they that be at sea in that year and come but tjme of the touffon , because few there be that escape that danger . in this year it be our chance to be at sea with the like storm , but it happen well unto we , for that our ship be new over - plancked , and have not any thing in she save victuali and balast , silver and gold , which from Pegu they carry to Bengala , and no other kind of merchandise . this touffon or cruel storm endure three day and three night : in which time it carry away our sail , yard , and rudder ; and because the ship labour in the sea , we cut our mast over board : which when we have do she labour a great deal more than before , in such wise , that she be almost full with water that come over the high part of she and so go down : and for the space of three day and three night sixty man do nothing but hale water out of she in this wise , twenty man in one place , and twenty man in another place , and twenty in a third place : and for all this storm , the ship be so good , that she take not one jot of water below through her side , but all run down through the hatch , so that those sixty man do nothing but cast the sea into the sea and thus drive too and fro as the wind and sea will , we be in a dark night about four of the clock cast on a shall : yet when it be day , we can neither see land on one side nor other , and know not where we be . and as it please 436 the divine power , there come a great wave of the sea , which drive we beyond the shall . and when we feel the ship aflote , we rise up as man revive , because manifest the sea be calm and smooth water , and then sound we find twelve fathom water , and within a while after fill ™ we have but six fathom , and then present we come those coun - to anchor with a small anchor that be leave we at the stern , for all our other be lose in the storm : and by and by the ship strike a ground , and then we do prop she that she shall not overthrow . when it be day the ship be all dry , and we find she a good mile from the sea on dry land . This Touffon be end , we discover a island not far this island be from we , and we go from the ship on the sand to caUedSondiva . see what island it be : and we find it a place inhabit , and , to my judgement , the fertile island in all the world , the which be divide into two part by a channel which pass between it , and with great trouble we bring our ship into the same chanel , which part the island at flow water , and there we determine to stay 40 . day to refresh we . and when the people of the island see the ship , and that we be come a land : present they make a place of bazar or a market , with shop right over against the ship with all manner of provision of victual