his house , because it that traveu to be needful that the merchant that trade to the Indies thelndiesmust carry provision of household with they , because that in carry theirpro - every place where they come they must have a new house , the broker that have receive his cargason , come - they . 375 mand his servant to carry the merchant furniture for his house home , and load it on some cart , and carry it into the city , where the broker have diverse empty house meet for the lodging of merchant , furnish only with bedsted , table , chair , and empty jar for water : then the broker say to the merchant , go and repose your self , and take your rest in the city . the broker tarri at the water side with the cargason , and cause all his good to be discharge out of the ship , and pay the custom , and cause it to be bring into the house where the merchant lie , the merchant not know any thing thereof , neither custom , nor charge . Theise good be bring to this pass into the house of the merchant , the broker demand of the merchant if he have any desire to sell his good or merchandise , at the prize that such ware be worth at that present time ? and if he have a desire to sell his good present , then at that instant the broker sell they away . after this the broker say to the merchant , you have so much of every sort of merchandise neat and clear of every charge , and so much ready money . and if the merchant will employ his money in other commodity , than the broker tell he that such and such commodity will cost so much , put aboard without any manner of charge . the merchant understand the effect , make his account ; and if he think to buy or sell at the price currant , he give order to make his merchandise away : and if he have commodity for 20000 duket , all shall | be barter or sell away in fifteen day without any care or trouble : and when as the merchant think that he can sell his good at the prize currant , he may tarry as long as he will , but they can be sell by any man but by that broker that have take they on land and pay the custom : and perchance tarry sometime for sale of their commodity , they make good profit , and sometime loss : but those merchandise that come not ordinary every fifteen day , in tarry for the sale of they , there be great profit . the bark 376 steerage with * stem gallery Pilot ’ s or Maste windlass capstan that lade in Cambaietta go for diu to aid the ship that go from thence for the strait of Mecca and ormus , and some go to Chaul and goa : and these ship be very well appoint , or else be guard by the armada of the Portugal , for that there be many corsary or pirate great store of which go course alongst that coast , rob and spoil - of ^ arre mg : and for tear of these thief there be no fate tfie coast sail in those sea , but with ship very well appoint Cambaia . and arm , or else with the fleet of the Portugal , as be aforesaid . in fine , the kingdom of Cambaia be a place of great trade , and have much do and traffic with all man , although hitherto it have be in the hand of tyrant , because that at 75 year of age the true king be at the assault of diu , be there slay ; who name sultan Badu . at that time four or five captain of the army divide the kingdom among themselves , and every one of they show in his country what tyranny he can : but twelve year ago the great mogul a moor king of Agra and del , forty day journey within the land of Amadavar , become the governor of all the kingdom of Cambaia without any resistance , because he be of great power and force , devise which way to enter the land with his people , there be not any man that will make he any resistance , although they be tyrant and a beastly people , they be soon bring under obedience . during the time i dwell in a marvellous Cambaietta i see very marvellous thing : there be a infinite number of artificer that make bracelet call m women - mannii , or bracelet of elephant tooth , of diverse colour , for the woman of the gentile , which have their arm full deck with they . and in this occupation there be spend every year many thousand of crown : the reason whereof be this , that when there die any whatsoever of their kindred , then in sign and token of mourning and sorrow , they break all their bracelet from their arm , and present they go and buy new again , because that they have rather be without their meat then without their bracelet . 377 have pass diu , i come to the second city that the Portugal have , call Daman , situate in the territory of Cambaia , distant from diu and hundred and [ ii i . 218 . i twenty mile : it be no town of merchandise , save rice and corn , and have many village under it , where in time of peace the Portugal take their pleasure , but in time of war the enemy have the spoil of they ; in such wise that the Portugal have little benefit by they . next unto Daman you shall have Basan , which be a filthy place in respect of Daman : in this place be rice , corn , and timber to make ship and galley . and a small distance beyond Basan be a little hand call Tana a Tana , a place very populous with Portugal , moor , hand whereof an i Gentiles : these have nothing but rice , there be t > a many maker of Armesine , and weaver of girdle