make fast your boat to the banckeside , you must keep good watch against they the arabian arabian which be thief in number like to ant , yet thief be in when they come to rob , they will not kill , but steal ant and run away . harquebuss be very good weapon against they , for that they stand great in fear of the shot . and as you pass the river Euphrates from by | our to Feluchia , there be certain place which you must pass by , where you pay custom certain medines upon a bale , which custom be belong to the son of aborise king of the arabian and of the desert , who have certain city and village on the river Euphrates . feluchia and Babylon . the old Babylon have great trade no * merchant still . feluchia be a village where they that come from by | our do unbark themselves and unlade their good , and it be distant from Babylon a day journey and a half by land : Babylon be no great city , but it be very populous , and of great trade of stranger because it be a great thorowfare for Persia , Turkia , and Arabia : and very often time there go out from thence Carovans into diverse country : and the city be very copious of victual , which come out of Armenia down the river of Tigris , on certain zattare or Raffes make of blow hide or skin call Utrii . this river Tigris do 368 wash the wall of the city . Theise Raffes be bind fist together , and then they lie board on the aforesaid blow skin , and on the board they lade the commodity , and so come they to Babylon , where they unlade they , and be unlade , they let out the wind out of the skin , and lade they on camel to make another voyage . this city of Babylon be situate in the kingdom of Persia , but now govern by the turk . on the other side of the river towards Arabia , over against the city , there be a fair place or town , and in it a fair Bazarro for merchant , with very many lodging , where the great part of the merchant stranger which come to Babylon do lie with their merchandise . the pass over Tigris from Babylon to this borough be by a long bridge make of boat chain together with a bridge great chain : provide , that when the river wax ° fboats - great with the abundance of rain that fall , than they open the bridge in the middle , where the one half of the bridge fall to the wall of Babylon , and the other to the brink of this borough , on the other side of the river : and as long as the bridge be open , they pass the river in small boat with great danger , because of the smallness of the boat , and the overlade of they , that with the fierceness of the stream they be overthrow , or else the stream do carry they away , so that by this mean , many people be lose and drown : this thing by proof i have many time see . of the tower of Babylon . the tower of Nimrod or Babel be situate on that side of Tigris that Arabia be , and in a very great plain distant from Babylon seven or eight mile : which tower be ruinate on every side , and with the fall of it there be make a great mountain : so that it have no form at all , yet there be a great part of it stand , which be compass and almost cover with the aforesaid fall : this tower be build and make of five 369 2 a these brick foursquare brick , which brick be make of earth , be in thickness anj dry in the sun in manner and form follow : stx or seven grst iayetj a lay of brick , than a mat make of foot a half anes5 square as the brick , and in stead or lime , they square . daub it with earth : these mat of cane be at this time so strong , that it be a thing wonder to behold , be of such great antiquity : i have go round about it , and have not find any place where there have be any door or entrance : it may be in my judgement in circuit about a mile , and rather less than moor . this tower in effect be contrary to all other thing which be see afar off , for they seem small , and the more near a man come to they the big they be : but this tower afar off seem a very great thing , and the near you come to it the lesser . my judgement and [ ii i . 215 . ] reason of this be , that because the tower be set in a very great plain , and have nothing more about to make any show save the ruin of it which it have make round about , and for this respect descry it a far off , that piece of the tower which yet stand with the mountain that be make of the substance that have fall from it , make a great show than you shall find come near to it . Babylon and Basora . from Babylon i depart for Basora , ship my self in one of the bark that use to go in the river Tigris from Babylon to Basora , and from Basora to Babylon : which bark be make after the manner of fust or galliot with a speron and a cover poop : they have no pump in they because of the great abundance of pitch which they have to pitch they with all : which pitch they have in abundance two day journey from Babylon . Nere unto the river Euphrates , there be a city call Heit , near unto which city there be a great plain full of pitch , very marvellous to behold , and a thing almost incredible , that out of a hole in the earth , which continual throw out pitch into