innumerable ) be call Emyri , that be to say , lord . Theise all go clothe in green , or at the least have their turban green , to be know from the other . neither be it permit that any of those Christians which 351 dwell or traffic in their country go clothe in green , neither may they have any thing of green about they : for they say it be not lawful for misbeleevers - to wear that colour , wherein that great friend and prophet of God Mahomet be wont to be apparel . of the city of Mecca . the ci tie of Mecca in the arabian tongue be call Macca , that be to say , a habitation . this city be environ about with exceed high and barren mountains , and in the plain between the say mountain . and the city be many pleasant garden , where grow great abundance of fig , grape , apple , and melon . there be also great abundance of good water and flesh , but not of bread . this city have no wall about it , and contain in circuit five mile . the house be very handsome and commodious , and be build like to the house in Italy . the palace of the Serifo be sumptuous and gorgeous adorn . the woman of the place be courteous , jocund , and lovely , fair , with allure eye , be hot and libidinous , and the most of they naughty pack . the man of this place be give to that abominable , curse , and opprobrious vice , whereof both man and woman make but small account by reason of the pond zun zun , wherein have wash themselves , their opinion be , that although like the dog they return to their vomit , yet they be cleanse from all sin whatsoever , of which sin we will hereafter more large discourse . in the midst of the city be the great mosquita , [ ii i . 208 . ] with the house of Abraham stand in the very midst thereof , which mosquita be build in the time when their prophet live . it be four square , and so great , that it contain two mile in circuit , that be to say , half a mile each side . also it be make in manner of a cloister , for that in the midst thereof separate from the rest , be the abovesaid house of Abraham , also the gallery round about be in manner of 4 . street , and the partition which divide the one street from the other be pillar , whereof 352 some be of marble , and other of lime and stone . this famous and sumptuous mosquita have 99 gate , and 5 . steeple , from whence the Talismani call the people to the mosquita . and the pilgrim which be not provide of tent , resort hither , and for more devotion the man and woman lie together aloft and beneath , one upon another , so that their house of prayer become worse sometime than a den of thief . of the house of Abraham . the house of Abraham be also four square , and make of speckle stone , 20 . pace high , and 40 in circuit . and upon one side of this house within the wall , there be a stone of a span long , and half a span broad , which stone ( as they say ) before this house be build , fall down from heaven , at the fall whereof be hear a voice , that wheresoever this stone fall , there shall be build the house of God , wherein God will hear sinner . Moreover , they say that when this stone fall from heaven , it be not black as now , but as white as the white snow , and by reason it have be so oft kiss by sinner , it be therewith become black : for all the pilgrim be bind to kiss this stone , otherwise they carry their sin home with they again . the entrance into this house be very small , make in manner of a window , and as high from the ground as a man can reach , so that it be painful to enter . this house have without 31 . pillar of brass , set upon cubike or square stone be read and green , the which pillar sustain not aught else save a thread of copper , which reach from one to another , whereunto be fasten many burn lamp . Theise pillar of brass be cause to be make by sultan Soliman grandfather to sultan Amurath now emperor . after this , have enter with the difficulty abovesaid , there stand at the entrance two pillar of marble , to wit , on each side one . in the midst there be three of aloes - wood not very thick , and cover with tile of India of 1000 colour which serve to underprop the Terratza . it be five 353 z so dark , that they can hardly see within for want of light , not without a evil smell . without the gate five pase be the abovesaid pond zun zun , which be that bless pond that the angel of the lord show unto Agar while she go seek water for her son Ishmael to drink . of the ceremony of the pilgrim . in the beginning we have say how the mahometans have two feast in the year . the one they call Pascha di Ramazatco , that be to say , the feast of fast , and this feast of fast be hold thirty day after the feast , wherein the carovan travel to Mecca . the other be call the feast of the ram , wherein all they which be of ability be bind to sacrifice a ram , and this they call bane Bairam , that be to say , the great feast . and as the carovan depart from Cairo thirty day after the little feast , so likewise they come hither five or six day before the great feast , to the end the pilgrim may have time before the feast to finish their rite and ceremony , which be these . depart from the carovan , and be guide by such as be experience in the way , they go unto the city twenty or thirty in a company as they think good , walk through a