the carovan . the carovan have rest and be refresh as be abovesaid , the next day depart on the way , and the first place they arrive at worthy mention be call bedrihonem , in which place ( as be aforesaid ) grow those little shrub whereout balm issue . and before the carovan arrive at this place , a mile from the city be a large and great field environ about with most high and huge mountain . and in this field , accord to the Alcoran , their prophet Mahomet have a most fierce and cruel battle give by the Christians of the country and other people which set themselves against they , and withstand his opinion , so that he be overcome and vanquish of the christian , and almost half of his people slay in the battle . whereupon , the prophet see himself in such extremity , fall to his prayer , and they say , that God have compassion upon his dear friend and prophet , hear he , and send he infinite thousand of angel , wherewith return to the battle , they conquer and overcome the conqueror . and therefore in memory of this victory , the carovan lodge every year one night in this place , make great bonfire with great mirth . and they say that as yet there be hear upon the mountain a little drum , which while the carovan pass , never cease sound . and they say further , that the say drum be sound by the angel in sign of that great victory grant of God to their prophet . also the mahometan write affirm , that after the end of the say battle , the prophet commanded certain of his people to go and bury all the mahometans which be dead in the field , who go , know not the one from the other , because as yet they use not circumcision , so they return unto he , answer , that they have be to do his commandment , but they know not the musulmans from the 349 christian . to who the prophet answer , say : turn again , and all those which you shall find with their face downward , leave they , because all they be misbeliever ; and the other which you shall find with their face turn upward , they bury , for they be the true Musulmani , and so his commandment be do . the next morning by sun rise , the carovan arrive at bedrihonem , in which place every man wash himself from top to toe , as well man as woman , and leave off their apparel , have each one a cloth about their privity , call in their tongue Photah , and another white one upon their shoulder , all which can go to Mecca in this habit , do so , and be think to merit more than the other , but they which can do so make a vow to sacrifice a ram at the mountain of pardon : and after they be wash , it be not lawful for any man or woman to kill either flea or louse with their hand , neither yet to take they with their nail , until they have accomplish their vow oration in the mountain of pardon abovesaid : and therefore they carry with they certain stick make of purpose in manner of a file , call in their language Area , Cassah Guch , with which they grate their shoulder . and so the carovan march , come within two mile of Mecca where they rest that night . in the morning at the break of day , with all pomp possible they set forward towards Mecca , and draw near thereunto , the Seripho issue forth of the city with his guard , accompany with a infinite number of people , shout , and make great triumph . And be come out of the city a boweshoote into a fair field , where a great multitude of tent be pitch , and in the midst the pavilion of the captain , who meet with the Serifo , after salutation on each side , they light from their horse and enter into the pavilion , where the king of Mecca deprive himself of all authority and power , and commit the same to the abovenamed captain , give he full licence and authority to command , govern , and minister justice 350 during his abode in Mecca with his company , and on the other side the captain to requite this liberality use towards he by the Serifo give he a garment of cloth of gold of great value , with certain jewel and other like thing . Arter this , sit down together upon carpet and hide they eat together , and rise from thence with certain of the chief , and take with they the garment and gate abovesaid , they go direct to the mosquita , attend on but with a few , and be enter , they cause the old to be pull down , and put the new coverture upon the house of Abraham , and the old vesture be the eunuch which serve in the say mosquita , who after sell it unto the pilgrim at four or five serafine the pike : and happy do that man think himself , which can get never so little a piece thereof , to conserve ever after as a most holy relic : and they say , that put the same under the head of a man at the hour of his death , through virtue thereof all his sin be forgive . also they take away the old door , set in the place the new door , and the old by custom they give unto the Serifo . after have make their prayer with certain ordinary and wont ceremony , the Serifo remain in the city , and the captain of the pilgrimage return unto his pavilion . of the Serifo the king of Mecca . the Serifo be descend of the prophet Mahomet by Fatma daughter of that good prophet , and Alli husband to she , and son in law to Mahumet , who have no issue male , save this stock of the Serifo , to the elder son whereof the realm come by succession . this realm have of revenue royal , every year half a million of gold , or little more : and all such as be of the prophet kindred , or descend of that blood ( which be almost