i eight hundred ducat , and there i be constrain to sell a small quantity of ruby to sustain my need : and i sell that for five hundred ducat , that be worth a thousand . and when i begin to wax well of my disease , i have but little of that money leave , every thing be so scarce : for every chicken ( and yet not good ) cost i seven or eight liver , which be six shilling , or six shilling eight penny . beside this great charge , the apothecary with their medicine be no small charge to i . at the end of six month they raise the siege , and then i begin to work , for jewel be rise in their price : for , whereas before i sell a few of refuse ruby , i determine then to sell the rest of all my jewel that i have there , and to make a other voyage to Pegu . and for because that at my departure from Pegu , opium be in great request , i go then to cambaya to employ a good round sum of money in opium , and there i buy 60 . parcel of opium , which cost i two thousand and a hundred ducat , every ducat at four shilling two penny . Moreover i buy three bale of bombast cloth , which cost i eight hundred ducat , which be a good commodity for Pegu : when i have buy these thing , the viceroy command that the custom of the opium shall be pay in goa , and pay custom there i may carry it whither i will . i ship my 3 . bale of cloth at Chaul in a ship that go for Cochin , and i go to goa to pay the aforesaid custom for my opium , and from goa i depart to Cochin in a ship that be for the voyage of Pegu , and go to winter then at saint Tome . when i come to Cochin , i understand that the ship that have my three bale of cloth be cast away and lose , so that i lose my 800 . Serafins or ducat : and depart from Cochin to go for saint Tome , in cast about for 440 the island of Zeilan the pilot be deceive , for that the cape of the island of Zeilan lie far out into the sea , and the pilot think that he may have pass hard aboard the cape , and pay roomer in the night ; when it be morning we be far within the cape , and past all remedy to go out , by reason the wind blow so fierce against we . so that by this mean we lose our voyage for that year , and we go to Manar with the ship to winter there , the ship have lose her mast , and with great diligence we hardly save she , with great loss to the captain of the ship , because he be force to fraught another ship in saint Tome for Pegu with great loss and interest , and i with my friend agree together in Manar to take a bark to carry we to saint Tome ; which thing we do with all the rest of the merchant ; and arrive at saint Tome i have news through or by the way of Bengala , that in Pegu opium be very dear , and i know that in saint Tome there be no opium but i to go for pegu that year , so that i be hold of all the merchant there to be very rich : and so it will have prove , if my adverse fortune have not be contrary to my hope , which be this . at that time there go a great ship from Cambaya , to the king of Assi , with great quantity of opium , and there to lade peper : in which voyage there come such a storm , that the ship be force with wether to go roomer 800 . mile , and [ ii i . 242 . ] by this mean come to Pegu , whereas they arrive a day before i ; so that opium which be before very dear , be now at a base price : so that which be sell for fifty bizze before , be sell for 2 . bizze and a half , there be such quantity come in that ship ; so that i be glad to stay two year in Pegu unless i will have give away my commodity : and at the end of two year of my 2100 . ducat which i bestow in Cambaya , i make but a thousand ducat . than i depart again from Pegu to go for the Indies and for ormus with great quantity of Lacca , and from ormus i return into the Indies for Chaul , and from Chaul to Cochin , 441 clove . nutmeg and mace . white Sandal . Canfora . and from Cochin to Pegu . once more i lose occasion to make i rich , for whereas i may have bring good store of opium again , i bring but a little , be fearful of my other voyage before . in this small quantity i make good profit . and now again i determine to go for my country , and depart from Pegu , i tarry and winter in Cochin , and then i leave the Indies and come for ormus . i think it very necessary before i end my voyage , to reason somewhat , and to show what fruit the Indies do yield and bring forth . first , in the Indies and other east part of India there be pepper and ginger , which grow in all part of India . and in some part of the Indies , the great quantity of peper grow among wild bush , without any manner of labour : save , that when it be ripe they go and gather it . the tree that the peper grow on be like to our ivy , which run up to the top of tree wheresoever it grow : and if it shall not take hold of some tree , it will lie flat and rot on the ground . this peper tree