before sunrising they be arrive half way , where there be certain habitation well furnish , and good inn to lodge in , but especial woman enough which voluntary bestow their alm upon the poor pilgrim : likewise depart the next evening , the morning after , they come unto Grida . this city be found upon the red sea bank , environ with wall and tower to the landward , but through continuance of time almost consume and waste : on the side to seaward it stand unwalled . Grida have three gate , one on each side , and the third in the midst toward the land , which be call , the port of Mecca , near unto which be 6 . or 7 . Turks upon [ ii i . 211 . ] the old tower for guard thereof with four falcon upon one of the corner of the city to the landward . also to seaward where the wall join with the water , there be late make a fort like unto a bulwark , where they have plant 25 piece of the best ordinance that may be have , which be very well keep and guard . more outward towards the sea upon the far old tower be other five good piece with 30 man to guard they . on the other side of the city at the end of the wall there be late build a bulwark strong and well guard by a sanjaccho with 150 turk well provide with ordinance and all other necessary and munition , and all these fortifying be for none other cause then the Portugal ! for fear and suspicion of the Portugal . and if the port be g °° d all this be in vain : but the port cansea . not be worse nor more dangerous , be all full of rock and sand , in such wise , that the ship can come near , but perforce ride at the least two mile off . at forty or fifty this port arrive every year forty or fifty great ship rich ship lade with spice and other rich merchandise which yield at grida . in custom 150000 ducat , the half whereof go unto the grand signior , and the other half to the Serifo . and because there be none other thing worthy mention in Grida we will return to our carovan which have almost rest enough . 360 the carovan depart for Medina return the same way they come unto bedrihonem abovesaid , where they leave their ordinance and other carriage , whereof they have no need , with the pilgrim which have see Medina aforetime , and desire not to see it again , but stay in that place , expect the carovan , and rest until the carovan go from bedrihonem to Medina , where they always find goodly habitation , with abundance of sweet water , and date enough , and be within fbureteene mile of Medina they come unto a great plain call by they Jabel el salema , that be to say , the mountain of health , from which they begin to descry the city and tomb of Mahomet , at which sight they light from their horse in token of reverence . And be ascend up the say mountain with shout which pierce the sky they say , Sala tuua salema alaccha Jarah sul Allah . Sala tuua Salema alaccha Janabi Allah , Sala tuua Salema allaccha jahabit Allah : which word in the arabian tongue signify : prayer and health be unto thou , oh prophet of God : prayer and health be upon thou , oh belove of God . and have pronounce this salutation , they proceed • on their journey , so that they lodge that night within three mile of Medina : and the next morning the • captaine of the pilgrimage arise , and proceed towards the city , and draw near , there come the governor under the Serifo , accompany with his people to receive the carovan , have pitch their tent in the midst of a goodly field where they lodge . of Medina . MEdina be a little city of great antiquity , contain in circuit not above two mile , have therein but one castle , which be old and weak , guard by a aga with fifty piece of artillery , but not very good . the house thereof be fair and well situate , build of lime and stone , and in the midst of the city stand a foure - 361 square mosquita , not so great as that of Mecca , but more goodly , rich , and sumptuous in building . within the same in a corner thereof be a tomb build upon four pillar with a vault , as if it be under a pavement , which bind all the four pillar together . the tomb be so high , that it far exceed in height the mosquita , be cover with lead , and the top all enamele with gold , with a half moon upon the top : and within the pavement it be all very artificial wrought with gold . below there , be round about very great stair of iron ascend up until the midst of the pillar , and in the very midst thereof be bury the body of Mahomet , and not in a chest of iron cleave to the adamant , as many affirm that know not the truth thereof . Moreover , over the body they have build a tomb of speckle stone | | or , a a two brace and a half high , and over the same another of fathom . legmame foursquare in manner of a pyramid . after this , round about the sepulture there hang a curtain of silk , which let the sight of those without , that they can see the sepulture . beyond this in the same mosquita be other two sepulchre cover with green cloth , and in the one of they be bury Fatma the daughter of Mahomet , and Alli be bury in the other , who be the husband of the say Fatma . the attendant upon these sepulchre be fifty eunuch white and tawny , neither be it grant to any of they to enter within the tomb , save to three white eunuch the old and best of credit ; unto who it be lawful to enter but twice in the day , to light the lamp , and to do other service . all the other eunuch attend without to the