it will cost a thousand or two thousand ducat . also from s . tome they lay great store of red yarn , of bombast die with a root which they call 427 note the departure of the ship from saint Tome to Pegu . commodity bring into Pegu . the chikinos be piece of gold worth sterling 7 . shilling . Saia , as aforesaid , which colour will never out . with which merchandise every year there go a great ship from saint Tome to Pegu , of great importance , and they usual depart from saint Tome to Pegu the 11 . or 12 . of September , and if she stay until the twelve , it be a great hap if she return not without make of her voyage . their use be to depart the sixth of September , and then they make sure voyage , and now because there be a great labour about that kind of cloth to bring it to perfection , and that it be well dry , as also the greediness of the captain that will make a extraordinary gain of his fraught , think to have the wind always to serve their turn , they stay so long , that at sometime the wind turn . for in those part the wind blow firm for certain time , with the which they go to Pegu with the wind in poop , and if they arrive not there before the wind change , and get ground to anchor , perforce they must return back again : for that the gale of the wind blow there for three or four month together in one place with great force . but if they get the coast and anchor there , then with great labour they may save their voyage . also there go another great ship from Bengala every year , lade with fine cloth of bombast of all sort , which arrive in the harbour of Pegu , when the ship that come from saint Tome depart . the harbour where these two ship arrive be call cosmin . from Malaca to Martavan , which be a port in Pegu , there come many small ship , and great , lade with pepper , Sandolo , porcellan of China , Camfora , Bruneo and other merchandise . the ship that come from Mecca enter into the port of Pegu and Cirion , and those ship bring cloth of wool , scarlet , velvet , opium , and Chickinos , by the which they lose , and they bring they because they have no other thing that be good for Pegu : but they esteem not the loss of they , for that they make such great gain of their commodity that they carry from thence out of that kingdom . also the king of Assi his ship come thither 428 into the same port lade with peper ; from the coast of saint tome of Bengala out of the sea of Bara to Pegu be three hundred mile , and they go it up the river in four day , with the increase water , or with the flood , to a city call Cosmin , and there they discharge their ship , whither the customer of Pegu come to take the note and mark of all the good of every man , and take the charge of the good on they , and convey they to Pegu , into the king house , wherein they make the custom of the merchandise . when the customer have take the charge of the good and put they into bark , the retor of the city give licence to the merchant to take bark , and go up to Pegu with their merchandise ; and so three or four of they take a bark and go up to Pegu in company . God deliver every man that he give great rigour not a wrong note , and entry , or think to steal any firthesteahng custom : for if they do , for the least trifle that be , he be w10 ™ * - utter undo , for the king do take it for a most great affront to be deceive of his custom ; and therefore they make diligent search , three time at the lade and unlade of the good , and at the take of they a land . in Pegu this search they make when they go out of the ship for diamond , pearl , and fine cloth which take little room : for because that all the jewel that come into Pegu , and be not find of that country , pay custom , but ruby , safyre and spinel pay no custom in nor out : because they be find grow in that country . i have speak before , how that all merchant that mean to go through the Indies , must carry all manner of household stuff with they which be necessary for a house , because that there be not any lodging nor inn nor host , nor chamber room in that country , but the first thing a man do when he come to any city be to hire a house , either by the year or by the month , or as he mean to stay in those part . in Pegu their order be to hire their house for six month . now from cosmin to the city of Pegu 429 they go in six hour with the flood , and if it be ebb water , than they make fast their boat to the river side , and there tarry until the water flow again . description of it be a very commodious and pleasant voyage , have on the fruitful - side of the river many great village , which they call city : in the which hen , pigeon , egg , milk , rice , and other thing be very good cheap . it be all plain , and a goodly country , and in eight day you may make your voyage up to Macceo , distant from Pegu twelve mile , and there they discharge their good , and lade they in cart or wain draw with ox , and the merchant be carry in a closet which they call deal be a deal , in the which a man shall be very well accommo - smallrt date