they have by the great privilege which the citizen have of that city , because there be two principal commodity that they deal withal in that great privi - place , which be these . the great store of silk that come from China , and the great store of sugar have which come from Bengala : the marry citizen pay not any custom for these two commodity : for all other commodity they pay 4 . per cento custom to the king of Cochin , rate their good at their own pleasure . those which be not marry and stranger , pay in Cochin to the king of Portugal eight per cento of all manner of merchandise . i be in Cochin when the viceroy of the king of Portugal wrought what he can to break the privilege of the citizen , and to make they to pay custom as other do : at which time the citizen be glad to weigh their pepper in the night that they jade the ship withal that go to Portugal and steal the custom in the night . the king of Cochin have understanding of this , will not suffer any more pepper to be weigh . then present after this , the merchant be license to do as they do before , and there be no more speech of this matter , nor any wrong do . this king of Cochin [ ii i . 224 . . ] be of a small power in respect of the other king of 393 a very strange thing hardly to be believe . the Indies , for he can make but seventie thousand man of arm in his camp : he have a great number of gentleman which he call Amochi , and some be call nairi : these two sort of man esteem not their life any thing , so that it may be for the honour of their king , they will thrust themselves forward in every danger , although they know they shall die . Theise man go naked from the girdle upwards , with a cloth roll about their thigh , go barefooted , and have their hair very long and roll up together on the top of their head , and always they carry their buckler or target with they and their sword naked , these nairi have their wife common among themselves , and when any of they go into the house of any of these woman , he leave his sword and target at the door , and the time that he be there , there dare not any be so hardy as to come into that house . the king child ’ shall not inherit the kingdom after their father , because they hold this opinion , that perchance they be not beget of the king their father , but of some other man , therefore they accept for their king , one of the son of the king sister , or of some other woman of the blood royal , for that they be sure they be of the blood royal . the nairi and their wife use for a bravery to make great hole in their ear , and so big and wide , that it be incredible , hold this opinion , that the great the hole be , the more noble they esteem themselves . i have leave of one of they to measure the circumference of one of they with a thread , and within that circumference i put my arm up to the shoulder , clothe as it be , so that in effect they be monstrous great . thus they do make they when they be little , for than they open the ear , and hang a piece of gold or lead thereat , and within the open , in the hole they put a certain leaf that they have for that purpose , which make the hole so great . they lade ship in Cochin for Portugal and for ormus , but they that go for 394 1563 - 81 - ormus carry no pepper but by Contrabanda , as for sinamome they easy get leave to carry that away , for all other spice and drug they may liberal carry they to ormus or Cambaia , and so all other merchandise which come from other place , but out of the kingdom of Cochin proper they carry away with they into Portugal great abundance of pepper , great quantity of ginger dry and conserve , wild cinnamon , good quantity of Arecca , great store of cordage of Cairo , make of the bark of the tree of the great nut , and better than that of hemp , of which they carry great store into Portugal . the ship every year depart from Cochin to go note the de - for Portugal , on the five day of December , or the five day of January . now to follow my voyage for the Indies : from Cochin i go to Coulam , distant from Cochin seventie and two mile , which Coulam be a small fort of the king of Portugal , situate in the kingdom of Coulam , which be a king of the gentile , and of small trade : at that place they lade only half a ship of pepper , and then she go to Cochin to take in the rest , and from thence to Cao Comori be seventie and two mile , and there end the coast of the Indies : and alongst this coast , near to the water side , and also to Cao Comori , down to the low land of Chialo , which be about two hundred mile , the people there be as it be all turn to the christian faith : there be also church of the friar of saint Paul order , which friar do very much good in those place in turn the people , and in convert they , and take great pain in instruct they in the law of Christ . the fish for pearl . the sea that lie between the coast which de - the order how scend from Cao Comori , to the low land of t ^ yfithfir Chilao , and the hand Zeilan , they call the fish of fearles - pearle , which fish they make every year , begin in march or April ,