the people and camel which follow the carovan . behind these , less than a mile , follow the rearward , whereof the great part be pilgrim : the occasion whereof be , for that the merchant seek always to be in the foreward for the security of their good , but the pilgrim which have little to loose care not though they come behind . behind these always go five and twenty other Spachi well arm with another Chaus their captain , and forty arabian all archer for guard of the rearward . and because the carovan go always along the red sea bank , which in go forth they have on their right hand , therefore the two hundred janissary part into three company go upon their left hand well arm and mount upon camel bind one to another , for upon that side be all the danger of thief , and on the other no danger at all , the captain of the carovan always go about his people , sometime on the one side , and sometime on the other , never keep any firm place , be continual accompany with a Chaus and 25 . Spachi , arm and mount upon dromedary , and 8 . musician with viole in their hand , which cease not sound till the captain take his rest , upon who they attend , till such time as he enter his pavilion , and then licens all his attendant and follower to depart , they go each man to their lodging . 346 of thing notable which be see in this voyage by the way . because in the way there be not many thing find worthy memory , for that the carovan seidome rest in place of habitation , of which in the way there be but few , yea rather the carovan rest altogether in the field : therefore in this our voyage we will only make mention of certain castle find in the way , which be these , namely , agerut , Nachel , Aeba , biritem , Muel , and Ezlem . of which five , the two first be keep of Moores , and the other three of Turk , and for guard they have eight man or ten at the most in every castle , with four or five Smerigli , which serve to keep the water from the arabian , so that the carovan come thither , may have wherewithal ! to refresh it self . Agerut be distant from Suez a port of the red sea eight mile , where be always resident five and twenty galley of the grand signior for the keep of that sea Nachel be distant from the sea a day journey . the wall of Aeba be found upon the red sea bank . biritem and Muel likewise be dash by the wave of the sea Ezlem be distant from thence above a day journey . Theise five castle abovesaid be not of force altogether to defend themselves against a hundred man . the carovan depart from Birca until Agerut find no water by the way to drink , neither from Agerut till Nachel , nor from nachel till Aeba , but between Aeba and biritem be find two water , one call Agium el Cassap , and the other Magaraxiaibi , that be to say , the river of Jethro the father in law of Moses , for this be the place mention in the second chapter of exodus , whither it be say that Moses flee from the anger of Pharaoh , who will have kill he , because he have slay the egyptian , [ ii i . 206 . ] which fight with the hebrew , in which place stand the city of midian ; and there be yet the pond , near unto the which Moses sit down . and from that place forward they find more store of water by the way , and 347 in more place , though not so good . it be also to be note , that in this voyage it be needful and a usual thing , that the captain put his hand to his purse , in these place , and bestow present , garment , and turban upon certain of the chief of the arabian , to the end they may give he and his carovan free passage : who also promise , that their follower likewise shall do no damage to the carovan , and bind themselves to accomplish the same , promise also by word of mouth , that if the carovan be rob , they will make restitution of such thing as be steal : but notwithstanding the carovan be by they oftentimes damnify , and those which be rob have no other restitution at the arabian hand then the show of they a pair of heal , fly into such place as it be impossible to find they . now the carovan continue her accustom journey , and have pass the abovesaid castle , and other not worthy mention , at length come to a place call Jehbir , which be the beginning and confine of the state and realm of Serifo the king of Mecca : where , at their approach issue out to meet they the governor of the land , with all his people to receive the carovan , with such shout and triumph , as be impossible to express , where they stay one whole day . this place abound with fresh and clear water , which with stream fall down from the high mountain . Moreover , in this place be great store of date , and flesh great store and good cheap , and especial lace mutton which willing fall down , and here the weary pilgrim have commodity to refresh themselves , say , that this wicked fact purge they from a multitude of sin , and beside increase devotion to prosecute the voyage . touch the build in these place , it be to be judge by the house half ruinate , that it have be a magnificent city : but because it be in time past inhabit more with thief then true man , it be therefore altogether destroy by sultan Gauri king of / Egypt , who go on pilgrimage unto Mecca , and pass by this place , there 348 be by the inhabitant hereof some injury do unto his carovan , which he understand of , dissemble till his return from Mecca , and then cause it to be burn and destroy in pitiful sort for revenge of the injury do unto