because that with the Ganza they may buy and sei every thing with great advantage . and how needful be it to be advertise , when they will recover their payment , in what order they shall receive their Ganza ? because he that be not experience may do himself great wrong in the weight of the Gansa , as also in the falseness of they : in the weight he may be great deceive , because that from place to place it do rise and fall great : and therefore when any will receive money or make payment , he must take a public 432 wayer of money , a day or two before he go about his business , and give he in payment for his labour two byzaes a month , and for this he be bind to make good all your money , and to maintain it for good , for that he receive it and seal the bag with his seal : and when he have receive any store , than he cause it to be bring into the Magason of the merchant , that be the owner of it . that money be very weighty , for fourty Byza be a strong porter burden ; and also where the merchant have any payment to be make for those good which he buy , the common wayer of money that receive his money must make the payment thereof . so that by this mean , the merchant with the charge of two byze a month , receive and pay out his money without loss or trouble . the merchandize that go out of Pegu be gold , silver , ruby , saphire , spinely , great store of Benjamin , long peper , lead , Lacca , rice , wine , some sugar , yet there may be great store of sugar make in the country , for that they have abundance of cane , but they give they to eliphants to eat , and the people consume great store of they for food , and many more do they consume in vain thing , as these follow . in that kingdom they spend many of these sugar cane in make of house and tent which they call vare for their idol , which they call Pagodes , whereof there be great abundance , great and small , and these house be make in form of little hill , like to sugar loaf or to bell , and some of these house be as high as a reasonable steeple , at the foot they be very large , some of they be in circuit a quarter of a mile . the say house within be full of earth , and wall round about with brick and dirt in stead of lime , and without form , from the top to the foot they make a cover for they with sugar cane , and plaster it with lime all over , for otherwise they will be spoil , by the great abundance of rain that fall in those country . also they consume about these varely or idol house five 433 2 e A . D . i563 - 81 . [ ii i . 239 . ] the merchandize that go out of Pegu . i563 - 81 . idol house cover with gold . ruby exceed cheap in pfgu - great store of leaf - gold , for that they overlay all the top of the house with gold , and some of they be cover with gold from the top to the foot : in cover whereof there be great store of gold spend , for that every 10 . year they new overlay they with gold , from the top to the foot , so that with this vanity they spend great abundance of gold . for every 10 . year the rain do consume the gold from these house . and by this mean they make gold dear in pegu then it will be , if they consume not so much in this vanity . also it be a thing to be note in the buy of jewel in Pegu , that he that have no knowledge shall have as good jewel , and as good cheap , as he that have be practise there a long time , which be a good order , and it be in this wise . there be in Pegu four man of good reputation , which be call tareghe , or broker of jewel . Theise four man have all the jewel or ruby in their hand , and the merchant that will buy come to one of these tareghe and tell he , that he have so much money to employ in ruby . for through the hand of these four man pass all the ruby : for they have such quantity , that they know not what to do with they , but sell they at most vile and base price . when the merchant have break his mind to one of these broker or tareghe , they carry he home to one of their shop , although he have no knowledge in jewel : and when the jeweller perceive that he will employ a good round sum , they will make a bargain , and if not , they let he alone . the use general of this city be this ; that when any merchant have buy any great quantity of ruby , and have agree for they , he carry they home to his house , let they be of what value they will , he shall have space to look on they and peruse they two or three day : and if he have no knowledge in they , he shall always have many merchant in that city that have very good knowledge in jewel ; with who he may always confer and take counsel , and may show 434 they unto who he will ; and if he find that he have not employ his money well , he may return his jewel back to they who he have they off , without any loss at all . which thing be such a shame to the tareghe to have his jewel return , that he have rather bear a blow on the face then that it shall be think that he sell they so dear to have they return . for