on the other side towards Syria 13 mile from Alexandria stand a little castle Bichier . call Bichier keep by fifty Turk , which castle be very old and weak , and have a port which in time past be good , but at this present be utter decay and full of sand , so that the vessel which come thither dare not come near the shore , but ride far off into the sea . Rosetto . forty mile further be Rossetto , which be a iide town without wall , and be situate upon the bank of Nilus three mile from the sea , at which place many time they build ship and other vessel , for government whereof [ ii i . 200 . ] be appoint a sanjacbey , without any other guard : it be a place of traffic , and the inhabitant be very rich , but naughty varlet and traitor . further down along the seaside and the river bank be another iide case like unto the abovesaid , and because the moor believe , that Mecca will in short time be conquer by the christian , they hold opinion , that the same be lose shall be renew in this place of Rossetto , namely , 332 that all their prayer , vow , and pilgrimage shall be transport to Rossetto , as the religious order of saint John of the Rhodes be translate thence to Malta . further forward thirty mile stand another castle of small importance call brulle , keep continual by fourty Turk , which have a good and secure port , in form like to a very great lake or pond , wherein be take great quantity of fish , which they salt , and the merchant of Candie and Cyprus come thither to lade the same , and it be great esteem , especial of the candiot , who have great abundance of wine adventure abroad to seek meat fit for the taste of the say wine . distant from brulle five and thirty mile there be another castle like unto the abovesaid keep by a aga with fourty man or thereabouts . moor within the land by the river side be Damiata a ancient city environ with wall contain five mile in circuit , and but of small strength . for the government of this place be a Sanjaco with all his household and no other company . this city be very large , delightful , and pleasant , abound with garden and fair fountain . other forty mile further be Latma , a castle of very small importance , and keep as other with forty Turk under a aga . in this place be no port , but a road very dangerous , and without other habitation . pass this place we enter Judea . but because our intent be to reason simple of the voyage to Mecca , we will proceed no further this way , but return to our first way , let it suffice to say , that from Alexandria to Cairo be two hundred mile , in which way i find nothing worthy of memory . of the mighty city of Cairo . CAiro contain in circuit eighteen mile , be so inhabit and replenish with people , that almost it can receive more ; and therefore they have begin to build new house without the city and about the wall . in Cairo be people of all nation , as Christians , Armenians , abexin , Turk , moor , Jew , Indians , 333 median , persian , arabian , and other sort of people , which resort thither by reason of the great traffic . this city be govern by a bassa , which minister justice , together with the Cadie throughout the whole kingdom . also there be two and twenty sanjacke , who office be only to oversee and guard the kingdom for every good respect . there be also seven thousand Turk in pay , to wit , three thousand janissary , and four thousand horseman : the rest of the people in Cairo be for the most part merchant which go and come , and the remnant be moor and other base people . about two mile from Cairo there be another little Cairo call the old Cairo , which contain in circuit little more than ten mile , and the better half be not inhabit , but destroy , whereof i need not make any other mention . the new Cairo answer every year in tribute to the grand signior , 600000 ducat of gold , neat and free of all charge grow on the same , which money be send to Constantinople , about the fine of September , by the way of Aleppo , always by land , under the custody of three hundred horseman and two hundred janissary footman . the city of Cairo be adorn with many fair mesquitas rich , great , and of goodly and gorgeous build , among which be five principali . the first be call Morastano , that be to say , the hospitali , which have off rend five hundred ducat of gold every day leave unto it by a king of Damascus from ancient time ; which king have conquer Cairo , for the space of five day continual put the people thereof to the sword , and in the end repent he of so great manslaughter , cause this cruelty to cease , and , to obtain remission for his sin commit , cause this hospitali to be build , enrich it as be abovesaid . the second famous monument of Cairo be call Neffisa , of one Neffisa bury there , who be a dame of honour , and move by lust , yield her body voluntary without reward , to any that require the same , and say she bestow this alm for the love of her prophet Maho - 334 meet , and therefore at this day they adore she , reverence she , and final have canonize she for a saint , affirm that she do many miracle . the three be call Zavia della Innachari , who be one of the four doctor in the law . the four be call Imamsciafii , where be bury Sciafii the second doctor of this law . of the other two doctor one be bury in Damascus , the other in Aleppo . the five and last famous monument be Giamalazar , that be , the house of Lazarus : and this be the generail university of the whole kingdom of Egypt . in this place