, with cushion under his head , and cover for the defence of the sun and rain , and there he may aforesaid . sleep if he have will thereunto : and his four Falchines carry he run away , change two at one time and two at another . the custom of Pegu and fraught thither , may amount unto twenty or twenty two per cento , and 23 . according as he have more or less steal from he that day they custom the good . it be requisite that a man have his eye watchful , and to be [ ii i . 238 . ] careful , and to have many friend , for when they custom in the great hall of the king , there come many gentleman accompany with a number of their slave , and these gentleman have no shame that their slave rob stranger : whether it be cloth in show of it or any other thing , they laugh at it . and although the merchant help one another to keep watch , and look to their good , they can look thereto so narrow but one or other will rob something , either more or less , accord as their merchandise be more or less : and yet on this day there be a worse thing than this : although you have set so many eye to look there for your benefit , that you escape unrob of the slave , a man can choose but that he must be rob of the officer of the custom house . for pay the custom with the same good oftentimes they take the best that 43 ° 1563 - 81 . you have , and not by rate of every sort as they ought to do , by which mean a man pay more than his duty . at length when the good be dispatch out of the custom house in this order , the merchant cause they to be carry to his house , and may do with they at his pleasure . there be in Pegu 8 . broker of the king , which be call tareghe , who be bind to sell all the merchandise which come to Pegu , at the common or the currant price : then if the merchant will sell their good at that price , they sei they away , and the broker have two in the hundred of every sort of merchandise , and they be bind to make good the debt of those good , because they be sell by their hand or mean , and on their word , and oftentimes the merchant know not to who he give his good , yet he can lose any thing thereby , for that the broker be bind in any wise to pay he , and if the merchant sei his good without the consent of the broker , yet nevertheless he must pay he two per cento , and be in danger of his money : but this be very seldom see , because the wife , child , and slave of the debtor be bind to the creditor , and when his time be expire and payment not make , the creditor may take the debtor and carry he home to his house , and shut he up in a magasin , whereby present he have his money , and not be able to pay the creditor , he may take the wife , child , and slave of law fir the debtor , and sei they , for so be the law of that king - bankrupt . dome . the currant money that be in this city , and throughout all this kingdom be call Gansa or Ganza , which be make of copper and lead : it be not the money every man of the king , but every man may stamp it that will , because may stamp it have his just partition or value : but they make many tmoneyhe of they false , by put overmuch lead into they , and those will not pass , neither will any take they . with this money Ganza , you may buy gold or silver , ruby and musk , and other thing . for there be no other money currant among they . and gold , silver and 431 other merchandise be at one time dear than another , as all other thing be . this Ganza go by weight of byze , and this name of Byza go for you account of the weight , and common a Byza of a Ganza be worth ( after our account ) half a ducat , little more or less : and albeit that gold and silver be more or less in price , yet the Byza never change : every Byza make a hundred Ganza of weight , and so the number of the money be Byza . he that go to Pegu to buy jewel , if he will do well , it behoove he to be a whole year there to do his busi - how a man ness . for if so be that he will return with the ship may dispose come jn he can Jo any thing so convenient for the trade in the brevity or the time , because that when they custom Pegu . their good in Pegu that come from saint Tome in their ship , it be as it be about Christmas : and when they have custom their good , then must they sell they for their credit sake for a month or two : and then at the begin of march the ship depart . the merchant that come from saint Tome take for the payment of their good , gold , and silver , which be never want good instrue - there . and 8 . or 10 . day before their departure they t * ™ 1 ' be all satisfy : also they may have ruby in payment , but they make no account of they : and they that will winter there for another year , it be needful that they be advertise , that in the sale of their good , they specific in their bargain , the term of two or 3 . month payment , and that their payment shall | be in so many Ganza , and neither gold nor silver :