the other when i come unto a river where be a little bridge to pass over , i put my bullock to swim , and in the midst of the river there be a little hand , unto the which my bullock go , and find pasture , there he remain still , and in no wise we can come to he : and so perforce , i be force to leave he , and at that time there be much rain , and i be [ ii i . 222 . ] force to go seven day a foot with great pain : and by great chance i meet with Falchines by the way , who i hire to carry my clothes and victual . we have great trouble in our journey , for that every day we be take prisoner , by reason of the great dissension in that kingdom : and every morning at our departure we must pay reseat four or five page a man . and another trouble we have as bad as this , that when as we come into a new governor country , as every day we do , although they be all tributary to the king of bezeneger , yet every one of they stamp a several coin of copper , so that the money that we take this day will not serve the next : at length , by the help of God , we come 388 safe to Ancola , which be a country of the queen of Gargopam , tributary to the king of bezeneger . the themarchan - marchandise that go every year from goa to bezeneger be arabian horse , velvet , damask , and satin , bezeneger Armesine of Portugal , and piece of China , saffron , and every year . scarlet : and from bezeneger they have in Turkey for their commodity , jewel , and pagody which be ducat of gold : the apparel that they use in bezeneger be the velvet , satin , damask , scarlet , or white bombast cloth , accord to the estate of the person with long hat on their head , call Colae , make of velvet , satin , damask , or scarlet , gird themselves in stead of girdle with some fine white bombast cloth : they have breech after the order of the turk : they wear on their foot plain high thing call of they Aspergh , and at their ear they have hanging great plenty of gold . return to my voyage , when we be together in Ancola , one of my companion that have nothing to lose , take a guide , and go to goa , whither they go in four day , the other Portugal . not be dispose to go , tarry in Ancola for that winter . the winter in their wint ^ r those part of the Indies begin the fifteen of May , u on summer - and last unto the end of October : and as we be in Ancola , there come another merchant of horse in a palanchine , and two Portugal soldier which come from Zeilan , and two carrier of letter , which be christian bear in the Indies ; all these consort to go to goa together , and i determine to go with they , and cause a pallanchine to be make for i very poor of cane ; and in one of they cane i hide privy all the jewel i have , and accord to the order , i take eight Falchines to carry i : and one day about eleven of the clock we set forward on our journey , and about two of the clock in the afternoon , as we pass a mountain which divide the territory of Ancola and Dialcan , i be a little behind my company , be assault by eight thief , four of they have sword and target , and the other four have bow and arrow . 389 four small fort of the Portugal . when the Falchines that carry i understand the noise of the assault , they let the pallanchine and i fall to the ground , and run away and leave i alone , with my clothes wrap about i : present the thief be on my neck and rifle i , they strip i stark naked , and i feign my self sick , because i will not leave the pallanchine , and i have make i a little bed of my clothes ; the thief seek it very narrow and subtle , and find two purse that i have , well bind up together , wherein i have put my copper money which i have change for four pagody in Ancola . the thief think it have be so many ducat of gold , search no further : than they throw all my clothes in a bush , and hie they away , and as God will have it , at their departure there fall from they a handkerchief , and when i see it , i rise from my pallanchine or couch , and take it up , and wrap it together within my pallanchine . than these my Falchines be of so good condition , that they return to seek i , whereas i think i shall not have find so much goodness in they : because they be pay their money aforehand , as be the use , i have think to have see they no more . before their come i be determine to pluck the cane wherein my jewel be hide , out of my couch , and to have mad6 i a walk staff to carry in my hand to goa , think that i shall have go thither on foot , but by the faithfulness of my Falchines , i be rid of that trouble , and so in four day they carry i to goa , in which time i make hard fare , for the thief leave i neither money , gold , nor silver , and that which i do eat be give i of my man for God sake : and after at my come to goa i pay they for every thing royal that i have of they . from goa i depart for Cochin , which be a voyage of three hundred mile , and between these two city be