a description of the yearly voyage or pilgrimage of the mahumitans , Turk and moor unto Mecca in Arabia . Lexandria the most ancient city in Africa situate by the seaside contain seven mile in circuit , and be environ with two wall one near to the other with high tower , but the wall within be far high than those without , with a great ditch round about the same : yet be not this city very 329 strong by reason of the great antiquity , be almost half destroy and ruinate . the greatness of this city be such , that if it be of double habitation , as it be compass with a double wall , it may be true say , that there be two alexandrias one build upon another , because under the foundation of the say city be great habitation , and incredible huge pillar . true it be , that this part underneath remain at this day inhabitable , because of the corrupt air , as also for that by time , which consume all thing , it be great ruinate . it may well be say , that the founder hereof , as he be worthy in all his enterprise , so likewise in build hereof he do a work worthy of himself , name it after his own name . this city have one defect , for it be subject to a evil air , which only proceed of that hollowness underneath , out of the which issue infinite moisture : and that this be true the air without do evident testify , which be more subtle and wholesome then that beneath . the water hereof be salt , by reason that the soil of it self be likewise so . and therefore the inhabitant , at such time as the river Nilus flow , be accustom to open a great ditch , the head whereof extend into the say river , and from thence they convey the same within half a mile of Alexandria , and so consequent by mean of conductpipe the water come unto the cistern of Alexandria , which be full serve the city from one inundation to another . within the city be a pyramid mention of in history , but not of great importance . without the city be la colonna di Pompeio , or the pillar of Pompey , be of such height and thickness , that it be suppose there be not the like in the whole world beside . within the city there be nothing of importance save a little castle which be guard with 60 janissary . Alexandria have three port , one towards Rossetto , another to the land ward , and the three to the sea ward , which be call Babelbar , without which appear a broad hand call Ghesira in the moor tongue , which be not whole a 330 hand , because a iide point or corner thereof touch the firm land , and therefore may be call Peninsula , that be to say , almost a hand . hereupon be build many house of the Jew , in respect of the air . This Peninsula be situate between two very good port , one of they be much more safe than the other , call the old port , into the which only the vessel of Barbary , and the six galley of the grand signior depute for the guard of Alexandria do enter . and this port have upon the right hand at the mouth or entrance thereof a case of small importance , and guard but with fifteen man or thereabouts . on the other side of this hand be the other call the new port , which name be not unfidy give unto it , for that in all man judgement in time pass there have not be water there , because in the midst of this port , where the water be very deep , there be discover and find great sepulchre and other building , out of the which be daily dig with engine Jaspar and Porphyry stone of great value , of the which great store be send to Constantinople for the ornament of the mesquitas or turkish temple , and of other building of the grand signior . into this port enter all such vessel as traffic to this place . this port have on each side a castle , whereof that upon the Peninsula be call Faraone , upon the top whereof every night there be a light set in a great lantern for direction of the ship , and for the guard thereof be appoint 200 janissary : the other on the other side be but a iide castle keep by 18 man . it be certain , that this haven of Alexandria be one of the chief haven in the world : for hither come to traffic people of every nation , and all sort of vessel which go round about the city . it be more inhabit by stranger , merchant , and Christians , then by man of the country which be but a few in number . within fontechosigni - the city be five Fontechi , that be to say , one of the an h ™ * Frenchman , where the consul be resident , and this be the fair and most commodious or all the rest . or the other four , two belong to the venetian , one to the 331 raguseans , and the four to the genouese . and all stranger which come to traffic there , except the venetian , be under the french consuli . it be also to be understand , that all the christian dwell within their Fontechi , and every evening at the go down of the sun , they which be appoint for that office go about and shut all the gate of the say Fontechi outward , and the Christians shut the same within : and so likewise they do on the Friday ( which be the moor and the Turk sabbath ) till their devotion be expire . and by this mean all party be secure and void of fear : for in so do the Christians may sleep quiet and not fear rob , and the moor need not doubt while they sleep or pray , that the Christians shall make any tumult , as in time pass have happen . of the coast of Alexandria . on the side towards Barbary along the sea - coast for a great space there be find neither hold , nor any thing worthy of mention : but