house , and there set fire on they , which thing make 410 i to marvel . for as i pass up to satagan , i see this village stand with a great number of people , with a infinite number of ship and bazar , and at my return come down with my captain of the last ship , for who i tarry , i be all amaze to see such a place so soon raze and burn , and nothing leave but the sign of the burn house . the small ship go to satagan , and there they lade . of the city of Satagan . in the port of Satagan every year lade thirty or five and thirty ship great and small , with rice , cloth of bombast of diverse sort , Lacca , great abundance of sugar , mirabolans dry and preserve , long pepper , oil of Zerzeline , and many other sort of merchandise . the city of Satagan be a reasonable fair city for a city of the moor , abound with all thing , and be govern by the king of patten , and now be subject to the great mogul . i be in this kingdom four month , whereas many merchant do buy or fraught boat for their benefit , and with these bark they go up and down the river of Ganges to fair , buy their commodity with a great advantage , because that every day in the week they have a fair , now in one place , and now in another , and i also hire a bark and go up and down the river and do my business , and so in the night i see many strange thing . the kingdom of Bengala in time pass have be as it be in the power of Moores , nevertheless there be great store of Gentiles among they ; always whereas i have speak of Gentiles , be to be understand idolater , and whereas i speak of moor i mean Mahomet sect . those people especial that be within the land do great worship the river of Ganges : for when any be sick , he be bring out of the country to the bank of the river , and there they make he a small cottage of straw , and every day they wet he with that water , whereof there be many that die , and when they be dead , they make the commodity that be lade in satagan . [ ii i . 231 - ] moor be of the sect of Mahomet . 411 a ceremony of a heap of stick and bough and lay the dead body the gentile thereon , and put fire thereunto , they let the body be alone until it be half roast , and then they take it off from the fire , and make a empty jar fast about his neck , and so throw he into the river . Theise thing every night as i pass up and down the river i see for the space of two month , as i pass to the fair to buy my commodity with the merchant . and this be the cause that the Portugal will not drink of the water of the river Ganges , yet to the sight it be more perfect and clear than the water of Nilus be . from the port Piqueno i go to Cochin , and from Cochin to Malacca , from whence i depart for Pegu be eight hundred mile distant . that voyage be wont to be make in five and twenty or thirty day , but we be four month , and at the end of three month our ship be without victual . the pilot tell we that we be by his altitude not far from a city call tanasary , in the kingdom of Pegu , and these his word be not true , but we be ( as it be ) in the middle of many hand , and many uninhabited rock , and there be also some Portugal that affirm that they know the land , and know also where the city of Tanasari be . this city of right belong to the kingdom of Zion , which be situate on a great river side , which come out of the kingdom of Zion : and where this river run into the sea , there be a village call mirgim , merchandise jn who harbour every year there lade some ship with Xtrivaa . , Nypa , and Benjamin , a few clove , nutmeg and mace which come from the coast of Zion , but the great merchandise there be verzin and Nypa , which be a excellent wine , which be make of the flower of a tree call nype . who liquor they distil , and so make a excellent drink clear as crystal , good to the mouth , and better to the stomach , and it have a excellent gentle virtue , that if one be rot with the french pock , drink good store of this , he shall be 412 whole again , and i have see it prove , because that when i be in Cochin , there be a friend of i , who nose begin to drop away with that disease , and he be counsel of the doctor of physic , that he shall go to tanasary at the time of the new wine , and that he shall drink of the nype wine , night and day , as much as he can before it be distil , which at that time be most delicate , but after that it be distil , it be more strong , and if you drink much of it , it will fume into the head with drunkenness . this man go thither , and do so , and i have see he after with a good colour and sound . this wine be very much esteem in the Indies , and for that it be bring so far off , it be very dear : in Pegu ordinary it be good cheap , because it be near to the place where they make it , and there be every year great quantity make thereof . And return to my purpose , i say , be among these rock , and far from the land