to eat , which they bring down in great abundance , and sell it so good cheap , that we be amaze at the cheapness thereof . i buy many salt cow there , for the provision of the ship , for half a larine a piece , which Larine may be 12 . shilling six penny , be very good and fat ; and 4 . wild hog ready dress for a larine ; great fat hen for a bizze a piece , which be at the most a penny : and the people tell we that we be deceive the half of our money , because we buy thing so dear . also a sack of fine rice for a thing of nothing , and consequent all other thing for human sustenance be there in such abundance , that it be a thing incredible but to they that have see it . 437 Zondwa be the fruitful country in all the world . Chatigan be a port in Bengala , whither the Portugal go with their ship . the king of Pachim , or Aracam , neighbour to Bengala . [ ii i . 241 . ] this island be call Sondiva belong to the kingdom of Bengala , distant 120 . mile from Chatigan , to which place we be bind . the people be moor , and the king a very good man of a moor king , for if he have be a tyrant as other be , he may have rob we of all , because the Portugal captain of Chatigan be in arm against the retor of that place , and every day there be some slay , at which news . we rest there with no small fear , keep good watch and ward aboard every night as the use be , but the governor of the town do comfort we , and bid we that we shall fear nothing , but that we shall repose our self secure without any danger , although the Portugal of Chatigan have slay the governor of that city , and say that we be not culpable in that fact : and moreover he do we every day what pleasure he can , which be a thing contrary to our expectation , consider that they and the people of Chatigan be both subject to one king . we depart from Sondiva , and come to Chatigan the great port of Bengala , at the same time when the Portugal have make peace and take a truce with the governor of the town , with this condition that the chief captain of the Portugal with his ship shall depart without any lade : for there be then at that time 18 . ship of Portugal great and small . this captain be a gentleman and of good courage , be notwithstanding content to . depart to his great hindrance , rather than he will seek to hinder so many of his friend as be there , as also because the time of the year be spend to go to the Indies . the night before he depart , every ship that have any lade therein , put it aboard of the captain to help to ease his charge and to recompense his courtesy . in this time there come a messenger from the king of Rachim to this Portugal captain , who say in the behalf of his king , that he have hear of the courage and valour of he , desire he gentle that , he will vouchsafe to come with the ship into his port , 438 i5 & 3 - 81 - and come thither he shall be very well entreat . this Portugal go thither and be very well satisfy of this king . this Kling of Rachim have his seat in the middle coast between Bengala and Pegu , and the great enemy he have be the king of Pegu : which king of Pegu devise night and day how to make this king of Rachim his subject , but by no mean he be able to do it : because the king of Pegu have no power nor army by sea and this king of * Rachim may or , Aracam . arm two hundred galley or fust by sea , and by land he have certain sluice with the which when the king of Pegu pretend any harm towards he , he may at his pleasure drown a great part of the country . so that by this mean he cut off the way whereby the king of Pegu shall come with his power to hurt he . from the great port of Chatigan they carry for the Indies great store of rice , very great quantity of bombast cloth of every sort , sugar , corn , and money , with other merchandise . and by reason of the war in Chatigan , the Portugal ship tarry there so long , that they arrive not at Cochin so soon as they be wont to do other year . for which cause the fleet that be at Cochin be depart for Portugal before they arrive there , and i be in one of the small ship before the fleet , in discover of Cochin , we also discover the last ship of the fleet that go from Cochin to Portugal , where she make sail , for which i be marvellous discomfort , because that all the year follow , there be no go for Portugal , and when we arrive at Cochin i be full determine to go for Venice by the way of ormus , and at that time the city of goa be besiege by the people of Dialcan , but the citizen force not this assault , because they suppose that it will not continue long . for all this i embark my self in a galley that go for goa , mean there to ship my self for ormus : but when we come to goa , the viceroy the commodity that go from Chatigan to the Indies . the Portugal ship depart towards Portugal out of the harbour of Cochin . goa be besiege . 439 will not suffer any Portugal to depart , by reason of the war . And be in goa but a small time , i fall sick of a infirmity that hold i four month : which with physic and diet cost