situate on the coast of Coromandel : and because the captain of the castle of Malacca have understanding by advise that the king of * assi will come with a great army and power of man against they , therefore upon this he will not give licence that any ship shall depart : wherefore in this ship we depart from thence in the night , without make any provision of our water : and we be in that ship four hundred and odd man : we depart from thence with intention to go to a hand to take in water , but the wind be so contrary , that they will not suffer we to fetch it , so that by this mean we be two and forty day in the sea as it be lose , and we be drive too and fro , so that the first land that we discover , be beyond saint Tome , more than five hundred mile which be the mountain of Zerzerline , near unto the kingdom of Orisa , and so we come to Orisa with many sick , and more that be dead for want of water : and they that be sick in four day die : and i for the space of a year after have my throat so sore and hoarse , 408 that i can never satisfy my thirst in drink of water : i judge the reason of my hoarseness to be with sop that i wet in vinegar and oil , wherewith i sustain my self many day . there be not any want of bread nor of wine : but the wine of that country be so hot [ ii i . 230 . ] that be drink without water they will kill a man : neither be they able to drink they : when we begin to want water , i see certain moor that be officer in the ship , that sell a small dish full for a ducat , after this i see one that will have give a bar of pepper , which be two quintaly and a half , for a little measure of water , and he can not have it . true i believe that i have die with my slave , who than i have to serve i , which cost i very dear : but to provide for the danger at hand , i sell my slave for half that he be worth , because that i will save his drink that he drink , to serve my own purpose , and to save my life . of the kingdom of Orisa , and the river Ganges . ORisa be a fair kingdom and trusty , through the which a man may have go with gold in his hand without any danger at all , as long as the lawful king reign which be a gentle , who continue in the city call Catecha , which be within the land six day journey . this king love stranger marvelous well , especial merchant which have traffic in and out of his kingdom , in such wise that he will take no custom of they , neither any other grievous thing . only the ship that come thither pay a small thing accord to her portage , and every year in the port of Orisa be lade five and twenty or thirty ship great and small , with rice and diverse sort of fine white bombast cloth , oil of Zerzeline which they make of a seed , and it be very good to eat and to fry fish withal , great store of butter , Lacca , long pepper , ginger , mirabolans dry and condite , great store of cloth of herb , which be a kind of silk which grow among the 409 the commodity that go out of Orisa . this cloth we call Hettle cloth . wood without any labour of man , and when the bowl thereof be grow round as big as a orange , than they take care only to gather they . about sixteen year past , this king with his kingdom be destroy by the king of patten , which be also king of the great part of Bengala , and when he have get the kingdom , he set custom there twenty pro cento , as merchant pay in his kingdom : but this tyrant enjoy his kingdom but a small time , but be conquer by another tyrant , which be the great mogul king of Agra , del , and of all Cambaia , without any resistance . i depart from Orisa to Bengala , to the harbour Piqueno , which be distant from Orisa towards the east a hundred and seventie mile . they go as it be row alongst the coast fifty and four mile , and then we enter into they the river of river Ganges : from the mouth of this river , to a city Ganges . ' call Satagan , where the merchant gather themselves together with their trade , be a hundred mile , which they row in eighteen hour with the increase of the water : in which river it flow and eb as it do in the Thamis , and when the ebb water be come , they be not able to row against it , by reason of the swiftness of the water , yet their bark be light and arm with oar , like to foist , yet they can prevail against that stream , but for refuge must make they fast to the bank of the river until the next flow water , and they call these bark Bazaras and Patvas : they row as well as a galliot , or as well as ever i have see any . a good tide row before you come to Satagan , you shall have a place which be call Buttor , and from thence upward the ship do not go , because that upwards the river be very shallow , and little water . Every year at buttor they make and unmake a village , with house and shop make of straw , and with all thing necessary to their use , and this village stand as long as the ship ride there , and till they depart for the Indies , and when they be depart , every man go to his plot of