have his flower and berry like in all part to our ivy berry , and those berry be grain of peper : so that when they gather they they be green , and then they lie they in the sun , and they become black . the ginger grow in this wise : the land be till and sow , and the herb be like to Panizzo , and the root be the ginger . Theise two spice grow in diverse place . the clove come all from the Moluccas , which Moluccas be two island , not very great , and the tree that they grow on be like to our laurel tree . the nutmeg and mace , which grow both together , be bring from the island of Banda , who tree be like to our walnut tree , but not so big . all the good white Sandol be bring from the island of timor . Canfora be compound come all from China , and all that which grow in cane come from Borneo , and i think that this Canfora come 442 not into these part : for that in India they consume great store , and that be very dear . the good lignum lignum aloe . aloe come from Cauchinchina . the Benjamin come from the kingdom of Assi Benjamin . and Zion . long peper grow in Bengala , pegu , and Java . Longpeper . musk come from Tartary , which they make in 7 ^ / musk this order , as by good information i have be tell . there be a certain beast in Tartary , which be wild and 0jut ha ^ e as big as a wolf , which beast they take alive , and beat the good musk he to death with small staff y ‘ his blood may be and beat the spread through his whole body , than they cut it in ° fan . ass , e piece , and take out all the bone , and beat the flesh with ng ^ e ofit ' the blood in a mortar very small , and dry it , and make purse to put it in of the skin , and these be the cod of musk . true i know not whereof the amber be make , and there be diverse opinion of it , but this be most certain , it be cast out of the sea , and throw on land , and find upon the sea bank . the ruby , saphire , and the spinel be get in ruby , sa - the kingdom of Pegu . the diamond come from phyre , and diverse place ; and i know but three sort of they . that sort of diamond that be call chiappe , come from bezeneger . those that be point natural come from the land of del , and from Java , but the diamond of Java be more weighty than the other . i can never understand from whence they that be call Balassi come . the Balassi pearl they fish in diverse place , as before in this in , , • i 0 t ^ eilan . book be show . from Cambaza come the spodiom which congele in certain cane , whereof 1 find many in Pegu , when - tn i make my house there , because that ( as i have say Ethiopia , in before ) they make their house there off weave cane the land of like to mat . from Chaul they trade alongst the coast Cafr11 ™ 1 , then of melinde in Ethiopia , within the land of Cafraria : on hatthepor - that coast be many good harbour keep by the moor , tugal have . 443 buy and sell without word one to another . [ ii i . 243 . ] golden trade that the Portugal have . thither the Portugal bring a kind of bombast cloth of a low price , and great store of paternoster or bead make of paltry glass , which they make in Chaul accord to the use of the country : and from thence they carry elephant tooth for India , slave call Cafari , and some amber and gold . on this coast the king of Portugal have his castle call Mozambique , which be of as great importance as any castle that he have in all his Indies under his protection , and the captain of this castle have certain voyage to this Cafraria , to which place no merchant may go , but by the agent of this captain : and ' they use to go in small ship , and trade with the cafar , and their trade in buy and sell be without any speech one to the other . in this wise the Portugal bring their good by little and little alongst the sea coast , and lie they down : and so depart , and the Cafar merchant come and see the good , and there they put down as much gold as they think the good be worth , and so go their way and leave their gold and the good together , then come the Portugal , and find the gold to his content , he take it and go his way into his ship , and then come the Cafar and take the good and carry they away : and if he find the gold there still , it be a sign that the Portugal be not content , and if the Cafar think he have put too little , he add more , as he think the thing be worth : and the Portugal must not stand with they too strict ; for if they do , than they will have no more trade with they : for they disdain to be refuse , when they think that they have offer enough , for they be a peevish people , and have deal so of a long time : and by this trade the Portugal change their commodity into gold , and carry it to the castle of Mozambique , which be in a island not far distant from the firm land of Cafraria on the coast of Ethiopia , and be distant from India 2800 . mile . now to return to my voyage , when i come to ormus , i find there master Francis Berettin of