street which ascend by little and little till they come unto a certain gate , whereupon be write on each side in marble stone , Babel Salema , which in the arabian tongue signifies , the gate of health . and from this place be descry the great mosquita , which environ the house of Abraham , which be descry , they reverent salute twice , say , Salem Alech Jara sul Alla , that be to say , peace to thou , ambassador of God . this salutation be end , proceed on the way , they find a arch upon their right hand , whereon they ascend five step , upon the which be a great void place make of stone : after , descend other five step , and proceed the space of a flight - shoot , they find another arch like unto the first , and this way from the one arch to the other 354 they go and come 7 . time , say always some of their prayer , which ( they say ) the afflict Agar say , while she seek and find not water for her son Ishmael to drink . this ceremony be end , the pilgrim enter into the mosquita , and draw near unto the house of Abraham , they go round about it other seven time , always say : this be the house of God , and of his servant Abraham ; this do , they go to kiss that black stone abovesaid . after they go unto the pond zun zun , and in their apparel as they be , they wash [ ii i . 209 . ] themselves from head to foot , say , Tobah Allah , Tobah Allah , that be to say , pardon lord , pardon lord , drink also of that water , which be both muddy , filthy , and of a ill savour , and in this wise wash and water , every one return to his place of abode , and these ceremony every one be bind to do once at the least . but those which have a mind to overgo their fellow , and to go into paradise before the rest , do the same once a day while the carovan remain there . what the carovan do after have rest at Mecca . the carovan have abode within the city of Mecca five day , the night before the evening of their feast , the captain with all his company set forward towards the mountain of pardon , which they call in the the mountain arabian tongue , Jabel Arafata . this mountain be distant ° f pard ° ns - from Mecca 15 . mile , and in the mid way thereto be a place call Mina , that be to say , the haven , and a little from thence be 4 . great pillar , of which hereafter we will speak . now first touch the mountain of pardon , which be rather to be call a little hill , than a mountain , for that it be low , little , delightful and pleasant , contain in circuit two mile , and environ round about with the goodly plain that ever with man eye can be see , and the plain likewise compass with exceed high mountain , in such sort , that this be one of the goodly situation in the world : and it seem 355 very , that nature have therein show all her cunning , in make this place under the mountain of pardon so broad and pleasant . upon the side towards Mecca there be many pipe of water clear , fair , and fresh , and above all most wholesome , fall down into certain vessel make of purpose , where the people refresh and wash themselves , and water their cattle . and when Adam and Evah be cast out of paradise by the angel of the lord , the mahometans say , they come to inhabit this little mountain of pardon . also they say , that they have lose one another , and be separate for the space of 40 . year , and in the end meet at this place with great joy and gladness , and build a little house upon the top of this mountain , the which at this day they call Beyt Adam , that be to say , the house of Adam . of the three Carovans . the same day that the carovan of Cairo come to this place , hither come 2 . Carovans also , one of Damascus , the other of Arabia , and in like manner all the inhabitant for ten day journey round about , so that at one time there be to be see above 200000 . person , and more than 300000 . cattle . now all this company meet together in this place the night before the feast , the three host cast themselves into a triangle , set the mountain in the midst of they : and all that night there be nothing to be hear nor see , but gunshot and firework of sundry sort , with such sing , sound , shout , hallow , rumour , feast , and triumph , as be wonderful . after this , the day of the feast be come , they be all at rest and silence , and that day they attend on no other thing , than to sacrifice oblation and prayer unto God , and in the evening all they which have horse mount thereon , and approach as nigh unto the mountain as they can , and those which have no horse make the best shift they can on foot , give ever unto the captain of Cairo the chief place , the second to the captain of Damascus , and the three to the captain 356 of Arabia , and be all approach as be abovesaid , there come a square squire , one of the Santones , mount on a camel well furnish , who at the other side of the mountain ascend five step into a pulpit make for that purpose , and all be silent , turn his face towards the people , he make a short sermon of the tenor follow . the sum of the Santones sermon . the sum of this double doctor sermon be thus much in brief . he show they how many and how great benefit God have give to the mahometan people by the hand of his belove friend and prophet Mahomet , have deliver