anno 1566 in the month of January by misfortune of 1566 . fire be burn nine thousand book of great value , as well for that they be write by hand , as also [ ii i . 201 . ] wrought so rich with gold , that they be worth 300 and 400 ducat a piece , one with another . and because it can never be know yet how this fire begin , they have and do hold the same for a most sinister augury , and a evident and manifest sign of their utter ruin . the house of Cairo without be very fair , and within the great number rich adorn with hang wrought with gold . Every person which resort to this place for traffic sake , be bind to pay half a ducat , except the gentleman Venetians , Siotes , and rhaguseans , becapse they be tributary to the grand signior . Cairo be distant from the river Nilus descnp - a mile and more , be situate on a plain , save that ° f ^ air0 ‘ on the one side it have a fair little hill , on the top whereof stand a fair castle , but not strong , for that it may be batter on every side , but very rich and large , compass about with fair garden into the which they convey water for their necessity out of Nilus , with certain wheel and other like engine . this magnificent city be adorn with very fruitful garden both pleasant and commodious , with great plenty of pond to water the same . ' notwithstanding the great pleasure of Cairo be in the month of August , when by mean of the great rain in Ethiopia the river Nilus overflow and water all the country , and then they open the mouth of a 335 great ditch , which extend into the river , and pass through the midst of the city , and enter there be innumerable bark row too and fro lade with gallant girl and beautiful dame , which with sing , eat , drink and feast , take their solace . the woman of this country be most beautiful , and go in rich attire bedeck with gold , precious stone , and jewel of great value , but chief perfume with odour , and be very libidinous , and the man likewise , but foul and hard favour . the soil be very fertile and abundant , the flesh fat which they sell without bone , their candle they make of the marrow of cattle , because the moor eat the tallow . they use also certain little furnace make of purpose , under the which they make fire , put into the furnace four or five hundred egg , and the say fire they nourish by little and little , until the chicken be hatch , which after they be hatch , and become somewhat big , they sell they by measure in such sort , as we sell and measure nut and chestnut and such like . of certain notable monument without the city of Cairo . without the city , six mile high into the land , be to be see near unto the river diverse pira - mides , among which be three marvellous great , and very artificial wrought . out of one of these be daily dig the body of ancient man , not rot but all whole , the cause whereof be the quality of the egyptian soil , which will not consume the flesh of man , but rather dry and harden the same , and so always con - serveth it . and these dead body be the mummy which the physician and apothecary do against our will make we to swallow . also by dig in these pyramid oftentimes be find certain idol or image of gold , silver , and other mettle , but under the other pyramid the body be not take up so whole as in this , but there be find leg and arm comparable to 336 the limb of giant . near to these pyramid appears out of the sand a great head of stone somewhat like marble , which be discover so far as the neck join with the shoulder , be all whole , save that it want a little tip of the nose . ' the neck of this head contain in circuit about six and thirty foot , so that it may be accord to the neck consider , what greatness the head be of . the river Nilus be a mile broad , wherein be very many great croccodile from Cairo upward , but low than Cairo pass no such creature : and this , they say , be by reason of a enchantment make long since which hinder their passage for come any low than Cairo . Moreover of these creature there be sometime find some of a incredible bigness , that be to say , of fourty foot about . the male have their member like to a man , and the female like to a woman . Theise monster oftentimes issue out of the water to feed , and find any small beast , as sheep , lamb , goat , or other like , do great harm . and while they be forth of the water , if they happen at unware upon any man , woman or child , who they can overcome , they spare not their life . in the year of our lord one thousand five hundred and sixty it happen , that certain poor Christians travel by Cairo towards the country of Prete Janni to rescue certain slave , be guide by a Chaus , and journey alongst the bank of the say river . the Chaus remain linger alone behind to make his prayer ( as their custom be ) at a place call Tana , who be busy in his double devotion one of these crocodile cease by the shoulder , and draw he under water , so that he be never after see . and for this cause they have make in sundry place certain hedge as bank within the water , so that betwixt the hedge and bank of the river there remain so much water , that the woman wash may take water without danger at their pleasure . this country be so fruitful , that it [ H . i . 202 . ] cause the woman as also other creature to bring five 337 y forth one , two , and ofttimes three