. Penegonde . great man , his wife with all his slave with who he have have carnali copulation , burn themselves together with he . also in this kingdom i have see among the base sort of people this use and order , that the man be dead , he be carry to the place where they will make his sepulchre , and set he as it be upright , then come his wife before he on her knee , cast her arm about his neck , with embrace and clasp he , until such time as the mason have make a wall round about they , and when the wall be as high as their neck , there come a man behind the woman and strangle she : then when she be dead , the workman finish the wall over their head , and so they lie bury both together . beside these , there be a infinite number of beastly quality among they , of which i have no desire to write . i be desirous to know the cause why these woman will so wilful burn themselves against nature and law , and it be tell i that this law be of a ancient time , to make provision against the slaughter which woman make of their husband . for in those day before this law be make , the woman for every little displeasure that their husband have do unto they , will present poison their husband , and take other man , and now by reason of this law they be more faithful unto their husband , and count their life as dear as their own , because that after his death her own follow present . in the year of our lord God 1567 , for the ill success that the people of bezeneger have , in that their city be sack by the four king , the king with his court go to dwell in a castle eight day journey up in the land from bezeneger , call Penegonde . also six day journey from bezeneger , be the place where they get diamond : i be not there , but it be tell i that it be a great place , compass with a wall , and that they sell the earth within the wall , for so much a squadron , and the limit be set how deep or how low they shall dig . those diamond that be of a certain 386 size and big than that size , be all for the king , it be many year ago , since they get any there , for the trouble that have be in that kingdom . the first cause of this trouble be , because the son of this temeragio have put to death the lawful king which he have in prison , for which cause the baron and nobleman in that kingdom will not acknowledge he to be their king , and by this mean there be many king , and great division in that kingdom , and the city of bezeneger be not altogether destroy , yet the house stand still , but empty , and there be dwell in they nothing , as be report , but tiger and other wild beast . the circuit of this city be four and twenty mile about , and within the wall be certain mountain . the house stand wall with earth , and plain , all save the three palace of the three tyrant brethren , and the pagodas which be idol house : these be make with lime and fine marble . i have see many king court , and yet have i see none in greatness like to this of bezeneger , i say , for the order of his palace , for it have nine gate or port . first when you go into the place where the king do lodge , there be five great port or gate : these be keep with captain and soldier : then within these there be four lesser gate : which be keep with porter . without the first gate there be a little porch , where there be a captain with five and twenty soldier , that keep watch and ward night and day : and within that another with the like guard , wherethorow they come to a very fair court , and at the end of that court there be another porch as the first , with the like guard , and within that another court . and in this wise be the first five gate guard and keep with those captain : and then the lesser gate within be keep with a guard of porter : which gate stand open the great part of the night , because the custom of the gentile be to do their business , and make their feast in the night , rather than by day . the city be very safe from thief , for the Portugal merchant sleep in the street , or under 387 A . D . 1563 - 81 . porch , for the great heat which be there , and yet they never have any harm in the night . at the end of two month , i determine to go for goa in the company of two other Portugal merchant , which be make ready to depart , with two palanchine or little litter , which be very commodious for the way , with eight Falchines which be man hire to carry the palanchine , eight for a palanchine , four at a time : they carry they man ride m as we use to carry barrow . and i buy i two bulhck , and buhock , one of they to ride on , and the other to carry hem on vie my victua ^ s and provision , for in that country they ride way . on bullock with pannei , as we term they , girt and bridle , and they have a very good commodious pace . from bezeneger to goa in summer it be eight day journey , but we go in the midst of winter , in the month of July , and be fifteen day come to Ancola on the sea coast , so in eight day i have lose my two bullock : for he that carry my victual , be weak and can not go ,