be full of goodly garden , replenish with diverse tree and with the palmer tree as be aforesaid . this city be of great traffic for all 380 sort of merchandise which they trade withal in those part : and the fleet which come every year from Portugal , which be five or six great ship that come direct for goa , arrive there ordinary the six or ten of September , and there they remain forty or fifty day , and from thence they go to Cochin , where they lade for Portugal , and often time they lade one ship at goa and the other at Cochin for Portugal . Cochin be distant from goa three hundred mile . the city of goa be situate in the kingdom of Dialcan a king of the moor , who chief city be up in the country eight day journey , and be call bisapor : this king be of great power , for when i be in goa in the year of our lord 1570 , this king come to give assault to goa , be encamp near unto it by a river side with a army of two hundred thousand man of war , and he lie at this siege fourteen month : in which time there be peace conclude , and as report go among his people , there be great calamity and mortality which breed among they in the time of winter , and also kill very many elephant . then in the year of our lord 1567 , i go from goa to bezeneger the chief city of the kingdom of Narsinga eight day journey from goa , within the land , in the company of two other merchant which carry with they three hundred arabian horse to that king : because the horse of that country be of a small stature , and they pay well for the arabian horse : and it be requisite that the merchant sell they well , for that they stand they in great charge to bring they out of Persia to ormus , and from ormus to goa , where the ship that bring twenty horse and upward pay no custom , neither ship nor good whatsoever ; whereas if they bring no horse , they pay 8 per cento of all their good : and at the go out of goa the horse pay custom , two and forty pagody for every horse , which pagody may be of sterling money six shilling eight penny , they be piece of gold of that value . so that the arabian horse be a most unkind y wicked treason against their prince : this they have for give credit to stranger , rather than to their own native people . of great value in those country , as 300 , 400 , 500 ducat a horse , and to 1000 ducat a horse . bezeneger . the city of bezeneger be sack in the year 1565 , by four king of the moor , which be of great power and might : the name of these four king be these follow , the first be call Dialcan , the second Zamaluc , the three Cotamaluc , and the four Viridy : and yet these four king be not able to overcome this city and the king of bezeneger , but by treason . this king of bezeneger be a gentle , and have , among all other of his captain , two which be notable , and they be moor : and these two captain have either of they in charge threescore and ten or fourscore thousand man . Theise two captain be of one religion with the four king which be moor , wrought mean with they to betray their own king into their hand . the king of bezeneger esteem not the force of the four king his enemy , but go out of his city to wage battle with they in the field ; and when the army be join , the battle last but a while not the space of four hour , because the two traitorous captain , in the chief of the fight , with their company turn their face against their king , and make such disorder in his army , that as astonish they set themselves to flight . thirty year be this kingdom govern by three brethren which be tyrant , the which keep the rightful king in prison , it be their use every year once to show he to the people , and they at their pleasure rule as they list . Theise brethren be three captain belong to the father of the king they keep in prison , which when he die , leave his son very young , and then they take the government to themselves . the chief of these three be call ramaragio , and sit in the royal throne , and be call the king : the second be call temiragio , and he take the government on he : the three be call bengatre , and he be 382 captain general of the army . Theise three brethren be in this battle , in the which the chief and the last be never hear of quick nor dead . only temiragio flee in the battle , have lose one of his eye : when the news come to the city of the overthrow in the battle , the wife and child of these three tyrant , with their lawful king ( keep prisoner ) flee away , spoil as they be , and the four king of the moor enter the sack of the city bezeneger with great triumph , and there they the ntj ' remain six month , search under house and in all place for money and other thing that be hide , and then they depart to their own kingdom , [ ii i . 220 . i because they be not able to maintain such a kingdom as that be , so far distant from their own country . when the king be depart from bezeneger , this temiragio return to the city , and then begin for to repopulate it , and send word to goa to the merchant , if they have any horse , to bring they to he , and he will pay well for they , and for this cause the aforesaid two merchant that i go