on the voyage depart out of the city two league unto a place call Birca , where they expect the captain of the carovan . this place have a great pond cause by the inundation of Nilus , and so make , that the camel and other beast may drink therein : whereof , namely , of mule , camel , and dromedary there be at least forty thousand , and the person which follow the carovan every year be about fifty thousand , 340 few more or less , accord to the time . Moreover every three year they renew the captain of the carovan , call in the arabian tongue Amarilla Haggi , that be , the captain of the pilgrim , to who the grand signior give every voyage eighteen purse , contain each of they six hundred twenty and five ducat of gold , and these be for the behoof of the carovan , and also to do alm unto the needful pilgrim . this captain , beside other servingman which follow he , have also four Chausi to serve he . likewise he have with he for the security of the carovan four hundred soldier , to wit , two hundred Spachi or horseman mount on dromedary , and two hundred janissary ride upon camel . the Chausi and the Spachi be at the charge of the captain , but the janissary not so , for their provision be make they from Cairo . the Spachi wear cap or bonnet like to the cap of sergeant , but the janissary after another sort , with a lap fall down behind like a frenchhood , and have before a great piece of wrought silver on their head . the charge of these be to cause the carovan to march in good array when need require ; these be not at the commandment of any but of the captain of the carovan . Moreover the captain have for his guide eight pilot , the office of who be always stable and firm from heir to heir , and these go before guide the carovan , and show the way , as be well experience in the place , and in the night they govern they as the mariner , by the star . Theise also use to send before four or five man carry piece of dry wood which give light , because they shall not go out of the way , and if at any time through their ill hap they wander astray out • of the way , they be cast down and beat with so many bastinade upon the sole of their foot , as serve they for a perpetuali remembrance . the captain of the carovan have his lieutenant accompany continual with fifteen Spachi , and he have the charge to set the carovan in order , and to cause they to depart on their 341 piece of dry wood in stead of torch . journey when need require : and during the voyage their office be some while to go before with the forward , sometime to come behind with the rearward , sometime to march on the one side , and sometime on the other , to spy , that the coast be clear . the carovan carry with it six piece of ordinance draw by 12 camel , which serve to terrify the arabian , as also to make triumph at Mecca , and other place . the merchant which follow the carovan , some carry for merchandise cloth of silk , some coral , some tin , other wheat , rise , and all sort of grain . some sell by the way , some at Mecca , so that every one bring something to gain by , because all merchandise that go by land pay no custom , but that which go by sea be bind to pay ten in the hundred . the begin of the voyage . the feast before the carovan set forth , the captain with all his retinue and officer resort unto the case of Cairo before the bassa , which give unto every man a garment , and that of the captain be wrought with gold , and the other be serve accord to their degree . Moreover he deliver unto he you chisva Talnabi , which signify in the arabian tongue , the garment of the prophet : this vesture be of silk , wrought in the midst with letter of gold , which signify : la ilia ill ’ alia Mahumet Resullala : that be to say , there be no god but God , and his ambassador Mahumet . this garment be make of purpose to cover from top to bottom a little house in Mecca stand in the midst of the Mesquita , the which house ( they say ) be build by Abraham or by his son Ishmael . after this he deliver to he a gate make of purpose for the foresay [ two i . 204 . . ] house of Abraham wrought all with fine gold , and be of excellent workmanship , and it be a thing of great value . beside , he deliver unto he a cover of green velvet make in manner of a pyramid , about nine palm high , and artificial wrought with most fine golde * 342 and this be to cover the tomb of their prophet within Medina , which tomb be build in manner of a pyramid : and beside that cover there be bring many other of gold and silk , for the ornament of the say tomb . which thing be consign , the bassa depart not from his place ; but the captain of the carovan take his leave with all his officer and soldier , and depart accompany with all the people of Cairo orderly in manner of a procession , with sing , shout and a thousand other ceremony too long to recite . from the castle they go to a gate of the city call bab - nassera , without the which stand a mosquita , and therein they lie up the say vesture very well keep and guard . and of this ceremony they make so great account , that the world come to see this sight , yea the woman great with child , and other with child in their arm , neither be it lawful for any man to forbid his wife the go to this feast , for that in so do the wife may separate her self from her husband , and may lie with any other man , in