sufficient revenue to maintain himself without trouble of any , because the captain of the castle do maintain and defend his right , and when that the captain and he ride together , he be honour as a king , yet he can ride abroad with his train , without the consent of the captain first have : it behoove they to do this , and it be necessary , because of the great trade that be in the city : their proper language be the persian tongue . there i ship my self to go for goa , a city in the Indies , in a ship that have fourscore horse in she . this be to advertise those merchant that go from ormus to goa to ship themselves in those ship that carry horse , because every ship that carry twenty horse or upward be privilege , that all the merchandise whatsoever they carry shall pay no custom , whereas the ship that carry no horse be bind to pay eight per cento of all the good they bring . the election of the king of ormus . a privilege for merchant . goa , diu , and Cambaia . goa be the principali city that the Portugal have in the Indies , where be resident the viceroy with his court and minister of the king of Portugal . from ormus to goa be nine hundred four score and ten mile distance , in which passage the first city that you come to 373 in the Indies , be call diu , and be situate in a little hand in the kingdom of Cambaia , which be the great strength that the Portugal have in all the Indies , yet a small city , but of great trade , because there they lade very many great ship for the straight of Mecca and ormus with merchandise , and these ship belong to the moor and Christians , but they . Moores can not trade neither sail into those sea without the licence of the viceroy of the king of Portugal , otherwise they be take and make good prize . the merchandise that they lade these ship withal come from Cambaietta a port in the kingdom of Cambaia , which they bring from thence in small bark , because there can no great ship come thither , by reason of the sholdnesse of the water thereabouts , and these shold be a hundred or fourscore mile about in a straight or gulf , which they call Macareo , which be as much to say , as a race of a tide , because the water there run out of that place without measure , so that there be no place like to it , unless it be in the kingdom of Pegu , where there be another Macareo , where the water run out with more force than these doe . the principali city in Cambaia be call Amadavar , it be a day journey and a half from Cambaietta , it be a very great city and very populous , and for a city of the Gentiles it be very well make and bud with fair house and large street , with a fair place in it with many ship , and in show like to Cairo , but not so great : also Cambaietta be situate on the sea side , and be a very fair city . the time that i be there , the city be in great calamity and scarceness , so that i have see the man of the country that be Gentiles take their child , their son and their daughter , and have desire the Portugal to buy they , and i have see they sell for eight or ten larine a piece , which may be of our money x . s . or thirteen . s . four . d . for all this , if i have not see it , i can not have believe that there shall be such a trade at Cambaietta as there be : for in the time of every new moon and every full moon , the 374 small bark ( innumerable ) come in and out , for at those time of the moon the tide and water be high than at other time they be . Theise bark be lade with all sort of spice , with silk of China , with sandal , with elephant tooth , velvet of Vercini , great quantity of Pannina , which come from Mecca , Chickinos which be piece of gold worth seven shilling a piece sterling , with money , and with diverse sort of other merchandise . also these bark lade out , as it be , a infinite quantity of cloth make of bombast of all sort , as white stamp and paint , with great quantity of indigo , dry ginger and conserve , myrabolan dry and condite , Boraso in paste , great store of sugar , great quantity of cotton , abundance of opium , assa fetida , Puchio , with many other sort of drug , turban make in dui , great stone like to corneolaes , granat , agat , Diaspry , Calcidonii , hematist , and some kind of natural diamond . there be in the city of Cambaietta a order , but no man be bind to keep it , but they that will ; but all the [ ii i . 217 . ] Portugal merchant keep it , the which be this . there be in this city certain broker which be Gentiles and of great authority , and have every one of they fifteen or twenty servant , and the merchant that use that country have their broker , with which they be serve : and they that have not be there be inform by their friend of the order , and of what broker they shall be serve . now every fifteen day ( as abovesaid ) that the fleet of small ship enter into the port , the broker come to the water side , and these merchant assoon as they be come on land , do give the cargason of all their good to that broker that they will have to do their business for they , with the mark of all the farthel and pack they have : and the merchant have take on land all his furniture for