any noise , and so the hunter with the female eliphants and the wild one be all in the court together , and then within a small time the female withdraw themselves away one by one out of the court , leave the wild elephant alone : and when a excellent he perceive that he be leave alone , he be so mad that for two or three hour to see he , it be the great ’ pleasure in the world : he weep , he flinge , he run , he justle , he thrust under the place where the people stand to see he , think to kill some of they , but the post and timber be so strong and great , that he can hurt any body , yet he oftentimes break his tooth in the grate ; at length when he be weary and have labour his body that he be all wet with sweat , than he pluck in his trunk into his mouth , and then he throw out so much water out of his belly , that he sprinkle it over the head of the looker on , to the uttermost of they , although it be very high : and then when they see he very weary , there go certain officer into the court with long sharp cane in their hand , and prick he that they make he to go into one of the house that be make alongst the court for the same purpose : as there be many which be make long and narrow , that when the elephant be in , he can turn himself to go back again . and it be requisite that these man shall be very wary and swift , for although their cane be long , yet the elephant will kill they if they be not swift to save themselves : at length when 423 these cane be like to they in Spain which they call joco de tear . they have get he into one of those house , they stand over he in a loft and get rope under his belly and about his neck , and about his leg , and bind he fast , and so let he stand four or five day , and a strange give he neither meat nor drink . at the end of ^ lut ^ id th686 f ° ure or five day , they unloose he and put one shall in so the female unto he > and give they meat and drink , short time be and in eight day he be become tame . in my judgement make tame . there be not a beast so intellective as be these eliphants , nor of more understanding in all the world : for he will do all thing that his keeper say , so that he lack nothing but human speech . the great it be report that the great strength that the king strength that of pegU have be in these eliphants , for when they go tpegu ‘ hath to battle , they set on their back a castle of wood bind thereto , with band under their belly : and in every castle four man very commodious set to fight with harquebuss , with bow and arrow , with dart and pike , and other lance weapon : and they say that the skin of this elephant be so hard , that a harquebus will not pierce it , unless it be in the eye , a goodly order temple , or some other tender place of his body . and in a barbarous beside this , they be of great strength , and have a very peope . excellent order in their battle , as i have see at their feast which they make in the year , in which feast the king make triumph , which be a rare thing and worthy memory , that in so barbarous a people there the order of shall be such goodly order as they have in their thetr weapon arm ; es which be distinct in square of eliphants , of hl $ man . horseman , or harquebusier and pikeman , that true the number of they be infinite : but their armour and weapon be very nought and weak as well the one as the other : they have very bad pike , their sword be worse make , like long knife without point , his harquebuss be most excellent , and always in his war he have eighty thousand harquebuss , and the number of they increase daily . because the king will have [ ii i . 236 . ] they shoot every day at the plank , and so by con - 424 tinuall exercise they become most excellent shot : also he have great ordinance make of very good mettle ; to conclude there be not a king on the earth that have more power or strength then this king of Pegu , because he have twenty and six crown king at his command . he can make in his camp a million and a half of man of war in the field against his enemy . the state of his kingdom and maintenance of his army , be a thing incredible to consider , and the victual that shall maintain such a number of people in the war . : but he that know the nature and quality of that people , will easy believe it . i have see with my eye , that those people and soldier have eat • of all sort of wild beast that be on the earth , whether it be very filthy or otherwise all serve for their mouth : yea , i have see they eat scorpion and serpent , also they feed of all kind of herb and grass . so that if such a great army want not water and salt , they will maintain themselves a long time in a bush with root , flower and leaf of tree , they carry rice with they for their voyage , and that serve they in stead of comfit , it be so dainty unto they . this king of Pegu have not any army or power by sea , but in the land , for people , dominion , gold and silver , he far exceed the power of the great Turk in