regard of so great a trespass . now this procession proceed from the castle towards the mosquita , the camel which bring the vesture be all adorn with cloth of gold , with many little bell , and pass along the street you may see the multitude cast upon the say vesture thousand of beautiful ! flower ; of diverse colour , and sweet water , other bring towel and fine cloth touch the same , which ever after they keep as relic with great reverence . afterwards have leave the vesture in the mosquita , as be aforesaid , they return again into the city , where they remain the space of 20 day , and then the captain depart with his company , and take the vesture out of the mosquita , carry the same to the foresay place of Birca , where the captain have pitch his tent with the standard of the grand signior over the gate , and the other principali tent stand about he , stay there some ten day and no more : in which time all those resort thither that mean to follow the carovan in this voyage to Mecca . where 343 you shall see certain woman which intend to go on this voyage accompany with their parent and friend mount upon camel , adorn with so many trifle , tassel , and knot , that in behold the same a man can refrain from laughter . the last night before their departure they make great feast and triumph within the carovan , with castle and other infinite devise of firework , the janissary always stand round about the tent of the captain with such shout and joy , that on every side the earth resound , and this night they discharge all their ordinance , four or six time , and after at the break of the day upon the sound of a trumpet they march forward on their way . what time the carovan travel , and when it rest . it be to be note , that from Cairo to Mecca they make 40 day journey or thereabouts , and the same great day journey . for the custom of the carovan be to travel much and rest little , and ordinary they journey in this manner : they travel from two a clock in the morning until the sun rise , then have rest till noon , they set forward , and so continue till night , and then also rest again , as be abovesaid , till two of the clock : and this order they observe until the end of the voyage , never change the same , except in some place , whereof we will hereafter speak , where for respect of water they rest sometime a day and a half , and this they observe to refresh themselves , otherwise both man and beast will die . in what order the carovan travel . the manner and order which the carovan observe in march be this . it go divide into three part , to wit , the foreward , the main battle , and the rearward . in the foreward go the 8 pilot before with a Chaus , which have four knave , and each knave carry a sinew of a bull , to the end that if occasion require , you bastonado 344 may be give to such as deserve the same . Theise knave cast offender down , turn up the sole of their foot make fast to a staff , give they a perpetuali remembrance for they and the beholder . This Chaus be as the captain of the foreward , which command light to be carry before when they travel in the night . also there go in this foreward 6 Santones with red turban upon their head , and these eat and ride at the cost of the captain of the carovan . Theise Santones when the carovan arrive at any good lodging , sudden after they have escry the place , cry with a horrible voice say , good cheer , good cheer , we be near to the wish lodging . for which good news the chief of the company bestow their benevolence upon they . in this foreward go very near the three part of the people of the carovan , behind who go always 25 Spachi arm with sword , bow and arrow to defend they from thief . next unto the [ ii i . 205 . ] forward , within a quarter of a mile , follow the main battle , and before the same be draw the say six piece of ordinance , with their gunner , and fifteen Spachi archer . and next unto these come the chief physician , who be a old man of authority , have with he many medicine , ointment , salve , and other like refreshing for the sick , have also camel with he for the sick to ride on , which have no horse nor beast . next unto he go one Carnell alone , the fair that can be find : for with great industry be seek the great and fair which may be find within the dominion of the grand signior . this camel also be deck with cloth of gold and silk , and carry a little chest make of pure legmame make in likeness of the ark of the old testament : but , as be abovesaid , make of pure legmame , without gold or any other thing of cost . within this chest be the Alcoran all write with great letter of gold , bind between e two table of massy gold , and the chest during their voyage be cover with silk , but at their enter into Mecca it be all cover with cloth of gold , adorn with jewel , and 345 ' the like at the entrance into Medina . the Carnell aforesaid which carry the chest , be compass about with many arabian singer and musician , always sing and play upon instrument . after this follow fifteen other most fair camel , every one carry one of the abovesaid vesture , be cover from top to toe with silk . behind these go twenty other camel which carry the money , apparel , and provision of the Amir el Cheggi captain of the carovan . after follow the royal standard of the grand signior , accompany continual with the musician of the captain , and five and twenty Spachi archer , with a Chaus before they , and about these marvelous thing go all