have and harm . when the retor perceive that the Portugal make battery against the city , he take one and twenty Portugal that be there in the city , and send they four mile into the country , there to tarry until such time as the other Portugal be depart , that make the battery , who after their departure let they go at their own liberty without any harm do unto they . i my self be always in my house with a good guard appoint i by the retor , that no man shall do i injury , nor harm i nor my good ; in such wise that he perform all that he have promise i in the name of the king , but he will not let i depart before the come of the king , which be great to my hindrance , because i be twenty and one month sequester , that i can not buy nor sell any kind of merchandise . those commodity that i bring thither , be peper , sandal , and Porcellan of China : so when the king be come home , i make my 418 supplication unto he , and i be licence to depart when i will . from Martavan i depart to go to the chief city in the kingdom of Pegu , which be also call after the name of the kingdom , which voyage be make by sea in three or four day ; they may go also by land , but it be better for he that have merchandise to go by sea and lesser charge . and in this voyage you shall have a Macareo , which be one of the most marvellous thing in the world that nature have wrought , and i never see any thing so hard to be believe as this , to wit , the great increase and diminish of the water thingmost there at one push or instant , and the horrible earthquake and great noise that the say Macareo make where c0mming0f a it come . we depart from Martavan in bark , tide the earth which be like to our pilot boat , with the increase shall quake . of the water , and they go as swift as a arrow out of a bow , so long as the tide run with they , and when the water be at the high , than they draw themselves out of the channel towards some bank , and there they come to anchor , and when the water be diminish , than they rest on dry land : and when the [ ii i . 2 34 - 1 bark rest dry , they be as high from the bottom of the channel , as any house top be high from the ground . they let their bark lie so high for this respect , that if there shall any ship rest or ride in the channel , with such force come in the water , that it will u overthrow ship or bark : yet for all this , that the bark be so far out of the channel , and though Severne . the water have lose her great strength and fury before it come so high , yet they make fast their prow to the stream , and oftentimes it make they very fearful , and if the anchor do not hold her prow up by strength , she will be overthrow and lose with man and good . when the water begin to increase , it make such a noise and so great that you will think it a earthquake , and present at the first it make three wave . so that the first wash over the bark , from stem 419 these tide make their just course as we do . this Macareo be a tide or a currant . house make of cane y cover with leaf of tree . Godon be a place or house for merchant to lay their good in . the form of the building oj the new city of Pegu . to stern , the second be not so furious as the first , and the third raise the anchor , and then for the space of six hour while the water increase , they row with such swiftness that you will think they do fly : in these tide there must be lose no jot of time , for if you arrive not at the stagion before the tide be spend , you must turn back from whence you come . for there be no stay at any place , but at these stagion , and there be more danger at one of these place then at another , as they be high and low one then another . when as you return from Pegu to Martavan , they go but half the tide at a time , because they will lay their bark up aloft on the bank , for the reason aforesaid . i can never gather any reason of the noise that this water make in the increase of the tide , and in diminish of the water . there be another Macareo in Cambaya , but that be nothing in comparison of this . by the help of God we come safe to Pegu , which be two city , the old and the new , in the old city be the merchant stranger , and merchant of the country , for there be the great do and the great trade . this city be not very great , but it have very great suburb . their house be make with cane , and cover with leaf , or with straw , but the merchant have all one house or Magason , which house they call Godon which be make of brick , and there they put all their good of any valour , to save they from the often mischance that there happen to house make of such stufle . in the new city be the palace of the king , and his abide place with all his baron and noble , and other gentleman ; and in the time that i be there , they finish the build of the new city : it be a great city , very plain and flat , and four square , wall round about and with ditch that compass the wall about