the help of God , make many Christians 405 A . D . 1563 - 81 . hand not discover . Chinais under the gsvem - ment of the great tartar . [ ii i . 2x9 . ] a yearly Caravan from Persia to China . there like to themselves . from these hand hitherward the place be not yet discover for the great sholdnesse of sand that they find . the Portugal have make a small city near unto the coast of China call Macao , who church and house be of wood , and it have a bishopric , but the custom belong to the king of China , and they go and pay the same at a city call Canton , which be a city of great importance and very beautiful two day journey and a half from Macao . the people of China be Gentiles , and be so jealous and fearful , that they will not have a stranger to put his foot within their land : so that when the Portugal go thither to pay their custom , and to buy their merchandise , they will not consent that they shall lie or lodge within the city , but send they forth into the suburb . the country of China be near the kingdom of great Tartary , and be a very great country of the gentile and of great importance , which may be judge by the rich and precious merchandise that come from thence , than which i believe there be not better nor in great quantity in the whole world beside . first , great store of gold , which they carry to the Indies , make in plate like to little ship , and in value three and twenty caract a piece , very great abundance of fine silk , cloth of damask and taffeta , great quantity of musk , great quantity of Occam in bar , great quantity of quicksilver and of cinaper , great store of Camfora , a infinite quantity of porcellane , make in vessel of diverse sort , great quantity of paint cloth and square , infinite store of the root of China : and every year there come from China to the Indies , two or three great ship , lade with most rich and precious merchandise . the rhubarb come from thence over land , by the way of Persia , because that every year there go a great carovan from Persia to China , which be in go thither six month . the carovan arrive at a city call lanchin , the place where the king be resident with his court . i speak with 406 a persian that be three year in that city of lanchin , and he tell i that it be a great city and of great importance . the voyage of Malacca which be in the jurisdiction of the captain of the castle , be these : every year he send a small ship to timor to lade white sandal , for all the best come from this hand : there come some also from solor , but that be not so good : also he send another small ship every year to cauchin China , to lade there wood of aloe , for that all the wood of aloe come from this place , which be in the firm land near unto China , and in that kingdom i can not know how that wood grow by any mean . for that the people of the country will not suffer the Portugal to come within the land , but only for wood and water , and as for all other thing that they want , as victual or merchandise , the people bring that a board the ship in small bark , so that every day there be a mart keep in the ship , until such time as she market keep be lade : also there go another ship for the say ° ft , king captain of Malacca to Zion , to lade Verzino : all these z ‘ voyage be for the captain of the castle of Malacca , and when he be not dispose to make these voyage , he sell they to another . the city of Zion , or Siam . Zion be the imperiali seat , and a great city , but in the year of our lord God one thousand five hundred sixty and seven , it be take by the king of Pegu , which king make a voyage or come by land four month journey with a army of man through his land , and the number of his army be a million and four hundred thousand man of war : when he come to the city , he give assault to it , and besiege it one and twenty month before he can win it , with great loss . of his people , this i know , for that i be in Pegu six month after his departure , and see when that his officer that be in Pegu , send five hundred thousand man of war to furnish the place of they 407 a prince of marvellous strength and power . that be slay and lose in that assault : yet for all this , if there have not be treason against the city , it have not be lose : for on a night there be one of the gate set open , through the which with great trouble the king gate into the city , and become governor of Zion : and when the emperor see that he be betray , and that his enemy be in the city , he poison himself : and his wife and child , friend and nobleman , that be not slay in the first affront of the entrance into the city , be all carry captive into Pegu , where i be at the come home of the king with his triumph and victory , which come home and return from the war be a goodly sight to behold , to see the elephant come home in a square , lade with gold , silver , jewel , and with noble man and woman that be take prisoner in that city . now to return to my voyage : i depart from Malacca in a great ship which go for saint Tome , be a city