in company withal , carry those horse that they have to bezeneger . also this tyrant make a order or law , that if any - 4 » excellent merchant have any of the horse that be take in the t0 aforesaid battle or war , although they be of his mtra ? man it own mark , that he will give as much for they as they will : and beside he give generail safe conduct to all that shall bring they . when by this mean he see that there be great store of horse bring thither unto he , he give the merchant fair word , until such time as he see they can bring no more . than he licence the merchant to depart , without give they any thing for their horse , which when the poor man see , they be desperate , and as it be mad with sorrow and grief . i rest in bezeneger seven month , although in one month i may have discharge all my business , for it be necessary to rest there until the way be 383 a description of the burn place . feast and dance when they shall mourn . clear of thief , which at that time range up and down . and in the time i rest there , i see manystrange and beastly deed do by the gentile . first , when there be any noble man or woman dead , they burn their body : and if a marry man die , his wife must burn herself alive , for the love of her husband , and with the body of her husband : so that when any man die , his wife will take a month leave , two or three , or as she will , to burn her self in , and that day be come , wherein she ought to be burn , that morning she go out of her house very early , either on horseback or on a eliphant , or else be bear by eight man on a small stage : in one of these order she go , be apparel like to a bride , carry round about the city , with her hair down about her shoulder , garnish with jewel and flower , accord to the estate of the party , and they go with as great joy as bride do in Venice to their nuptial : she carry in her left hand a look glass , and in her right hand a arrow , and sing through the city as she pass , and say , that she go to sleep with her dear spouse and husband . she be accompany with her kindred and friend until it be one or two of the clock in the afternoon , than they go out of the city , and go along the river side call Nigondin , which run under the wall of the city , until they come unto a . place where they use to make this burn of woman , be widow , there be prepare in this place a great square cave , with a little pinnacle hard by it , four or five step up : the foresay cave be full of dry wood . the woman be come thither , accompany with a great number of people which come to see the thing , than they make ready a great banquet , and she that shall be burn eat with as great joy and gladness , as though it be her wedding day : and the feast be end , than they go to dance and sing a certain time , accord as she will . after this , the woman of her own accord , comma nd they to make the fire 384 in the square cave where the dry wood be , and when it be kindle , they come and certify she thereof , then present she leave the feast , and take the near kinsman of her husband by the hand , and they both go together to the bank of the foresay river , where she put off all her jewel and all her clothes , and give they to her parent or kinsfolk , and cover herself with a cloth , because she will not be see of the people be naked , she throw herself into the river , say : oh wretch , wash away your sin . come out of the water , she roll herself into a yellow cloth of fourteen brace long : and again she take her husband kinsman by the hand , and they go both together up to the pinnacle of the square cave wherein the fire be make . when she be on the pinnacle , she talk and reason with the people , recommend unto they her child and kindred . before the pinnacle they use to set a mat , because they shall not see the fierceness of the fire , yet there be many that will have they pluck away , show therein a heart not fearful , and that they be not afraid of that sight . when this silly woman have reason with the people a good while to her content , there be another woman that take a pot with oil , and sprinkle it over her head , and with the same she anoint all her body , and afterward throw the pot into the furnace , and both the woman and the pot go together into the fire , and present the people that be round about the furnace throw after she into the cave great piece of wood , so by this mean , with the fire and with the blow that she have with the wood throw after she , she be quick dead , and after this there grow such sorrow and such lamentation among the people , that all their mirth be turn into howl and weep , in such wise , that a man can scarce bear the hear of it . i have see many burn in this manner , because my house be near to the gate where they go out to the place of burn : and when there die any five 385 2 b A . D . 1563 - 81 . mourn when they shall rejoice . the cause why the woman do so burn themselves