in it , that their sin be forgive they , because God , as they say , do wash himself in that place . they gather up the sand in the bottom of it , and say it be holy . they never pray but in the water , and they wash themselves overhead , 477 and lade up water with both their hand , and turn themselves about , and then they drink a little of the water three time , and so go to their god which stand in those house . some of they will wash a place which be their length , and then will pray upon the earth with their arm and leg at length out , and will rise up and lie down , and kiss the ground twenty or thirty time , but they will not stir their right foot . and some of they will make their ceremony with fifteen or sixteen pot little and great , and ring a little bel when they make their mixture ten or twelve time : and they make a circle of water round about their pot and pray , and diverse sit by they , and one that reach they their pot : and they say diverse thing over their pot many time , and when they have do , they go to their god , and strow their sacrifice which they think be very holy , and mark many of they which sit by , in the forehead , which they take as a great gift . there come fifty and sometime a hundred together , to wash they in this well , and to offer to these idol . they have in some of these house their idol stand , and one sit by they in warm weather with a fan to blow wind upon they . and when they see any company come , they ring a little bell which hang by they , and many give they their alm , but especial those which come out of the country . many of they be black and have claw of brass with long nail , and some ride upon peacock and other fowl which be evil favour , with long hawk bill , and some like one thing and some another , but none with a good face . among the rest there be one which they make great account of : for they say he give they all thing both food and apparel , and one sit always by he with a fan to make wind towards he . here some be burn to ash , some scorch in the fire and throw into the water , and dog and fox do present eat they . the wife here do burn 478 with their husband when they die , if they will not , their head be shave , and never any account be make of they afterward . the people go all naked save a little cloth [ ii i . 256 . ] bind about their middle . their woman have their neck , arm and ear deck with ring of silver , copper , tin , and with round hoop make of ivory , adorn with amber stone , and with many agat , and they be mark with a great spot of red in their forehead , and a stroke of red up to the crown , and so it run three manner of way . in their winter , which be our may , the man be quilt gown of cotton like to our mattrace and quilt cap like to our great grocer mortar , with a slit to look out at , and so tie down beneath their ear . if a man or woman be sick and like to die , they will lay he before their idol all night , and that shall help he or make a end of he . and if he do not mend that night , his friend will come and sit with he a little and cry , and afterward will carry he to the water side and set he upon a little raft make of reed , and so let he go down the river . when they be marry the man and the woman come to the water side , and there be a old man which they call a bramane , that be , a priest , a cow , and a calf , or a cow with calf . then the man and the woman , cow and calf , and the old man go into the water together , and they give the old man a white cloth of four yard long , and a basket cross bind with diverse thing in it : the cloth he lay upon the back of the cow , and then he take the cow by the end of the tail , and say certain word : and she have a copper or a brass pot full of water , and the man do hold his hand by the old man hand , and then ? wife hand by her husband , and all have the cow by ne ^ vary the tail , and they pour water out of the pot upon the folk together cow tail , and it run through all their hand , and h they lade up water with their hand , and then the old man do tie he and she together by their clothes . “ Mexican ™ which do , they go round about the cow and calf , old time . 479 and than they give somewhat to the poor which be always there , and to the bramane or priest they give the cow and calf , and afterward go to diverse of their idol and offer money , and lie down flat upon the ground and kiss it diverse time , and then go their way . their chief idol be black and evil favour , their mouth monstrous , their ear gild , and full of jewel , their tooth and eye of gold , silver , and glass , some have one thing in their hand , and some another . you may not come into the house where they stand , with your shoe on . they have continual lamp Patenaw . burn before they . from Bannaras i go to Patenaw down the river of Ganges : where in the way we pass many fair town , and a country very fruitful : and many very great river do enter into Ganges , and some of