store of cloth which be make of grass , which they call Yerva , it be like a silk . they make good cloth of it which they send for India 8c diverse other place . to this haven of angeli come every year many ship out of India , Negapatan , Sumatra , Malacca , and diverse other place ; 8c lade from thence great store of rice , 8c much cloth 482 i583 - 9i - of cotton wool , much sugar , and long pepper , great store of butter and other victual for India . Satagam be a fair Satagam . city for a city of the moor , and very plentiful of all thing . here in Bengala they have every day in one place or other a great market which they call Chandeau , and they have many great boat which they call pericose , wherewithal ! they go from place to place and buy rice and many other thing : these boat have 24 . or 26 . oar to row they , they be great of burden , but have no coverture . here the Gentiles have the water of Ganges in great estimation , for have good water near they , yet they will fetch the water of Ganges a great way off , and if they have not sufficient to drink , they will sprinkle a little on they , and then they think themselves well . from Satagam i travel by the country of the king of Tippara or porto grande , with who the Mogores or Mogen have almost continual war . the Mogen which be of the kingdom of Recon and Rame , be strong than the king of Tippara , so that Chatigan or porto grande be oftentimes under the king of Recon . there be a country 4 . day journey from couch or quicheu before mention , which be call bottant and the city Bottia , the king be call Dermain ; the people whereof be very tall and strong , and there be merchant which come out of China , and they say out of Muscovia or Tartary . and they come to buy musk , cambal , agat , silk , pepper and saffron like the saffron of Persia . the country be very great , 3 . month journey . there be very high mountain in this country , and one of they so steep that when a man be 6 . day journey off it , he may see it perfect . upon these mountain be people which have ear of a span long : if their ear be not long , they call they ape . they say that when they be upon the mountain , they see ship in the sea sail to and fro ; but they know not from whence they come , nor whither they go . there be merchant which come out of the east , they say , 483 Tippara or porto Grande . bottant a greatnorthren country . merchant of China , moscovy and Tartary . these seem to be the mountain of Imaus call by the people Cumao . from under the sun , which be from China , which have no beard , and they say there it be something warm .. but those which come from the other side of the mountain which be from the north , say there it be very cold .. the apparel these northern merchant be apparel with woollen . of the tar - do anj hat , white hose close , and boot which be chant . °* Moscovia or tartane . they report that in their country they have very good horse , but they be little : some man have four , five , or six hundred horse and cow : they live with milk and flesh . they cut the come tail in tail of their cow , and sell they very dear , for they great request . bee jn great request anj much esteem in those part . the hair of they be a yard long , the rumpe be above a span long : they use to hang they for bravery upon the head of their elephant : they be much use in Pegu and China : they buy and sell by score upon the ground . the people be very swift on foot . Bacola . from Chatigan in Bengala , i come to Bacola ; the king whereof be a gentle , a man very well dispose and delight much to shoot in a gun . his country be very great and fruitful , and have store of rice , much , cotton cloth , and cloth of silk . the house be very fair and high build , the street large , the people naked , except a little cloth about their waste . the woman wear great store of silver hoop about their neck and arm , and their leg be ring with silver and copper , and ring make of elephant tooth . serrepore . from Bacola i go to serrepore which stand upon the river of Ganges , the king be call chondery . they be all hereabout rebel against their king zelabdim echebar : for here be so many river and hand , that they flee from one to another , whereby his horse ’ man can prevail against they . great store of cotton cloth be make here . Sinnergan . Sinnergan be a town six league from serrepore , where there be the best and fine cloth make of cotton that be in all India . the chief king of all these 484 country be call isacan , and he be chief of all the other king , and be a great friend to all Christians . the house here , as they be in the most part of India , be very little , and cover with straw , and have a few mat round about the wall , and the door to keep out the tiger and the fox . many of the people be very rich . here they will eat no flesh , nor kill no beast : they live of rice , milk , and fruit . they go with a little cloth before they , and all the rest of their body be naked . great store of cotton cloth go from hence , and much rice , wherewith they serve all India , Ceilon , pegu , Malacca , Sumatra , and many other place . i go from serrepore the 28 . of November 1586