they as great as Ganges , which cause Ganges to be of a great breadth , and so broad that in the time of rain you can see from one side to the other . Theise Indians when they be scorch and throw into the water , the man swim with their face downward , the woman with their face upward , i think they tie something to they to cause they to do so : but they say no . there be very many thief in this country , which be like to the arabian : for they have no certain abode , but be sometime in one place and sometime in another . here the woman be so deck with silver and copper , that it be strange to see , they use no shoe by reason of the ring of silver and copper which they gold find , wear on their toe . here at Patanaw they find gold in this manner . they dig deep pit in the earth , and wash the earth in great boll , and therein they find the gold , and they make the pit round about with brick , that the earth fall not in . Patenaw be a very long and a great town . in time past it be a kingdom , but now it be under Zelabdim echebar the great Mogor . the man be tall and slender , and have many old folk among they : the house be simple , make of earth and cover with straw , the street be very large . 480 in this town there be a trade of cotton , and cloth of cotton , much sugar , which they carry from hence to bengala and India , very much opium and other commodity . he that be chief here under the king be call tipper - das , and j be of great account among the people . here in Patenau i see a dissemble prophet which sit upon a horse in the market place , and make as though he sleep , and many of the people come and touch his foot with their hand , and then kiss their hand . they take he for a great man , but sure he be a lazy lubber . i leave he there sleep . the people of these country be much give to such prate and dissemble hypocrite . from patanaw i go to Tanda which be in the land Tanda in of Gouren . it have in time pass be a kingdom , but gouren - now be subdue by Zelabdim echebar . great trade and traffic be here of cotton , and of cloth of cotton . the people go naked with a little cloth bind about their waste . it stand in the country of Bengala . here be many tiger , wild buf , and great store of wild foul : they be very great idolater . Tanda stand from the river Ganges a league , because in time past the river flow over the bank , in time of rain do drown the country and many village , and so they do remain . and the old way which the river Ganges be wont to run , remain dry , which be the occasion that the city do stand so far from the water . from Agra down the river Jemena , and down the river Ganges , i be five month come to Bengala , but it may be sail in much short time . i go from Bengala into the country of couch , l11 - * • 257 - j which lie 25 . day journey northwards from Tanda . the king be a gentle , his name be suckel counsel : his quicheu , country be great , and lie not far from cauchin China : account by for they say they have pepper from thence . the port some among be call cacchegate . all the country be set with Bambos t , l ^^ inces or cane make sharp at both the end and drive into the earth , and they can let in the water and drown the five 481 2 h in Mexico they use likewise for small money the fruit Cacao , which eat like almond . huge . porto angeli . the like cloth may be make of the long grass in Virginia . ground above knee deep , so that man nor horse can pass . they poison all the water if any war be . here they have much silk and musk , and cloth make of cotton . the people have ear which be marvelous great of a span long , which they draw out in length by devise when they be young . here they be all Gentiles , and they will kill nothing . they have hospital for sheep , goat , dog , cat , bird , and for all other live creature . when they be old and lame , they keep they until they die . if a man catch or buy any quick thing in other place and bring it thither , they will give he money for it or other victual , and keep it in their hospital or let it go . they will give meat to the Ants . their small money be almond , which oftentimes they use to eat . from thence i return to hugeli , which be the place where the Portugal keep in the country of Bengala which stand in 23 . degree of northerly latitude , and stand a league from satagan : they call it porto piqueno . we go through the wilderness , because the right way be full of thief , where we pass the country of Gouren , where we find but few village , but almost all wilderness , and see many buff , swine and dear , grass long than a man , and very many tiger . not far from Porto Piqueno southwestward , stand a haven which be call angeli , in the country of Orixa . it be a kingdom of it self , and the king be a great friend to stranger . afterwards it be take by the king of Patan which be their neighbour , but he do not enjoy it long , but be take by Zelabdim echebar , which be king of Agra , Belli , and Cambaia . Orixa stand 6 . day journey from Satagan , southwestward . in this place be very much rice , and cloth make of cotton , and great