into the water where it be very deep : and both the party go into the water by the pole , and there sit man to judge , and they both do dive under the water , and he which remain long under the water do win the suit . the 10 of January i go from Pegu to Malacca , pass by many of the port of Pegu , as Martavan , the hand of Tavi , from whence come great store of five 497 21 tin which serve all India , the hand of tanaseri , Junsalaon , and many other ; and so come to Malacca the 8 of February , where the Portugal have a castle which stand near the sea . and the country fast without the town belong to the Malayos , which be a kind of proud people . they go naked with a cloth about their middle , and a little roll of cloth about their head . hither come many ship from China and from the Malucos , Banda ; timor , and from many other hand [ ii i . 263 . ] of the Javas , which bring great store of spice and drug , and diamond and other jewel . the voyage into many of these hand belong unto the captain of Malacca : so that none may go thither without his licence : which yield he great sum of money every year . the Portugal here have often time war with the king of Achem which stand in the hand of Sumatra : from whence come great store of pepper and other spice every year to Pegu and Mecca within the red sea , and other place . the voyage to when the Portugal go from Macao in China to Jafan ' Japan , they carry much white silk , gold , musk , and porcelain : and they bring from thence nothing but silver . they have a great carrack which go thither . every year , and she bring from thence every year ab ° ve ® ixe hundred thousand crusado : and all this sadoe ^ indher s ’ lver of JaPan , and two hundred thousand crusado imply more in silver which they bring yearly out of India , yearly by they they employ to their great advantage in China : and they ^ ch ^ a ^ m bring from thence gold , musk , silk , copper , porcelain , ’ and many other thing very costly and gild . when the Portugal come to canton in China to traffic , they must remain there but certain day : and when they come in at the gate of the city , they must enter their name in a book , and when they go out at night they must put out their name . they may not lie in the town all night , but must lie in their boat without the town . and their day be expire , if any man remain there , they be evil use and imprison . the 498 chinians be very suspicious , and do not trust stranger . it be think that the king do not know that any stranger come into his country . and further it be credible report that the common people see their king very seidome or not at all , nor may not look up to that place where he sit . and when he ride abroad he be carry upon a great chair or serrion gild very fair , wherein there be make a little house with a latise to look out at : so that he may see they , but they may not look up at he : and all the time that he pass by they , they heave up their hand to their head , and lie their head on the ground , and look not up until he be pass . the order of China be when they mourn , that they be white thread shoe , and hat of straw . the man do mourn for his wife two year , the wife for her husband three year : the son for his father a year , and for his mother two year . and all the time which they mourn they keep the dead in the house , the bowel be take out and fill with chownam or lime , and coffin : and when the time be expire they carry they out play and pipe , and burn they . and when they return they pull off their mourn weed , and marry at their pleasure . a man may keep as many concubine as he will , but one wife only . all the chineans , japonians , and cauchin writing chineans do write right downward , and they do write with a fine pencil make of dog or cat hair . ’ Laban be a hand among the Javas from whence come Laban . the diamond of the new water . and they find they diamond . in the river : for the king will not suffer they to dig the rock . Jamba be a hand among the Javas also , from whence come diamond . and the king have a mass of earth which be gold ; it grow in the middle of a river : and when the king do lack gold , they cut part of the earth and melt it , whereof come gold . this mass of earth do appear but once in a year ; which be when the water be low : and this be in the month of April . 499 bima . Bima be another hand among the Javas , where the woman travel and labour as our man do in England , and the man keep house and go where they will . he return the 29 of march 1588 , i return from Malacca to from Malacca . Martavan , and so to Pegu , where i remain the second time until the 17 of September , and then i go to Cosmin , and there take ship ; and pass many danger by reason of contrary wind , it please God Bengala . that we arrive in Bengala in November follow : where i stay for want of passage until the three of February 1589 , and then i ship my self for Cochin . in which voyage we endure great extremity for lack of fresh water : for the weather be extreme hot , and we be many merchant and passenger , and we have very many