the rest he have four white white elephant , which be very strange and rare : for there be elephants - none other king which have they but he : if any other king have one , he will send unto he for it . when any of these white elephant be bring unto the king , all the merchant in the city be command to see they , and to give he a present of half a ducat , which do come to a great sum : for that there be many merchant in the city . after that you have give your present you may come and see they at your pleasure , although they stand in the king house . this king in his title be call the king of the white elephant . if any other king have one , and will not send it he , he will make war with he for it : for he have rather lose a great part of his kingdom , than not to conquer he . they do very great service unto these white elephant ; every one of they stand in a house gild with gold , and they do feed in vessel of silver and gilt . one of they when he do go to the river to be wash , as every day they do , go under a canopy of cloth of gold or of silk carry over he by six or eight man , and eight or ten man go before he play on drum , shaum , or other instrument : and when he be wash and come out of the river , there be a gentleman which do wash his foot in a silver basin : which be his office give he by the king . there be no such account make of any black elephant , be he never so great . and sure there be woonderfoll fair and great , and some be nine cubit in height . and they do report that the king have above five thousand elephant of war , beside many other which be not teach to fight . this king have a very large place wherein he take the wild elephant . it stand about a mile from Pegu , build with a fair court within , and be in a great grove or wood : and there be many huntsman , which go into the wilderness with she elephant : for without the she they be not to be take . and they be teach for that purpose : and every hunter have five or six of they : and they say that they anoint they she elephant with a certain ointment , which when the wild elephant do smell , he will not leave she . when they have bring the wild elephant near unto the place , they send word unto the town , and many horseman and footman come out and cause the she elephant to enter into a strait 488 way which do go to the palace , and the she and Jie do run in : for it be like a wood : and when they be in , the gate do shut . afterwards they get out the female : and when the male see that he be leave alone , he weep and cry , and run against the wall , which be make of so strong tree , that some of they do break their tooth with run against they . than they prick he with sharp cane , and cause he to go into a strait house , and there they put a rope about his middle and about his foot , and let he stand there three or four day without eat or drink : and then they bring a female to he , with meat and drink , and within few day he become tame . the chief force of the king be in these elephant . and when they go into the war they set a frame of wood upon their back , bind with great cord , wherein sit four or six man , which fight with gun , bow and arrow , dart and other weapon . and they say that their skin be so thick that a pellet of a harquebus will scarce pierce they , except it be in some tender place . their weapon be very bid . they have gun , but shoot very bad in they , dart and sword short without point . the king keep a very great state : when he sit abroad as he do every day twice , all his noble man which they call Shemines sit on each side , a good distance off , and a great guard without they . the court yard be very great . if any man will speak with the king , he be to kneel down , to heave up his hand to his head , and to put his head to the ground three time , when he enter , in the middle way , and when he come near to the king : and then he sit down and talk with the king : if the king like well of he , he sit near he within three or four pace : if he think not well of he , he sit further off . when he go to war , he go very strong . at my be there he go to Odia in the country of Siam with three hundred thousand man , and five thousand elephant . thirty thousand man be 489 A . D . 1583 - 91 . odia a city in Siam . his guard . Theise people do eat root , herb , leaf , dog , cat , rat , serpent , and snake ; they refuse almost nothing . when the king ride abroad , he ride with a great guard , and many nobleman , oftentimes upon a elephant with a fine castle upon he very fair gild with gold ; and sometime upon a great frame like a horsliter , which have a little house upon it cover over head , but open on the side , which be all gild with gold , and set with many ruby and saphire , whereof he have infinite store in his country , and be carry upon this manner of sixteen or eighteen man shoulder . this coach in cartage on < - kp : r lanmiaorp i « rail Sprrinn . Verv oreat feastinv their language be call Serrion . very great feast and