gild , because the rain consume off the gold : for they stand open abroad . if they do not consume their gold in these vanity , it will be very plentiful and good cheap in Pegu . about two day journey from Pegu there be a Varelle or Pagode , which be the pilgrimage of the Pegues : it be call dogonne , and be of a wonder bigness , and all gild from the foot to the top . and there be a house by it wherein the tallipoy which be their priest do 492 preach . this house be five and fifty pace in length , and have three pawn or walk in it , and forty great pillar gild , which stand between the walk ; and it be open on all side with a number of small pillar , which be likewise gild : it be gild with gold within and without . there be house very fair round about for the pilgrim to lie in : and many goodly house for the tallipoy to preach in , which be full of image both of man and woman , which be all gild over with gold . it be the fair place , as i suppose , that be in the world : it stand very high , and there be four way to it , which all along be set with tree of fruit , in such wise that a man may go in the shade above two mile in length . and when their feast day be , a man can hardly pass by water or by land for the great press of people ; for they come from all place of the kingdom of Pegu thither at their feast . in Pegu they have many tallipoy or priest , which preach against all abuse . many man resort unto they . when they enter into their kiack , that be to say , their holy place or temple , at the door there be a great jar of water with a cock or a ladle in it , and there they wash their foot ; and than they enter in , and lift up their hand to their head first to their preacher , and then to the sun , and so sit down . the tallipoy go very strange apparel with the apparel one camboline or thin cloth next to their body of a ° ft } ie ' trfnests - browne colour , another of yellow double many time upon their shoulder : and those two be gird to they with a broad girdle : and they have a skin of leather hang on a string about their neck , whereupon they sit , bare head 8c bear footed : for none of they wear shoe ; with their right arm bare and a great broad sombrero or shadow in their hand to defend they in the summer from the sun , and in the winter from the rain . when the tallipoy or priest take their order , first they go to school until they be twenty year old or more , and then they come before a tallipoie appoint for that purpose , who they call Rowli : 493 he be of the chief and most learned , and he oppose they , and afterward examine they many time , whether they will leave their friend , and the company of all woman , and take upon they the habit of a tallipoie . if any be content , than he ride upon a horse about the street very rich apparel , with drum and pipe , to show that he leave the riches of the world to be a tallipoie . in few day after , he be carry upon a thing like a horsliter , which they call a serion , upon ten or twelve man shoulder in the apparel of a tallipoie , with pipe and drum , and many tallipoy with he , and all his friend , and so they go with he to his house which stand without the town , and there they leave he . every one of they have his house , which be very little , set upon six or eight post , and they go up to they with a ladder of twelve or fourteen staff . their house be for the most part by the high way side , and among the tree , and in the wood . and they go with a great pot make of wood or fine earth , and cover , tie with a broad girdle upon their shoulder , which come under their arm , wherewith they go to beg their victual which they eat , which be rice , fish , and herb . they demand nothing , but come to the door , and the people present do give they , some one thing , and some another : and they put all together in their pot : for they say they must eat of their alm , observation of and therewith content themselves . they keep their new moon . feasf by the moon : and when it be new moon they keep their great feast : and then the people send rice and other thing to that kiack or church of which they be ; and there all the tallipoy do meet which be of that church , and eat the victual which be send they . when the tallipoy do preach , many of the people carry they gift into the pulpit where they sit and preach . and there be one which sit by they to take that which the people bring . it be divide among they . they have none other ceremony nor service that i can see , but only preach . 494 i go from Pegu to Jamahey , which be in the Jamahey five country of the langeianne , who we call jangome ; it be five and twenty day journey Northeast from Pegu . in which journey i pass many fruitful and pleasant wardfrom country . the country be very low , and have many Pegu . fair river . the house be very bad , make of cane , and cover with straw . here be many wild buff and elephant . Jamahey be a very fair and great town , with fair house of stone , well people , the street be very - large , the man very well set and strong , with a cloth about they , bear head and bear footed : for in all these country