they wear no shoe . the woman be much fair than those of Pegu . here in all these country they have no wheat . they make some cake of rice . hither to Jamahey come many merchant out of China , and bring great store of musk , gold , silver , and many other thing of China work . here be great store of victual : they have such plenty that they will not milk the buffle , as they do in all other place . [ ii i . 262 . ] here be great store of copper and benjamin . in these country when the people be sick they make a vow to offer meat unto the devil , if they escape : and when they be recover they make a banquet with many pipe and drum and other instrument , and dance all the night , and their friend come and bring gift , coco , fig , arrecae , and other fruit , and with great dance and . rejoice they offer to the devil , and say , they give the devil to eat , and drive he out . when they be dance and play they will cry and hallow very loud ; and in this sort they say they drive he away . and when they be sick a tallipoy or two every night do sit by they and sing , to please the devil that he shall not hurt they . and if any die he be carry upon a they bune great frame make like a tower , with a cover all gild thetr dead - with gold make of cane carry with fourteen or sixteen man , with drum and pipe and other instrument play before he to a place out of the town and there be burn . he be accompany with all his 495 Caplan be the place where the ruby and other precious stone be find . Anthony gal - vano write of these ball . friend and neighbour , all man : and they give to the tallipoy or priest many mat and cloth : and then they return to the house and there make a feast for two day : and then the wife with all the neighbour wife and her friend go to the place where he be burn , and there they sit a certain time and cry and gather the piece of bone which be leave unburn and bury they , and then return to their house and make a end of all mourning . and the man and woman which be near of kin do shave their head , which they do not use except it be for the death of a friend : for they much esteem of their hair . Caplan be the place where they find the ruby , saphire , and spinelle : it stand six day journey from Ava in the kingdom of Pegu . there be many great high hill out of which they dig they . none may go to the pit but only those which dig they . in pegu , and in all the country of Ava , Langeiannes , Siam , and the Bramas , the man wear bunch or little round ball in their privy member : some of they wear two and some three . they cut the skin and so put they in , one into one side and another into the other side ; which they do when they be 25 or 30 year old , and at their pleasure they take one or more of they out as they think good . when they be marry the husband be for every child which his wife have , to put in one until he come to three and then no more : for they say the woman do desire they . they be invent because they shall not abuse the male sex . for in time past all those country be so give to that villainy , that they be very scarce of people . it be also ordain that the woman shall not have pass three cubit of cloth in their nether clothes , which they bind about they ; which be so strait , that when they go in the street , they show one side of the leg bear above the knee . the bunch aforesaid be of diverse sort : the least be as big as a little walnut , and very round : the great be as big as a little hen egg : 496 1583 - 91 ' some be of brass and some of silver : but those of silver be for the king and his noble man . these be gild and make with great cunning , and ring like a little bell . there be some make of lead , which they call selwy because they ring but little : and these be of lesser price for the poor sort . the king sometime take his out , and give they to his nobleman as a great gift : and because he have use they , they esteem they great . they will put one in , and heal up the place in seven or eight day . the Bramas which be of the king country ( for the king be a brama ) have their leg or belly , or some part of their body , as they think good themselves , make black with certain thing which they have : they use to prick the skin , and to put on it a kind of anile or black , which do continue always . and this be count a honour among they : but none may have it but the Bramas which be of the king kindred . these people wear no beard : they pull out the the people of hair on their face with little pinson make for that pegu wear no purpose . some of they will let 16 or 20 hair grow together , some in one place of his face and some in another , and pull out all the rest : for he carry his pinson always with he to pull the hair out assoon as they appear . if they see a man with a beard they wonder at he . they have their tooth black both man and woman , for they say a dog have his tooth white , therefore they will black they . the Pegues if they have a suit in the law which be so doubtful that they can well determine it , put two long cane