they . they be thief all and have no settle dwelling , but remove from place to place with their camel , goat , and horse , wife and child and all . they have large blue gown , their wife ear and nose be ring very full of ring of copper and silver , and they wear ring of copper about their leg . Basora stand near the gulf of Persia , and be a town of great trade of spice and drug which come from ormus . also there be great store of wheat , rice , 467 and date grow thereabouts , wherewith they serve Babylon and all the country , ormus , and all the part of India . i go from Basora to ormus down the gulf of Persia in a certain ship make of board , and sow together with cayro , which be thread make of the husk of cocoe , and certain cane or straw leave sow upon the seam of the horde which be the cause that they leak very much . and so have Persia always on the left hand , and the coast of Arabia on the right hand we pass many island , and among other the famous hand baharim from whence come the best pearl which be round and orient . ormus be a island in circuit about five and twenty or thirty mile , and be the dry island in the world : for there be nothing grow in it but only salt ; for their water , wood , or victual , and all thing necessary come out of Persia , which be about twelve mile from thence . all the hand thereabouts be very fruitful , from whence all kind of victual be send unto ormus . the portugal have a castle here which stand near unto the sea , wherein there be a captain for the king of Portugal have under he a convenient number of soldier , whereof some part remain in the castle , and some in the town . in this town be merchant of all nation , and many moor and gentile . here be very great trade of all sort of spice , drug , silk , cloth of silk , fine tapestry of Persia , great store of pearl which come from the isle of baharim , and be the best pearl of all other , and many horse of Persia , which serve all India . they have a moor to their king , which be choose and govern by the Portugal . their woman be very strange attire , wear on their nose , ear , neck , arm and leg many ring set with jewel , and lock of silver and gold in their ear , and a long bar of gold upon the side of their nose . their ear with the weight of their jewel be wear so wide , that a man may thrust three of his finger into they . here very short after our arrival we be put in prison , and have part of our good take 468 from we by the captain of the castle , who name be don Mathias de Albuquerque ; and from hence the eleven of October he ship we and send we for goa unto the viceroy , which at that time be don Francisco de Mascarenhas . the ship wherein we be embark for goa belong to the captain , and carry one hundred twenty and four horse in it . all merchandise carry to goa in a ship wherein be horse pay no custom in goa . the horse pay custom , the good pay nothing ; but if you come in a ship which bring no horse , you be then to pay eight in the hundred for your good . the first city of India that we arrive at upon the five of November , after we have pass the coast of Zindi , be call diu , which stand in a hand in the kingdom Diu . of Cambaia , and be the strong town that the Portugal have in those part . it be but little , but well store with merchandise ; for here they lade many great ship with diverse commodity for the streit of Mecca , for ormus , and other place , and these be ship of the moor and of Christians . but the moor can pass , except they have a passport from the Portugal . Cambaietta be the chief city of that province , which be great and very populous , and fair build for a town of the gentile : but if there happen any famine , the people will sell their child for very little . the last king of Cambaia be sultan Badu , which be kill at the siege of diu , and short after his city be take by the great Mogor , which be the king of Agra and of delli , which be forty day journey from the country of Cambaia . here the woman wear upon their arm infinite number of ring make of elephant tooth , wherein they take so much delight , that they have rather be without their meat then without their bracelet . go from diu we come to Daman the second town of the Portugal in the country Daman . of Cambaia which be distant from diu forty league . here be no trade but of corn and rice . they have many village under they which they quiet possess in time of peace , but in time of war the enemy be master of 469 basaim . they . from thence we pass by basaim , and from Tana . Basaim to Tana , at both which place be small trade but only of corn and rice . the ten of November we Chaul . arrive at Chaul which stand in the firm land . there be two town , the one belong to the Portugal , and the other to the moor . that of the Portugal be near to the sea , and command the bay , and be wall round about . a little above that be the town of the moor which be govern by a moor king call xa - maluco . here be great traffic for all sort of spice and drug , silk , and cloth of silk , sandal , elephant tooth , and much china work , and much sugar which be make of the nut call Gagara : the tree be call the palmer : which be the profitable tree