and fruitful . from thence i go to Servidore which be a fine country , and the king be call , the king of bread . the house here be all thatch and make of loom . here be many moor and gentile , but there be small religion among they . from thence i go to 472 Bellapore , and so to barrampore , which be in the country Bellapore . of Zelabdim echebar . in this place their money be make of a kind of silver round and thick , to the value of twenty penny , which be very good silver . it be marvellous great and a , populous country . in their winter which be in June , July , and August , there be no pass in the street but with horse , the water be so high . the house be make of loom and thatch . here be great store of cotton cloth make , and paint clothes of cotton wool : here grow great store of corn and rice . we find marriage great store both in town strange and village in many place where we pass , of boy mariases - of eight or ten year , and girl of five or six year old . they both do ride upon one horse very trim deck , and be carry through the town with great pipe and play , and so return home and eat of a banquet make of rice and fruit , and there they dance the most part of the night and so make a end of the marriage . they lie not together until they be ten year old . they say they marry their child so young , because it be a order that when the man die , the woman must be burn with he : so that if the father [ ii i . 254 . ] die , yet they may have a father in law to help to bring up the child which be marry : and also that they will not leave their son without wife , nor their daughter without husband . from thence we go to Mandoway , which be a very strong town . it be Mandoway a besiege twelve year by Zelabdim echebar before he strong can win it . it stand upon a very great high rock ' as the most part of their castle do , and be of a very great circuit . from hence we go to Ugini and ugini . serringe , where we overtake the ambassador of Zelabdim echebar with a marvelous great company of man , elephant , and camel . here be great trade of cotton and cloth make of cotton , and great store of drug . from thence we go to Agra pass many river , which by reason of the rain be so swell , that we wade Agra a and . eat and swim oftentimes for our life . Agra be a very city . 473 the like be report of the city of China . great city and populous , build with stone , have fair and large street , with a fair river run by it , which fall into the gulf of Bengala . it have a fair castle and a strong with a very fair ditch . here be many moor and gentile , the king be call Zelabdim echebar : the people for the most part call he the great Mogor . from thence we go for fatepore , which be the place where the king keep his court . the town be great than Agra , but the house and street be not so fair . here dwell many people both moor and gentile . the king have in Agra and fatepore as they do credible report 1000 elephant , thirty thousand horse , 1400 . tame deer , 800 . concubine : such store of ounce , tiger , Buffies , cock and hawk , that be very strange to see . he keep a great court , which they call Dericcan . Agra and fatepore be two very great city , either of they much great than London and very populous . between Agra and fatepore be 12 . mile , and all the way be a market of victual and other thing , as full as though a man be still in a town , and so many people as if a man be in a market . they have many fine cart , and many of they carve and gild with gold , with two wheel which be draw with two little Buis about the bigness of our great dog in England , and they will run with any horse , and carry two or three man in one of these cart : they be cover with silk or very fine cloth , and be use here as our coach be in England . hither be great resort of merchant from Persia and out of India , and very much merchandise of silk and cloth , and of precious stone , both ruby , diamond , and pearl . the king be apparel in a white cabie make like a shirt tie with string on the one side , and a little cloth on his head colour oftentimes with red or yellow . None come into his house but his eunuch which keep his woman . here in fatepore we stay all three until the 28 . of September 1585 . and then master John Newberie take his journey towards the city of lahor , determine from 474 thence to go for Persia and then for Aleppo or Constantinople , whether he can get soon passage unto , and direct i to go for Bengala and for Pegu , and do promise i , if it please God , to meet i in Bengala within two year with a ship out of England . i leave William lead the jeweller in service with the king Zelabdim echebar in fatepore , who do entertain he very well , and give he a house and five slave , a horse , and every day six saint saint in money . i go from Agra to satagam in Bengala , in the company of one hundred and fourscore boat lade with salt , opium , hinge , lead , carpet , and diverse other commodity down the river Jemena . the chief merchant be moor and gentile . in these country they have many strange ceremony . the Bramanes which be their priest , come to the water and have a string