about their neck make with great ceremony , and lade up water with both their hand , and turn the string first with both their hand within , and then one arm after the other out . though it be never so cold , they will wash themselves in cold water or in warm . Theise Gentiles will eat no flesh nor kill any thing . they live with rice , butter , milk , and fruit . they pray in the water naked , and dress their meat and eat it naked , and for their penance they lie flat upon the earth , and rise up and turn themselves about 30 . or 40 . time , and use to heave up their hand to the sun , and to kiss the earth , with their arm and leg stretch along out , and their right leg always before the left . Every time they lie down , they make a score on the ground with their finger to know when their stint be finish . the Bramanes mark themselves in the forehead , ear and throat with a kind of yellow gear which they grind , and every morning they do it . and they have some old man which go in the street with a box of yellow powder , and mark man on their head and neck as they meet they . and their wife do come by 10 . 20 . and 30 . together to the water side sing , and there 475 A . D . 1583 - 91 - Wil . Leades serve the king of Cambaia . the superstitious ceremony of the Bramanes . do wash themselves , and then use their ceremony , and mark themselves in their forehead and face , and carry some with they , and so depart sing . their daughter be marry , at , or before the age of io . year . the man may have 7 . wife . they be a kind of crafty people , worse than the Jew . when they salute one another , they heave up their hand to their head , and say Rame , rame . from Agra i come to Prague , where the river Ganges . Jemena enter into the mighty river Ganges , and Jemena lose his name . Ganges come out of the [ ii i . 255 . ] northwest , and run east into the gulf of Bengala . in those part there be many tiger and many partridge 8c turtle - dove , and much other foul . here be many beggar in these country which go naked , and the people make great account of they : they call they Schesche . here i see one which be a monster among the rest . he will have nothing upon he , his beard be very long , and with the hair of his head he cover his privity . the nail of some of his finger be two inch long , for he will cut nothing from he , neither will he speak . he be accompany with eight or ten , and they speak for he . when any man speak to he , he will lay his hand upon his breast and bow himself , but will not speak . he will not speak to the king . we go from Prague down Ganges , the which be here very broad . here be great store of fish of sundry sort , 8c of wild foul , as of swan , goose , crane , and many other thing . the country be very fruitful and populous . the man for the most part have their face shave , and their head very long , except some which bee all shave save the crown : and some of they be as though a man shall set a dish on their head , and shave they round , all but the crown . in this river of Ganges be many hand . his water be very sweet and pleasant , and the country adjoin Bannaras . very fruitful . from thence we go to Bannaras which be a great town , and great store of cloth be make there of cotton , and shash for the moor . in this place 476 i583 - 91 - they be all Gentiles , and be the great idolater that ever i see . to this town come the gentile on pil - pilgrimage grimage out of far country . here alongst the water ° fthegentiles - side be very many fair house , and in all of they , or for the most part they have their image stand , which be evil favour , make of stone and wood , some like lion , leopard , and monkei , some like man and woman , and peacock , and some like the devil with four arm and 4 . hand . they sit across legged , some with one thing in their hand , and some another , and by break of day and before , there be man and woman which come out of the town and wash themselves in Ganges . and there be diverse old man which upon place of earth make for the purpose , sit pray , and they give the people three or four straw , which they take and hold they between their finger when they wash themselves : and some sit to mark they in the forehead , and they have in a cloth a little rice , barley , or money , which , when they have wash themselves , they give to the old man which sit there pray . afterwards they go to diverse of their image , and give they of their sacrifice . and when they give , the old man say certain prayer , and then be all holy . and in diverse place there stand a kind of image which in their language they call Ada . and they have diverse great stone carve , whereon they pour water , and throw thereupon some rice , wheat , barley , and some other thing . This Ada have four hand with claw . Moreover , they have a great place make of stone like to a well with step to go down ; wherein the water stand very foul and stink : for the great quantity of flower , which continual they throw into it , do make it stink . there be always many people in it : for they say when they wash themselves