calm , and hot weather . yet it Ceyhn . please God that we arrive in Ceylon the six of march , where we stay five day to water , and to furnish our self with other necessary provision . This Ceylon be a brave hand , very fruitful and fair ; but by reason of continual war with the king thereof , all thing be very dear : for he will not suffer any thing to be bring to the castle where the Portugal be : wherefore often time they have great want of victual . their provision of victual come out of Bengala every year . the king be call Raia , and be of great force : for he come to Columbo , which be the place where the Portugal have their fort , with a hundred thousand man , and many elephant . but they be naked people all of they ; yet many of they be good with their piece which be musket . when the king talk with any man , he stand upon one leg , and set the other foot upon his knee with his sword in his hand : it be not their order for the king to sit but to stand . his apparel be a fine paint cloth make of cotton wool about his middle : his hair be long and bind • up with a little fine cloth about his head : all [ ii i . 264 . ] the rest of his body be naked . his guard be a thousand man , which stand round about he , and he in the 500 middle ; and when he march , many of they go before he , and the rest come after he . they be of the race of the chingalaye , which they say be the best kind of all the malabar . their ear be very large ; for the great they be , the more honourable they be account . some of they be a span long . the wood which they burn be cinamom wood , and it smell very sweet . there be great store of ruby , saphire , and spinely in this hand : the best kind of all be here ; but the king will not suffer the inhabitant to dig for they , lest his enemy shall know of they , and make war against he , and so drive he out of his country for they . they have no horse in all the country . the elephant be not so great as those of Pegu , which be monstrous huge : but they say all other elephant do fear they , and none dare fight with they , though they be very small . their woman have a cloth bind about they from their middle to their knee : and all the rest be bare . all of they be black and but little , both man and blanch people . woman . their house be very little , make of the branch of the palmer or cocoa - tree , and cover with the leaf of the same tree . the eleven of march we sail from Ceylon , and so double the cape of Comori . not far from thence , cape de between Ceylon and the main land of Negapatan , Comori . they fish for pearl . and there be fish every year very much ; which do serve all India , Cambaia , and Bengala , it be not so orient as the pearl of baharim in the gulf of Persia . from cape de Comori we pass by Coulam , which be a fort of the Portugal : from coulam . whence come great store of pepper , which come for Portugal : for oftentimes there lade one of the carrack of Portugal . thus pass the coast we arrive in Cochin the 22 of march , where we find the Cochin . weather warm , but scarcity of victual : for here grow neither corn nor rice : and the great part come from Bengala . they have here very bad water , 5O1 people with swell leg mention also by i oh . Huygen . how pepper grow . black people y or Calicut , or Cananor . for the river be far off . this bad water cause many of the people to be like leper , and many of they have their leg swell as big as a man in the waste , and many of they be scant able to go . Theise people here be malabar , , and of the race of the naire of Calicut : and they differ much from the other malabar . Theise have their head very full of hair , and bind up with a string : and there do appear a bush without the band wherewith it be bind . the man be tall and strong , and good archer with a long bow and a long arrow , which be their best weapon : yet there be some caliver among they , but they handle they bad . here grow the pepper ; and it spring up by a tree or a pole , and be like our ivy berry , but something long like the wheat ear : and at the first the bunch be green , and as they wax ripe they cut they off and dry they . the leaf be much lesser than the ivy leaf and thin . all the inhabitant here have very little house cover with the leaf of the coco - tree . the man be of a reasonable stature ; the woman little ; all black , with a cloth bind about their middle hang down to their ham ; all the rest of their body be naked : they have horrible great ear with many ring set with pearl and stone in they . the king go incach , as they do all ; he do not remain in a place above five or six day : he have many house , but they be but little : he guard be but small : he remove from one house to another accord to their order . all the pepper of Calicut and course cinamom grow here in this country . the best cinamom do come from Ceylon , and be peel from fine young tree . here be very many palmer or coco tree , which be their chief food : for it be their meat and drink : and yield many other necessary thing , as