the voyage of m . Ralph Fitch merchant of London by the way of Tripoli in Syria , to ormus , and so to goa in the east India , to Cambaia , and all the kingdom of Zelabdim echebar the great Mogor , to the mighty river Ganges , and down to Bengala , to Bacola , and Chonderi , to Pegu , to Imahay in the kingdom of Siam , and back to Pegu , and from thence to Malacca , Zeilan , Cochin , and all the coast of the east India : begin in the year of our lord 1583 , and end 1591 , wherein the strange rite , manner , and custom of those people , and the exceed rich trade and commodity of those country be faithful set down and diligent describe , by the aforesaid m . Ralph Fitch . n the year of our lord 1583 , i Ralph Fitch of London merchant be desirous to see the country of the east India , in the company of m . John Newberie merchant ( which have be at ormus once before ) of William leede jeweller , and James story painter , be chief set [ ii i . 251 . ] forth by the right worshipful sir Edward Osborne knight , and m . Richard 0 stape citizen and merchant of London , do ship my self in a ship of London call the tiger , wherein we go for Tripoli in Syria : and from thence we take the way for Aleppo , which we go in seven day with the caro van . be in Aleppo , and find good company , we go from thence to birra , which be two day and a half travail with camel . birra be a little town , but very plentiful of victual : birra . and near to the wall of the town run the river of Euphrates . here we buy a boat and agree with a master and bargeman , for to go to Babylon . Theise boat be but for one voyage ; for the stream do run five 465 2 g so fast downwards that they can return . they carry you to a town which they call Felugia , and there you sell the boat for a little money , for that which cost you fifty at birra you sell there for seven or eight . from birra to Felugia be sixteen day journey , it be not good that one boat go alone , for if it shall chance to break , you shall have much a do to save your good from the arabian , which be always there about rob : and in the night when your boat be make fast , it be necessary that you keep good watch . for the arabian that be thief , will come swim and steal your good and flee away , against which a gun be very good , for they do fear it very much . in the river of Euphrates from birra to Felugia there be certain place where you pay custom , so many medines for a some or camel lade , and certain raison and soap , which be for the son of aborise , which be lord of the arabian and all that great desert , and have some village upon Beluga . the river . Felugia where you unlade your good which come from birra be a little village : from whence you go to Babylon in a day . Babylon . Babylon be a town not very great but very populous , and of great traffic of stranger , for that it be the way to Persia , Turkia and Arabia : and from thence do go Carovans for these and other place . here be great store of victual , which come from Armenia down the river of Tigris . they be bring upon raft make of goat skin blow full of wind and board lay upon they : and thereupon they lade their good which be bring down to Babylon , which be discharge they open their skin , and carry they back by camel , to serve another time . Babylon in time past do belong to the kingdom of Persia , but now be subject to the Turk . over against Babylon there be a very fair village from whence you pass to Babylon upon a long bridge make of boat , and tie to a great chain of iron , which be make fast on either side of the river . when any boat be to pass up or down the river , 466 they take away certain of the boat until they be past . the tower of Babel be build on this side the river Tigris , towards Arabia from the town about seven or eight mile , which tower be ruinate on all side , and with the fall thereof have make as it be a little mountain , so that it have no shape at all : it be make of brick dry in the son , and certain cane and leaf of the palm tree lay betwixt the brick . there be no entrance to be see to go into it . it do stand upon a great plain betwixt the river of Euphrates and Tigris . by the river Euphrates two day journey from Babylon at a place call ait , in a field near unto it , be a strange thing to see : a mouth that do continual throw forth against the air boil pitch with a filthy smoke : which pitch do run abroad into a great field which be always full thereof . the moor say that it be the mouth of hell . by reason of the great quantity of it , the man of that country do pitch their boat two or three inch thick on the out side , so that no water do enter into they . their boat be call Danec . A . D . i583 - 9i . the tower of Babel . boil pitch continual issue out of the earth . when there be great store of water in Tigris you may go from Babylon to Basora in 8 or 9 day : if there be small store it will cost you the more day . Basora in time past be under the arabian , but now be subject to the Turk . but some of they the Turk can subdue , for that they hold certain island in the river Euphrates which the Turk can win of