in the world : it do always bear fruit , and do yield wine , oil , sugar , vinegar , cord , coal , of the leaf be make thatch for the house , sail for ship , mat to sit or lie on : of the branch they make their house , and broom to sweep , of the tree wood for ship . the wine do issue out of the top of the tree . they cut a branch of a bow and bind it hard , and hang a earthen pot upon it , which they empty every morning and every evening , and still it and put in certain dry raisin , and it becomes very strong wine in short time . hither many ship come from all part of India , ormus , and many from Mecca : here be many moor and gentile . they have a very strange order among they , they worship a cow , and esteem much of the cow dung to paint the wall of their house . they will kill nothing not so much as a louse : for they hold it a sin to kill any thing . they eat no flesh , but live by root , and rice , and milk . and when the husband die his wife be burn with he , if she be alive : if she will not , her [ ii i . 253 ] head be shave , and then be never any account make of she after . they say if they shall be bury , it be a great sin , for of their body there will come many worm and other vermin , and when their body be consume , those worm will lack sustenance , which 470 1583 - 9 ! • be a sin , therefore they will be burn . in Cambaia they will kill nothing , nor have any thing kill : in the town they have hospital to keep lame dog and cat , and for bird . they will give meat to the Ants . goa be the most principal city which the Portugal goa . have in • India , wherein the viceroy remain with his court . it stand in a hand , which may be 25 . or 30 . mile about . it be a fine city , and for a indian town very fair . the hand be very fair , full of orchard and garden , and many palmer tree , and have some village . here be many merchant of all nation . and the fleet which come every year from Portugal , which be four , five , or six great ship , come first hither . and they come for the most part in September , and remain there forty or fifty day ; and then go to Cochin , where they lade their pepper for Portugal . oftentimes they lade one in goa , the rest go to Cochin which be from goa a hundred league southward . goa stand in the country of Hidalcan , who lie in the country six or seven day journey . his chief city be call bisapor . at our come we be cast into they be th * prison , and examine before the justice and demand for letter , and be charge to be spy , but they can ’ prove nothing by we . we continue in prison until the two and twenty of December , and then we be set at liberty , put in surety for two thousand ducat not to depart the town ; which surety father Stevens a english Jesuite which we find there , 8c another religious man a friend of his procure for we . our surety name be Andreas taborer , to who we pay 2150 . ducat , and still he demand more : whereupon we make suit to the viceroy and justice to have our money again , consider that they have have it in their hand near five month and can prove nothing against we . the viceroy make we a very sharp answer , and say we shall be better sift before it be long , and that they have further matter against we . whereupon we present determine rather to seek our liberty , than 471 to be in danger for ever to be slave in the country , for it be tell we we shall have you strapado . whereupon present , the five day of April 1585 . in the morning we run from thence . And be set over the river , we go two day on foot not without fear , not know the way nor have any guide , for we dare trust none . one of the first town which we come unto , be call Bellergan a Bellergan , where there be a great market keep of town . diamond , ruby , saphire , and many other soft stone . bitapor . from Bellergan we go to bisapor which be a very great town where the king do keep his court . he have many Gentiles in his court and they be great idolater . and they have their idol stand in the wood , which they fall Pagodes . some be like a cow , some like a monkey , some like buffle , some like peacock , and some like the devil . here be very many elephant which they go to war withal . here they have good store of gold and silver : their house be of stone very Gulconda . fair and high . from hence we go for Gulconda , the king whereof be call cutup de lashach . here and in the kingdom of Hidalcan , and in the country of the king of Decan be the diamond find of the old water . it be a very fair town , pleasant , with fair house of brick and timber , it abound with great store of fruit and fresh water . here the man and the woman do go with a cloth bind about their middle without any more apparel . we find it here very hot . the winter begin here about the last of may . in Masulipatan . these part be a port or haven call Masulipatan , which stand eight day journey from hence towards the gulf of Bengala , whether come many ship out of India , pegu , and Sumatra , very rich lade with pepper , spice , and other commodity . the country be very Servidore . good