further benefit by their ware , they will be content to be punish . with that we depart from they , promise they to do our best : and in the end we obtain so much of the archbishop , that he go unto the viceroy to deliver our petition , and persuade he so well , that he be content to set they at liberty , and that their good shall be deliver unto they again , upon condition they shall put in surety for two thousand pardawe , not to depart the country before other order shall be take with they . thereupon they present find a citizen of the town that be their surety for two thousand pardawe , to who they pay in hand one thousand and three hundred pardawe , and because they say they have no more ready money , he give they credit , see what store of merchandise they have , whereby at all time life need be , he may be satisfy : and by that mean they be deliver out of prison , and hire themselves a house , and begin to set open shop : so that they utter much ware , and be present well know among all the merchant , because they always respect gentleman , special such as buy their ware , show great courtesy and honour unto they , whereby they win much credit , and be belove of all man , so that every man favour they , and be willing to do they pleasure . to we they show great friendship , for who sake the archbishop favour they much , and show they very good countenance , which they know well how to increase , by offer he many present , although he will not receive they , neither will ever take gift or present at any man hand . likewise they behave themselves so discreet that no man carry a evil eye , no , nor a evil think towards they . which like not the Jesuit , because it hinder they from that they hope for , so that they cease not still by this dutch Jesuite to put they in fear , that 5 ° 9 they shall be send into Portugal to the king , counsel they to yield themselves Jesuit into their cloister , which if they do , he say they will defend they from all trouble , say further , that he counsel they therein as a friend , and one that know for certain that it be so determine by the viceroy privy council : which to effect he say they stay but for ship that shall sail for Portugal , with diverse other persuasion , to put they in some fear , and so to effect their purpose . the english man to the contrary , dare not say any thing to they , but answer , that as yet they will stay a while , and consider thereof , thereby put the Jesuit in comfort , as one among they , be the principali of they ( call John Newberry ) complain unto i often time , say that he know not what to say or think therein , or which way he may be rid of those trouble : but in the end they determine with themselves to depart from thence , and secret by mean of other friend they employ their money in precious stone ; which the better to effect , one of they be a jeweller , and for the same purpose come with they . which be conclude among they , they dare not make know to any man , neither do they credit we so much , as to show we their mind therein , although they tell we all whatsoever they know . but on a Whitsunday they go abroad to sport themselves about three mile from goa , in the mouth of the river in a country call bard , have with they good store of meat and drink . and because they shall not be suspect , they leave their house and shop , with some ware therein unsold , in custody of a dutch boy , by we provide for they , that look unto it . this boy be in the house not know their intent , and be in bard , they have with they a Patamar , which be one of the indian post , which in the winter time carry letter from one place to the other , who they have hire to guide they : and because that between bard and the firm land there be but a little river , in a manner half dry , they pass over it on foot , and so travel by land , 5iq ... i584 ‘ be never hear of again : but it be think they arrive in Aleppo , as some say , but they know not certain . their great hope be that John Newberry can speak the arabian tongue , which be use in all Arabian those country , or at the least understand ; for it be very general ! common in all place there about , as French with we . news be come to goa , there be a great stir and murmur among the people , and we much wonder at it : for many be of opinion , that we have give they counsel so to do : and present their surety seize upon the good remain , which may amount unto above two hundred pardawe ; and with that and the money he have receive of the english man , he go unto the viceroy , and deliver it unto he : which the viceroy have receive , forgive he the rest . this flight of the english man grieve the Jesuit most , because they have lose such a prey , which they make sure account of : whereupon the dutch Jesuite come to we to ask we if we know thereof , say , that if he have suspect so much , he will have deal otherwise , for that he say , he once have in his hand of they a bag wherein be forty thousand veneseander ( each veneseander be two [ ii i . 268 . ] pardawe ) which be when they be in prison . and that they have always put he in comfort to accomplish his desire : upon the which promise he give they their money again , which otherwise they shall not so light have come by , or peradventure never , as he open say : and in the end he call they heretic , and spy , with a thousand other rail speech , which he utter against they . the english man that be become a Jesuite , hear that his companion be go , and perceive that the Jesuit show he not so great favour , neither use he so well as they do at the first , repent himself ; and see he have not as then make any solemn promise , and be counsel to leave the house , and tell that he can not want a live in the town , as also that the Jesuit can not keep he there without he be willing to stay , so they can not accuse he of any thing , he tell they flat that he have no desire to stay within the cloister . and although they use all the mean they can to keep he there , yet he will not stay , but hire a house without the cloister , and open shop , where he have good store of work : and in the end marry a mestizos daughter of the town , so that he make his account to stay there while he live . by this english man i be instruct of all the way , trade , and voyage of the country , between Aleppo and ormus , and of all the ordinance and common custom which they usual hold during their voyage over the land , as also of the place and town where they pass . and since those english man departure from goa , there never arrive any stranger , either english or other , by land , in the say country , but only italian which daily traffic over land , and use continual trade go and come that way .