. for Pegu in a small ship or foist of one Albert Caravallos , and so pass down Ganges , and pass by the island Sundiva of Sundiva , porto grande , or the country of tippera , sland - the kingdom of Recon and Mogen , leave they on our left side with a fair wind at northwest : our course be south and by east , which bring we to the bar of Negrais in Pegu : if any contrary wind have come , we have throw many of our thing overboard : for we be so pester with people and good , that there be scant place to lie in . from Bengala to Pegu be 90 . league . we enter the bar of Negrais , which be a brave bar negrais . and have 4 . fathom water where it have least . three day after we come to Cosmin , which be a very - pretty cosmin . town , and stand very pleasant , very well furnish with all thing . the people be very tall and well dispose ; the woman white , round face , with little eye : the house be high build , set upon great high post , and they go up to they with long ladder for fear of the ladder use tiger which be very many . the country be very fruitful of all thing . here be very great fig , orange , beastst cocoe , and other fruit . the land be very high that we fall withal , but after we be enter the bar , it be very low and full of river , for they go all too and dwell m fro in boat , which they call paroe , and keep their bmt ' house with wife and child in they . 485 Dela . Cirion . Macao . coach cart on man shoulder . Pegu . from the bar of Nigrais to the city of Pegu be ten day journey by the river . we go from cosmin to Pegu in faroes or boat , and pass up the river we come to Medon , which be a pretty town , where there be a wonderful number of paroe , for they keep their house and their market in they all upon the water . they row too and fro , and have all their merchandize in their boat with a great Sombrero or shadow over their head to keep the sun from they , which be as broad as a great cart wheel make of the leaf of the Coco tree and fig tree , and be very light . from Medon we go to Dela , which be a very fair town , and have a fair port into the sea , from whence go many ship to Malacca , Mecca , and many other place . here be 18 . or 20 . very great and long house , where they tame and keep many elephant of the king : for there about in the wilderness they catch the wild elephant . it be a very fruitful country . from Dela we go to Cirion , which be a good town , and have a fair port into the sea , whither come many ship from Mecca , Malacca , Sumatra , and from diverse other place . and there the ship stay and discharge , and send up their good in paroe to Pegu . from Cirion we go to Macao , which be a pretty town , where we leave our boat or paroe , and in the morning take delingege , which be a kind of coach make of cord and cloth quilt , and carry upon a stang between 3 . or 4 . man : we come to Pegu the same day . Pegu be a city very great , strong , and very fair , with wall of stone , and great ditch round about it . there be two town , the old town and the new . in the old town be all the merchant stranger , and very many merchant of the country . all the good be sell in the old town which be very great , and have many suburb round about it , and all the house be make of cane which they call Bambos , and be cover with straw . in your house you have a warehouse 486 which they call Godon , which be make of brick to put your good in , for oftentimes they take fire and burn in a hour four or five hundred house : so that if the Godon be not , you shall be in danger to have all burn , if any wind shall rise , at a trice . in the new town be the king , and all his nobility and gentry . it be a city very great and populous , and be make square and with very fair wall , and a great ditch round about it full of water , with many crocodile in it : it have twenty gate , and they be make [ ii i . 259 . ] of stone , for every square five gate . there be also many turret for centinel to watch , make of wood , and gild with gold very fair . the street be the fair that ever i see , as straight as a line from one gate to the other , and so broad that ten or twelve man may ride a front through they . on both side of they at every man door be set a palmer tree which be the nut tree : which make a very fair show and a very commodious shadow , so that a man may walk in the shade all day . the house be make of wood , and cover with tile . the king house be in the middle of the city , and be wall and ditch round about : and the building within be make of wood very sumptuous gild , and great workmanship be upon the forefront , which be likewise very costly gild . and the house wherein his pagode or idol stand be cover with tile of silver , and all the wall be gild with gold . within the first gate of the king house be a great large room , on both side whereof be house make for the king elephant , which be marvellous great and fair , and be bring up to war and in service of the king . and among