triumph be many time before the king both of man and woman . this king have little force by sea , man shoulder be sue in Peru , and in Florida . because he have but very few ship . he have house full of gold and silver , and bring in often , but spend very little , and have the mine of ruby and saphire , and spinely . near unto the palace of the king , there be a treasure wonder rich ; the which because it be so near , he do not account of it : and it stand open for all man to see in a great wall court with two gate , which be always open . there be four house gild very rich , and cover with lead : in every one of they be pagoda or image of huge stature and great value . in the first be the picture of a king in gold with a crown of gold on his head full of great ruby and saphire , and about he there stand four child of gold . in the second house be the picture of a man in silver wonder great , as high as a house ; his foot be as long as a man , and he be make sit , with in crown on his head very rich with stone . in the three house be the picture of a man great than the other , make of brass , with a rich crown on his head . in the four and last house do stand another , make of brass , great than the other , with a crown also on his head very rich with stone . in another court not far from this stand four other pagoda or idol , marvellous great , of copper , make in 49 ° the same place where they do stand ; for they be so great that they be not to be remove : they stand in four house gild very fair , and . be themselves gild all over save their head , and they show like a black morian . their expense in gild of their image be wonderful . the king have one wife and above three hundred concubine , by which they say he have fourscore or fourscore and ten child . he sit in judgement almost every day . they use no speech , but give up their supplication write in the leaf of a tree the with the point of a iron big than a bodkin . Theise leave be a ell long , and about two inch broad ; they ‘ be also double . he which give in his supplication , do stand in a place a little distance off with a present . if his matter be like of , the king accept of his present , and grant his request : if his suit be not like of , he return with his present ; for the king will not take it . in India there be few commodity which serve for pegu , except opium of Cambaia , paint cloth of saint Thome , or of Masulipatan , and white cloth of Bengala , which be spend there in great quantity . they bring thither also much cottont yarn red colour with a root a excellent colour with a root call which they call Saia , which will never lose his colour : Saia . it be very well sell here , and very much of it come yearly to Pegu . by your money you lose much . the ship which come from Bengala , saint Thome , and Masulipatan , come to the bar of Nigrais and to cosmin . to Martavan a port of the sea in the kingdom of Pegu come many ship from Malacca lade with Sandall , porcelains , and other ware of China , and with Camphora of Borneo , and pepper from Achen in Sumatra . to Cirion a port of Pegu come ship from Mecca with in Pesu woollen cloth , scarlet , velvet , opium , and such like . there be in Pegu eight broker , who they call tareghe , which be bind to sell your good at the price which they be worth , and you give they for their labour two in the hundred : and they be bind to make 491 the several ! merchandise of Pegu . the form of their temple or varellaes . [ ii i . 261 . ] the tallipay or priest of Pegu . your debt good , because you sell your merchandise upon their word . if the broker pay you not at his day , you may take he home , and keep he in your house : which be a great shame for he . and if he pay you not present , you may take his wife and child and his slave , and bind they at your door , and set they in the sun ; for that be the law of the country . their current money in these part be a kind of brass which they call Gansa , wherewith you may buy gold , silver , ruby , musk , and all other thing . the gold and silver be merchandise , and be worth sometime more , and sometime less , as other ware be . this brazen money do go by a weight which they call a biza ; and common this biza after our account be worth about half a crown or somewhat less . the merchandise which be in Pegu , be gold , silver , ruby , saphire , spinelle , musk , benjamin or frankincense , long pepper , tin , lead , copper , lacca whereof they make hard wax , rice , and wine make of rice , and some sugar . the elephant do eat the sugar cane , or else they will make very much . and they consume many cane likewise in make of their varellaes or idol temple , which be in great number both great and small . they be make round like a sugar loaf , some be as high as a church , very broad beneath , some a quarter of a mile in compass : within they be all earth do about with stone . they consume in these varellaes great quantity of gold ; for that they be all gild aloft : and many of they from the top to the bottom : and every ten or twelve year they must be new