i have declare before . the naire which be under the king of two Samorin , which be malabar , have always war with the Portugal . the king have always peace with they ; but his 502 people go to the sea to rob and steal . their chief captain be call Cogi Alli ; he have three castle under he . when the Portugal complain to the king , he say he do not send they out : but he consent that they go . they range all the coast from Ceylon to goa , and go by four or five parowe or boat together ; and have in every one of they fifty or threescore man , and board present . they do much harm on that coast , and take every year many foist and boat of the Portugal . many of these people be moor . this king country begin twelve league from Cochin , and reach near unto goa . i remain in Cochin until the second of November , which be eight month ; for that there be no passage that go away in all that time : if i have come two day soon i have find a passage present . from Cochin i go to goa , where i remain three day . from Cochin to goa be a hundred league . from goa i go to Chaul , which be threescore league , where i remain three and twenty day : and there make my provision of thing necessary for the ship , from thence i depart to ormus ; where i stay for a passage to Balsara fifty day . from goa to ormus be four hundred league . here i think good , before i make a end of this my book , to declare some thing which India and the country far eastward do bring forth . the pepper grow in many part of India , especial about Cochin : and much of it do grow in the field among the bush without any labour : and when it be ripe they go and gather it . the shrub be like unto our ivy tree : and if it do not run about some tree or pole , it will fall down and rot . when they first gather it , it be green ; and than they lie it in the sun , and it become black . the ginger grow like unto our garlic , and the root be the ginger : it be to be find in many part of India . A . D . i583 - 9i . goa . Chaul . ormus . [ ii i . 265 . ] the pepper tree . ginger . 503 clove . the dove do come from the isle of the moluccoes , which be diverse hand : their tree be like to our bay tree . nutmeg y the nutmeg and mace grow together , and come mace . from the he of Banda : the tree be like to our walnut tree , but somewhat lesser . the white sandol be wood very sweet and in great request among the Indians ; for they grind it with a little water , and anoint their body therewith : it come from the isle of timor . Camphora . Camphora be a precious thing among the Indians , and be sell dear than gold . i think none of it come for Christendom . that which be compound come from China : but that which grow in cane and be the best , come from the great isle of Borneo . lignum aloe . lignum aloe come from Cauchinchina . the benjamin come out of the country of Siam and Jangomes . the long pepper grow in Bengala , in Pegu , and in the hand of the Javas . the musk come out of Tartary , and be make after this order , by report of the merchant which bring it to Pegu to sell ; in Tartary there be a little beast like unto a young roe , which they take in snare , and beat he to death with the blood : after that they cut out the bone , and beat the flesh with the blood very small , and fill the skin with it : and hereof come the musk . of the amber they hold diverse opinion ; but most man say it come out of the sea , and that they find it upon the shore side . the ruby , saphire , and spinelle be find in Pegu . the diamond be find in diverse place , as in Bisnagar , in Agra , in delli , and in the hand of the Javas . the best pearl come from the hand of baharim in the persian sea , the worse from the piscaria near the isle of Ceylon , and from Aynam a great hand on the southermost coast of China . 504 amber . ruby , saphire and spinel . diamond . spodium and many other kind of drug come from podium . Cambaia . now to return to my voyage ; from ormus i go to Balsara or Basora , and from Basora to Babylon : and Basora . we pass the most part of the way by the strength of ba ° ” ' man by hail the boat up the river with a long cord . from Babylon i come by land to mosul , which stand mosul . never to Ninive , which be all ruinate and destroy ; it stand fast by the river of Tigris . from mosul i go to Merdin , which be in the country of the Merdin . Armenians ; but now there dwell in that place a people which they call Cordies , or Curdi . from Merdin i go to Orfa , which be a very fair town , and it have a goodly Orfa . fountain full of fish ; where the moor hold many great ceremony and opinion concern Abraham : for they say he do once dwell there . from thence i go to by | our , and so pass the river of Euphrates . from by | our i Bir . go to Aleppo , where i stay certain month for Aleppo . company ; and than i go to Tripoli ; where find Tripoli . English ship , i come with a prosperous voyage to London , where by God assistance i safe arrive the 29 of April 1591 , have be eight year out of my native country .