about five and twenty or thirty very fair and furnish with goodly ordinance . to this port of Balsara come monthly diverse ship from ormuz , lade with all sort of indian merchandise , as spice , drug , indigo and calecut cloth . Theise ship be usual from forty to threescore ton , have their plank sow together with cord make of the bark of date tree , and in stead of Occam they use the shivering of the bark of the say tree , and of the same they also make their tackle . they have no kind of iron work belong to these vessel , save only their anchor . from this place six day sail down the gulf , they go to a place call Baharem in the mid way to ormus : there they fish for pearl four month in the year , to wit , in June , July , August , and September . my abode in Balsara be just six month , during which time i receive diverse letter from m . John Newberry from ormus , who as he pass that way with her majesty letter to Zelabdim echebar king of Cambaia , and unto the mighty emperor of China , be traitorous there arrest , and all his company , by the Portugal , and afterward send prisoner to goa : where after a long and cruel imprisonment he and his companion be deliver upon surety , not to depart the town without leave , at the suit of one father Thomas Stevens a english religious man , which they find there : but short after three of they escape , whereof one , to wit , m . Ralph Fitch , be since come into England . the four , which be a painter call John story , become religious in the college of saint Paul in goa , as we understand by their letter . i and my companion William shale have dispatch our business at Balsara , embark our self in company of seventy bark all lade with merchandise , have every bark 14 man to draw they , like our western bargeman on the Thames , and we be forty four day come up against the stream to Babylon , where arrive and pay our custom , we with all other sort of merchant buy we camel , hire we man to lade and drive they , furnish our self with rice , butter , blsket , honey make of date , onion and date : and every merchant buy a proportion of live mutton , and hire certain shepherd to drive they with we : we 7 A . D . 1584 . ship make • without iron in the persian gulf . ' Zelabdim echebar king of Cambaia . their provision of victual . he return from Balsara to Aleppo . also buy we tent to lie in , and to put our good at Caravan off under : and in this our caravan be four thousand c ^ meh . usab4 camel lade with spice and ° ther rich marchandi . SeS ‘ S ‘ these camel will live very well two or three day without water : their feed be on thistle , wormwood , magdalene , and other strong weed which they find upon the way . the government and decide of all quarrel and duty to be pay , the whole caravan commit to one speciali rich merchant of the company , of who honesty they conceive best . in pass from Babylon to Aleppo , we spend forty day , travel twenty , or four and twenty mile a day , rest ourselves common from two of the clock in the afternoon , until three in the morning , at which time we begin to take our journey . eight day journey from Babylon towards Aleppo , near [ ii i . 271 . ] unto a town call Heit , as we cross the river Euphrates by boat , about 3 . mile from the town there be a valley wherein be many spring throw out abundant at great mouth , a kind of black substance like unto tar , which serve all the country to make staunch their bark and boat : every one of these spring make a noise like unto a smith forge in the blow and puff out of this matter , which never cease night nor day , and the noise may be hear a mile off continual . this vale swallow up all heavy thing that come upon it . the people of the country call it in their language Babil gehenham , that be to say , hell door . as we pass through these desert , we see certain wild beast , as wild ass all white , roebuck , wolf | be , leopard , fox , and many hare , whereof we chase and kill many . aborise the king of the wander arabian in these desert , have a duty of 40 . S . sterling , upon every camel load , which he send his officer to receive of the Caravans , and in consideration hereof , he take upon he to conduct the say Caravans if they need his help , and to defend they against certain prowl thief . i and my companion William shale come to Aleppo with the Caravan the eleven of June , 1584 . where we be joyful receive 20 . mile distant from the town by m . William Barret our Consuli , accompany with his people and janissary , who fall sick immediate and depart this life within 8 . day after , and elect before his death m . Anthony bate consul of our english nation in his place , who laudable supply the same room 3 . year . in which mean time , i make two voyage more unto Babylon , and return by the way aforesaid , over the desert of Arabia . and afterward , as one desirous to see other part of the country , i go from Aleppo to Antioch , which be thence 60 . English mile , and from thence go down to Tripoli , where go aboard a small vessel , i arrive at joppe , and travel to Rama , Lycia , Gaza , Jerusalem , Bethleem , to the river of Jordan , and the sea or lake of Zodome , and return back to joppe , and from thence by sea to Tripoli , of which place because many other have publish large discourse , i surcease to write . within few day after embark my self at Tripoli the 22 . of December , i arrive ( God be thank ) in safety here in the river of Thames with diverse english merchant , the 26 . of march , 1588 , in the Hercules of London , which be the rich ship of english merchant good that ever be know to come into this realm . A . D . I588 . William Barret consul in Aleppo . m . Wil . Barret . two voyage more make to Babylon .