rise by the cast of stone in that place : the substance of the ground there be brimstone , and burn sometime so much that it blow up the rock . the 24 . of June we come to Cyprus , and have sight in the way of the aforesaid six galley , that come from Alexandria , one whereof come unto we , and require a present for himself , and for two of the other galley , which we for quietness sake give they . the 27 . of June , we come to Tripoli , where i stay [ ii i . 284 . ] till the five of July , and then take passage in a small bark call a Caramusalin , which be a passage boat , and be bind for Bichieri , thirteen mile on this side Alexandria , which boat be freight with Turk , moor , and Jew . the 20 . day of July , this bark which i pass in run upon a rock , and be in very great danger , so that we all begin some to be ready to swim , some to leap into the ship boat , but it please God to set we quick off the rock , and without much harm . the 28 . of July i come to Bichieri , where i be well Bichieri . entertain of a Jewe which be the customer there , give i muskadine , and drink water himself : have break my fast with he , he provide i a Carnell for my carriage , and a mule for i to ride upon , and a moor to run by i to the city of Alexandria , English who have charge to see i safe in the english house , whither i come , but find no Englishman there : but then my guide bring i aboard a ship of Aiderman Martins , call the tiger of London , where i be well receive of the master of the say ship , who name be Thomas Rickman , and of all the company . the say master have make i good cheer , and make i also to drink of the water of Nilus , have the key of the english house , go thither with i himself , and appoint i a fair chamber , and leave a man with i to provide i all thing that i need , and every day come himself to i , and carry i into the city , and show i the monument thereof , which be these . he bring i first to Pompey his pillar , which be T & a mighty thing of grey marble , and all of one stone , ex in height by estimation above 52 . yard , and the compass about six fathom . the city have three gate , one call the gate of Barbaria , the other of Merina , and the third of Rossetto . he bring i to a stone in the street of the city , whereupon saint mark be behead : to the place where saint Katherine die , have there hide herself , because she will not marry : also to the bath of S . Katherine . i see there also pharaos needle , which be a thing in height almost equal with Pompey pillar , and be in compass five fathom , and a half , and all of one stone . i be bring also to a most brave and dainty bath , where we wash our self : the bath be of marble , and of very curious workmanship . the city stand upon great arch , or vault , like unto church , with mighty pillar of marble , to hold up the foundation : which arch be build to receive the water of the river of Nilus , which be for the use of the city . it have three castle , and a hundred church : but the part that be destroy of it , be six time more than that part which stand . the last day of July , i depart from Alexandria towards Cayro in a passage boat , wherein first i go Rossetti . to Rossetto , stand by the river side , have 13 . or 14 . great church in it , their build there be of stone and brick , but as for lodging , there be little , except we bring it with we . from Rossetto we pass along the river of Nilus , which be so famous in the world , twice as broad as the Thames at London : on both side grow date tree in great abundance . the people be rude , insomuch that a man can travel without a janizary to conduct he . the Turk the time that i stay in jEgypt be the Turk Lent ‘ and Moores lend , in all which time they burn lamp in their church , as many as may hang in they : their lent endure 40 . day , and they have three Lents in the year : during which time they neither eat nor drink in the day time , but all the night they do nothing else . betwixt Rossetto and Cayro there be along the water side three hundred city and town , and the length of the way be not above three hundred mile . to this famous city of Cayro i come the five day of Cayro . August , where i find m . William Alday , and William Caesar , who entertain i in very good sort . m . Caesar bring i to see the pyramid which be three in number , one whereof king Pharaoh make for his own tomb , the tomb it self be almost in the top of it : the monument be high and in form 4 . square , and every of the square be as long as a man may shoot a rove arrow , and as high as a church , i see also the ruin of the city of Memphis hard by those pyramid . the house of Joseph be yet stand in Cayro , which be a sumptuous thing , have a place to walk in of 56 . mighty pillar , all gilt with gold , but i see it not , be then lame . the 11 . day of August the land be cut at Cayro , to let in the water of the river of Nilus , which be do with great joy and triumph . the 12 . of August i set from Cayro towards Alexandria again , and come thither the 14 . of August . the 26 . day there be keep a great feast of the Turk and moor , which last two day , and for a day they never cease shoot off of great ordinance . from Alexandria i sail to Argier , where i lie with the english m . Typton Consuli of the english nation , who use £° n ™ 1at i most kind , and at his own charge . he bring i to the king court , and into the presence of the [ ii i . 285 . ] king , to see he , and the manner of the court : the king do only bear the name of a king , but the great government be in the hand of the soldier . the king of Potanca be prisoner in Argier , who come to Constantinople , to acknowledge a duty to the great Turk , be betray by his own nephew , who write to the Turk , that he go only as a spy , by that mean to get his kingdom . i hear at Argier of seven galley that be at that time cast away at a town call Formentera : three of they be of Argier , the other four be the Christians . we find here also 13 . Englishmen , which be by force of weather put into the bay of Tunis , where they be very ill use by the moor , who force they to leave their bark : whereupon they go to the council of Argier , to require a redress and remedy for the injury . they be all belong to the ship , call the golden noble of London , whereof master bird be owner . the master be Stephen Haselwood , and the captain Edmond hence . the third day of December , the pinnace call the moonshine of London , come to Argier with a prize , which they take upon the coast of Spain , lade with sugar , hide , and ginger : the pinnace also belong to the golden noble : and at Argier they make sale both of ship and good , where we leave they at our come away , which be the seven day of Januarie , and the first day of February , i land at Dartmouth , and the seven day come to London , with humble thanks to almighty God , for my safe arrival .