the money and measure of Babylon , Balsara , and the Indies , with the custom , etc write from Aleppo in Syria , An . 1584 . by m . will . Barret . Babylon : the weight , measure , and money currant there , and the custom of merchandise . Mana of Babylon be of Aleppo baptize rove 5 ounce and a half : and 68 mana and three seven part , make a quintali of Aleppo , which be 494 livre . 8 ounce of London : and too mana be a quintali of Babylon , which make in Aleppo 146 rove , and of London 722 livre . and so much be the say quintail : but the merchant accord be by so much the mana , and in the say place they bate the tear in all sort of commodity , accord to the order of Aleppo touch they tear . the measure of Babylon be great than that of Aleppo 21 in you 100 for bring 100 pike of any measurable ware from Aleppo thither , there be find but 82 pike in Babylon , so that the 100 pike of Babylon be of Aleppo 121 pike , very little less . the currant money of Babylon be say , which say be 5 medines , as in Aleppo , and 40 medines be 8 say make a ducat currant , and 47 medines pass in value as the ducat of gold of Venice , and the dollar of the best sort be worth 33 medines . the royal of plate be sell by the 100 dram at prize , accord as they be in request : but among the merchant they bargain by the 100 metral , which be 150 dram of Aleppo , which 150 dram be 135 single royal of plate : but in the mint or castle , they take they by the 100 dram , which be 90 royal of plate , and those of the mint give 5 medines less in each 100 dram than they be worth to be sell among the merchant , and make payment at the term of 40 day in say . the custom in Babylon , as well inward as outward , be in this manner : small ware at 6 per 100 , coral and amber at 5 and a half per 100 , Venice cloth , english cloth , kersey , mockair , chamblet , silk , velvet , damask , satin and such like at 5 per 100 : and they rate the good without reason as they lust themselves . the Toafo , Boabo , and other exaction 6 medines per bale , all which they pay present in ready money , accord to the custom and use of the emperor . to the ermine of the mint you ordinary use be to give 30 say in courtesy , otherwise he will by authority of his office come aboard , and for despite make such search in the bark , that he will turn all thing topsy turvie . ball be a : the weight , measure , and money in the city of Balsara . a Mana of Balsara answer 5 rove 2 ounce and a half of Aleppo weight , and 19 mana and one 4 part of Balsara , answer the quintali of Aleppo , which be 494 rove , 8 ounce English , and 20 mana be the quintail of Balsara , which be 104 Alepine , and of London 514 livre . 8 . ounce , and so much be the say quintali , but the merchant bargain at so much the mana or wolsene ( which be all one ) and they abate the tear in every mana , as the sort of spice be , and the order take therefore in that place . the measure of Balsara be call a pike , which be just as the measure of Babylon , to say , 100 pike of Balsara make of Aleppo 121 pike , ut supra in the rate of Babylon . the currant money of Balsara be as follow . there be a sort of fluss of copper call Estivi , whereof 12 make a mamedine , which be the value of one medine Aleppine , the say mamedine be of silver , have the 11 [ ii i . 272 ] Moresco stamp on both side , and two of these make a danine , which be 2 medines Aleppine . the say danine be of silver , have the Turkesco stamp on both side , and 2 and a half of these make a say , which be in value as the say of Aleppo . the say say be of the similitude and stamp of Aleppo , be ( as appear ) 60 estive . also one say and 20 estive make a larine , which be of Aleppo money 6 medines and a half . the say larine be a strange piece of money , not be round as all other currant money in Christianity , but be a small rod of silver of the greatness of the pen of a goose feather , wherewith we use to write , and in length about one eight part thereof , which be wrest , so that the two end meet at the just half part , and in the head thereof be a stamp Turkesco , and these be the best currant money in all the India , and 6 of these larines make a ducat , which be 40 medines or eight say of Aleppo . the ducat of gold be worth there 7 larine , and one danine , which be of Aleppo money 48 medines and a half . the venetian money be worth larines 88 per 100 meticals , which be 150 dram of Aleppo , ut supra . the royal of plate be worth 88 larine by the 100 meticals , and albeit among the merchant they sei by the 100 meticals , yet in the mint or castle , they sei by the too drams , have there less than the worth 5 medines in each hundred dram , and have their payment in 40 day make they in say or larine . the custom of the say place , aswell inward as outward , be alike of all sort of good , to say 6 by the 100 , and Toafo , Boabo , and scrivan medines 6 by the bale inward and outward , to say , 3 inward , and as much outward : but who so leave his good in the custom house pay nothing , where otherwise at the take thereof away , he shall pay 3 med . by the bale , and of the say good there be no other duty to pay , 12 and this come to pass when the customer esteem the good too high . for in such a case they may be drive to take so much commodity as the custom amount to , and not to pay they in money , for such be the order from the grand signior . have pay the custom , it behoove to have a quittance or cocket seal and firm with the customer hand , in confirmation of the dispatch and clear , and before departure thence , to cause the say customer to cause search to be make , to the end that at the voyage return there be no cavillation make , as it oftentimes happen . note that zoo meticals of Balsara weigh 17 ounce and a half sottile Venetian , and of