or after the mid voyage ) be free from all custom . the custom of ormuz be eleven in the 100 , to say , 10 for the king , and encage for the arm of the foist : but for small ware as glass , and look glass of all sort , and such like , make for apparel , pay no custom . but cloth of wool , kersey , mockaire , chamlet , and all sort of silk , saffron , and such like , pay custom , be esteem reasonable . there be also another custom , which they call caida , which be , that one bring his good into Ormuz , with purpose to send you same further into India , the same be bind to pay 3 by the 100 , but none other be bind to pay this custom , except the armenian , Moores , and Jew : for the Portugal and venetian pay nothing thereof . note y ‘ in ormuz they abate tear of all sort of commodity , by a order observe of custom . the fraught from ormuz to Chaul , goa , and Cochin , be as follow : mokaire larine 6 per table of 60 pike . Aquariosa 8 larines by ordinary chest , raisin io by chest , which be a quintail of rove 128 . Ruvia of Chalangi larines 10 per quintali , glass larine 8 per chest , of 4 foot and a half , glass in gr ^ at chist 14 and 15 larine by chest . small ware larine 12 by chest of five foot . Tamari for Maschat sadines 2 and a half , and 3 by the farthel . Tamarie for diu and Chaul 4 sadines , and 4 and a half by bale . other drug and thing which come from Persia pay accord to the greatness of the bale . the fraught mention , they pay as appear , when they ship the say good in ship where horse go : otherwise not have horse , they pay somewhat less , because of the custom which they be to pay . the use of the India ship be , that the patroness thereof be not at any charge neither with any passenger , nor yet with any mariner in the ship , but that every one at the begin of the voyage do furnish to maintain his own table ( if he will eat ) and for drink they have a great jar of water , which be guard with great custody . goa . the weight , measure , and money currant in goa . the quintail of goa be 5 mana , and 8 larine , and the mana be 24 rotilo , so that the quintal of goa be 128 rot . and every rot . be 16 ounce , which be of Venice weight 1 livre . and a half , so that the quintal of goa be 192 livre . sotile Venice , which be 26 rotiloe 8 ounce Aleppine , and of London weight 132 livre . English , as the weight of Ormuz . all the merchandise , spice and drug , be sell by this quintal , except some drug , as lignum de China , Galanga , and other , whereof they bargain at so much per candill , vi 17 b musk oftar - tarie by you way of China . advertise that there be two sort of candill , one of 16 mana , the other of 20 mana , that of 16 mana come to be just 3 quintal , and that of 20 mana , 3 quintal , 3 rove . note that 4 rove make a quintail , and the rove be 32 rotiloe , as in ormuz . there be also another weight which they call Marco , which be eight ounce or half a rotilo of goa , and 9 ounce of Venice sotile : with this they weigh amber , corail , musk , ambracan , civet , and other fine ware . there be also another sort of weight call man - giallino , which be 5 grain of Venice weight and therewith they weigh diamond and other jewel . note that in goa they use not to abate any tear of any good , except of sack or wrap , and therefore it require great advisement in buy of the good , especial in the musk of Tartary which come by way of China in bladder , and so weigh it without any tear rebate . the measure of goa be call a toad , which increase upon the measure of Babylon and Balsara after the rate of 17 and one eight part by the 100 , so that bring 100 pike of any measurable ware from thence to goa , it be find 117 pike 7 eight part , and bring 100 code from ormuz to goa , there be find but 93 code and one four part . there be also the vare in goa , which be just as the vare of Ormuz , and therewith they measure only thing that be of small value . for the money of goa , there be a kind of money make of lead and tin mingle , be thick and round , and stamp on the one side with the sphere or globe of the world , and on the other side two arrow and 5 round : and this kind of money be call Basaruchi , and 15 of these make a vinton of naughty money , and 5 vinton make a tangam , and 4 vintena make a tangam of base money : so that the tangam of base money be 60 basaruchy , and the tangam of good money 75 basaruchy , and 5 tangas make a seraphine of gold , which in merchandise be worth 5 tangas good money : but if one will 18 1584 . change they into basaruchy , he may have 5 tangas , and 16 basaruchy , which overplus they call cerafagio , and when they bargain of the pardaw of gold , each pardaw be mean to be 6 tangas good money , but in merchandise they use not to demand pardawe of gold in goa , except it be for jewel and horse , for all the rest they take of seraphin of silver , per adviso . the royal of plate , i say , the royal of 8 be worth per custom and commandment of the king of Portugal 400 rey , and every rey be one basaruchie and one four part , which make tangas 6 , and 53 basaruchy as their just [ ii i . 275 . ] value , but for that the say royal be excellent silver and currant in diverse place of the India , and chief in Malacca , when the ship be to depart at their due time ( call Monsons ) every one to have the say royal pay more than they be worth , and the overplus , as be abovesaid they call serafagio . and first they give you just value of the 100 royal of 8 , and 5 tangas 50 basaruchy a piece , which do , they give seraphin 5 , 6 , 7 , 8 , 9 , 10 , 12 , 15 , until 22 by the 100 , accord as they be in request . the ducat of gold be worth 9 tangas and a half good money , and yet not stable in price , for that when the ship depart