they use to tanne their goat skin which they churn withal . their hair , apparel , and colour be altogether like to those vagabond Egyptians , which heretofore have go about in England . their woman all without exception wear a great round ring in one of their nostril , of gold , silver , or iron , accord to their ability , and about their arm and smalle of their leg they have hoop of gold , silver or iron . all of they aswell woman and child as man , be very great swimmer , and often time swim they bring we milk to our bark in vessel upon their head . Theise people be very thievish , which i prove to my cost : for they steal a casket of i , with thing of good value in the same , from under my man head as he be asleep : and therefore traveller keep good watch as they pass down the river . Euphrates at birrah be about the breadth of the Thames at Lambeth , and in some place narrow , in some broad : it run very swift , almost as fast as the river of Trent : it have diverse sort of fish in it , but all be scale , some as big as salmon , like barbil . we land at Felugia the eight and twenty of June , where we make our abode seven day , for lack of camel to carry our good to Babylon : the heat at that time of the year be such in those part , that man be loath to let out their camel to travel . This Felugia be a village of some hundred house , and a place appoint for discharge of such good as come down the river : the inhabitant be arabian . not find camel here , we be constrain to unlade our good , and hire a hundred ass to carry our english merchandise only to new Babylon over a short desert , in cross whereof we spend eighteen hour travel by night , and part of the morning , to avoid the great heat . in this place which we cross over , stand the old mighty city of Babylon , many old ruin whereof be easy to be see by daylight , which i John Eldred have often behold at my good leisure , have make three voyage between the new city of Babylon and Aleppo over this desert . here also be yet stand the ruin of the old tower of Babel , which be upon a plain ground seem a far off very great , but the near you come to it , the lesser and lesser it appear ; sundry time i have go thither to see it , and find the remnant yet stand above a quarter of a mile in compass , and almost as high as the stonework of Paul steeple in London , but it show much big . the brick remain in this most ancient monument be half a yard thick , and three quarter of a yard long , be dry in the sun only , and between every course of brick there lie a course of mat make of cane , which remain sound and not perish , as though they have be lay within one year . the city of new Babylon join upon new Babylon . the aforesaid small desert where the old city be , and the river of Tigris run close under the wall , and nuum they may if they will open a sluice , and let the water tig ™ - of the same run round about the town . it be above two english mile in compass , and the inhabitant general speak three language , to wit , the persian , arabian and turkish tongue : the people be of the Spaniard complexion : and the woman general wear in one of the gristle of their nose a ring like a wed - [ ii i . 270 . ] ding ring , but somewhat great , with a pearl and a turkish stone set therein : and this they do be they never so poor . this be a place of very great traffic , and a very great thorowfare from the east Indies to Aleppo . the town be very well furnish with victual which come down the river of Tigris from mosul which be call Ninive in old time . they bring these victual and diverse sort of merchandise upon raft bear upon baft bear goat skin blow up full of wind in manner of bladder . and when they have discharge their good , they sei the raft for fire , and let the wind out of their goat skin , and carry they home again upon their ass by land , to make other voyage down the river . the build here be most of brick dry in the sun , and very little or no stone be to be find : their house . be seidome rain . all flat - roofed and low . they have no rain for eight month together , nor almost any cloud in the sky , night nor day . their winter be in November , December , January and February , which be as warm as our summer in England in a manner . this i know by good experience , because my abode at several time in this city of Babylon have be at the least the space of two year . as we come to the city , we pass over the river of Tigris on a great bridge make with boat chain together with two mighty chain of iron . from thence we depart in flat bottomed bark more strong bite and si great than those of Euphrates , and be eight and twenty day twenty day also in pass down this river to Balsara , jfy ^ ver " from ^ ut we m ' ght have do it in eighteen or less , if the Babylon to water have be high . upon the water side stand by balsara . the way diverse town resemble much the name of the old prophet : the first town they call Ozeah , and another Zecchiah . before we come to Balsara by one day journey , the two river of Tigris and Euphrates curnagastle . meet , and there stand a castle call Curna , keep by the Turks , where all merchant pay a small custom . here the two river join together begin to be eight or nine mile broad : here also it begin to ebb and flow , and the water overflow make the country all about very fertile of corn , rice , pulse , and date . Balsara . the town of Balsara be a mile and a half in circuit : all the building , castle and wall , be make of brick dry in the sun the Turk have here five hundred janissaries , beside other soldier continual in garrison and pay , but his chief strength be of galley which be