, that we shall pass either without spoil , if we resist , or without composition at the least , and acknowledgement of duty to the spanish king . but it be neither the report of the attendance of these army , nor the opinion of the people , nor any thing else , that can daunt or dismay the courage of our man , who ground themselves upon the goodness of their cause , and the promise of God , to be deliver from such as without reason seek their destruction , carry resolute mind , notwithstanding all impediment to adventure through the sea , and to finish their navigation , maugre the beard of the spanish soldier . but lest they shall seem too careless , and too secure of their estate , and by lay the whole and entire burden of their safety upon God providence , shall foolish presume altogether of his help , and neglect the mean vi 49 d which be put into their hand , they fail not to enter into counsel among themselves , and to deliberate advise for their best defence . and in the end with generail consent , the merchant royal be appoint admiral ! of the fleet , and the Toby viceadmiral , by who order the rest promise to be direct , and each ship vow not to break from another , whatsoever extremity shall fall out , but to stand to it to the death , for the honour of their country , and the frustrate of the hope of the ambitious and proud enemy . thus in good order they leave Zante and the castle of Graecia , and commit themselves again to the sea , and proceed in their course and voyage in quietness , without sight of any enemy , till they come near to Pantalarea , a island so call , betwixt Sicily , and the coast of Africa : into sight whereof they come the 13 . day of July 1586 . and the same day in the morning about 7 . of the clock they descry 13 . sail in number , which be of the galley , lie in wait of purpose for they , in and about that place . as soon as the english ship have spy they , they by and by accord to a common order , make themselves ready for a fight , lay out their ordinance , scour , charge , and prime they , display their ensign , and leave nothing undo to arm themselves thorough . in the mean time , the galley more and more approach the ship , and in their banner there appear the arm of the isle of Sicilia , and Malta , be all as then in the service and pay of the Spaniard . immediate , both the admiral of the galley send from each of they a frigate , to the admiral of our english ship , which be come near they , the sicilian frigate first hail they , and demand of they whence they be ? they answer that they be of England , the arm whereof appear in their colour . whereupon the say frigate expostulate with they , and ask why they delay to send or come with their captain and purser to don Pedro de Leiva their general , to acknowledge their duty and obedience to he in the name [ ii i . 287 . ] of the spanish king , lord of those sea ? our man reply , and say , that they owe no such duty nor obedience to he , and therefore will acknowledge none , but command the frigate to depart with that answer , and not to stay long a brabble , upon her peril . with that away she go , and up come towards they the other frigate of Malta , and she in like sort hail the admiral , and will needs know whence they be , and where they have be . our Englishman in the admiral , not disdain a answer , tell they that they be of England , merchant of London , have be at turquoise , and be now return home : and to be requite in this case , they also demand of the ffigat whence she and the rest of the galley be : the messenger answer , we be . e of Malta , and for my own part my name be Cavallero . Theise galley be in service and pay to the king of Spain , under the conduct of don Pedro de Leiva a noble man of Spain , who have be command hither by the king with this present force and army , of purpose to intercept you . you shall therefore ( quoth he ) do well to repair to he to know his pleasure , he be a noble man of good behaviour and courtesy , and mean you no ill . the captain of the english admiral , who name be m . Edward Wilkin - , son , reply and say . we purpose not at this time to make trial of don Pedro his courtesy , whereof we be suspicious and doubtful , and not without good cause : use withal good word to the messenger , and will he to come aboard he , promise security and good usage , that thereby he may the better know the Spaniard mind : whereupon he in deed leave his frigate , and come aboard he , who he entertain in friendly sort , and cause a cup of wine to be draw for he , which he take and begin , with his cap in his hand , and with reverend term to drink to the health of the queen of England , speak very honourable of her majesty , and give good speech of the courteous usage and entertainment that he himself have receive in London , at the time that the duke of Alenson , brother to the late french king be last in England : and after he have well drink , he take his leave , speak well of the sufficiende and goodness of our ship , and especial of the merchant royal , which he confess to have see before , ride in the Thames near London . he be no soon come to don Pedro de Leiva the spanish general , but he be send off again , and return to the english admiral , say that the pleasure of the general be this , that either their captain , master and purser shall come to he with speed , or else he will set upon they , and either take they or sink they . the reply