a true report of a worthy fight , perform in the voyage from turkic , by five ship of London , against 11 . galley , and two frigate of the king of Spain , at Pantalarea within the strait , anno , 1586 . write by Philip Jones . he merchant of London , be of the incorporation of the Turkey trade , have receive intelligence , and advertisement , from time to time , that the king of Spain grudge at the prosperity of this kingdom , have not only of late arrest all english ship , body , and good , in Spain , but also malign the quiet traffic which they use to and in the dominion , and province , under the obedience of the great Turk have give order to the captain of his galley in the 46 Levant , to hinder the passage of all english ship , and to endeavour by their best mean , to intercept , take , and spoil they , their person , and good : they hereupon think it their best course to set out their fleet for turquoise , in such strength and ability for their defence , that the purpose of their spanish enemy may the better be prevent , and the voyage accomplish with great securi tie to the man and ship . for which cause , five tall , and stout ship , appertain to London , and intend only a merchant voyage , be provide and furnish with all thing belong to the sea ; the name whereof be these : i . the merchant royal , a very brave and good ship , and of great report . 2 . the Toby . 3 . the Edward Bonaventure . 4 . the William , and John . 5 . the Susan . these five depart from the coast of England , in the month of November 1585 . keep together as one fleet , till they come as high as the isle of Sicily , within the Levant . and there , accord to the order and direction of the voyage , each ship begin to take leave of the rest , and to separate himself , set his course for the particular port , whereunto he be bind : one for Tripoli in Syria , another for Constantinople , the chief city of the Turk empire , situate upon the coast of Romania , call of old , Thracia , and the rest to those place , whereunto they be private appoint . but before they divide themselves , they altogether consult , of and about a certain and speciali place for their meet again after the lade of their good at their several port . and in conclusion , the general agreement be to meet at Zante , a island near to the main continent of the west part of Morea , well know of all the pilot , and think to be the fit place of their rendezvous . concern which meeting , it be also covenant on each side , and promise , that whatsoever ship of these 5 . shall first arrive at Zante , shall there stay and expect the come of the rest of the fleet , for the space of twenty day . This be do , each man make his best haste accord as wind and wether will serve he to fulfil his course , and to dispatch his business ; and no need be there to admonish or encourage any man , see no time be ill spend , nor opportunity omit on any side , in the performance of each man duty , accord to his place . it fall out that the Toby which be bind for Constantinople have make such good speed , and get such good weather , that she first of all the rest come back to the appoint place of Zante , and not forget the former conclusion , do there cast anchor , attend the arrival of the rest of the fleet , which accord ( their business first perform ) fail not to keep promise . the first next after the Toby be the royal merchant , which together with the William and John come from Tripoli in Syria , and arrive at Zante within the compass of the foresay time limit . Theise ship in token of the joy on all part conceive for their happy meeting , spare not the discharge of their ordinance , the sound of drum and trumpet , the spread of ensign with other warlike and joyful behaviour , express by these outward sign , the inward gladness of their mind , be all as ready to join together in mutual consent to resist the cruel enemy , as now in sport manner they make mirth and pastime among themselves . Theise three have not be long in the haven , but the Edward Bonaventure also , together with the Susan she consort , be come from Venice with their lade , the sight of who increase the joy of the rest , and they no less glad of the presence of the other , salute they in most friendly and kind sort , accord to the manner of the sea : and whereas some of these ship stand at that instant in some want of victual , they be all content to stay in the port , till the necessity of each ship be supply , and nothing want to set out for their return . in this port of Zante , the news be fresh and currant , of two several army and fleet provide by the king of Spain , and lie in wait to intercept they : the one consist of 30 . strong galley , so well appoint in all respect for the war , that no necessary thing want : and this fleet hover about the strait of Gibraltar . the other army have in it 20 . galley , whereof some be of Sicily , and some of the island of Malta , under the charge and government of John Andrea Dorea , a captain of name serve the king of Spain . Theise two diverse and strong fleet wait and attend in the sea for none , but the english ship , and no doubt make their account and sure reckon that not a ship shall escape their fury . and the opinion also of the inhabitant of the isle of Zante be , that in respect of the number of galley in both these army , have receive such strait commandment from the king , our ship and man be but few , and little in comparison of they , it be a thing in humane reason impossible