from goa to Cochin , they pay they at 9 tangas and 3 four part , and 10 tangas , and that be the most that they be worth . the larines be worth by just value basaruchy 93 and 3 four part , and 4 larine make a seraphine of silver , which be 5 tangas of good money , and these also have serafagion of 6 , 7 , 8 , 10 , until 16 , by the 100 , for when the ship depart for the north , to say , for Chaul , diu , Cambaia , or bassaim , all carry of the same , because it be money more currant than any other . there be also a sort of seraphin of gold of the stamp of ormuz , whereof there be but few in goa , but be there , they | be worth five larine and somewhat more , accord as they be in request . there be also another iide sort of money , round , have on the one side a cross , and on the other side a crown , which be worth one half a tangam of good money , and another of the same stamp less than that which they call imitivo de buona moneda , which be worth 18 basaruches 3 four part a piece . note that if a man bargain in merchandise , it behoo - veth to demand tangas of good money : for by nominate tangas only , be understand to be base money of 60 basaruche , which want of the good money ut supra . the custom of goa be 8 in the 100 inward , and as much outward , and the good be esteem just rather to the merchant advantage then the king . the custom they pay in this order . come with a ship from ormuz to goa without horse , they pay 8 in the 100 whether they sell part or all , but if they will carry of the say merchandise to any other place , they pay none other custom , except other buy it and carry it forth of the country , and then they pay it 8 in the 100 and if one have pay the custom shall sell to another with composition to pass it forth as for his proper account to save the custom , this may not be , because the seller be put to his oath , whether he send the good for his own account , or for the account of any other that have buy the same , and be find to the contrary , they pay custom as abovesaid . and in this order the merchant pay pf all the good which come from any part of the Indies . but if they come from Ormuz to goa with horse , they be not subject to pay any custom inward , notwithstanding if they send all or any part thereof for any other place , or return it to ormuz , they pay the custom outward , although they can not sell . they use also in goa among the common sort to bargain for coal , wood , lime and such like , at so many braganines , account 24 basaruche for one braganine , albeit there be no such money stamp . the custom of the Portugal be , that any moor or gentle , of what 20 1584 . condition or state soever he be , may not depart from goa to go within the land , without licence of certain deputy depute for that office , who ( if they be moor or Gentiles ) do set a seal upon the arm , have thereon the arm of Portugal , to be know of the porter of the city , whether they have the say licence or no . Cochin . the weight , measure , and money , currant in Cochin . a li the merchandise which they sell or buy within the say city , they bargain for it at so many serafine per quintal , which be 128 . rotilo of just weight with you quintal and rotilo of goa and ormuz : advertise that there be diverse sort of bar accord to the sort of commodity , and in traffic , they reason at so much the bar . note that there be bar of 3 quintal and 3 quintal and half , and 4 quintal . they abate a use tear of all merchandise , accord to the sort of good , and order take for the same . the measure of goa and Cochin be all one . the money of Cochin be all the same sort which be currant in goa , but the ducat of gold in value be 10 tangas of good money . the custom of Cochin as well inward as outward for all stranger , be eight in the hundred , but those that have be marry four year in the country pay but four in the hundred , per adviso . Malacca . [ li . i . 276 . ] the weight , measure , and money of Malacca . for the merchandise buy and sell in the city they reckon at so much the bar , which bar be of diverse sort , great and small , accord to the ancient custom of the say city , and diversity of the good . but for the clove they bargain at so much the bar , which bar be 3 quintal , 2 rove and 10 rotilo . as i have abovesaid , all kind of drug have their sort of 21 bar limit . note that every quintal be 4 rove , and every rove 32 rotilo , which be 128 rotilo the quintali , the which answer to Aleppo 95 rotilo , and to London 472 livre . per quintal . the measure of Malacca be as the measure of goa . in Malacca they abate tear accord to their distinction and agreement , for that there be no just tear limit .. for the money of Malacca , the least money currant be of tin stamp with the arm of Portugal , and 12 of these make a chazza . the chazza be also of tin with the say arm , and 2 of these make a challaine . the challaine be of tin with the say arm , and 40 of these make a tangam of goa good money , but not stamp in Malacca . there be also a sort of silver money which they call patachines , and be worth 6 tangas of good money , which be 360 reye , and be stamp with two letter , saint T . which be S . Thomas on the one side , and the arm of Portugal on the other side . there be also a kind of money call cruzado stamp with the arm of Portugal , and be worth 6 tangas good money , the larine be every 9 of they worth 2 cruzado , which be 12 tangas good money , and these larines be of those which be stamp in Balsara and Ormuz . the royal of 8 they call pardaos de Reales , and be worth 7 tangas of good money . the custom of Malacca be 10 in the 100 as well inward as outward , and those which pay the custom inward , if in case they send the same good for any other place within term of a year and a day , pay no custom for the same .