Aleppo dram 150 , ut supra . the fraught of the bark from ormuz to Balsara , i will say from Balsara to Ormuz , they pay accord to the greatness thereof . to say , for carriage of 10 care 180 larine , those of 15 care 270 larine , those of 20 care 360 larine , those of 30 care 540 urine . note that a cara be 4 quintal of Balsara . they pay also to the pilot of the bark for his own carriage one care , and to all the rest of the mariner among they 3 care fraught , which be in they . whole 4 care , and pay the abovesaid prize and freight , they be at no charge of victual with they , but it be requisite that the same be declare in the charter party , with the condition that they lade not aboard one rotilo more than the fraught , under pain that find more in ormuz , it be forfeit , and beside that to pay the fraught of that which they have lade . and in this accord it behoove to deal wary , and in the presence of the ermine or some other honest man ( whereof there be but few ) for they be the worst people in all Arabia . and this diligence must be put in execution , to the end the bark may not be overlade , because they be to pass many sand betwixt Balsara and Ormuz . the weight , measure , and money currant in the kingdom of Ormuz : spice and drug they weigh by the bar , and of every sort of good the weight be different . to say , of some drug 3 quintal , and 3 erubi or rove , and other some 4 quintal 25 rotiloe , and yet both be call a bar , which bar , as well great as little , be 20 frasoli , and every frasoli be 10 mana , and every mana 23 chiansi , and every chianso 10 meticals and a half . note that every quintail make 4 erubi or rove , and every what antilo rove 32 rotiloe , and every rotilo 16 ounce , and every u - ounce 7 meticals , so that the quintali come to be 128 rotiloe , which be aleppine 26 rotiloe and one three part , which be 132 livre . english weight . and contrariwise you quintal of Aleppo ( which be 494 rotiloe 8 ounce english ) make 477 rotiloe and a half of ormuz , which be 3 quintal 2 rove , 29 rotiloe and a half . note that there be bar of diverse weight , ut supra , of which they bargain simple , accord to the sort of commodity , but if they bargain of the great bar , the same be 7 quintal and 24 rotiloe , which be 958 livre . 9 ounce of London weight , and of Aleppo 193 rotiloe and a half . touch the money of Ormuz , they bargain in merchandise at so many leche by the bar , which lech be 100 asary , and make larines 100 and a half , which make pardaos 38 , and larines one half , at larines 5 by the pardao . one asarie be sadines 10 , and every sadine be 100 danarie . the larine be worth 5 sadines and one four part , so that the sadine be worth of Aleppo money 1 medine and 1 four part , and the larine as in Balsara worth of Aleppo money 6 medines and a half . the pardao be 5 larine of Balsara . there be also stamp in Ormuz a seraphine of gold , 14 the money of ORMUZ which be iide and round , and be worth 24 sadines , which make 30 medines of Aleppo . the venetian money be worth in ormuz larines 88 per too meticals , and the royal be worth larine 86 less one sadine , which be every thousand meticals , 382 assure : but those that will not sei they , use to melt they , and make they so many larines in the king of Ormuz his mint , whereby they clear 2 per 100 , and somewhat more : and this they do because neither venetian money nor royal run as currant in ormuz , per advise . the measure of ormuz be of 2 sort , the one call codo which increase upon the measure of Aleppo 3 per 100 , for bring 100 pike of any measurable ware from Aleppo to Ormuz , it be find in ormuz to be 103 code . also these measure of ormuz increase upon those of Balsara and Babylon 25 and two three part per 100 : for bring 100 pike of any measurable ware from Balsara or Babylon , there be find in ormuz 125 code and two three part . the other measure be call a vare , which be send from the king of Portugal to the India , by which they sell thing of small value , which measure be of 5 palm or span , and be one code and two three part , so that buy 100 code of any measurable ware , and return to measure it by the say vare , there be find but 60 vare , contrary wise 100 vare make 166 code and two three part . note that all such ship as lade horse in ormuz for goa or any other place of India , lade 10 horse or upward , in what place soever the say horse be take a shore in the India , the merchandise which be to be discharge out of that ship wherein the say horse come , be bind to pay no custom at all , but if they lade one horse less than ten , than the good be bind to pay the whole custom . and this law be make by don Emanuel king of Portugal , but it be to be diligent foresee , whither all those horse lade be bind r5 to pay the king his custom : for many time by the king of Portugal his commandment , there be favour show to the king of Cochin his brother in arm , so that his horse that come in the same ship , be not to answer custom . as for example : if there be 4 horse lade in one ship , all which be to pay custom to the king , and one other of the king of cochin which be not to pay any custom , the same cause all the merchandise of that ship to be subject to pay custom , per advise . but if they lade ten horse upon purpose to pay the king his custom in goa , and in the voyage any of they shall die in that case , if they bring the tail of the dead horse to the custom in goa , than the merchandise be free from all custom , because they be lade in ormuz to pay custom in goa . Moreover , if the horse shall die before the midst of the voyage , they pay no custom at all , and if they die in the mid of the voyage , than they pay half custom , but if any horse die after the mid voyage , they pay custom no less then if they arrive safe . notwithstanding , the merchandise ( whether the say horse die before or in the mid voyage