be make by m . Wilkinson aforesaid , that not a man shall come to he : and for the brag and threat of don Pedro , it be not that spanish bravado that shall make they yield a jot to their hindrance , but they be as ready to make resistance , as he to offer a injury . whereupon Cavallero the messenger leave brag , and begin to persuade they in quiet sort , and with many word , but all his labour be to no purpose , and as his threat do nothing terrify they , so his persuasion do nothing move they to do that which he require . at the last he entreat to have the merchant of the admiral carry by he as a messenger to the general , that so he may be satisfy , and assure of their mind by one of their own company . but m . Wilkinson will agree to no such thing , although Richard Rowit the merchant himself seem willing to be employ in that message , and labour by reasonable persuasion to induce m . Wilkinson to grant it , as hope to be a occasion by his presence and discreet answer to satisfy the general , and thereby to save the effusion of christian blood , if it shall grow to a battle . and he seem so much the more willing to be send , by how much deep than oath and protestation of this Cavallero be , that he will ( as he be a true knight and a soldier ) deliver he back again in safety to his company . albeit , m . Wilkinson , which by his long experience have receive sufficient trial of spanish inconstancy and perjury , wish he in no case to put his life and liberty in hazard upon a Spaniard oath . but at last , upon much intreaty , he yield to let he go to the general , think in deed , that good speech and answer of reason will have content he , whereas otherwise refusal to do so , may peradventure have provoke the more discontentment . m . Rowit therefore pass to the spanish general , the rest of the galley have espy he , think in deed that the english be rather determine to yield , than to fight , and therefore come flock about the frigate , every man cry out , que nuevas , que nuevas , have these english man yield ? the frigate answer , not so , they neither have , nor purpose to yield , only they have send a man of their company to speak with our general : and be come to the galley wherein he be , he show himself to m . Rowit in his armour , his guard of soldier attend upon he in armour also , and begin to speak very proud in this sort : thou Englishman , from whence be your fleet , why stand you aloof off " , know you not your duty to the catholique king , who person i here represent ? where be your bill of lade , your letter , passport , and the chief of your man ? think you my attendance in these sea to be in vain , or my person to no purpose ? let all these thing be do out of hand as i command , upon pain of my further displeasure and the spoil of you all : these [ ii i . 288 . ] word of the spanish general be not so outrageous pronounce as they be mild answer by m . Rowit , who tell he that they be all marchantman , use traffic in honest sort , and seek to pass quiet , if they be not urge further than reason . as for the king of Spain , he think ( for his part ) that there be amity betwixt he and his sovereign the queen of England , so that neither he nor his officer shall go about to offer any such injury to english merchant , who as they be far from give offence to any man , so they will be loath to take a abuse at the hand of any , or sit down to their loss , where their ability be able to make defence . and as touch his commandment aforesaid , for the acknowledge of duty , in such particular sort , he tell he , that where there be no duty owe , there none shall be perform , assure he that their whole company and ship in general , stand resolute upon the negative , and will not yield to any such unreasonable demand , join with such imperious and absolute manner of command . why then , say he , if they will neither come to yield , nor show obedience to i in the name of my king , i will either sink they or bring they to harbour , and so tell they from i . with that the frigate come away with m . Rowit , and bring he aboard the english admiral again accord to promise : who be no soon enter in , but by and by defiance be sound on both side : the Spaniard hew off the nose of the galley , that nothing may hinder the level of the shot , and the english on the other side courageous prepare themselves to the combat , every man accord to his room , bend to perform his office with alacrity and diligence . in the mean time a cannon be discharge from the admiral of the galley , which be the onset of the fight , be present answer by the english admiral with a culverin : so the skirmish begin , and grow hoit and terrible , there be no powder nor shot spare : each english ship match it self in good order against two spanish galley , beside the inequality of the ffigat on the Spaniard side : and although our man perform their part with singular valour , accord to their strength , insomuch that the enemy as amaze therewith will oftentimes pause and stay , and consult what be best to be do , yet they cease not in the midst of their business to make prayer to almighty God the revenger of all evil , and the giver of victory , that it a report of a worthy fight a . d . 15 % . will please he to assist they in that good quarrel of they , in defend themselves against so proud a tyrant , to teach their hand to war , and their finger to fight , that the glory of