the second voyage of m . Laurence Aldersey , to the city of Alexandria , and Cayro in Aegypt . anno 1586 . embark my self at Bristol , in the Hercules , a good ship of London , and set sail the 21 day of February , about ten of the clock in the morning , have a merry wind : but the 23 day , there arise a very great storm , and in the mid of it we descry a small boat of the burden of ten ton , with four man in she , in very great danger , who call a main for our help . whereupon our master make towards they , and take they into our ship , and let the boat , which be lade with timber , and appertain to Chepstow , to run a drift . the same night about midnight arise another great storm , but the wind be large with we , until the 27 of the same month , which then grow somewhat contrary : yet notwithstanding we hold on our course , and the ten day of march , we descry a sail about cape Sprat , which be a little on this side the straight of gibraltare , but we speak not with she . the next day we descry twelve sail more , with who we think to have speak , to have learn what they be , but they make very fast away , and we give they over . Thursday the 16 of march , we have sight of the strait , and of the coast of Barbary . the 18 day we pass they , and sail towards Patras . upon the 23 of march , we meet with the centurion of London which come from Genoa , by who we send letter to England , and the four man also which we take in , upon the coast of England , beforemention . the 29 of march we come to Goleta a small hand , Goleta . and have sight of two ship , which we judge to be of England . Tuesday the four of April , we be before Malta , Malta . 39 and be there becalm , our master cause the two ship boat to be have out , and they tow the ship , till we be out of sight of the castle of Malta . the Zante . 9 day of April we come to Zante , and be before the town , William Aldridge , servant to master Thomas cordall of London , come aboard we , with who our master and twelve more of our company , think to have go on shore , but they can not be permit : Patras . so we all come aboard again , and go to Patras , where we arrive upon good Friday , and lie there with good entertainment at the english house , where be the Consuli master Grimes , Ralph Ashley , and John Doddington , who very kind go with we , and show we the pleasure of the town . they bring we to the house of the Cady , who be [ il i . 283 . ] make then to understand of the 20 turk that we have aboard , which be to go to Constantinople , be redeem out of captivi tie , by sir Francis drake in the west Indies , and bring with he into England , and by order of the queen majesty send now into their country . whereupon the Cady command they to be bring before he , that he may see they : and when he have talk with they , and understand how strange they be deliver , he marveil much , and admire the queen majesty of England , who be but a woman , be notwithstanding of such power and renown among all the prince of Christendom , with many other honourable word of commend her majesty . so he take the name of those 20 . Turk , and record they in their great book , to remain in perpetuali memory . after this , our foresay countryman bring i to the chapel of S . Andrew where his tomb or sepulchre be , and the board upon which he be behead , which board be now so rot , that if any man offer to cut it , it fall to powder , yet i bring some of it away with i . upon Tuesday in Easter week , we set out towards Zante again , and the 24 . of April with much ado , we 40 • were all permit to come on shore , and i be carry to the english house in Zante , where i be very well entertain . the commodity of Zante be currant and oil : the situation of the town be under a very great hill , upon which stand a very strong castle , which command the town . at Zante we take in a captain and 16 . soldier , with other passenger . we depart from Zante upon Tuesday the 15 . of April , and the next day we anchor at a small island , call Strivalia , which be desolate of people , save a few religious man , who entertain we well , without take any money : but of courtesy we bestow somewhat upon they for their maintenance , and then they give we a couple of lean sheep , which we carry aboard . the last day of April , we arrive at Candie , at a castle , call sowday , where we set the captain , soldier , and mariner ashore , which we take in at Zante , with all their carriage . the second day of may we set sail again , and the four day come to the island of Milo , where we anchor , and find the people there very courteous , and take in such necessary as we want . the island be in my judgement a hundred in number , and all within the compass of a hundred mile . the 11 . day , the Chaus , which be the great man there in authority , for certain offence do in a little chapel by the water side , which they say one of our ship have do , and impute it to i , because i be see go into it three day before , come to we , and make much a do , so that we be fain to come out of our ship arm : but by three piece of gold the brabble be end , and we come to our ship . this day we also set sail , and the next day pass by the castle of Serpeto , which be a old ruinate thing , and stand under a hill side . the 13 . day we pass by the island of Paris , and the island of the bank of Helicon , and the island call Ditter , where be many boar , and the woman be 41 A . D . 1586 . Strivalia . Candie . may . the island of Milo , in old time call Sporades . witch . the same day also we pass by the castle of Tino , stand upon a very high mountain , and near unto it be the island of Diana . the 15 . of may , we come to Sio , where i stay thirty and three day . in it be a very proper town , after the build of that country , and the people be civil : and while we be here , there come in six galley , which have be at Alexandria , and one of they which be the admiral , have a prince of the moor prisoner , who they take about Alexandria , and they mean to present he to the Turk . the town stand in a valley , and a long the water side pleasant . there be about 26 . windmill about it , and the commodity of it be cotton wool , cotton yarn , mastike , and some other drug . as we remain at Sio , there grow a great controversy between the mariner of the Hercules , and the greek of the town of Sio , about the bring home of the Turk , which the greek take in ill part , and the boy cry out , vive el re Philippe : whereupon our man beat the boy , and throw stone , and so a broil begin , and some of our man be hurt : but the greek be fetch out of their house , and manacle together with iron , and threaten to the galley : about fourty of they be send to the prison , and what become of they , when we be go , we know not , for we go thence within two day after , which be the 19 of June . the 20 . day we pass by the island of Singonina , . a island