the voyage of m . John Eldred to Trypolis in Syria by sea , and from thence by land and river to Babylon and Balsara . 1583 . depart out of London in the ship call the tiger , in the company of m . John Newberry , m . Ralph Fitch , and six or seven other honest merchant upon Shrove Monday 1583 , and arrive in Tripoli of Syria the first day of May next ensue : at our land we go on may upon s . George hand , a place where Christians die aboard the ship , be wont to be bury . in this city our english merchant have a Consuli , and our nation abide together in one house with he , call Fondeghi ingle , build of stone , square , in manner like a cloister , and every man have his several chamber , as it be the use of all other Christians of several nation . this town stand under a part of the mountain of Libanus two English mile distant from the port : on the side of which port , trending in form of a half moon , stand five block house or small fort , wherein be some very good artillery , and the fort be keep with about a hundred janissary . right before this town from the seaward be a bank of move sand , which gather and increase with the western wind , in such sort , that , accord to a old prophesy among they , this bank be like to swallow up and overwhelm the town : for every year it increase and eat up many garden , although they use all policy to diminish the same , and t © make it firm ground . the city be about the bigness vi 1 a the description of Tripoli in Syria . Cotton wool . gall tree . . Aleppo . [ il i . 269 . ] of Bristol , and wall about , though the wall be of no great force . the chief strength of the place be in a citadel , which stand on the south side within the wall , and overlook the whole town , and be strong keep with two hundred janissary and good artillery . a river pass through the midst of the city , wherewith they water their garden and mulberry tree , on which there grow abundance of silk woime , wherewith they make great quantity of very white silk , which be the chief natural commodity to be find in and about this place . This ride be more frequent with christian merchant , to wit , Venetians , Genouois , Florentines , marsilians , sicilian , raguse , and late with english man , than any other port of the turk dominion . from Tripoli i depart the 14 of may with a caravan , pass three day over the ridge of mount Libanus , at the end whereof we arrive in a city call hammah , which stand on a goodly plain replenish with corn and cotton wool . on these mountain which we pass grow great quantity of gall tree , which be somewhat like our oak , but lesser and more crooked : on the best tree a man shall not find above a pound of gall . this town of hammah be fall and fall more and more to decay , and at this day there be scarce one half of the wall stand , which have be very strong and fair : but because it cost many man life to win it , the Turk will not have it repair ; and have write in the arabian tongue over the castle gate , which stand in the midst of the town , these word : curse be the father and the son that shall lay their hand to the repair hereof . refresh our self one day here , we pass forward with camel three day more until we come to Aleppo , where we arrive the 21 of May . this be the great place of traffic for a dry town that be in all those part : for hither resort Jew , tartarian , persian , armenian , egyptian , Indians , and many sort of Christians , and enjoy freedom ' s of their conscience , and bring thither many kind of rich merchandise . in the midst of this town also stand a goodly castle raise on high , with a garrison of four or five hundred janissary . within four mile round about be goodly garden and vineyard and tree , which bear goodly fruit near unto the river side , which be but small ; the wall be about three english mile in compass , but the suburb be almost as much more . the town be great people . we depart from thence with our camel the last of may with m . John Newberry and his company , and come to birrah in three day , be a small town situate upon birrah . the river Euphrates , where it begin first to take his name , be here gather into one channel , whereas before it come down in manifold branch , and therefore be call by the people of the country by a name which signify a thousand head . here be plenty of victual , whereof we all furnish our self for a long journey down the aforesaid river . And accord to the manner of those that travel down by water , we prepare a small bark for the conveyance of our self and of our good . Theise boat be flat bottomed , because the river be shallow in many place : and when Euphrates man travel in the month of July , August , and Septem - shallow - b , the water be then at the low , they be constrain to carry with they a spare boat or two to lighten their own boat , if they chance to fall on the shold . we be eight and twenty day upon the water be - eisht and between birrah and Felugia , where we disimbark our ^ es self and our good . Every night after the sun set , nver , we tie our bark to a stake , go on land to gather stick , and set on our pot with rice or bruise wheat , and have sup , the merchant lie aboard the bark , and the mariner upon the shore side as near as they can unto the same . in many place upon the river side we meet with troop of arabian , of who we buy arabian upon milk , butter , egg , and lamb , and give they in barter , ( for they care not for money ) glass , comb , coral , ' amber , to hang about their arm and neck , and for the arabian woman wear gold ring in their nostril . Euphrates describe . Felugia . the ruin of aid Babylon . churn milk we give they bread and pomegranate peel , wherewith