the number of soldier continual attend upon the beglerbeg the governor of province and sanjack , and their petty captain maintain of these province . the beglerbeg of GRaecia , fourty thousand Buda , fifteen thousand Sclavonia , fifteen thousand Anatolia , fifteen thousand Caramania , fifteen thousand Armenia , eighteen thousand Persia , twenty thousand Usdrum , fifteen thousand Chirusta , fifteen thousand caraemiti , thirty thousand giersul , two and thirty thousand ■ person . the beglerbeg of BAgdat , five and twenty thousand ‘ balsara , two and twenty thousand Lassaija , seventeen thousand Aleppo , five and twenty thousand Damascus , seventeen thousand Cayro , twelve thousand Abes , twelve thousand " person . Mecca , eight thousand Cyprus , eighteen thousand Tunis in Barbary , eight thousand Tripoli in Syria , eight thousand Alger , fourty thousand who sangjack and petty captain be three hundred sixty eight , every of which retain continual in pay from five hundred to two hundred soldier , may be one with another at the least , three hundred thousand person . [ chief officer chief officer in his seraglio about his person . CApiaga , high porter . alnader Bassi , treasurer . Oda Bassi , Chamberlaine . killergie Bassi , steward . be these comptroller . ne tnese peskeroien ) groom of the chamber . Edostoglan , gentleman of the ewer . Sehetaraga , armour bearer . Choataraga , he that carry his ride cloak . Ebietaraga , groom of the stool . there be many other manner officer , which i esteem superfluous to write . the Turk yearly revenue . the grand signior annual revenue be say to be fourteen million and a half of golden ducat , which be sterling five million , eight score thousand pound . the tribute pay by the Christians his Subjects be one gold ducat yearly for the redemption of every head , which may amount unto not so little as one million of golden ducat , which be sterling three hundred threescore thousand pound . moreover , in time of war he exact manifold sum for maintenance of his army and navy of the say Christians . the emperor pay he yearly tribute for Hungary , threescore thousand dollar , which be sterling thirteen thousand pound , beside present to the viceroy and bassa , which be say to surmount to twenty thousand dollar . [ it . i . 294 . ] ambassador allowance . the ambassador of the emperor be allow one thousand asper the day . the ambassador of the french king heretofore enjoy the like : but of late year by mean of 68 displeasure conceive by Mahumet than viceroy , it be reduce to six crown the day , beside the provision of his esquire of his stable . the ambassador of Poland , and for the state of Venice be not Ligiers as these two abovesaid . the say polack be allow 12 . French crown the day during his abode , which may be for a month . very seidome do the state of Venice send any ambassador otherwise , then enforce of urgent necessity : but in stead thereof keep their agent , precedent over other merchant , of they term a bailiff , who have none allowance of the grand signior , although his port and state be in manner as magnifical as the other aforesaid ambassador . the spanish ambassador be equal with other in janissary : but for so much as he will not accord to custom follow the list of other ambassador in make present to you grand signior , he have none allowance . his abode there be 3 . year , at the end whereof , have conclude a truce for 6 . year , take place from his first come in November last past 1580 . he be not admit to the presence of the grand signior .