at the rise and set ) as i have see sundry doe in Aleppo : he reason iio be draw from the effect which it work in give light to the moon and other star , and cause all thing to grow and increase upon the earth : answer be make , that it do move with the rest as the wheel of a clock , and therefore of force must have a mover . likewise in the eclipse be darken it be manifest prove that it be not god , for God be altogether goodness and brightness , which can neither be darken nor receive detriment or hurt : but the sun receive both in the eclipse , as it be apparent : to which he can not answer ; but so they have receive from their ancestor , that it be without beginning or end , as in any orbicular or round body neither beginning or end can be find . he likewise say , that there be other gentile in the Indies which worship the moon as chief , and their reason be . the moon when she rise go with thousand of star accompany like a king , and therefore be chief : but the sun go alone , and therefore not so great . against who the banians reason , that it be not true , because the moon and star receive their light from the sun , neither do the sun vouchsafe they his company but when he list , and therefore like a mighty prince go alone , yet they acknowledge the moon as queen or viceroy . law they hold none , but only seven precept which they say be give they from their father Noe , not know Abraham or any other . aman s ’ first , to honour father and mother ; second , not to steal ; three not to commit adultery ; fourthly not to kill any thing live ; fiftly , not to eat any thing live ; sixth , not to cut their hair ; seventh , to go barefoot in their church . Theise they hold most strict , and by no mean will break they : but he that break one be punish with twenty stripe ; but for the great fault they will kill none , neither by a short death nor a long , only he be keep some time in prison with very litde meat , and have at the most not above twenty or five and twenty stripe . in the year iti they have 16 feast , and then they go to their church , where be picture in a broad table the sun , as we use to paint it , the face of a man with beam round about , not have any thing else in it . at their feast they spot their face in diverse part with saffron all yellow , and so walk up and down the street ; and this they do as a custom . they hold , there shall | be a resurrection , and all shall come to judgement , but the account shall | be most straight , insomuch that but one of ioooo shall | be receive to favour , and those shall live again in this world in great happiness : the rest shall | be torment . and because they will escape this judgement , when any man die , he and his wife be both burn together even to ash , and then they be throw into a river , and so disperse as though they have never be . if the wife will not burn with her dead husband , she be hold ever after as a whore . and by this mean they hope to escape the judgement to come . as for the soul , that go to the place from whence it come , but where the place be they know not . that the body shall not be make again they reason w ‘ the philosopher , say , that of nothing nothing can be make ( not know that God make the whole world and their god the sun of nothing ) but behold the course of nature , that nothing be make but by a mean , as by the seed of a man be make another , and by corn cast into the ground there come up new corn : so , say they , man can be make except some part of he be leave , and therefore they burn the whole : for if he be bury in the earth , they say there be a small bone in the neck which will never be consume : or if he be eat by a beast , that bone will not consume , but of that bone will come another man ; and then the soul be restore again , he shall come into judgement , whereas now , the body be destroy , the soul shall not be judge : for their opinion be , that both body and soul must be unite together , as they have sin together , to receive 112 judgement ; and therefore the soul alone can . their seven precept which they keep so strict be not for any hope of reward they have after this life , but only that they may be bless in this world , for they think that he which break they shall have ill success in all his business . they say , the three chief religion in the world be of the christian , Jew , and turk , and yet but one of they true : but be in doubt which be the true of the three , they will be of none : for they hold that all these three shall be judge , and but few of they which be of the true shall be save , the examination shall be so straight ; and therefore , as i have say before , to prevent this judgement , they burn their body to ash . they say , these three religion have too many precept to keep they all well , and therefore wonderful hard it will be to make account , because so few do observe all their religion aright . and thus pass the time for the space of three month in this sea voyage , [ two i . 311 . ] we arrive at Venice the ten of June : and after i have see Padua , with other english man , i come the ordinary way over the Alps , by Augusta , Noremberg , and so for England ; where to the praise of God i safe arrive the nine of August 1595 . vi “ 3