church by the sea side , whither , with a perma ( that be one of their usual whirry ) they approach within some two or three score yard , where the plaintiff stand up , and hold his petition over his forehead in sight of the grand signior ( for his church be open to the sea side ) the rest sit still in the boat , who appoint one of his dwarf to receive they , and to bring they to he . a dwarf , one of the ambassador favorite , so soon as he be discern , beckon he to the shore side , take his Arz , and with speed carry it to the grand signior . now the effect of it be this ; that except his highness will redress this so great a indignity , which the vizir he slave have offer he and her majesty in his person , he be purpose to detain the present until such time as he may by letter overland from her majesty be certify , whither she will put up so great a injury as it be . whereupon he present return answer , request the ambassador within a hour after to go to the Dovan of the vizir , unto who himself of his charge will send a gown of cloth of gold , and command he public to put it upon he , and with kind entertainment to embrace he in sign of reconciliation . whereupon our ambassador return home , take his horse , accompany with his man , and come to the vizier court , where , accord to the grand signior command , he with all show of kindness embrace the ambassador , and with courteous speech reconcile himself , and with his own hand put the gown of cloth of gold upon his back . which do , he with his attendant return home , to the no small admiration of all Christians that hear of it , especial of the french and venetian ambassador , who never in the like case against the second person of the turkish empire dare have attempt so bold a enterprise with hope of so friendly audience , and with so speedy redress . this reconciliation with the great vizir thus make , the ambassador prepare himself for the delivery of the vi 97 c A . D . 1593 - [ two - i - 3O5 - ] the great hall of justice . reconciliation with the vizir make . present , which upon the 7 of October 1593 * in “ “ sister manner he perform . the ambassa - the ascension with her flag and streamer , as afore - dor go to say , repair nigh unto the place where the ambassador tepgo . ^ shall land to go up to the seraglio : for you must understand that all christian ambassador have their dwelling in Pera where most christian abide , from which place , except you will go 4 or 5 mile about , you can by land go to Constantinople , whereas by sea it be little broad than the Thames . our ambassador likewise apparel in a suit of cloth of silver , with a upper gown of cloth of gold , accompany with 7 gentleman in costly suit of satin , with 30 other of his man very well apparel , and all in one livery of sad french russet cloth gown , at his house take boat : at who land the ship discharge all her ordinance , where likewise attend 2 bassa , with 40 or 50 chause to accompany you ambassador to the court , and also horse for the ambassador and his gentleman , very rich furnish , with turkish servant attendant to take the horse when they shall light . the ambassador thus honorable accompany , the chause foremost , next his man on foot all go by two and two , himself last with his Chause and Drugaman or Interpreter , and 4 janissary , which he do usual entertain in his house to accompany he the ambass . continual abroad , come to the seraglio about a come to the english mile from the water side , where first he pass Zeraglto . a great gate into a ] arge court Hke the space before white hall gate ) where he with his gentleman alight and leave their horse . from hence they pass into a other stately court , be about 6 score in breadth , and some 10 score yard long , with many tree in it : where all the court be with great pomp set in order to entertain our ambassador . upon the right captltof " hand a11 the lensth of the court be a gallery arch hundred and ove5 and bear up with stone pillar , much like then of fifty . royal exchange , where stood * most of his guard in 98 and rank from the one end to the other in costly array , with round head piece on their head of mettle and gilt over , with a great plume of feather somewhat like a long brush stand up before . on the left hand stand the cappagy or porter , and the chause . all these courtier be about the number of 2000 ( as i may well guess ) most of they apparel in cloth of gold , silver , velvet , satin and scarlet , do together with bow their body , lay their hand upon their breast in courteous manner of salutation , entertain the ambassador : who likewise pass between they , and turn himself sometime to the right hand and sometime to the left , answer they with the like . as he thus pass along , certain chause conduct he to the Dovan , which be the seat of justice , where certain day of the week the grand vizir , with the other vizier , the cadi - lesk or lord chief justice , and the mufti or high priest do sit to determine upon such cause as be bring before they , which place be upon the left side of this great court , whither the ambassador with ambassa - his gentleman come , where he find the vizir thus accompany as aforesaid , who with great show of kind - au1 1 nes receive he : and after receit of her majesty letter , kindness . and conference have of the present , of her majesty health , of the state of England , and such other matter as concern our peaceable traffic in those part : dinner be prepare be by many of you courtier bring dinner bring into another inner room next adjoin , which consist tn - of a hundred