a description of a voyage to Constantinople and Syria , begin the 21 . of march 1593 . and end the 9 of August , 1595 . wherein be show the order of deliver the second present by master Edward Barton her majesty ambassador , which be send from her majesty to sultan Murad can , emperor of turquoise . [ two . i . 304 . ] e set sail in the ascension of London , a new ship very well appoint , of two hundred and three score ton ( whereof be master one William Broadbanke , a provident and skilful man in his faculty ) from Gravesend the one and twenty of march 1593 . and upon the eight of April follow we pass the strait of Gibraltar , and with a small western gale , the 24 . of the same , we arrive at Zante a hand under the venetian . the four of May we depart , and the one and twenty we arrive at Alexandretta in Cilicia in the very bottom of the Mediterrane sea , a road some 25 . mile distant from Antioch , where our merchant land their good to be send for Aleppo . from thence we set sail the five of June , and by contrary wind be drive upon the coast of caramania into a road near a little hand where a castle stand , call castle rosso , some thirty league to the eastwards of the Rhodes , where after long search for fresh water , we can find none , until certain poor greek of the hand bring we to a well where we have 5 or 6 tun . that part of the country next the sea be very barren and full of mountain , yet find we there a old tomb of marble , with a epitaph of a ancient greek character , by antiquity near wear out and past read ; which to the beholder seem a monument of the greatness of the grecian monarchy . from thence we go to the Rhodes , and by contrary wind be drive into a port of candy , call Sittia : candle . this hand be under the venetian , who have there 600 soldier , beside certain Greeks , continual in pay . here with contrary wind we stay six week , and in the end , have the wind prosperous , we sail by Nicaria , Pharos , Delos , and Andros , with sight of many other hand in the archipelago , and arrive at the two castle in Hellespont the 24 of August . within few day after we come to Galipoli some thirty mile from this place , where four of we take a Parma or boat of that place , with two waterman , which row we along the thracian shore to Constantinople , which sometime sail and sometime row , in four day they perform . the first of September we arrive at the famous port of the grand signior , where we be not a little welcome to m . Edward Barton until then her majesty agent , who ( with many other great person ) have for many day expect the present . five or six day after the ship arrive near the seven the ascension tower , which be a very strong hold , and so call of be ' , - have < i at the so many turret , which it have , stand near the sea ‘ side , be the first part of the city that we come unto . here the agent appoint the master of the ascension to stay with the ship until a fit wind and opportunity serve to bring she about the seraglio to salute the grand signior in his moskyta or church : for you shall understand that he have build one near the wall of his seraglio or palace adjoin to the sea side ; whereunto twice or thrice a week he resort to perform such religious rite as their law require : where he be within few day after , our ship set out in their best manner with flag , streamer and pendant of diverse colour silk , with all the mariner , together with most of the ambassador man , have the wind fair , and come within two cable length of this his moskita , where ( he to his great content behold the ship in such bravery ) they discharge 95 1593 - the ship salutes the grand signior . the cause of stay the present . a Arz to the grand signior . first two voly of small shot , and then all the great ordinance twice over , there be seven and twenty or eight and twenty piece in the ship . which perform , he appoint the bustangi - bassa or captain of the great and spacious garden or park , to give our man thanks , with request that some other day they will show he the like sport when he will have the sultana or empress a beholder thereof which few day after at the ship go to the customhouse they perform . the grand signior salutation thus end , the master bring the ship to a anchor at Rapamat near the ambassador house , where he likewise salute he with all his great ordinance once over , and where he land the present , the delivery whereof for a time be stay : the cause of which stay it shall neither be dishonourable for our nation , or that worthy man the ambassador to show you . at the departure of Sinan Bassa the chief vizir , and our ambassador great friend towards the war of Hungary there be another bassa appoint in his place , a churlish and harsh nature man , who upon occasion of certain Genouezes , escape out of the castle stand towards the euxine sea , now call the black sea , there imprison , apprehend and threaten to execute one of our Englishman call John field , for that he be take thereabouts , and know not many day before to have bring a letter to one of they : upon the solicit of who liberty there fall a jar between the bassa ( be now chief vizir ) and our ambassador , and in choler he give her majesty ambassador such word , as without sustain some great indignity he can not put up . whereupon after the arrival of the present , he make a Arz , that be , a bill of complaint to the grand signior against he , the manner in exhibit whereof be thus perform . the plaintiff expect the grand signior go abroad from his palace , either to Santa Sophia or to his 96