in by the sea , be , as Ezekiel prophesy , a place for the spread out of a net . Sidon be situate in a small bay at the foot of mount Libanus , upon the side of a hill look to the north : it be wall about , with a castle nigh to the sea , and one towards the land which be ruinate , but the wall thereof stand . some half mile up towards the mountain be certain ruin of building , with marble , pillar , remain : here for three day we be kind entertain of the captain of the castle : and in a small bark we sail from hence along the shore to Tripoli , and so to Alexandretta , where the 24 of August we arrive . from thence with a venetian caravan we go by land to Aleppo , pass by Antioch , which be seat upon the side of a hill , who wall still stand with 360 turret upon they , and near a very great plain which bear the name of the city , through which run the river Orontes , in scripture call farfar . in Aleppo i stay until February follow ; in this city , as at a mart , meet many nation out of Asia with the people of Europe , have continual traffic and interchangeable course of merchandise one with another : the state and trade of which place , because it be so well know to most of our nation i omit to write of . the 27 of February i depart from Aleppo , and the five of march embark my self at Alexandretta in a great ship of Venice call the Nana Ferra , to come for England . the 14 we put into Salino in Cyprus , where the ship stay many day to lade cotton wool , and other commodity , in the mean time accompany with m . William Barret my country man , the master of the ship a greek , 108 and other we take occasion to see Nicosia , the chief city of this hand , which be some twenty mile from this place , which be situate at the foot of a hill : to the east be a great plain , extend it self ill a great length from the north to the south : it be wall about , but of no such strength as Famagusta ( another city in this hand near the sea side ) who wall be cut out of the main rock . in this city be many sumptuous and goodly building of stone , but uninhabited ; the cause whereof do give i just occasion to show you of a rare judgement of God upon the owner sometime of these house , as i be credible inform by a cypriot a merchant of good wealth in this city . before it come in subjection to the turk , while it be under the venetian , there be many baron and noble man of the cipriots , who partly by usurp more superiority over the common people than they ought , and partly through their great revenue which yearly come in by their cotton wool and wine , grow so insolent and proud , and withal so impious wicked , as that they will at their pleasure command both the wife and child of their poor tenant to serve their unclean lust , 8c hold they in such slavery as though they have be no better than dog , will wage they against a grayhound or spaniel , and he who win the wager shall ever after hold they as his proper good and chattel , to do with they as he list , be Christians aswell as themselves , if they may deserve so good a name . as they behave themselves most unchristianly towards their brethren , so and much more ungodly ( which i shall have put in the first place ) do they towards God : for as though they be too great , stand on foot or kneel to serve God , they will come ride on horseback into the church to hear their mass : which church now be make a public basistane or market place for the Turk to sell commodity in : but behold the judgement of the righteous God , who pay the sinner measure for measure . the 109 A . D . » 595 - Nicosia . a great judgement of God upon the noble man of Cyprus . Turk the year before the overthrow give they at Lepanto by don John take Cyprus . Theise mighty nimrods flee some into hole and some into mountain to hide themselves ; whereupon the Turk make generail proclamation , that if they will all come in and yield themselves , they will restore they to their former revenue and dignity : who not mistrust the mischievous pretense of the Turk , assemble together to make themselves know ; who after the Turk have in possession , they ( as the lord executioner ) put they with their wife and child all to the sword , pretend thereby to cut of all future rebellion , so that at this day be not one of the noble race know alive in the hand , only two or three remain in Venice but of little wealth , which in the time of the war escape . after we have stay in this hand some thirty day , we set sail in the foresay ship be about the burden of 900 ton , have in her passenger of diverse nation , as Tartars , persian , Jew , and sundry Christians . among all which i have often conference with a Jew , who by reason of his many year education at safet a place in Judea near Jerusalem , where they study the rabbi with some other art as they think good , as also for his travel into Persia and ormus , he seem to be of good experience in matter abroad , who relate unto i such conference as he have with a baniane at ormus , be one of the Indians inhabit the country of Cambaia . This baniane be a gentle have skill in astronomic , as many of that nation have , who by his book write in his own tongue and character , can tell the time of eclipse both of sun and moon , with the change and full , and by judgement in astrology give answer to any question demand . be ask concern his opinion in religion , what he think of God ? he make answer , that they hold no other god but the sun , ( to which planet they pray both