bear , pay , or perform , that than it shall and may be lawful for the rest of the say governor and company of merchant of Levant , present to expel , remove , and displace every such person so refuse , or not bear or pay out , of , and from the say corporation and company , and from all privilege , liberty , and pre - eminence which any such person shall , or may claim , or have by virtue of this our grant , and in place of they to elect other exercise the lawful trade of merchandise to be of the say company . and that every such person so expel , removed , or displace by consent of the say governor and company of merchant of Levant , or the more part of they , shall be from thenceforth utter disable to take any benefit by virtue of this privilege , or any time 90 the second Levant charter a . d . 1592 . after to be admit or receive again into the same , any thing in these present contain to the contrary notwithstanding . provide always , that if it shall hereafter appear to we our heir and successor , that this grant or the continuance thereof in the whole or in any part thereof , shall not be profitable to we our heir and successor , or to this our realm , that then and from thenceforth , upon and after eighteen month warning to be give to the say company by we our heir and successor , this present grant shall cease , be void , and determine to all intent , construction and purpose . and further of our speciali grace , certain knowledge , and mere motion , we have condescend and grant , and by these present for we , our heir and successor , do condescend and grant to the say governor and company of merchant of Levant , that if at the end of the say term of twelve year it shall seem meet and convenient to the say governor and company , or any the party aforesaid , that this present grant shall be continue : and if that also it shall appear unto we , our heir and successor , that the continuance thereof shall not be prejudicial ! or hurtful to this our realm , but that we shall find the further continuance thereof profitable for we our heir and successor and for our realm with such condition as be herein mention , or with some alteration or qualification thereof , that than we our heir and successor at the instance and humble petition of the say governor and company , or any of they so sue for the same , and such other person and person our subject as they shall nominate and appoint , or shall be by we , our heir and successor new nominate , not exceed in number twelve , new letter patent under the great seal of England in due form of law with like cove - [ ii i . 303 . ] nant , grant , clause , and article , as in these present be contain , or with addition of other necessary article or change of these in some part , for , and during the full term of twelve year then next follow . willing now hereby , and straight command and charge all and singular our admiral , viceadmiral , justice , major , sheriff , escheator , constable , bailiff , and all and singular other our officer , minister , liegeman and subject whatsoever , to be aid , favour , help , and assist unto the say company and their successor , and to their deputy , officer , factor , servant , assign and minister , and every of they , in execute and enjoy the premise as well on land as on sea , from time to time , and at all time when you or any of you shall thereto be require , any statute , act , ordinance , proviso , proclamation or restraint heretofore have , make , set forth , ordain or provide , or any other matter , cause or thing whatsoever to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding . although express mention of the true yearly value or certainty of the premise , or any of they , or of any other gift or grant by we , or any of our progenitor to the say governor and company of the merchant of Levant before this time make , in these present be not make : or any statute , act , ordinance , provision , proclamation or restraint to the contrary thereof before this time have , make , do , or provide , or any other matter , thing or cause whatsoever , in any wise notwithstanding . in witness whereof we have cause these our letter to be make patent . witness our self at Westminster the seven day of Januarie in the four and thirty year of our reign . per breve de privato Sigillo . Bailie . to the worshipful and his very love uncle m . Rowland Hewish esquire , at sand in Devonshire . ir , consider the goodness of your nature which be wont kind to accept from a friend , even of mean thing be give with a good heart , i have presume to trouble you with the read of this rude discourse of my travail into turquoise , and of the delivery of the present with such other occurrent as there happen worthy the observation : of all which proceed i be a eyewitness , it please the ambassador to take i in with he to the grand signior . if for lack of time to put it in order i have not perform it so well as it ought , i crave pardon , assure you that to my knowledge i have not miss in the truth of any thing . if you ask i what in my travel i have learn , i answer as a noble man of France do to the like demand , hoc unum didici , mundi contemptum : and so conclude with the wise man in the book of the preacher , that all be vanity , and one thing only be necessary , i take my leave and commit you to the almighty . from London the 16 . march 1597 . your love nephew Richard wrag . 93