dish or thereabouts , most boil and roast , where the ambassador accompany w ‘ the vizier go to dinner , his gentleman likewise with the rest of his man have a dinner with the like variety prepare upon you same side of the court , by themselves sit down to their meat , 40 or 50 chause stand at the upper end attend upon the gentleman to see they serve in good order ; their drink be water mingle with rose water and sugar bring in a Luthro ( that be a goat skin ) which a man carry at his back , and under his arm let it run out at a spout into cup as man will call for [ ii i . 306 . ] gown of cloth of gold for the ambassador and his gentleman . the present . the present view . it . the dinner thus with good order bring in , and for half a hour with great sobriety and silence perform , be not so orderly take up ; for certain moglans officer of the kitchen ( like her majesty black guard ) come in disorder manner and take away the dish , and he who hungry eye one dish can not satisfy , turn two or three one into the other , and thus of a sudden be a clean riddance make of all . the ambassador after dinner with his gentleman , by certain officer be place at the upper end upon the left side of the court , near unto a great gate which give entrance to a three court be but little , pave with stone . in the midst whereof be a little house build of marble , as i take it , within which sit the grand signior , accord to who commandment give there be gown of cloth of gold bring out of sie wardrobe , and put upon the ambassador and 7 of his gentleman , the ambassador himself have 2 , one of gold , and the other of crimosin velvet , all the rest one a piece . then certain cappagy have the present , which be in trunk there ready , deliver they by the ambassador man , it be 12 goodly piece of gild plate , 36 garment of fine english cloth of all color , 20 garment of cloth of gold , 10 garment of satin , 6 piece of fine holland , and certain other thing of good value ; all which be carry round about the court , each man take a piece , be in number very near 100 parcel , and so 2 and 2 go round that all may see it , to the great glory of the present , and of he to who it be give : they go into the innermost court pass by the window of that room , where the grand signior sit , who , as it go by to be lay up in certain room adjoin , take view of all . present after the present follow the ambassador with his gentleman ; at the gate of which court stand 20 or 30 agaus which be eunuch . within the court yard be the Turk dwarf and dumb man , be most of they youth . at the door of his room stand the bustangi - bassa , with another bassa to lead the ambassador and his 100 follower to the grand signior who sit in a chair of estate , apparel in a gown of cloth of silver . the floor under his foot , which part be a foot high than the rest , be cover with a carpet of green satin embroidered most rich with silver , orient pearl and great turkese ; the other part of the house be cover with a carpet of carnation satin embroider wl gold , none be in the room with he , but a bassa who stand next the wall over against he hang down his head , and look submiss upon the ground as all his subject do in his presence . the ambassador thus betwixt two fmbassa - which stand at the door be lead in , either of they take a arm , kiss his hand , and so backward with hand . his face to the Turk they bring he nigh the door again , where he stand until they have likewise do so with all the rest of his gentleman . which end , the ambassador , accord as it be the custom when any present be deliver , make his three demand , such as he think most expedient for her majesty honour , 8c the peaceable traffic of our nation into his dominion : whereunto he answer in one word , nolo , which be in turkish as much as , it shall be do : for it be not the manner of the turkish emperor familiar to confer with any christian ambassador , but he appoint his vizir in his the ambassa - person to grant their demand if they be to his like ; dqr demand as to our ambassador he grant all his demand , 8c give e ' order that his daily allowance for his house of money , flesh , wood , 8c hay , shall be augment with half as much more as it have be before . hereupon the ambassador take his leave , depart with his gentleman the same way he come , the whole court salute he as they do at his come in ; 8c come to the second court to take our horse , after we be mount , we stay half a hour , until the captain of the guard with 2000 horseman at the least pass before , after who follow 40 or 50 chause next before the ambassador to accompany he to his house . and as before at his land , so now at his take boat , the ship discharge ioi the sultanas present to the queen . letter send for England . the other vizier present . [ ii i . 3 ° 7 - ] all her great ordinance , where arrive , he likewise have a great banquet prepare to entertain those which come to bring he home . the pomp and solemnity of the present , with the day thus end , he short after present the sultana or empress who ( by reason that she be mother to he which be heir to the crown imperial ) be have in far great reverence than any of his other queen or concubine . the present send she in her majesty name be a jewel of her majesty picture , set with some ruby and diamond , 3 great piece of gild plate , 10