garment of cloth of gold , a very fine case of glass botde silver and gilt , with 2 piece of fine holland , which so grateful she accept , as that she send to know of the ambassador what present he think she may return ill will most delight her majesty : who send word that a suit of princely attire be after the turkish fashion will for the rareness thereof be acceptable in England . whereupon she send a upper gown of cloth of gold very rich , an under gown of cloth of silver , and a girdle of turquoise work , rich and fair , with a letter of gratification , which for the rareness of the stile , because you may be acquaint with it , i have at the end of this discourse hereunto annex , which letter and present , with one from the grand signior , be send by m . Edward Bushell , and m . William Aldridge overland the 20 of march , who pass through Valachia and Moldavia , and so through Poland , where Michael prince of Valachia , and Aron Voivoda prince of Moldavia receive letter from the ambassador , entertain they with all courtesy , through who mean by the great favour which his lordship have with the grand signior , they have not long before both of they be advance to their princely dignity . he likewise present Sigala the admiral of the sea , with abrim bassa , who marry the great Turk daughter , and all the other vizier with diverse piece of plate , fine english cloth and other costly thing : the particular whereof , to avoid tediousness , i omit . all the present thus end , the ship 102 shoot ten piece of ordinance at the seraglio point , as a last farewell , depart on her journey for England the ascension first of November , my self continue in Constantinople < tyarUik . until the last of July after . this year in the spring there be great preparation for the hungarian war ; and great pre - the great Turk threaten to go himself in person : but like Heliogabalus , his affection be more service - narre . able to Venus then to Mars , he stay at home . yet a great army be dispatch this year ; who , as they come out of Asia to go for Hungary , do so pester the street of Constantinople for the space of two month in the spring time , as scarce either . Christian or Jew can without danger of lose his money pass up and down the city . what insolence , murder and robbery be commit not only upon Christians but also upon Turks i omit to write , and i pray God in England the like may never be see : and yet i can wish , that such among we as have enjoy the gospel with such great and admirable peace and prosperity under her majesty government this forty year , and have not all this time bring forth better fruit of obedience to God , and thankfulness to her majesty , be there but a short time to behold the miserable condition both of Christians and other live under such a infideli prince , who not only be wrap in most palpable and gross ignorance of mind , but be clean without the mean of the true knowledge of God : i doubt not but the sight hereof ( if they be not clean void of grace ) will stir they up to more thankfulness to God , that ever they be bear in so happy a time , and under so wise and godly a prince profess the true religion of Christ . the number of soldier which go to the war of Hungary this year be 470000 , as by the particular give by the admiral to the ambassador hereunder do appear . although all these be appoint and suppose to go , yet the victory which the Christians in the spring have against the turk strike such a 103 terror in many of the turkish soldier , as by report diverse upon the way thither leave their captain and steal away . the number of turkish soldier which be appoint to go into Hungary against the christian emperor . May 1594 * Sinan bassa generail , with the sanjacke masould , that be , out of office , with the other sanjack in office or of degree , 40000 . Achmigi , that be , adventurer , 50000 . the Agha or captain with his janissary , and his giebegy , 20000 the Beglerbeg of Graecia , with all his sanjack , 40000 . the company of Spaheis or horseman , 10000 the company of silitari , 6000 . the company of sagbulve and of solbulve both to - gether , 8000 . the bassa of Belgrade , the bassa of Temiswar . the bassa of Bosna . the bassa of Buda . ► 80000 . the Sanjack of gersech . out of Asia . the bassa of Caramania . ' the bassa of Laras . the bassa of Damascus . the bassa of Suas . the bassa of van or Nan . the bassa of Usdrum . of Tartar there be about 100000 . 120000 . thus you may see that the great Turk make war with no small number . and in anno 1597 , when sultan Mahomet himself go in person into Hungary , if a man may believe report , he have a army of 600000 . 104 for the city of Constantinople you shall understand that it be matchable with any city in Europe , aswell in bigness as for the pleasant situation thereof , and commodious traffic and bring of all manner of necessary provision of victual , and whatsoever else man life for the sustentation thereof shall require , be seat upon a promontory , look towards Pontus Euxinus upon the north - east , and to Propontis on the southwest , by which two sea by ship be bring great store of all manner [ ii i . 308 . ] of victual . the city it self in form represent a triangular figure , the sea wash the wall upon two side thereof , the other side face the continent of Thracia ; the grand signior seraglio stand upon that point which look into the sea , be cut off " from the city by a wall ; so that you wall of his palace contain in circuit about two english mile : the seven tower speak of before stand at another corner , and Constantine old palace to the north at the three corner . the city have a threefold wall about