it ; the innermost very high , the next low than that , and the three a countermure , and be in circuit about ten english mile : it have four and twenty gate : and when the empire be remove out of the west into the east , it be enrich with many spoil of old room by Vespasian and other emperor , have many monument and pillar in it worthy the observation ; among the rest in the midst of Constantinople stand one of white marble call Vespasians pillar , of 38 or 40 yard high , which have from the base to the top proportion of man in armour fight on horseback : it be likewise adorn with diverse goodly building and stately mesquitas , whereof the big be sultan Soliman a great warrior , which live in the time of Charles the five ; but the fair be Santa Sophia , Santa Sophia . which in the time of the christian emperor be the chief cathedral church , and be still in great account with the great Turk : it be build round like other greekish church , the pavement and wall be all of marble , it have beneath 44 pillar of diverse colour 105 marble of admirable heighth and bigness , which stand upon great round foot of brass , much great than the pillar , and of a great heighth , some ten yard distant from the wall : from which unto these pillar be a great gallery build , which go round about the church ; and upon the outside of the gallery stand 66 marble pillar which bear up the round roof be the top of the church : it have three pulpit or preach place , and about 2000 lamp bring in by the Turk . likewise upon one side in the top be the picture of Christ with the 12 apostle , but their face be deface , with two or three ancient tomb of Christians : to the west stick a arrow in the top of the church , which , as the turk report , sultan Mahomet shoot when he first take the city . near adjoin be two chapel of marble , where lie bury most of the emperor with their child and sultana . the 16 of July , accompany with some other of our nation we go by water to the black sea , be 16 mile distant from Constantinople , the sea all the way thither be little broad than the Thames ; both side of the shore be beautify with fair and goodly building . at the mouth of this Bosphorus lie a rock some fourscore yard from the main land , whereupon stand a white marble pillar call Pompey pillar , the shadow whereof be 23 foot long at nine of the clock in the forenoon : over against it be a turret of stone upon the main land 120 step high , have a great glass - lanthorn in the top four yard in diamiter and three in heighth , with a great copper pan in the midst to hold oil , with twenty light in it , and it serve to give passage into this strait in the night to such ship as come from all part of those sea to Constantinople : it be continual keep by a Turk , who to y ‘ end have pay of the grand signior . and thus have spend eleven month in Constantinople , accompany with a chause , and carry certain mandate from the grand signior to the bassa of Aleppo for the kind usage of our nation in those part , the 30 of July i take passage in a turkish car - 106 mosale or ship bind for Sidon ; and pass through Propontis , have Salimbria with Heraclia most pleasant situate on the right hand , and Proconesus now call Marmora on the left , we come to Gallipoly , and so by gallfly . Hellespont , between the two castle before name call Sestos and Abydos , famous for the passage make there both by Xerxes and great Alexander , the one into Thracia , the other into Asia , and so by the sigean promontory , now call cape janitzary , at the mouth of Hellespont upon Asia side , where Troy stand , where be yet ruin Troy . of old wall to be see , with two hill rise in a pira - midall form , not unlikely to be the tomb of Achilles and Ajax . from thence we sail along , have Tenedos and Lemnos on the right hand , and the trojan field on the left : at length we come to m itylen and Sio long zw . time inhabit by the genouese , but now under the Turk . the hand be beautify with goodly building and pleasant garden , and abound with fruit , wine , and the gum mastic . from thence sail alongst the gulf of Ephesus with Nicaria on the right hand , Samos and Smirna on the left , we come to Patmos , where saint Patmos . John write the revelation . the hand be but small , not above five mile in compass : the chief thing it yield be corn : it have a port for ship , and in it be a monastery of greekish caloiero . from thence by Cos cousin ( now call Lango ) where Hipocrates be bear : and pass many other hand and rock , we arrive at Rhodes , Rhodes . one of the strong and fair city of the east : here we stay three or four day ; and by reason of a by which go in the ship to Paphos in Cyprus , who use i with all kindness , i go about the city , and take the view of all : which city be still with all the house and wall thereof maintain in the same order as they take it from the rhodian knight . over the door of many of the house , which be strong build of stone , do remain undefaced , the arm of England , [ ii i . 309 . ] France , Spain , and many other christian knight , as though the Turk in the view thereof glory in the 107 Antioch . Aleppo . take of all Christendom , who arm there they behold . from thence we sail to Paphos a old ruinous town stand upon the western part of Cyprus , where saint Paul in the act convert the governor . depart hence , we come to Sidon , by the turk call saytosa , within ten or twelve mile of the place where Tirus stand , which now be eat