the letter of Sinan bassa chief counsellor to sultan Murad can the grand signior , to the sacred majesty of Elizabeth queen of England , show that upon her request , and for her sake especial , he grant peace unto the king and kingdom of Poland . the same in english . [ two . i . 295 . i most glorious , and the most resplendent of woman , most select princess , most gracious Elizabeth queen of the valiant follower of Jesus in the famous kingdom of England , most wise governess of all the affair and business of the people and family of the Nazarens , most sweet fountain of brightness and glory , most acceptable cloud of rain , inheritress and lady of the blessedness and glory of the renown kingdom of England , to who in humble wise all man offer their petition : wish of the almighty creator most happy increase and prosperous success unto all your majesty affair and action , and offer up mutual and perpetuali vow worthy of our familiarity , with eternal praise : in most friendly manner we signify unto your princely highness , that certain year past the most mighty cesarlike majesty of the grand signior wage unspeakable war with casul - bas the prince of the persian , in regard of which war he will not go in battle against any other place ; and for that cause certain thief in the part of Polonia call Cosacks , and other notorious person live in the same part cease not to trouble and molest the subject of our most mighty emperor . but now have finish and bring to some good issue his affair in Persia , determine to punish the say malefactor of Poland , and for that purpose commit a army unto the Beglerbeg of Grecia , and the year last pass , send his imperiali commandment unto the prince of the Tartar , he have forage , molest , and lay waste some part of the kingdom of Poland , and the cosack and other notorious offender have receive condign punishment . which the king of Poland perceive scent two ambassador to his imperiali highness signify , that he will hunt out the say malefactor , and inflict most severe punishment upon they , and also that he will better his gift , which he have for many year heretofore ordinary send unto the porch of he imperiali highness . howbeit his imperiali majesty ( upon who the almighty creator have bestow so great power , and who vouchsafe to give ear unto all humble suppliant ) reject the supplication of the king of Poland , determine again to send his army against the say king , and by the help of the almighty creator , utter to subvert and overthrow his kingdom . by your majesty ambassador resident in the bless and glorious porch of he imperiali highness interpose himself as a mediator , signify that from the part of Poland you be furnish with corn , gunpowder , mast of ship , gun , and other necessary , and crave peace on the behalf of the kingdom and king of Poland , and make intercession , that the say king may not be molest nor trouble by the mean of the grand signior , and declare that this be your majesty most earnest desire ; so soon as the report and intercession of your majesty ambassador be signify unto the grand signior , for your sake , unto who all honour and favourable regard be due , upon the condition aforesaid , namely , that the wicked cosacks may be seek out and grievous punish , or that their offence may be remit for the value of some small gift , upon this condition ( i say ) the letter of he imperiali highness be send unto the king of Poland . howbeit have not this conclusion of league and amity be solicit on the behalf of your majesty , his imperiali highness will never have vouchsafe the same unto the kingdom of Poland . but for your majesty sake his imperiali highness have exhibit this so singular a favour unto the say king and kingdom of Poland . and hereof your majesty and the king of Poland ought certain to be persuade . we wish your majesty most happy and well to fare . give at Constantinople in the end of the month call Sabaum , in the year of our sacred prophet Mahomet 998 , and in the year of Jesus 1590 , the 12 of June .