a brief extract specify the certain daily payments , answer quarterly in time of peace , by the grand signior , out of his treasury , to the officer of his seraglio or court , successive in degree : collect in a yearly totali sum , as follow . or his own diet every day , one thousand and one asper , accord to a former custom receive from his ancestor : notwithstanding that otherwise his diurnal expense be very much , and not certain know , which sum make sterling money by the year , two thousand , one hundred , 92 . pound , three shilling , eight penny . the five and fourty thousand janissary disperse in sundry place of his dominion , at six asper the day , amount by the year to five hundred , fourscore and eleven thousand , and three hundred pound . the azamoglan , tribute child , far surmount that number , for that they be collect from among the christian , from who between the year of six and twelve , they be pull away yearly perforce : whereof i suppose those in service may be equal in number with the janissary abovesaid , at three asper a day , one with another , which be two hundred fourscore and fifteen thousand , six hundred and fifty pound . the five bassa , whereof the viceroy be supreme , at one thousand asper the day , beside their yearly revenue , amount sterling by the year to ten thousand , nine hundred and fifty pound . the five beglerbeg , chief president of Greece , Hungary and Sclavonia , be in Europe , in Anatolia , and Caramania of Asia , at one thousand asper the day : as also to eighteen other go verno ur of province , at five hundred asper the day , amount by the year , to thirty thousand six hundred , and threescore pound . the bassa , admiral of the sea , one thousand asper the day , two thousand , one hundred , four score and ten thousand pound . the aga of the janissary , general of the footman , five hundred asper the day , and make by the year in sterling money , one thousand , fourscore and fifteen pound . the Imbrahur bassa , master of his horse , one hundred and fifty asper the day , be sterling money , three hundred and eight and twenty pound . the chief esquire under he , one hundred and fifty asper , be three hundred and eight and twenty pound . the Agas of the spahi , captain of the horseman , six , at one hundred and fifty asper to either of they , make sterling , one thousand , nine hundred , three score and eleven pound . the capagi bassa head porter four , one hundred and fifty asper to each , and make out in sterling money by the year , one thousand , three hundred , and fourteen pound . the Sisinghir bassa , controller of the household , one hundred and twenty asper the day , and make out in sterling money by the year , two hundred , threescore and two pound , sixteen shilling . the Chaus bassa , captain of the pensioner , one hundred and twenty asper the day , and amount to by the year in sterling money , two hundred , threescore and two pound , sixteen shilling . the Capigilar Caiasi , captain of his barge , one hundredth and twenty asper the day , and make out by the year in sterling money , two hundred , threescore and two pound , sixteen shilling . the Solach Bassi , captain of his guard , one hundred and twenty asper , two hundred , three score and two pound , sixteen shilling . the Giebrigi Bassi , master of the armoury , one hundred and twenty asper , two hundred , three score and two pound , sixteen shilling . the Topagi Bassi , master of the artillery , one hundred and twenty asper , two hundred , three score and two pound , sixteen shilling . the Echim Bassi , physician to his person , one hundred and twenty asper , two hundred , three score and two pound , sixteen shilling . to fourty physician under he , to each fourty asper , be three thousand , eight hundred , three score and six pound , sixteen shilling . the Mustafaracas spearman , attend on his person , in number five hundred , to either three score asper , and make sterling , threescore and five thousand , and seven hundred pound . the Cisingeri gentleman , attend upon his diet , fourty , at fourty asper each of they , and amount to sterling by the year , three thousand , five hundred and four pound . the Chausi pensioner , four hundred and fourty , at thirty asper , twenty eight thousand , nine hundred , and eight pound . the capagi porter of the court and city , four hundred , at eight asper , and make sterling money by the year , seven thousand , and eight pound . the Solachi , archer of his guard , three hundred and twenty , at nine asper , and come unto in english money , the sum of six thousand , three hundred and six pound . the spahi , man of arm of the court and the city , ten thousand , at twenty five asper , and make of english money , five hundred , forty and seven thousand , and five hundred pound . the janizaire sixteen thousand , at six asper , be two hundred and ten thousand , and two hundred and forty pound . the giebegi furbu sher of armour , one thousand , five hundred , at six asper , and amount to sterling 63 money , nineteen thousand , seven hundred , and fourscore pound . the Seiesir , servitor in his equier or stable , five hundred , at two asper , and make sterling money , two thousand , one hundred , fourscore and ten pound . the Saesi , Sadlers and bit maker , five hundred , at seven asper , seven thousand , six hundred , threescore and five pound . the Catergi , carrier upon mule , two hundred , at five asper , two thousand , one hundred , fourscore and ten pound . the cinegi , carrier upon camel , one thousand , five hundred , at eight asper , and amount in sterling money , to twenty six thousand , two hundred , and fourscore pound . the reiz , or captain of the galley , three hundred , at ten asper , and amount in english money by the year , the sum of six thousand , five hundred , threescore and ten pound . the Alechingi , master of the say galley , three hundred , at seven asper , four thousand , five hundred , fourscore and nineteen pound . the getti , boatswain thereof , three hundred , at six asper , be three thousand , nine hundred , forty and two pound . the Oda Bassi , purser , three hundred , at five asper , make three thousand , two hundred , and fourscore pound . the Azappi soldier two thousand six hundred at four asper , whereof the six hundred do continual keep the galley , two and twenty thousand , seven hundred fourscore and six pound . the mariers Bassi master over the shipwright and kalker of the navy , nine , at 20 . asper the piece , amount to three thousand fourscore and four pound , four shilling . the master Dassi shipwright and kalker , one thousand at fourteen asper , which amount by the year , to thirty thousand , six hundred threescore pound . summa totalis of daily payment amount by the year sterling , one million , nine hundred threescore eight thousand , seven hundred thirty five pound , nineteen shilling eight penny , answer quarterly without default , with the sum of four hundred fourscore twelve thousand , one hundred fourscore and four pound four shilling eleven penny , and be for every day five thousand three hundred fourscore and thirteen pound , fifteen shilling ten penny . annuity of land never improve , five time more in value then their sum mention , give by the say grand signior , as follow . to the viceroy for his Timar or annuity 60 . thousand gold ducat . to the second bassa for his annuity 50 . thousand ducat . to the three bassa for his annuity 40 . thousand ducat . to the four bassa for his annuity 30 . thousand ducat . to the five bassa for his annuity 20 . thousand ducat . to the captain of the janissary 20 . thousand ducat . to the jeu Merhorbassi master of his horse 15 . thousand ducat . to the captain of the pensioner 10 . thousand ducat . to the captain of his guard 5 . thousand ducat . summa totalis 90 . thousand livre . sterling . beside these above specify , be sundry other annuity give to diverse other of his aforesaid officer , as also to certain call sahim , diminish from three thousand to two hundred ducat , esteem treble to surmount the annuity abovesaid . the Turk chief officer . the viceroy be high treasurer , notwithstanding that under he be three subtreasurer call teftadar , which be accountable to he of the receipt out of vi 65 e Europe , Asia and Africa , save their yearly annuity of land . the lord chancellor be call Nissangi bassa , who seal with a certain proper character such licence , safe conduct , passport , especial grant , etc as proceed from the grand signior : notwithstanding all letter to foreign prince so firm be after enclose in a bag , and seal by the grand signior , with a signet which he ordinary wear about his neck , credit of they to have be of ancient appertain to king Salomon the wise . the admiral give his voice in the election of all beg , captain of island , to who he give their charge , as also appoint the subbassa , bailiff or constable over city and town upon the sea coast about Constantinople , and in the archipelago , whereof he reap great profit . the Subbassi of Pera pay he yearly fifteen thousand ducat , and so likewise either of the other accord as they be place . the ressistop serve in office to the viceroy and chancellor , as secretary , and so likewise do the cogie master of the roll , before which two , pass all write present to , or grant by the say viceroy and chancellor , office of especial credit and like profit , moreover reward with annuity of land . there be also two chief judge name Cadi Lesker , the one over Europe , and the other over Asia and Africa , which in court do sit on the bench at the left hand of the bassa . Theise sell all office to the under judge of the land call cady , whereof be one in every city or town , before who all matter in controversy be by judgement decide , as also penalty and correction for crime ordain to be execute upon the offender by the Subbassi .