forle his flag , and to be at our commandment in all thing . in the end we agree to come to a anchor , and to send our boat on shore with the admiral boat , and one of his pinnace , and a almain which they have bring out of France , to seek water , as for our pinnace she 214 i557 - came to a anchor to seaward of we all , and will not come at we . all this night the boat continue on shore . the first day of January our boat come to we again and have find no river . whereupon we weigh and set sail , and anchor again at another river . the 2 day we go into the river and bargain , and take 5 small elephant tooth . the 3 day we take 5 more . the four day the french admiral and we take - a assault fifteen small tooth . this day we take thirty man with we and go to seek elephant , our man be ' all well arm with harquebuss , pike , long bow , crossbow , partisan , long sword , and sword and buckler : we find two elephant which we strike diverse time with harquebuss and long bow , but they go away from we and hurt one of our man . the five day we set sail and run along the coast . the 6 day we fall with the river de saint Andre , at Rio at saint which place the land be somewhat high to the westward Andre . of the river , and a fair bay also to the westward of it : but to the eastward of it it be low land . the 7 day we go into the river and find no village , but certain wild negro not accustom to trade . it be a very great river and 7 fathom water in some place at the enter . here we fill water , and after set sail . the 8 day we sail along the shore and come to the red cliff , and go forward in sail the 9 day also . the 10 day we come together to confer with captain Blundel admiral of the french ship , Jerom Baudet his vice admiral , and John de Orleans master of a ship of 70 ton , and with their merchant , and agree that when God shall send we to any place where we may make sale , that we shall be of one accord and not one of we hurt the market of the other , but certain of our boat to make the price for all the rest , and then captain Blundel the french admiral . 215 the castle of Mina . cape de tres puntas . one boat to make sale for every ship . this night our boat go to the shore meet with certain negro , who say that they have gold , and therefore we here cast anchor . the two day all the day we take but one half angel weight of 4 grain , which we take by hand , for the people of this place have no weight : the negro call this place allow . the 12 day we run along the coast and find but one town , but no boat will come out to we , and therefore we go our course . the 13 day i take my boat and go along the shore , and pass by diverse small town , and be wave to come on shore at 3 place , but the sea go so high upon the shore , that it be not possible for we to land , neither can they come to we if they have have boat , as i can see none but at one place , where there be one that will have come unto we , but the land - wash go so sore that it overthrow his boat , and one of the man be drown , which the people lament , and cry so sore , that we may easy hear they , and they get his body out of the sea , and carry it among they to their town . the 14 day we come within saker - shot of the castle , and straightway they set forth a almade to descry we , and when they perceive that we be no Portugal , they run within the town again : for there be a great town by the castle which be call by the negro Dondou . without this there lie two great rock like hand , and the castle stand upon a point which show almost like a hand . before we come at this castle , we find the land for five or six league to be high land , and about seven league before we come to the castle , low land , until we come at the castle , and then we find the land high again . this castle stand about five league to the east of cape de tres puntas . here i take the boat with our negro and run alongst the shore till i come to the cape 216 1557 - and find two small town , but no boat at they , neither any traffic to be have . at these place our negro do understand they well , and one of they go a shore at all the place and be well receive of they . this night we anchor at the cape de tres puntas . the 15 day i take our boat and go along the shore , and about 3 league beyond the eastermost part of the cape we find a fair bay where we run in , and find a small town and certain boat which belong to the same town , but the negro in a long time will not come to we , but at the last by the persuasion of our own negro , one boat come to we , and with he we send George our negro a shore , and after he have talk with they , they come aboard our boat without fear , and i give to their captain a basin , and two string of Margaret , and they show we about 5 ducat weight of gold , but they require so much for it that we will not take it , because the Frenchman and we have agree to make price of our good all in one boat , and the price be make then every man to sell in his own boat , and no man to give more than the price which shall be set by we all this place be call Bulle , and here the negro be very glad of Bulle . our negro