so we tarry there until night , and no man will come to we : but diverse of the negro make we sign to depart . the 24 the captain of the Christopher take his boat and go to mowre , and when he come thither , certain negro come to he to know the price of his ware , but in the end there come a almade , which he judge come from the castle , and cause all the negro to depart from he : and when he see they will come no more to he , he go a shore and take certain man with he , and then the negro cast stone at they , and will not suffer they to come up to their town . and when they see that , they take certain of the Almades , and put they to the sea , and afterward depart . the same morning i go a shore at don Johns town , and take a white flag with i , but none of the negro can come to i , which cause we to judge that the Portugal be in the town . after this , our boat come to we well man , and i send one man up to the town with a white flag in his hand , but when he be come thither , all the negro go away and will not speak with he . than i send one alone into the wood after they , but 244 they in no case will come to we . when we see that , we take twelve goat and fourteen hen , which we find in the town , and go aboard without do any further hurt to the town : and when i come aboard , i find our pinnace come from Cormatin , which have take Cormatin . there two pound and five ounce of gold . then after much ado with the froward mariner , we go thitherwards with our ship , and the Christopher go to mowre . the 25 day the master of the Christopher send his boat to the shore for ballast , and the negro will have beat the company from the shore , whereupon then the company resist they , and slay and hurt diverse of they , and have put they to flight , burn their town , and break all their boat . the 26 day our pinnace come to we from Cormatin , and have take two pound and eleven ounce of gold : and John sheriff tell we that the negro of that place be very desirous to have a ship come back again to their town . the 27 we weigh and go to Cormatin . the 28 the Christopher come to we from mowre , and traffic there two day . the second day of June the tiger come to we from Egrand , and the pinnace from Weamba , and they two have take about fifty pound of gold since they depart from we . the 4 day we depart from Cormatin to ply up to Shamma , be not able to tarry any long upon the coast for lack of victual , and special of drink . the 7 day we have sight of five of the king of Portugal ship , which come to a anchor beside the castle . the 8 day George and Binny come to we , and bring with they about two pound of gold . the 10 day in the morning i take our small pinnace , and the captain of the Christopher with i , and man she well , and go to the castle to view the Portugal ship , and there we find one ship of about 300 ton , and four caravel : when we have well view 24 they , we return back again to our ship which we find seven league at sea . the 11 day in the morning we find our self well shoot towards Shamma , and the tiger with we , but the minion and the pinnace have not weigh that night , so that we be out of sight of they : and have bring our self in the weather of the Portugal ship , we come to a anchor to tarry for the minion , or else we may have fetch Shamma . at night the minion and the pinnace come up to we , but can not fetch so far to the weatherward as we , and therefore they anchor about a league a weather the castle , and we weigh in the Christopher , and go room with she . the 12 day the tiger come room with we , and she and the Christopher find themselves to stand in great need of victual , will have go with the Portugal ship to have fetch some of they forth : but our master and company will in no case consent to go with they , for fear of hang when we come home : and the other two ship be folly mind to have go , and fear that their own company will accuse they , dare not go to they . after this , by reason of the want of victual in the pinnace , which can receive no victual from the other ship , but from we only , we take out all our man , and put twelve Frenchman into she , and give they victual to bring they to Shamma . [ ii two . 50 . ] the 19 day the tiger and minion arrive at Shamma , note - and then Christopher within two league off they , but can not fetch the wind by reason of the scantness of the wind , which have be so scant , that in fifteen day we have ply to the windward but twelve league , which before we do in one day and a night . the 20 day i take our pinnace , and go to the town of Shamma to speak with the captain , and he tell i that there be no gold there to be have , nor so much as a hen to be buy , and all by reason of 246 the accord which he have make with the Portugal , and i see that depart peaceable from he . the 2i i put such thing as we have into our small pinnace , and take one merchant of our ship , and another of the tiger ,