a voyage make out of England unto Guinea and Benin in Africa , at the charge of certain merchant adventurer of the city of London , in the year of our lord 1553 . be desire by certain of my friend to make some mention of this voyage , that some memory thereof may remain to our posterity , if either iniquity of time consume all thing , or ignorance creep in by barbarousness and contempt of knowledge shall hereafter bury in obli vion so worthy attempt , so much the greatly to be esteem , as before never enterprise by Englishman , or at the least so frequent , as at this present they be , , and may be , to the great commodity of our merchant , if the same be not hinder by the ambition of such , as for the conquer of forty or fifty mile here and there , and erect of certain fortress , think to be lord of half the world , envy that other shall enjoy the commodity , which they themselves can whole possess . and although such as have be at charge in the discover and conquer of such land ought by good reason to have certain privilege , preeminence , and tribute for the same , yet ( to speak under correction ) it may seem somewhat rigorous , and against good reason and conscience , or rather against the charity that ought to be among Christian man , that such as invade the dominion of other shall not permit other friendly to use the trade of merchandise in place near , or seidome frequent of they , whereby their trade be not hinder in such place , where they themselves have at their own election appoint the mart of their traffic . but forasmuch as at this present it be not my intent to accuse or defend , approve or improve , i will cease to speak any further hereof , and proceed to the description of the first voyage , as brief and faithful as i 141 Tunis . Buga . Tripoli . Numidia . be advertise of the same , by the information of such credible person , as make diligent inquisition to know the truth thereof , as much as shall be requisite , omit to speak of many particular thing , not great necessary to be know : which nevertheless , with also the exact course of the navigation , shall be more full declare in the second voyage . and if herein favour or friendship shall perhaps cause some to think that some have be sharp touch , let they lay apart favour and friendship , and give place to truth , that honest man may receive praise for well do , and lewd person reproach , as the just stipend of their evil desert , whereby other may be deter to do the like , and virtuous man encourage to proceed in honest attempt . but that these voyage may be more plain understand of all man , i have think good for this purpose , before i entreat hereof , to make a brief description of Africa , be that great part of the world , on who west side begin the coast of Guinea at Cabo Verde , about twelve degree in latitude , on this side the equinoctial line , and two degree in longitude from the measure line , so run from the north to the south , and by east in some place , within 5 , 4 , and 3 degree and a half unto the equinoctial , and so forth in manner direct east and by north , for the space of 36 degree or thereabouts , in longitude from the west to the east , as shall more plain appear in the description of the second voyage . a brief description of Africa gather by Richard Eden . n Africa the less be these kingdom : the kingdom of Tunis and Constantina , which be at this day under Tunis , and also the region of Bugia , Tripoli , and Ezzah . this part of Africa be very barren by reason of the great desert , as the desert of Numidia and Barca . the principali port 142 of the kingdom of Tunis be these : Goletta , Bizerta , Potofarnia , bona , and Stora . the chief city of Tunis be Constantina and bona , with diverse other . under this kingdom be many hand , as Zerbi , Lam - Hand * of padola , Pantalarea , Limoso , beit , Gamelaro , and Malta , where at this present be the great master of the ' Rhodes . under the south of this kingdom be the great desert of Lybia . all the nation in this Africa the desert of the less be of the sect of Mahomet , and a rustical people , live scatter in village . the best of this part of Africa be Barbaria lie on the coast of the sea Barbary . mediterraneum . Mauritania ( now call Barbaria ) be divide into two Mauritania . part , as Mauritania Tingitana , and Caesariensis . Mauritania Tingitana be now call the kingdom of fe , and 2 % kingdom the kingdom of Morocco . the principali city of fe be call Fessa : and the chief city of Morocco be name ’ Morocco . Mauritania Caesariensis be at this day call the kingdom of Tremisen , with also the city call Tremisen or tremisen . Telensin . this region be full of desert , and reach to the sea Mediterraneum , to the city of Oram , with the Oram . port of Mersalquiber . the kingdom of fe reach Mersalquiber . unto the ocean sea , from the west to the city of Argilla : and the port of the say kingdom be call Sala . Sala . the kingdom of Morocco be also extend above the ocean sea , unto the city of Azamor and Azafi , which Azamor . be upon the ocean sea , towards the west of the say kingdom . near Mauritania Tingitana ( that be to say , by the two kingdom of fe , and Morocco ) be in the sea , the hand of Canarie , call in old time , the fortunate hand of hand . towards the south of this region be the kingdom canana - of Guinea , with Senega , Jalofo , Gambra , and many other guinea .