of they will lay the same upon the ground and lie down breast . by they , but all the woman have not such breast . at this place all the day the wind blow off the [ ii two . 27 . ] sea , and all the night off the land , but we find it to differ sometime , which our master marveil at . this night at 9 of the clock the wind come up at the east , which ordinary about that time be wont to come out of the north northwest off the shore : yet we weigh and hail off south with that wind all night into the sea , but the next morning we hail in again to the land , and take in 6 . ton of water for our ship , and i think the hind take in as much . i can not perceive that here be any gold , or any other good thing : for the people be so wild and idle , that they give themselves to seek out nothing : if they will take pain they may gather great store of grain , but in this place i can not perceive two tun . there be many fowl in the country , but the people will not take the pain to take they . i observe some of their word of speech , which i think good here to set down . Bezow , bezow , ' Manegete afoye , Crocow afoye , zeramme afoye , beg sack , beg come , > - ‘ be their salutation . grain enough . hen enough . have you enough ? give i a knife . give i bread . Borke , coutrecke , veede , brekeke , diago , 185 hold your peace . the lie . put forth , or empty . Rowe . their captain , and some the language about the river of 8 . Vincent . call he Dabo . Theise and other word they speak very thick , and oftentimes recite one word three time together , and at the last time long than at the two first . the 18 . day towards night , as we be sail along the coast , we meet with certain boat in the sea , and the man show we that there be a river thwart of we , where there be grain to be sell , but we think it not good to tarry there , lest the other ship shall get before we . this river have lie before it three great rock , and 5 . small rock , one great tree , and a little tree right by the river , which in height exceed all the rest : we hail this night along the coast 10 . league . the 19 day as we coast the shore , about twelve of the clock there come out to we 3 . boat to tell we that they have grain , and bring some with they for a show , but we can not tarry there . we proceed along the coast , and anchor by the shore all the night , and run this day 10 . league . the 20 . day the hind have anchor by we among rock , and foul ground , lose a small anchor . at noon , as we pass along the coast , there come forth a negro to we , make sign , that if we will go a shore , we shall have grain , and where we anchor at night , there come another to we , and bring grain , and show we they , and make sign that we shall tarry , and make a fire upon the land in the night , mean thereby to tell we where we shall land , and so they do in diverse other place upon the coast , where they see we to anchor . the tide and in all the place where we have anchor , since we come shore rome our watr ‘ ns placei we have find the tide always ' running to the westwards , and all along the coast many rock hard aboard the shore , and many of they a league off the shore or more , we run this day 12 . league . the 21 . day , although we run all day with a good gale of wind , yet the tide come so sore out of the coast , 188 that we be not able to run above six league : and this day there come some negro to we , as there have do other time . the 22 . we run all day and night to double a point , call Das palma , and run sixteen league . the 23 . day about 3 . of the clock we be thwart of the point , and before we come to the westermost part of it , we see a great ledge of rock , which lie west from the cape about 3 . league and a league or more from the land . Shortly after we have sight of the eastermost part of the cape , which lie 4 . league from the westermost part , and upon the very corner thereof lie two green place , as it be close , and to the westwards of the cape the land part from the cape , as it be a bay , whereby it may well be know . four league more beyond that there lie a headland in the sea , and about two league beyond the headland there go in a great bay , as it be a river , before which place we anchor all that night , which we do , lest in the night we shall overrun a river , where the * last year they have all their elephant tooth . this cape das palmas lie under four degree and a half , and betwixt the say cape , and the river de Sestos be the great store of grain to be have , and be past the say cape , there be no great store else where . where we anchor this night , we find that the tide , which before run always to the westward , from this cape run all to the eastward : this