land , cape de las but some low place thereof by the water side look like Palmas . red cliff with white strike like high way , a cable length a piece , and this be the east part of the cape . this cape be the southermost land in all the coast of the coast of Guinea , and stand in four degree and a terce . Guinea . the coast from cape de las Palmas to cape trepointe , or de tres puntas , be fair and clear without rock or other danger . twenty and five league from cape de las Palmas , the land be high than in any place , until we come to cape trepointe : and about ten league before you r59 the town of Samma . the pledge be sir John York his nephew . cape Corea . the castle of Mina pertaining to the king of Portugal . come to cape trepointe , the land rise still high and high , until you come to cape trepointe , also before you come to the say cape , after other 5 league to the northwest part of it , there be certain break ground , with two great rock , and within they in the bite of a bay , be a castle call Arra , pertain to the king of Portugal . you shall know it by the say rock that lie off it : for there be none such from cape de las Palmas to cape trepointe . this coast lie east and by north , west and by south . from cape de las Palmas to the say castle be fourscore and fifteen league . and the coast lie from the say castle to the westermost point of trepoynte , southeast and by south , northwest and by north . also the westermost point of trepoynte be a low land , lie half a mile out in the sea : and upon the innermost neck , to the landward , be a tuft of tree , and there we arrive the eleven day of January . the 12 day of January we come to a town call Samma or Samva , be 8 league from cape trepointe towards Eastnortheast . between cape trepointe and the town of Samva be a great ledge of rock a great way out in the sea . we continue four day at that town , and the captain thereof will needs have a pledge a shore . but when they receive the pledge , they keep he still , and will traffic no more , but shoot off their ordinance at we . they have two or three piece of ordinance and no more . the sixteenth day of the say month we make reckon to come to a place call cape Corea , where captain don John dwell , who man entertain we friendly . this cape Corea be four league eastward of the castle of Mina , otherwise call la mina , or Castello de mina , where we arrive the 18 day of the month . here we make sale of all our cloth , save two or three pack . the 26 day of the same month we weigh anchor , and depart from thence to the Trini tie , which be seven league eastward of we , where she sell her ware . 160 then they of the Trinity will we to go eastward of that eight or nine league , to sell part of their ware , in a place call Perecow , and another place name Perecow Grande , be the eastermost place of both these , which you shall know by a great round hill near unto it , name Monte Rodondo , lie westward from it , and by the water side be many high palm tree . from hence do we set forth homeward the thirteenth day of February , 8c ply up along till we come within seven or eight league to cape trepointe . about eight of the clock the 15 day at afternoon , we do cast about to seaward : and beware of the currant , for they will deceive you sore . whosoever shall come from the coast of Mina homeward , let he be sure to make his way good west , until he reckon himself as far as cape de las Palmas , where the currant set always to the eastward . and within twenty league eastward of cape de las Palmas be a river call de los Potos , where you may have fresh water and ballast enough , and plenty of ivory or elephant tooth . this river stand in four ivory . degree , and almost two terce . and when you reckon your self as far shoot as cape de las Palmas , be in a degree , or a degree and a half , you may go west , and palmas - west by north , until you come in three degree : and than you may go westnorthwest , and northwest and by west , until you come in five degree , and than northwest . and in six degree , we meet northerly wind , and great ruffle of tide . and as we can judge , the currant go to the northnorthwest . Furthermore between cape de monte , and cape Verde , go great currant , which deceive many man . currant . the 22 day of April , we be in 8 degree and two terce : and so we run to the northwest , have the wind at Northeast and Eastnortheast , and sometime at east , until we be at 18 degree and a terce , which be on May day . and so from 18 and two terce , we have the wind at east and Eastnortheast , and sometime at eastsoutheast : and then we reckon the island of vi 161 l Perecow . Perecow grand . monte Rodondo . the currant . from Mina homeward . Rio de los Potos . where they lose the sight oj the north star . how the compass do vary . [ ii two . 18 . ] cape verde eastsoutheast of we , we judge our self to be 48 league off . and in 20 and 21 degree , we have the wind more easterly to the southward then before . and so we run to the northwest