day we run some 16 . league . the 24 . day run our course , about eight of the clock there come forth to we certain boat , which bring with they small egg , which be soft without shell , and they make we sign , that there be within the land fresh water , and goat : and the master think that it be the river which we seek , cast anchor and send the boat on shore , with one that know the river , and come near the shore , he perceive that it be not the river , and so come back again , and go along the 189 A . D . 1555 - the point oj Palmas , * that be they ere 1554 . the tide run eastward . [ ii two . 28 . ] shore , with their oar and sail , and we weigh and run along the shore also : and be thirteen league beyond the cape , the master perceive a place which he judge to be the river , when we be in deed two mile shoot past it : yet the boat come from the shore , and they that be in she say , that there be no river : notwithstanding we come to a anchor , and the master and i take five man with we in the boat , and when he come near the shore , he perceive that it be the same river which he do seek : so we row in , and find the entrance very ill , by reason that the sea go so high : and be enter , diverse boat come to we , and show we that they have elephant tooth , and they bring we one of about eight pound , and a little one of a pound , which we buy : than they bring certain tooth to the river side , make sign , that if the next day we will come again , they will sell we they : so we give unto two captain , to either of they a manillio , and so we depart , and come aboard , and send out the other boat to another place , where certain boat that come into the sea , make we sign that there be fresh a town , water : and be come thither , they find a town , but no river , yet the people bring they fresh water , and show they a elephant tooth , make sign that the next day they will sei they tooth , and so they come aboard . this river lie by the card thirteen league from the cape Das palma , and there lie to the westwards of the same a rock about a league in the sea , and the river it self have a point of land come out into the sea , whereupon grow five tree , which may well be discern two or three league off , come from the westward , but the river can be perceive until such time as a man be hard by it , and then a man may perceive a little town on each side the river , and to each town there belong a captain . the river be but small , but the water be good and fresh . two mile beyond the river , where the other town be , 190 there lie another point into the sea , which be green like a close , and not above six tree upon it , which grow one of they from the other , whereby the coast may well be know : for along all the coast that we have hitherto sail by , i have not see so much bare land . in this place , and three or four league to the westward of it , all along the shore , there grow many palm tree , whereof they make their wine de Palma . Theise tree may easy be know almost two league off , for they be very high and white body , and straight , and be big in the midst : they have no bough , but only a round bush in the top of they : and at the top of the same tree they boar a hole , and there they hang a bottle , and the juice of the tree run out of the say hole into the bottle , and that be their wine . from the cape das Palmas , to the cape tres puntas , there be 100 league : and to the port where we purpose to make sale of our cloth beyond the cape Tres punta 40 . league . note , that betwixt the river de Sestos , and the cape Das palma , be the place where all the grain be gather . the language of the people of this place , as far as i can perceive , differ not much from the language of those which dwell where we water before : but the people of this place be more gentle in nature than the other , and goodly man : their building and apparel be all one with the other . their desire in this place be most of all to have manillio and margarite : as for the rest of our thing , they do little esteem they . about nine of the clock there come boat to we forth , from both of the place aforesaid , and bring with they certain tooth , and after they have cause i to swear by the water of the sea that i will not hurt they , they come aboard our ship three or four of they , and we give they to eat of all such thing 191 many palm tree . cape tres puntas . their manner of swear by the water of the sea as we have , and they do eat and drink of all thing , as well as we our self . afterwards we buy all their tooth , which be in number 14 . and of those 14 . there be 10 . small : afterward they depart , make we sign that the next day we shall come to their town . the 26 . day because we will not trifle long at this place i