require the master to go unto one of the town , and to take two of our merchant with he , and i my self go to the other , and take one with i , because these two town stand three mile asunder . to these place we carry somewhat of every kind of merchandise that we have : and he have at the one town , nine tooth , which be but small , and at the other town where i be , i have eleven , which be also not big , and we leave aboard with the master certain manillio , wherewith he buy 12 . tooth aboard the ship , in our absence : and have buy these of they , we perceive that they have no more tooth : so in that place where i be one bring to i a small goat , which i buy , and to the master at the other place they bring five small hen , which he buy also , and after that we see there be nothing else to be have , we depart , and by one of the clock we meet aboard , and then weigh , and go east our course 18 . league still within sight of land . the 28 . the wind vary , and we run into the sea , and the wind come again off the sea , we fall with the land again , and the first of the land which we raise show as a great red cliff round , but not very high , and to the eastward of that another small read cliff , and right above that into the land a round hummoke and green , which we take to be tree . we run in these 24 . hour , not above four league . the 29 . day come near to the shore , we perceive the red . cliff aforesaid to have right upon the top of it a great heap of tree , and all to the westwards of it full of red cliff as far as we can see , and all 192 along the shore , as well upon the cliff , as otherwise , full of wood : within a mile of the say great cliff there be a river to the eastwards , and no cliff that we can see , except one small cliff , which be hard by it . we run this day and night 12 . league . the wind that we have in this place by the report of the people and of those that have be there , have not be usual , but in the night , at north off the land , and in the day south off the sea , and most common northwest , and Southwest . the 31 . day we go our course by the shore northwards : this land be all along a low shore , and full of wood , as all the coast be for the most part , and no rock . this morning come out many boat which go a fish , which bee great boat than those which we see before , so that in some of they there sate 5 . man , but the fashion of the boat be all one . in the afternoon about three of the clock we have sight of a town by the sea side , which our pilot judge to be 25 . league to the westwards of the cape tres puntas . the three of January in the morning we fall with the cape tres puntas , and in the night pass , as our cape tres pilot say , by one of the Portugal castle , which be 8 . league to the westwards of the cape : upon the first sight of the cape we discern it a very high land , and all grow over with tree , and come near to it , we perceive two head land , as it be two bay betwixt they , which open right to the westward , and the uttermost of they be the eastern cape , there we perceive the middle cape , and the eastermost cape : the middle cape stand not above a league from the west cape , although the card show they to be 3 . league one from the other : and that middle cape have right before the point of it a small rock so near to it , that it can be discern from the cape , except a man be near to the shore , and upon the same cape stand a great heap of tree , and when a man be thwart vi 193 n the same cape to the eastward , there rise hard by it a round green hommoke , which come out of the main .. the third cape be about a league beyond the middle cape , and be a high land like to the other cape , and betwixt the middle , and the third come out a little head or point of a land out of the main , and diverse rock hard aboard the shore . before we come to the cape , be about 8 . league off they , we have the land southeast , and by east , and be past the cape , the land run in again east Northeast . about two league beyond the far cape there be a low glade about two mile long , and then the land rise high again , and diverse headland rise one beyond another , and diverse rock lie at the point of the first headland . the midst of these cape be the near to the southward , i mean , further into the sea then any of the other , so that be to the eastward of it , it may be discern far off , and be so to the eastward it rise with two small rock . this day we anchor for fear of overshoot a town call S . Johns . we run this day not above 8 . league . in the afternoon this day there come a boat of the country from the shore , with five man in she , and go along by we , as we think , to discern our flag , but they