, who inhabitant be accustom to traffic Regnum with the nation of Arabia , and their king be join in meltnde . friendship with the king of Portugal , and pay tribute to prester John . the other Ethiope , call Ethiopia interior ( that be ) Aethiopia the inner Ethiope , be not yet know for the greatness tnterwr - thereof , but only by the sea coast : yet be it describe in this manner . first from the Aequinoctiali towards the south , be a great region of aethiopian , which bring forth white elephant , tiger , and the beast call white rhinocerote . also a region that bring forth plenty elephant . of cynamome , lie between the branch of Nilus . also the kingdom of Habech or Habasia , a region of Habasia . 169 montes luna . gazatia . Cap . bona spei . Africa without cold . the winter of Africa . flame of fire and noise in the air . the middle region of the air be cold . christian man , lie both on this side and beyond Nilus . here be also the aethiopian , call Ichthiophagi ( that be ) such as live only by fish , and be sometime subdue by the war of great Alexander . Furthermore the aethiopian call Rhapsii , and anthropophagi , y ‘ be accustom to eat man flesh , inhabit the region near unto the mountain call Montes Lunae ( that be ) the mountain of the moon . Gazatia be under the Tropike of Capricorn . after this follow the front of Africa , the cape of buena Speranza , or caput bonae spei , that be , the cape of good hope , by the which they pass that sail from Lisbon to Calicut . but by what name the cape and gulf be call , forasmuch as the same be in every globe and card , it be here superfluous to rehearse they . some write that Africa be so name by the grecian , because it be without cold . for the greek letter Alpha or A signify privation , void , or without : and phrice signify cold . for in deed although in the stead of winter they have a cloudy and tempestuous season , yet be it not cold , but rather smother hot , with hot shower of rain also , and somewhere such scorch wind , that what by one mean and other , they seem at certain time to live as it be in furnace , and in manner already half way in purgatory or hell . gemma Phrisius write , that in certain part of Africa , as in Atlas the great , the air in the night season be see shine , with many strange fire and flame rise in manner as high as the moon : and that in the element be sometime hear as it be the sound of pipe , trumpet and drum : which noise may perhaps be cause by the vehement and sundry motion of such fiery exhalation in the air , as we see the like in many experience wrought by fire , air and wind . the hollowness also , and diverse reflection and break of the cloud may be great cause hereof , beside the vehement cold of the middle region of the air , whereby the say fiery exhalation , ascend thither , be sudden strike back with 17 ° great force : for even common and daily experience teach we , by the whiss of a burn torch , what noise fire make in the air , and much more where it strive when it be enclose with air , as appear in [ ii two . 21 . ] gun , and as the like be see in only air enclose , as strtfe 9f in organ pipe , and such other instrument that go by ment ' wind . for wind ( as say the philosopher ) be none wind . other then air vehement move , as we see in a pair of bellows , and such other . some of our man of good credit that be in this last voyage to Guinea , affirm earnest that in the night season they feel a sensible heat to come from the beam the heat of of the moon . the which thing , although it be strange fa moon . and insensible to we that inhabit cold region , yet do it stand with good reason that it may so be , forasmuch as the nature of star and planet ( as write Pliny ) con - the nature of sist of fire , and contain in it a spirit of life , which the starres - cannot be without heat . and , that the moon give heat upon the earth the prophet David seem to confirm in his 121 . psalm , where speak of such man as be defend from evil by God protection , he say thus : per diem sol non exuret te , nec luna per noctem . that be to say , in the day the sun shall not burn thou , nor the moon by night . they say furthermore , that in certain place of the spout of sea they see certain stream of water , which they call teattrfdkng spout , fall out of the air into the sea , and that some of these be as big as the great pillar of church : insomuch that sometime they fall into ship , and put they in great danger of drown . some fain that these shall be the cataract of heaven , which be cataract oj all open at Noes flood . but i think they rather to aven . be such fluxion and eruption as Aristotle in his book de mundo say , to chance in the sea . for speak of such strange thing as be see often time in the sea , he write thus . oftentimes also even in the sea be see evaporation of fire , and such eruption and break - 171 ing forth of spring , that the mouth of river be open . whirlpool , and fluxion be cause of such vthement other vehement motion , not only in the midst of the motums in the sea > but also in creek and strait . at certain time ea ‘ also