Savill go in one boat , and the master John Makeworth , and Richard curligin , in the other , and go on shore , and that night i take for my part fifty and two ounce , and in the other boat they take eight ounce and a quarter , all by one weight and measure , and so be very late , we depart and go aboard , and take in all this day three pound . the seven day we go a shore again , and that day i take in our boat three pound 19 ounce , so that we dispatch almost all the cloth that we carry with we before noon , and then many of the people be depart and those that remain have little gold , yet they make we sign to fetch they some latten bason , which 199 i will , not because i purpose not to trine out you time , but go thence with speed to don Johns town . but John Savill and John Makeworth be desirous to go again : and i , loath to hinder they of any . profit , consent , but go not my self : so they take eighteen ounce of gold and come away , see that the people at a certain cry make , be depart . while they be at the shore , there come a young fellow which can speak a little portuguise , with three more with he , and to he i sell 39 hason and two small white saucer , for three ounce , etc which be the best reckon that we do make of any bason : and in the forenoon when i be at the shore , the master sell five bason unto the same fellow , for half a ounce of gold . this fellow , as far as we can perceive , have be take into the castle by the Portugal , and be get away from they , for he tell we that the Portugal be [ ii two . 32 . ] bad man , and that they make they slave if they can take they , and will put iron upon their leg , and beside he tell we , that as many Frenchman or Englishman , as they can take ( for he can name these two very well ) they will hang they : he tell we further , 60 . Portugal that there be 60 man in the castle , and that every year ^ htaCaStle there come thither two ship , one great , and one small ‘ carveil , and further , that don John have war with the Portugal , which give i the better courage to go to his town , which lie but four league from the castle , wherehence our man be beat the last year . this fellow come aboard our ship without fear , and assoon as he come , he demand , why we have not the english bring again their man , which the last year we take * take ™ ™ away , and can tell we that there be five take away negro ? hy Englishmen : we make he answer , that they be in England well use , and be there keep till they can speak the language , and then they shall be bring again to be a help to Englishman in this country : and then he speak no more of that matter . 200 our boat be come aboard , we weigh and set sail and a title after spy a great fire upon the shore , and by the light of the fire we may discern a white thing , which they take to be the castle , and for fear of overshoot the town of don John we there anchor two league off the shore , for it be hard to fetch up a town here , if a ship overshoot it . this day we take seven pound , and five ounce of gold . this town lie in a great bay , which be very deep . the people in this place desire most to have bason and cloth . they will buy some of they also many trifle , as knife , horsetaile , home : and some of our man go a shore , sell a cap , a dagger , a hat , etc they show we a certain course cloth , which i think to be make in France , for it be course wool , and a small thread , and as thick as worsted , and stripe with stripe of green , white , yellow etc diverse of the people do wear about their neck great bead of it ’ " ' . here also i learn glass of diverse colour . here also of their language , as follow : some Mattea , mattea , Dassee , dassee , sheke , cowrte , Cracca , Bassina , Foco , foco , Molta , ' be their salutation . i thank you . gold . cut . knife . basin . cloth . much , or great store . this language seem partly to be corrupt . the eight day in the morning we have sight of the castle , but by reason of a mist that then fall we can not have the perfect sight of it , till we be almost at the town of don John , and then it clear sight of the castleofMina . up , and we see it and a white house , as it be a chapel , upon the hill about it : than we hail into the shore , within two english mile of don Johns town , and there anchor in seven fathom water . here , as in many other place before , we perceive that the currant go with the wind . 201 the land here be in some place low and in some high , and full of wood altogether . do John yhe town of don John be but little , of about scribe twenty house , and the most part of the town be ' wall in with a wall of a man height , make with reed or sedge , or some such thing . here we stay two or three hour after we have anchor , to see