the three and last voyage of m . William [ H . two . 44 - ] towrson to the coast of guinie , and the castle de Mina , in the year 1577 . he thirty day of January , the year abovesaid , we depart out of the sound of Plymouth , with three ship , and a pinnace , whereof the name be these : 1 the minion admiral of the fleet . 2 than Christopher vice - admiral . 3 the tiger . 4 a pinnace call the unicorn : be all bind for the canary , and from thence , by the grace of God , to the coast of guinie . the next day , be the last of this month , we meet with two hulk of Dantzick , the one call the rose , a ship of four hundred ton , and the other call the unicorn , of a hundred and fifty ton , the master it be to be understand , that at this time there be war betwixt of the rose be call Nicholas mass , and the master England and of the unicorn Melchior white , both lade at bour - france - deaux , and for the most part with wine . when we come to they , we cause they to hoist forth their boat , and to come and speak with we , and we examine every one of they apart , what french man good they have in their ship , and they say they have none : but by the contrariety of their tale , and by the suspicion which we gather of their false chartar - party , we perceive that they have french man good in they : we therefore cause one of they to fetch up his bill of 231 lade , and because he deny that he have any , we send certain with he , who cause he to go to the place where he have hide they , and by the difference of his bill of lade , and his talk , we gather , as before , that they have frenchmens good . whereupon we examine they straight , and first the purser of the unicorn , which be the small ship , confess that they have two and thirty ton and a hogshead of a french man . than we examine the master in like case , and he acknowledge the same to be true . than we examine also the master of the great ship , and he confess that he have a hundred and eight and twenty ton of the same french man , and moor they will not confess , but say that all the rest be lade by Peter lewgue of Hamburg , to be deliver to one Henry summer of camphire , notwithstanding all their letter be direct to Hamburg , and write in dutch without , and within in french . when they have confess that they have thus much french man good within their ship , we confer together what be best to be do with they . William Cretton and Edward Selman be of the opinion , that it shall be good either to carry they into Spain , and there to make sale of the good , or else into Ireland , or to return back again into England with they , if the wind will permit it . but i , weigh what charge we have of our master , first by mouth , and afterward by writing , that for no such matter we shall in any case prolong the time , for fear of lose the voyage , and consider that the time of the year be very far spend , and the money that we shall make of the wine not very much , in respect of the commodity which we hope for by the voyage , persuade they that to go into Ireland , the wind be easterly as it be , may be a occasion that we shall be lock in there with that wind , and so lose our voyage : and to carry they into Spain , see they sail so ill , that have all their sail abroad , we keep they company only with our foresaile , 232 and without any top sail abroad , so that in every two day sail they will have hinder we more than one ; and beside that ( the wind be easterly ) we shall not be able to seize the coast with they : beside all this the loss of time when we come thither be to be consider , whereupon i think it not good to carry they any further . and as for carry they into England , although the wind have be good , as it be not , consider what charge we have of our master , to shift we out of the way for fear of a stay by reason of the war , i hold it not in any wise convenient . but notwithstanding all this , certain of our company not be herewith satisfy go to our master to know his opinion therein , who make they a plain answer , that to carry they into any place , it be not the best the french way nor the profit of their master . and he tell they further , that if the time be prolong one month sfime long before they pass the cape , but a few man war upon will go the voyage . all these thing consider , we the loss of all pause , and determine at the last , that every man cales - should take out of the hulk so much as he can well bestow for necessary , and the next morning to conclude what shall be further do with they . so we take out of they for we fourteen ton and a half of wine , and one ton we put into the pinnace . more we take out one hogshead of aquavitae . six cake of rosin . a small hals for tie : and certain chestnut . the Christopher take out , [ ii two . 45 . ] ten ton of wine , and one hogshead . a quantity of aquavitae . shall - line . chestnut . six double base with their chamber . and their man break up the hulk chest , and take out their compass , and run glass , the sound lead and line , and