the first voyage make by master William towrson merchant of London , to the coast of Guinea , with two ship , in the year 1555 . Pon Monday the thirty day of Sep - September . tember we depart from the isle of wight , out of the haven of Neuport with two good ship , the one call the hart , the other the hind , both of London , and the master of they be John Ralph , and William carter , for a voyage to be make unto the river de Sestos in Guinea , and to other haven thereabouts . it fall out by the variety of wind , that it be the fourteen day of October before we can fetch October . Dartmouth : and be there arrive we continue in that ride six day , and the 20 . of October our warp out of the haven , and set sail , direct our course towards the southwest , and the next morning we be run by estimation thirty league . the first of November we find ourselves to be in November . 31 . degree of latitude by the reckon of our master . this day we run about 40 . league also . the second day we run 36 . league . the three day we have sight of Porto Santo , which be Porto Santo . a small island lie in the sea , about three league long , and a league and a half broad , and be possess by Portugal . it rise as we come from the northnorthwest like two small hill near together . the east end of the same island be a high land like a saddle with a valley , which make it to bear that form . the west end of it be low with certain small round hillock . this island lie in thirty and three degree . vi 177 m the same day at n . of the clock we raise the isle Madera , of Madera , which lie 12 . league from Porto Santo , towards the southwest : that island be a fair island and fruitful , and be inhabit by Portugal , it rise afar off like a great whole land and high . by three of the clock this day at after noon we be thwart of Porto Santo , and we set our course Southwest , to leave the isle of Madera to the eastward , as we do Porto Santo . Theise two island be the first land that we see since we leave the coast of England . about three of the clock after midnight we be thwart of Madera , within three league of the west end of it , and by mean of the high hill there , we be becalm : we suppose we run this day and night 30 . league . the four day we lay becalm under the isle of Madera , until one of the clock at afternoon , and then , the wind come into the east , we go our course , and run that day fifteen league . the 5 . day we run 15 . league more . the 6 . day in the morning we raise the isle of tenerif . tenerif , otherwise call the pike , because it be a very high island , with a pike upon the top like a loaf of Palma , sugar . the same night we raise the isle of Palma , which be a high land also , and to the westward of the isle of tenerif . Gomera . the 7 . day we perceive the isle of Gomera , which be a island stand betwixt tenerif and Palma , about 12 . league eastward from Palma , and 8 . league westward from tenerif : and for fear of be becalm with the isle of tenerif , we leave both it , and Gomera to the eastward of we , and go betwixt Palma and Gomera . we run this day and night 30 . league . note that these island be 60 . league from Madera , and that there be 3 . Islands more to the westward of tenerif , name the grand Canaria , forteventura , and Lancerot , of which island we come not in sight : they be inhabit by Spaniards . 178 this day also we have sight of the isle of Ferro , Ferro . which be to the southward 13 . league from the other island , and be possess by Spaniards . all this day and night by reason of the wind we can not double [ H . two . 24 . ] the point or the isle of Ferro , except we will have go to the westward of it , which have be much out of our course : therefore we keep about , and run back five hour eastnortheast to the end we may double it upon the next board , the wind continue southeast , which have not be often see upon that coast by any traveller : for the wind continue there for the most part north - east , and east Northeast : so upon the other board by the next morning we be in a manner with the island , and have room enough to double the same . the 8 . day we keep our course as near the wind as we can , because that our due course to fetch the coast of Barbary be southeast and by east , but by the scant wind we can not go our due course , but go as near it as we can , and run this day and night 25 . league . the 9 day we run 30 . league , the 10 . 25 . league , the 12 . 24 . the 12 . day we see a sail under our lee , which be as we think a fisherman , so that we go room to have speak with he , but within one hour there fall such a fog , that we can not see the ship nor one of we the other : we shoot off diverse piece to the hind , but she hear they not : at after noon she shoot off a piece which we hear , and make her answer with