great rock , and the 3 . other small one , which when we see , we suppose that the light come from the shore , and so weigh and set sail east southeast along the shore , because the master do not well know the place , but think that we be not so far to the east as the river de Sestos . this land all a long be a low land , and full of very high tree all along the shore , so that it be not possible to know the place that a man do fall withal , except it be by the latitude : in these 24 . hour i think we run 16 . league , for all the night we have a great gale as we be under sail , and have withal store of thunder and lightning . the 13 . day for the most part we run east southeast all along the shore , within two league always of the same , and find the land all as at the first , fill of wood and great rock hard aboard the shore , and the billow beat so sore , that the sea break upon the shore as white as snow , and the water mount so high that a man may easy discern it 4 . league off , in such wise that no boat can land there . thus we run until 12 . of the clock , and then they take the sun and after judge themselves to be 24 . league past the river de Sestos to the eastwards , by reason whereof we hail into the shore within two english mile , and there anchor and find fifteen fathom water , and all off from the shore the sea so 182 » 555 - smooth , that we may well have rid by a Hawser . all that afternoon we trim our boat and make she a sail , to the end that she may go along by the shore to seek some place to water in : for we can not go back again to the river de Sestos , because the wind blow always contrary , and the currant run - currant n always to the eastwards , which be also against ast ~ we . ’ the 14 . day we set sail St go back again along the coast , and send our boat hard aboard the shore to seek a water place , which they find about 12 . of the clock , and we be far into the sea , meet with diverse boat of the country , small , long and narrow , and in every boat one man and no more : we give they bread which they do eat , and be very glad of it . about 4 of the clock our boat come to we with fresh water : and this night we anchor against a river . the 15 . day we weigh and set sail to go near the shore , and with our lead we sound all the way , and find sometime rock , and sometime fair ground , and at the shallow sound 7 . fathom always at the least . so in fine we find 7 . fathom and a half within a english mile of the shore , and there we anchor in a manner before the mouth of the river , and then we send our boat into the river for water , which go about a mile within the river , where they have very good water . river this river lie by estimation 8 . league beyond the cent ‘ river de Sestos , and be call in the card river S . Vincent , but it be so hard to find , that a boat be within half a mile of it shall not be able to discern that it be a river : by reason that direct before the mouth of it there lie a ledge of rock , which be much broad than the river , so that a boat must run in along the shore a good way betwixt the rock and the shore before it come to the mouth of the river , and be within it , it be a great river and diverse other river fall into it : the go into it be somewhat ill , because that at the enter the sea do 183 grain of Guinea . elephant tooth . [ il two . 26 . ] go somewhat high , but be once within it , it be as calm as the Thames .. there be near to the sea upon this river diverse inhabitant , which be mighty big man and go all naked except some thing before their privy part , which be like a clout about a quarter of a yard long make of the bark of tree , and yet it be like a cloth : for the bark be of that nature , that it will spin small after the manner of linen . some of they also wear the like upon their head be paint with diverse colour , but the most part of they go bare head , and their head be clip and shear of diverse sort , and the most part of they have their skin of their body raze with diverse work , in manner of a leather jerkin . the man and woman go so alike , that one can know a man from a woman but by their breast , which in the most part be very foul and long , hang down low like the udder of a goat . the same morning we go into the river with our skiff , and carry certain bason , manel , etc and there we take that day one hogshead and 100 livre . weight of grain , and two elephant tooth at a reasonable good reckon . we sell they both bason , and manelios , and margarit , but they desire most to have bason : for the most part of our bason we have by estimation about 30 . livre . for a piece , and for a elephant tooth of 30 . livre . weight , we give they 6 . the 16 . day in the morning we go into the river with our skiff ,