which have beat all the coast , and be depart one month before our arrive there , and they three have take about 700 pound of gold . assoon as we have lay the ship aboard , and leave certain man in she to keep she , we set sail and give chase to the other two ship , and chase they all day and night , and the next day until three a clock in the afternoon , but we can not fetch they : and therefore see that we bring our self very far to vi 241 queen A . D . 1511 - the english board the Frenchman . [ ii two . 48 . ] fifty pound of glide take in the french prize . Benin . our man die ofsicknesse . leeward of our place , we leave the chase , and keep about again to go with the shore . the 7 day i send for the captain , merchant and master of the other ship , and when they come we weigh the gold which we have from the Frenchman , which weigh fifty pound and five ounce of gold : this do , we agree to put man out of every ship into the prize to keep she . the 12 day we come to the further place of the Mina call Egrand , and be come to a anchor , discharge all the merchant good out of the prize , and will have sell the ship with the victual to the Frenchman , but because she be leak they will not take she , but desire we to save their life in take they into our own ship : than we agree to take out the victual and sink the ship , and divide the man among our ship . the 15 at night we make a end of discharge the prize , and divide all the Frenchman except four which be sick and not able to help themselves ; which four both the Christopher and the tiger refuse to take , leave they in their ship alone in the night , so that about midnight i be force to fetch they into our ship . the 15 of April , move our company for the voyage to Benin , the most part of they all refuse it . the 16 , see the unwillingness of the company to go thither , we determine to spend as much time upon the coast as we can , to the end we may make our voyage , and agree to leave the minion here at Egrand , the tiger to go to pericow which be four league off , and the Christopher to go to Weamba , which be ten league to the weatherward of this place : and if any of they both shall have sight of more sail than they think good to meddle withal , to come room with their fellow : to wit , first the Christopher to come with the tiger , and then both they to come with we . we remain in this place call Egrand , until the last day of April , in which time many of our man fall 242 sick ; and six of they die . and here we can have no traffic with the negro but three or four day in the week , and all the rest of the week they will not come at we . the 3 of may not have the pinnace send we with cloth from the other ship , as they promise , we sell french cloth , and give but three yard thereof to every fuffe . the 5 day the negro depart , and tell we they will come to we again within four day , which we determine there to tarry , although we have diverse of our man sick . the 8 day , all our cloth in the minion be sell , i call the company together , to know whether they will tarry the sale of the cloth take in the prize at this place or no : they answer , that in respect of the death of some of their man , and the present sickness of twenty sickness . more , they will not tarry , but repair to the other ship , of who they have hear nothing since the 27 of April : and yet they have our pinnace with they , only to carry news from one to another . the 9 day we determine to depart hence to our fellow , to see what they have do , and to attempt what be to be do at the town of don John . the 10 day in the morning we sit sail to seek the Christopher and the tiger . the 11 day the captain of the Christopher come to we , and tell we that they can find small do at the place where they have be . the 12 William Crompton and i in our small pinnace go to the tiger and the Christopher at perenine . the 13 we send away the tiger to Egrand , because we find nothing to do at perenine , worth the tarry for . the 14 our great pinnace come to we , and present we put cloth into she , and send she back to Weamba , where she have be before , and have take there ten pound of gold . 243 the 15 the minion come to we , and the next day we go a shore with our boat , and take but one ounce of gold . the 19 day have set sail we come to a anchor before mowre . mowre , and there we tarry two day , but take not a ounce of gold . [ ii two . 49 . i the 21 we come to a anchor before don Johns town . the 22 we man our boat and go to shore , but the negro will not come at we ; then the captain of the Christopher and i take a skiff and eight man with we , and go and talk with the negro , and they say the great that they will send a man to the great town , where ‘ john m don John himself lie , to advertise he of our come . ’ the 23 we go a shore again , and the negro tell we that this day the merchant of don John will come down :