or seventeen fathom deep . Seven , or eight league off from the river deal the river del oro to cape de las barbas , there use many Spaniard qro - and Portugal to trade for fish , during the month of November : and all that coast be very low land . also we go from cape de las barbas Southsouthwest , and Southwest and by south , till we bring our self in twenty degree and a half , reckon our self seven league off : and there be the least shoal of cape blank . then we go south until we bring our self in 13 degree , reckon our self five and twenty league off . and in 15 degree we do rear the cross - the crossier sier , and we may have rear they soon if we have or cnsse star it look for they . they be not right a cross in the month of November , by reason that the night be short there . nevertheless we have the sight of they the 29 day of the say month at night . the first of December , be in 13 degree we set our course south and by east , until the four day of December at 12 of the clock the same day . than we be in nine degree and a terce , reckon our self 30 league off the shoal of the river call Rio Grande , Rio Grande . be westsouthwest off they , the which shoal be 30 league long . the four of December we begin to set our course southeast , we be in six degree and a half . the nine day of December we set our course east - [ ii two . 16 . ] southeast : the fourteenth day of the say month we set our course east , we be in five degree and a half , reckon our self thirty and six league from the coast of Guinea . 157 the river of Sesto . the river of Sesto . Rio dulce . cape de monte . cave de las Palmas . the nineteenth of the say month we set our course east and by north , reckon our self seventeen league distant from cape Mensurado , the say cape be eastnortheast of we , and the river of Sesto be east . the one and twenty day of the say month , we fall with cape Mensurado to the southeast , about tfao league off . this cape may be easy know , by reason y * the rise of it be like a porpose - head . also towards the southeast there be three tree , whereof the eastermost tree be the high , and the middlemost be like a high stack , and the southermost like unto a gibbet : and upon the main be four or five high hill rise one after another like round hommock or hillock . and the southeast of the three tree , brandiernwise : and all the coast along be white sand . the say cape stand within a little in six degree . the two and twenty of December we come to the river of Sesto , and remain there until the nine and twenty day of the say month . here we think it best to send before we the pinnace to the river dulce , call Rio dulce , that they may have the begin of the market before the come of the John Evangelist . at the river of Sesto we have a ton of grain . this river stand in six degree , lack a terce . from the river of Sesto to Rio dulce be five and twenty league . Rio dulce stand in five degree and a half . the river of Sesto be easy to be know , by reason there be a ledge of rock on the southeast part of the road . and at the enter into the haven be five or six tree that bear no leaf . this be a good harbour , but very narrow at you entrance into the river . there be also a rock in the haven mouth right as you enter . and all that coast between cape de monte , and cape de las Palmas , lie southeast and by east , northwest and by west , be three league off the shore . and you shall have in some place rock two league off : and that , between the river of Sesto and cape de las Palmas . 158 I555 ’ between the river of Sesto and the river dulce be five and twenty league : and the high land that be between they both , be call Cakeado , be eight league from of the river of Sesto . and to the southeastward of it be Cakead < 1 - a place call Shawgro , and a other call shyawe or shauo , where you may get fresh water . off this shyawe shauo . lie a ledge of rock : and to the southeastward lie a headland call Croke . between Cakeado and Croke Croke . be nine or ten league . to the southeastward off , be a harbour call S . Vincent : right over against s . Vincent , be a rock under the water , two league and a * ' half off the shore . to the southeastward of that rock you shall see a island about three or four league off : this island be not past a league off the shore . to the eastsoutheast of the island be a rock that lie above the water , and by that rock go in the river dulce , eriver which you shall know by the say river and rock . the ‘ northwest side of the haven be flat sand , and the southeast side thereof be like a island , and a bare plot without any tree , and so be it not in any other place . in the road you shall ride in thirteen or fourteen fathom , good oaze and sand , be the mark of the road to bring the island and the north - east land together , and here we anchor the last of December . the three day of Januarie , we come from the river dulce . note that cape de las Palmas be a fair high