, and behind to their girdle , and cap of their own make , some like a basket , and some like a great wide purse of beast skin . all their cloth , cord , girdle , fish line , and all such like thing which they have , they make of the bark of certain tree , and thereof they can work thing very pretty , and iron work they can make very fine , of all such thing as they do occupy , as dart , fishhook , their hook iron , iron head , and great dagger , some of weapons - them as long as a woodknife , which be on both side exceed sharp , and bend after the manner of turquoise blade , and the most part of they have hanging at their left side one of those great dagger . their target be make of such pill as their cloth be make of , and very close wrought , and they be in form four square , and very great , and somewhat long than they be broad , so that kneel down , they make their target to cover their whole body . their bow be short , and of a pretty strength , as much as a man be able to draw with one of his finger , and the string be of the bark of a tree , make flat , and about a quarter of a inch broad : as for their arrow , i have not as yet see any of they , for they have wrap they up close , and because i be busy i can not stand about it , to have they open they . their gold also they work very well . when the captain be set , i send he two else of [ ii two . 31 . ] cloth , and two bason , and give they unto he , and he send again for a weight of the same measure , and i send he a weight of two angel , which he will not take , 197 neither will he suffer the town to buy any thing , but the bason of brass : so that we sell that day 74 . bason unto the man of the town , for about half a angel weight , one with another , and nine white bason , which we sell for a quarter of a angel a piece , or thereabouts . we show they all our other thing which we have , but they do not esteem they . about two of the clock , the captain who do depart in the morning from we , come again , and bring with he to present i withal , a hen , and two great root , which i receive , and after make i sign that the country will come to his town that night , and bring great store of gold , which in deed about 4 . of the clock they do : for there come about 100 man under 3 . captain , well appoint with their dart and bow , and when they come to we , every man stick down his dart upon the shore , and the captain have stool bring they , and they sit down , and send a young man aboard of we , which bring a measure with he of a ell , and one four part , and one sixteenth part , and he will have that four time for a weight of one angel and twelve grain : i offer he two else , as i have do before for two angel weight , which he esteem nothing , but still stick at his four measure aforesaid : yet in the end , when it grow very late , and i make he sign that i will depart , he come to four else for the weight abovesaid , and otherwise he will not deal , and so we depart . this day we take for bason six ounce and a half and one eight part . the sixth day in the morning we man our boat and the skiff well , for fear of the Portugal which the last year have take away a man from the other ship , and go on shore , and land , because they have no boat to come to we , and so the young man which be with we the night before be send aboard , who seem to have deal and bargain before with the Portugal for he can speak a little portuguise , and be perfect in 198 weight and measure : at his come he offer we , as he have do before , one angel , and twelve grain for four else , and more he will not give , and make sign , that if we will not take that , we shall depart , which we do : but before we do indeed depart , i offer he of some rot cloth three else for his weight of a angel and twelve grain , which he will not take , and then we depart make sign to he that we will go away , as indeed we will have do , rather than have give that measure , although the cloth be ill , see we be so near to the place , which we judge to be better for sale . than we go aboard our ship , which lie about a league off , and come back again to the shore for sand and balaste : and then the captain perceive that the boat have bring no merchandise but come only for water and sand , and see that we will depart , come unto they , make sign again to know whether we will not give the four eaves , and they make sign again , that we will give they but three , and when they see that the boat be ready to depart , they come unto they and give they the weight of our angel and twelve grain , which we require before and make sign , that if we will come again , they will take three else . so when the boat come aboard , we lay ware in they both , and for the speedy dispatch i and John