and send she to Hanta , to attempt , if she can do any thing there . that night they can do nothing but be promise to have gold the next day . the next day ( which be the 22 ) be come , we send our pinnace to Hanta again , but there neither the captain nor the negro dare traffic with we , but entice we from place to place , and all to no purpose . this day we put away our pinnace , with five and they put the twenty Frenchman in she , and give they such victual Trenchmen as we can spare , put fifteen of they to the ransom then of six crown a man . pinnace . the 23 of June our pinnace come to we from Hanta , and tell we that the negro have deal very ill with they , and will not traffic with they to any purpose . the 24 we take our boat and pinnace and man they well , and go to the town of Shamma , and Shamma burn because the captain thereof be become subject to the tyk english . Portugal we burn the town , and our man seek the spoil of such trifle as be there find a Portugal chest , wherein be some of his apparel , and his weight , and one letter send to he from the castle , whereby we gather that the Portugal have be there of a long time . the 25 day , about three of the clock at afternoon , their retume we set sail , and put into the sea , for our return to homewardEngland . the last day of this month we fall with the shore again , and make our reckon to be eighteen league to the weatherward of the place where we set off " . when we come to make the land , we find our self to be eighteen league to the leeward of the place , where we set off , which come to pass , by reason of the extreme currant that run to the eastward : when we perceive the currant . 247 the description of the lie of 8 . Thome . our self so abuse , we agree to cast about again , and to lie as near the wind as we can , to fetch the line . the seven of July we have sight of they he of saint Thome , and think to have seek the road to have anchor there : but the next morning the wind come about , and we keep our course . the nine , the wind vary , we keep about again , and fall with the hand of S . Thome , and seek the road , be becalm near the hand , and with the currant be put near the shore , but can have no ground to anchor : so that we be force to hoist out our pinnace , and the other ship their skif to tow from the hand , which do little good , but in the end the wind put we three league off the shore . the ten day the Christopher and the tiger cast about , whereby we judge they to have agree together , to go seek some ship in the road , and to leave we : our man be not willing to go after they , for fear of run in with the hand again , and of put our self into the same danger that we be in the night before : but we shoot off a piece , and put out two light , and they answer we with light again : whereupon we keep our course , and think that they have follow we , but in the morning we can not see they , so that they leave we willing , and we determine to follow they no more . but the eleven day we alter our opinion and course , and consent to cast about again for the hand , to seek our ship ; and about four of the clock in the afternoon we meet with they . the 13 we fall again with the hand of S . Thome ; and the same night we find our self direct under the line . this hand be a very high hand , and be upon the west side of it , you shall see a very high pike , which be very small , and straight , as it be the steeple of a church , which pike lie direct under the line , and at the same south end of the hand to the westward thereof lie a small hand , about a mile from the great hand . 248 the three of August we depart from the he of saint some , and meet the wind at the southwest . the 12 day we be in the height of cape verde . the 22 day we fall with one of the isle of Cape verde , call the he of salt , and be inform by a Scotish ° f man that we take among the Frenchman upon the salt ' coast , that there be fresh victual to be have , we come to a anchor there . the 23 day in the morning we man our skiff , and go a shore , and find no house , but we see four man , which keep themselves always far from we , as for cattle we can find none , but great store of goat , [ ii two . 51 . ] and they be so wild , that we can not take above three or four of they : but there we have good store of fish , and upon a small hand which lie by the same we have great store of sea - bird . at night the Christopher break her cable , and lose a anchor , so that she can tarry no long , so we all weigh , and set sail . upon the same hand we leave the Scotish man , which be the occasion of our go aland at that place , but how he be leave we can not tell : but , as we judge , the people of the hand find he sleep , and so carry he away : for at night i go my self to the hand to seek he , but can hear nothing of he