and take some of every sort of our merchandise with we , and show it to the negro , but they esteem it not , but make light of it , and also of the bason , manellio and margarit , which yesterday they do buy : howbeit for the bason they will have give we some grain , but to no purpose , so that this day we take not by estimation above one hundred pound weight of grain , by mean of their captain , who will suffer no man to sell any thing but through his hand , and at his price : he be so subtle , that for 184 a basin he will not give 15 . pound weight of grain , and sometime will offer we small dishful , whereas before we have basket full , and when he see that we will not take they in contentment , the captain depart , and cause all the rest of the boat to depart , think belike that we will have follow they , and have give they their own asking . but after that we perceive their fetch , we weigh our Grapnel and go away , and then we go on land into a small town to see the fashion of the country , and there come a threescore of they about we , and at the first they be afraid of we , but in the end perceive that we do not hurt , they will come to we and take we by the hand and be familiar with we , and then we go into their town , the descrip - which be like to twenty small hovel , all cover over oftheir ^ with great leaf and baggage , and all the side open , and a scaffold under the house about a yard high , where they work many pretty thing of the bark of tree , and there they lie also . in some of their house they work iron and make fair dart , and diverse other thing to work their boat , and other thing withal , and the woman work as well as the man . but when we be there diverse of the woman to show we pleasure dance and sing after their manner , full ill to our ear . their song be thus : sakere , sakere , ho , ho . sakere , sakere , ho , ho . and with these word they leap and dance and clap their hand . beast we can see none that they have , but two goat , small dog , and small hen : other beast we see none . after that we have well mark all thing we depart and go aboard our ship : which thing the captain of the other town perceive , send two of his servant in a boat with a basket of grain , and make we sign that if when we have sleep we will come again into their river , we shall have store of grain , and so show we his grain and depart . the 17 . day in the morning because we think that the negro will have do something because the captain send for we , i require the master to go on shore , and send the rest of our merchant with he , and tarry aboard my self by reason that the last day he esteem our thing so little : so when the master and the rest come into the river , the captain with diverse other come to they , and bring grain with they , and after that he see that i be not there , he make sign to know where i be , and they make sign to he again that i be in the ship : and then he make sign to know diago the who be captain by the name of Diago , for so they call name of a their captain , and they point to the master of the ship : captain . begin to bis grain ) but he hold they so unreasonable , that there be no profit to be make of they : which thing the master perceive , and see that they have no store of grain , come away , and take not above 50 . pound weight of grain . than he go a shore to the little town where we be the day before , and one of they pluck a gourd , wherewith the negro be offend , and come many of they to our man with their dart and great target , and make sign to they to depart : which our man do , have but one bow and two or three sword , and go aboard the boat and come away from they : and assoon as they be come aboard our weigh and set sail , but the wind be off the sea , so that we can not get out clear of certain rock , and therefore we come to a anchor again . the latitude this river be call river S . Vincent , stand in 4 . of . Vincent degree anc [ a half , and it eb and flow there ' agree and a everX I2 - hour , but not much water when it eb half . the most : while we be there , it ebb one fathom and a half water . this country as far as we can perceive be altogether woody , and all strange tree , whereof we know leaf of ex - none , and they be of many sort , with great leaf like ceed length , great dock , which bee high than any man be able to reach the top of they . long pease there be certain peason by the sea side , which grow stalk . upon great and very long stalk , one of the stalk i 186 1555 - measured and find it 27 . pace long , and they grow upon the sand like to tree , and that so near the sea , that sometime the sea flow into the wood as we may perceive by the water mark . the tree and all thing in this place grow continual green . diverse of the woman have such exceed long breast , that some long woman