region of the black moor , call aethiopian or aethiopian . Negros , all which be water with the river negro call in old time Niger . in the say region be no city , but only certain low cottage make of bough ’ 43 of tree , plaster with chalk , and cover with straw . in these region be also very great desert . Marot continue . the kingdom of Morocco have under it these seven kingdom : hea , sus , guzula , the territory of Marrocco , fe . Duccala , Hazchora , and tedle . the kingdom of fe have as many : as fe , temesne , azgar , Elabath , Errif , Tremisen . Garet , and elcair . the kingdom of Tremisen have these region : Tremisen , Tenez , and elgazair , all which be guinea . Machometists . but all the region of Guinea be pure gentile , and idolatrous , without profession of any religion , or other knowledge of God , then by the law of nature . Africa the Africa the great be one of the three part of the world , and eat - know in old time , and sever from Asia , on the east by the river Nilus , on the west from Europe by the pillar of Hercules . the hither part be now call Barbary , and the people Moores . the inner part be Africa the call Lybia and Aethiopia . Africa the less be in this k ™ ' wise bound . on the west it have Numidia ; on the east Cyrenaica : on the north , the sea call Mediterraneum . in this country be the noble city of Carthage . Carthage . in the east side of Africa beneath the red sea , dwell the great and mighty emperor and christian king Prester John . Prester John , well know to the Portugal in their voyage to Calicut . his dominion reach very far on every side : and have under he many other king both Christian and heathen that pay he tribute . this mighty prince be call David the emperor of Aethiopia . some write that the king of Portugal send he yearly eight ship lade with merchandise . his kingdom con - fineth with the red sea , and reach far into Africa towards Aegypt and Barbary . southward it confine cape de bona with the sea towards the cape de bona Speranza : and on Speranda . the other side with the sea of sand , call mare de sabione , a very dangerous sea lie between you great alcair . city of alcair , or Cairo in Aegypt , and the country of [ il two . two . ] Aethiopia : in the which way be many unhabitable 144 desert , continue for the space of five day journey . and they affirm , that if the say christian emperor be not hinder by those desert ( in the which be great lack of victual , and especial of water ) he will or now have invade the kingdom of Egypt , and the city of alcair . the chief city of Ethiopia , where this great emperor be resident , be call amacaiz , be a fair city , Amacaiz . who inhabitant be of the colour of a olive . there be also many other city , as the city of Sava upon the river of Nilus , where the emperor be accustom to remain in the summer season . there be likewise a great city name barbaregaf , and ascon , from whence from whence it be say that the queen of Saba come to Jerusalem to hear the wisdom of Salomon . this city be but ' little , yet very fair , and one of the chief city in Ethiope . in this province be many exceed high mountain , upon the which be say to be the earthly paradise : and some the say that there be the tree of the sun and moon , ^ ! ad * se ' . ; r i .... , .. 1 he tree oj whereof the antiquity make mention : yet that none sun and can pass thither by reason of great desert of a hundred the moon . day journey . also beyond these mountain be the cape of Bona Speranza . and to have say thus much of Africa it may suffice . the first voyage to Guinea and Benin . n the year of our lord 1553 . the twelve day of August , sail from Portsmouth two goodly ship , the primerose and the lion , with a pinnace call the moon , be all well furnish aswell with man of the lusty sort , to the number of seven score , as also with ordinance and Pinteado . victual requisite to such a voyage : have also two captain , the one a stranger call Anthony anes pinteado , a Portugal ! , bear in a town name the port of Portugal ! , a wise , discreet , and sober man , who for vi 145 the castle of Mina . the king of Portugal , and to who the coast of Brasile and Guinea be commit to be keep from the Frenchman , to who he be a terror on the sea in those part , and be furthermore a gentleman of the king his master house . but as fortune in manner never favour but flatter , never promise but deceive , never raise but cast down again : and as great wealth and favour have always companion , emulation and envy , he be after many adversity and quarrel make against he , inforce to come into England : where in this golden voyage he be evil match with a unequal companion , and unlike match of most sundry quality and condition , with virtue few or none adorn . thus depart these noble ship under sail on their voyage : but first captain Windam put forth of his ship at Portsmouth a kinsman of one of the head merchant , and show herein a muster of the tragical part he have conceive in his brain , and with such small beginning nourish so monstrous a birth , that more happy , yea and bless be that young man be leave behind , then if he have be take with they , as some do wish he have do the like by they . thus sail