they on their voyage , until they come to the hand of Madera , where they take in certain wine for the store of their ship , and pay for they as they agree of the price . ■ at these hand they meet with a great Galion of the king of Portugal , full of man and ordinance : yet such as can not have prevail if it have attempt to withstand or resist our ship , for the which cause it be set forth , not only to let and interrupt these our ship of their purpose voyage , but all other that shall attempt the like : yet chief to frustrate our voyage . for the king of Portugal be sinister inform , that our ship be arm to his castle of Mina in those party , whereas nothing less be mean . after that our ship depart from the hand of Madera forward on their voyage , begin this worthy captain Pinteados sorrow , as a man torment with the 146 company of a terrible Hydra , who hitherto flatter with he , and make he a fair countenance and show of love . then do he take upon he to command all alone , set nought both by captain Pinteado , and the rest of the merchant factor , sometime with opprobrious word , and sometime with threaten most shameful abuse they , take from Pinteado the service of the boy and certain mariner that be assign he by the order and direction of the worshipful merchant , and leave he as a common mariner , which be the great despite and grief that can be to a Portugal or Spaniard , to be diminish of their honour , which they esteem above all riches . thus sail forward on their voyage , they come to the hand of Canarie , continue their course hand of from thence until they arrive at the hand of S . Nicholas , of where they victual themselves with fresh meat , of s the flesh of wild goat , whereof be great plenty in that hand , and in manner of nothing else . from hence follow on their course and tarry here and there at the desert hand in the way , because they will not come too timely to the country of Guinea for the heat , and tarry somewhat too long ( for what can be well minister in a common wealth , where inequality with tyrannic will rule alone ) they come at the length to the first land of the country of Guinea , where they fall with the great river of the river of Sesto , where they may for their merchandize have lade their ship with the grain of that country , which be a very hot fruit , and much like unto a fig as it grow on the tree . for as the fig be full of small seed , so be the say fruit full of grain , which be loose within the cod , have in the mid thereof a hole on every side . this kind of spice be much use in cold country , and may there be sell for great advantage , for exchange of other ware . but our man , by the persuasion or rather enforcement of this tragical captain , not regard and set light by that commodity , in comparison of the fine gold the thirst of they thirst , sail a hundred league further , until they come to the golden land : where not attempt to 147 fury admiti - eth no counsel . the Rossia . rot heat . Benin . Francisco . Nich . Lambart . come near the castle pertain to the king of Portugal , which be within the river of Mina , they make sale of their ware only on this side and beyond it , for the gold of that country , to the quantity of a hundred and fifty pound weight , there be in case that they may have dispatch all their ware for gold , if the untame brain of Windam have , or can have give ear to the counsel and experience of Pinteado . for when that Windam not satisfy with the gold which he have , and more may have have if he have tarry about the Mina , command the say Pinteado ( for so he take upon he ) to lead the ship to Benin , be under the equinoctial line , and a hundred and fifty league beyond the Mina , where he look to have their ship lade with pepper : and be counsel of the say Pinteado , consider the late time of the year , for that time to go no further , but to make sale of their ware such as they have for gold , whereby they may have be great gainer : Windam not assent hereunto , fall into a sudden rage , revile the say Pinteado , call he Jew , with other opprobrious word , say , this whoreson Jew have promise to bring we to such place as be not , or as he can bring we unto : but if he do not , i will cut off his ear and nail they to the mast . Pinteado give the foresay counsel to go no further for the safeguard of the man and their life , which they shall put in danger if they come too late , for the rossia which be their winter , not for cold , but for smother heat , with close and cloudy air and storm weather , of such putrify quality , that it rot the coat of their back : or else for come to soon for the scorch heat of the sun , which cause they to linger in the way . but of force and not of will bring he the ship before the river of Benin , where ride at a anchor , they send their pinnace up into the river 50 or 60 league , from whence certain of the merchant with captain Pinteado , Francisco a Portugal , Nicholas Lambart gentleman , and other merchant be conduct to the court where the king remain , ten league from the 148 river side , whither when they come , they be bring with a great company to the presence of the king , who the king of be a black moor ( although not so black as the rest )