the second voyage to Guinea set out by sir George bairn , sir John York , Thomas Lok , Anthony Hickman and Edward Castelin , in the year 1554 . the captain whereof be m . John Lok . s in the first voyage i have declare rather the order of the history , than the course of the navigation , whereof at that time i can have no perfect information : so in the description of this second voyage , my chief intent have be to show the course of the same , accord to the observation and ordinary custom of the mariner , and as i receive it at the hand of a expert pilot , be one of the chief in this voyage , who also with his own * 54 hand write a brief declaration of the same , as he find and try all thing , not by conjecture , but by the art of sail , and instrument pertain to the mariner faculty . not therefore assume to my self the commendation due unto other , neither so bold as in any part to change or otherwise dispose the order of this voyage so well • observed by art and experience , i have think good to set forth the same , in such sort and phrase of speech as be common use among they , and as 1 receive it of the say pilot , as i have say . take it therefore as follow . in the year of our lord 1554 the eleven day of October , we depart the river of Thames with three [ ii two . 15 . ] goodly ship , the one call the Trinity , a ship of the burden of sevenscore ton , the other call the Bartholomew , a ship of the burden of ninety , the three be the John Evangelist , a ship of seven score ton . with robertgainsh the say ship and two pinnace ( whereof the one be drown on the coast of England ) we go forward on n van ' our voyage , and stay at Dover fourteen day . we stay also at rye three or four day . Moreover last of all we touch at Dartmouth . the first day of November at nine of the clock at night , depart from the coast of England , we set off the start , bear Southwest all that night in the sea , and the next day all day , and the next night after , until the three day of the say month about noon , make our way good , do run threescore league . the 17 day in the morning we have sight of they he the lie of of Madera , which do rise to he that come in the Madera . Northnortheast part upright land in the west part of it , and very high : and to the southsoutheast a low long land , and a long point , with a saddle through the midst of it , stand in two and thirty degree : and in the west part , many spring of water run down from the mountain , and many white field like unto corn field , and some white house to the southeast part of it : and the top of the mountain show very ragged , 155 from Madera to the isk of palm . grand Canaria . Forteventura . the hand of Gomera . teneriffa . snow . the coast of Barbary . cape blank . if you may see it , and in the north - east part there be a bite or bay as though it be a harbour : also in the say part , there be a rock a little distance from the shore , and over the say bite you shall see a great gap in the mountain . the 19 day at twelve of the clock we have sight of the isle of palm and Teneriffa and the canary . the he of palm rise round , and lie southeast and northwest , and than northwest part be low . in the south be a round hill over the head land , and another round hill above that in the land . there be between the southeast part of they he of Madera and than northwest part of they he of palm seven and fifty league . this isle of palm lie in eight and twenty degree . and our course from Madera to the lie of palm be south and south and by west , so that we have sight of Teneriffa and of the canary . the southeast part of the lie of the palm , and the northnortheast of Teneriffa lie southeast and northwest , and between they be 20 league . Teneriffa and the great canary call grand Canaria , and the west part of Forteventura stand in seven and twenty degree and a half . Gomera be a fair island but very ragged , and lie westsouthwest off7 Teneriffa . and whosoever will come between they two hand must come south and by east , and in the south part of Gomera be a town and a good ride in the say part of the hand : and it stand in seven and twenty degree and three terce . Teneriffa be a high land , with a great high pike like a sugar loaf , and upon the say pike be snow throughout all the whole year . and by reason of that pike it may be know above all other hand , and there we be becalm the twenty day of November , from six of the clock in the morning , until four of the clock at afternoon . the two and twenty day of November , under the Tropike of Cancer the sun go down west and by south . upon the coast of Barbary five and twenty league by north cape blank , at three league off the i56 main , there be fifteen fathom and good shelly ground , and sand among and no stream , and two small hand stand in two and twenty degree and a terce . from Gomera to cape de las barbas be a hundred league , and our course be south and by east . the say cape stand in two and twenty and a half : and all that coast be flat , sixteen