but as for all the rest of our ship , they pack on all the sail that they can and run to sea , and as they themselves confess , they pray for we , but as for help at their hand we can have none . the 28 day we meet with our vice - admiral , our pinnace , and two of the Frenchman , and the three be flee which be a ship of fourscore ton , and belong to roan : and when i have the sight of the rest of our ship , i take our skiff and go to they to know why they lose we in such a case , and John kire make i answer that his ship will neither rear nor steer , and as for the pinnace , John Davis make i answer that she will do nothing , and that he can carry she no further , for her rudder be break , so that the hart be glad to tow she . than i go to the french admiral , and find himself to be a man of good stomach , but the one half of his man be sick and dead : and then i talk with the small Frenchman , and he make i answer that he can do nothing , say , that his ship will bear no sail , and have 16 of his man dead and sick , so he make we plain answer that he be able to do nothing . after this the Frenchman dare not anchor for fear of the Portugal . the 29 day the master of the pinnace come to we and say that they be not able to keep she any long , and then we view she and see there be no remedy , her rudder with all the iron work be break both aloft and below , we agree to break she up and to put the man into the hart so we take out of her four base , one anchor , and certain fire wood , and set she on fire , and afterward run along the coast . the thirty day we go in to the shore , and speak with certain negro , who tell we that some french 223 [ ii two . + I . i ship have be there , but we can not bargain with they they be so unreasonable . the 31 day i go to shore but do not traffic . February . the i day of February we weigh , see we can not bring the negro to any reason , and come to another place which stand upon a hill . the three day i go to a town four league from we , and shoot off two piece , and the captain come to we , and i send Thomas Rippen a land who know the captain , and assoon as he come on shore the captain know he and diverse of the negro who then begin to ask for i , and have tell the captain that i be in the boat , he make no long tarry but by and by cause two boat to be put to the sea , and come to i himself , and when he see i , he cry to i before he come to the boat and seem to be the glad man alive , and so do all the company that know i , and i give he a reward as the manner of the country be , and cause the Frenchman to give another , promise the next day to give he wine : and that night because it be late , he will not talk of any price , but leave i a pledge , and take another of i and so depart . the 4 day go on shore , i find that the ship of France which have be there , have do much hurt to our market , but yet i take five ounce and a half of gold . the five day i take eight ounce and one eight part of gold : but i see that the negro perceive the difference in cloth betwixt we and that which the Frenchman have , which be better , and broad than we : and then i tell captain Blundel that i will go to the leeward , because i perceive that be there where his cloth be sell , i shall do no good , whereof he be sorry . the 6 day there come a almade and negro aboard i , request i to come to their town for they have much gold and many merchant : and so i go and find their old captain go , and another in his place : but this night we do not good , because the merchant 224 1557 - were not come down : so he require a pledge which i let he have , and take another of he . the 7 day George our negro come to we , who have George ° ur follow we at the least 30 league in a small boat , and negro - when he come , the negro and we soon conclude of price . i take this day five pound and one ounce , and 3 quarter of gold . this negro we have leave at Shamma at the time of the fight , who say that he see the fight be on shore , and that when we be go from the Portugal , the Portugal come into their river , and tell they that the Englishman have slay two Portugal with ^• oPo ^ tu ^ s a piece , which be in deed out of our ship , and they ' require harbour there , but the captain of Shamma will not suffer they . the 8 day we take nineteen pound three ounce and a half . the 9 day we take two half . pound six ounce and a the 10 day three pound . the 11 day come to we Jerome Bawdet the viceadmiral of the Frenchman and his pinnace , and he show we that where we leave they there be no good to be do , and say he will go to the eastward , but we tell he he shall not : and thereupon commanded he to go to his company which he be appoint to be with , which he refuse to do until we have shoot three or four piece at their pinnace , and when the ship see that , she keep about , and run to seaward , and dare come no near to we , so the pinnace go after she . we take this day one pound five the Frenchman bridle by the english . ounce . the 12 day there come one of the