Bentn be sit in a great huge hall , long and wide , the wall make of nurt ' earth without window , the roof of thin board , open in sundry place , like unto lover to let in the air . and here to speak of the great reverence they give to ' reverence to - their king , it be such , that if we will give as much to ward the king . our saviour Christ , we shall remove from our head many plague which we daily deserve for our contempt and impiety . so it be therefore , that when his noble man be in his presence , they never look he in the face , but sit cower , as we upon our knee , so they upon their buttock , with their elbow upon their knee , and their hand before their face , not look up until the king command they . and when they be come towards the king , as far as they do see he , they do show such reverence , sit on the ground with their face cover as before . likewise when they depart from he , they turn not their back towards he , but go creep backward with like reverence . and now to speak somewhat of the communication that be between the king and our man , you shall first understand that he himself can speak the Portugal tongue , which he have learn of a child . therefore after the communi - he have command our man to stand up , and demand cati ™ ketween or they the cause or their come into that country , Benin and our they answer by Pinteado , that they be merchant man . travel into those party for the commodity of his country , for exchange of ware which they have bring from their country , be such as shall be no less commodious for he and his people . the king then have of old lie in a certain store - house 30 or 40 kintal of pepper ( every kintail be a hundred weight ) pepper . will they to look upon the same , and again to bring he a sight of such merchandize as they have bring with they . and thereupon send with the captain and 149 the merchant certain of his man to conduct they to the water side , with other to bring the ware from the pinnace the king gen - to the court . who when they be return and the tlenes towards ware seenj the king grow to this end with the merchant our man . provide in 30 day the lade of all their ship with pepper . and in case their merchandize will not extend to the value of so much pepper , he promise to credit they to their next return , and thereupon send the country round about to gather pepper , cause the same to be bring to the court : so that within the space of 30 day they have gather fourscore ton of pepper . in the mean season our man partly have no rule of [ ii two . 13 . ] themselves , but eat without measure of the fruit of the country , and drink the wine of the palm tree that drop in the night from the cut of the branch of the same , and in such extreme heat run continual into the water , not use before to such sudden and vehement alteration ( than the which nothing be more dangerous ) be thereby bring into swell and ague : insomuch that the late time of the year coming on , cause they to die sometime three and sometime 4 or 5 in a day . then Windam perceive the time of the 30 day to be expire , and his man die so fast , send to the court in post to captain Pinteado , and the rest to come away , and to tarry no long . but Pinteado with the rest , write back to he again , certify he of the great quantity of pepper they have already gather and look daily for much more : desire he furthermore to remember the great praise and name they shall win , if they come home prosperous , and what shame of the contrary . with which answer Windam not satisfy , and many of their man die daily , will and command they again either to come away forthwith , or else threaten to leave they behind . when Pinteado hear this answer , think to persuade he with reason , he take his way from the court towards the ship , be conduct thither with man by the king commandment . i5 ° in the mean season Windam all rage , break up Pinteados cabin , break open his chest , spoil such provision of cold still water and sucket as he have provide for his health , and leave he nothing , neither of his instrument to sail by , nor yet of his apparel : and in the mean time fall sick , himself die also . sleaik of who death Pinteado come aboard , lament as wintiam - much as if he have be the dear friend he have in the world . but certain of the mariner and other officer Pinteado evil do spit in his face , some call he Jewe , say that he usetiofthe have bring they thither to kill they : and some draw their sword at he , make a show to slay he . than he perceive that they will needs away , desire they to tarry that he may fetch the rest or the merchant that be leave at the court , but they will not grant this request . then desire he they to give he the ship - boat , with as much of a old sail as may serve for the same , promise they therewith to bring Nicholas this Lambert Lambert and the rest into England , but all be in vain . then write he a letter to the court to the merchant , who father inform they of all the matter , and promise they have be lord if God will lend he life to return with all haste to mayor rf fetch they . and thus be Pinteado keep ashipboord against his will , thrust among the boy of the ship , not use like a man