hand together , as they bow , and then do depart . the king have common sit by he 8 or 10 ancient man with grey beard . this day we take one pound and 10 ounce of gold . the 24 day we take 3 pound and 7 ounce . the 25 we take 3 ounce and 3 quarter . the 26 we take 2 pound and 10 ounce . the 27 two pound and five ounce . the 28 four pound , and then see that there be no more gold to be have , we weigh and go forth . the first day of march we come to a town call mowre . mowre , but we find no boat nor people there : but be ready to depart , there come two almade to we [ ii two . 43 . ] from another town , of who we take two ounce and a half of gold : and they tell we that the negro that dwell at mowre be go to dwell Lagova . at Lagova . they return . the second day we come thwart of the castle , and about two league off , and there see all the five Portugal ship at anchor , and this day by night we fetch Shamma . 228 the three day we have sight of one tall ship , of about two hundred ton , in the weather of we , and within less than two league of our ship , and then we see two moor a stern of she , the one a ship of five hundred or moor , and the other a pinnace : and these be a new fleet at that present arrive out of Portugal . whereupon we weigh , and make shift to double out of the land , and then the wind come to the southsouthwest , the hart go room with they fall three league to the leeward of we . these Portugal give we the chase from nine of the clock in the morning , till five at night , but do no good against we . at last , we perceive the admiral to be far a stern of his company , because his main topmast be spend , determine to cast about with they again , because we be sure to weather they , and the wind be as it be , it be our best course : but the hart be so far to the leeward , that we can not do it , except we will lose her company , so that we take in some of our sail , and go room with he : which when he perceive , he looff to , and be able to lie as near as he do before . at night , when we come to he , he will not speak to we : than we ask of his company why he go so room ; and they make excuse that they be able to bear no sail by , for fear of bear their foretopmast over board : but this be a simple excuse . the four day , be put from our water place we begin to seethe our meat in salt water , and to rebate our allowance of drink , to make it endure the long : and so conclude to set our course thence , for our own country . the 12 of march i find my self thwart of cape das palmas . the 16 day we fall with the land , which we judge to be the cape Mensurado , about which place be very much high land . the 18 day we lose sight of the hart , and i think the wilful master run in with the shore of purpose 229 ship of Portugal . cape mensurado . a french bravado . to lose we , be offend that i tell he of his own folly . the 27 day we fall in sight of two small land , which lie by our reckon six league off the headland of Sierra Leona : and before we come in sight of the same land , we make our reckon to be forty or thirty league at the least offend they . therefore all they that sail this way be to regard the current which set northnorthwest , or else they may be much deceive . the 14 of April we meet with two great ship of Portugal , which although they be in the weather of we , yet come not room with we , whereby we judge that they be bind for Calicut . the 18 day we be in the heighth of cape verde . the 24 we be direct under the tropic of cancer . the first day of May Henry Wilson our steward die : and the next day die John Underwood . the five day we be in the heighth of saint Michael . the 23 we have sight of a ship in the weather of we , which be a Frenchman of 90 ton , who come with we as stout and as desperate as may be , and come near we perceive that we have be upon a long voyage , and judge we to be weak , as in deed we be , come near we , and think to have lay we aboard , and there step up some of his man in armour , and command we to strike sail : whereupon we send they some of our stuff , crossebarre , and chainshot , and arrow , so thick , that it make the upper work of their ship fly about their ear , and we spoil he with all his man , and tear his ship miserable with our great ordinance , and then he begin to fall a stern of we , and to pack on his sail , and get away : and we see that , give he four or five good piece more for his farewell ; and thus we be rid of this french man , who do we not harm at all . we have aboard we a french man a trumpeter , who be sick , and lie in his bed , take his trumpet notwithstanding , and sound till he can sound no more , and so die . 230 the 28 we confer together , and agree to go into Severne , and so to Bristol , but the same night we have sight of the lizard , and by reason of the wind , we be not able to double the land end to go into Severne , but be force to bear in with the lizard . the 29 day , about nine of the clock in the morning , we arrive safe in Plymouth , and praise God for our good arrival .