quarter . the 22 . 3 . livre . 8 . ounce and a quarter . and this night about 4 of the clock the captain who have lie all this while upon the shore , go away with all the rest of the people with he . the 23 day we be wave a shore by other negro , and sell they cloth , casket , knife , and a dozen of bell , and take 1 . livre . 10 . ounce of gold . the 24 likewise we sell bell , sheet , and thimble , and take two livre . one ounce and a quarter of gold . the 25 day we sell 7 dozen of small bell and other thing , and then perceive their gold to be do , we weigh and set sail and go to leeward to seek the hind , and about $ of the clock at night we have sight of she , and bear with she , and understand that she have make some sale . the 26 day we receive out of the hind 48 livre . 3 ounce and one eight part of gold , which they have take in the time that we be from they . and this day upon the request of a negro that come unto we from a captain , we go to shore with our merchandise , and take 7 livre . and one ounce of gold . at this place they require no gage of we , but at night they send a man aboard we , which lie vi 209 oh [ ii two . 36 . ] with we all night , because we may know that they will also come to we the next day . the 27 day in both our ship we take 8 . livre . one ounce , three quarter and half a quarter of gold . the 28 we make sale for the company , and take one pound and half a ounce of gold . the 29 day in the morning we hear two caliver shoot off upon the shore , which we judge to be either by the Portugal or by the negro of the Portugal : we man our boat and arm our self and go to shore , but can find nothing : for they be go . the 30 day we make more sale for the company and for the master . the 31 we send our boat to shore to take in sand for ballast , and there our man meet the negro , with who they have make sale the day before a fish which do help they to fill sand , and have no gold , sell fish to our man for their handkerchief and nightker - chiefes . the 1 . day of February we weigh and go to another place , and take 1 . livre . 9 ounce 3 quarter of gold . the 2 day we make more sale : but have view our victual , we determine to tarry no long time upon the coast , because the most part of our drink be spend , and that which remain grow sour . the 3 and 4 day we make some sale , though not great , and find the wind this 4 . day to come off the shore , we set sail and run along the shore to the westwards : upon this coast we find by experience that ordinary about 2 of the clock in the night the wind come off the shore at Northnortheast , and so continue until eight of the clock in the morning : and all the rest of the day and night it come out of the southwest : and as for the tide or currant upon this shore , it go continual with the wind . the 5 day we continue sail and think to have meet with some english ship , but find none . the sixth day we go our course Southwest to fetch under the line , and run by estimation 24 league . the 13 day we think our self by our reckon 210 to be clear off the cape das Palmas , and run 12 league . the 22 day we be thwart of the cape de monte , Cape de which be to the westward of the river de Sestos , about Monte . 30 league . the first day of march in a ternado we lose the march . hind , whereupon we set up a light and shoot off a piece but can not hear of she , so that than we strike our sail and tarry for she , and in the morning have sight of she again three league a stern off we . upon the 22 day we find our self to be in the cape Verde height of cape Verde , which stand in 14 . degree and m latitude r4 a half . in a from this day till the 29 day we continue our course , ' and then we find our self to be in 22 degree . this day one of our man call William king , who have be long sick , die in his sleep , his apparel be distribute to those that lack it , and his money be keep for his friend to be deliver they at his come home . the 30 day we find our self to be under the Tropike . the 31 day we go our course , and make way 18 league . from the first day of April to the 20 we go our April . course , and then find our self to be in the height of the asores . the seven day of may we fall with the south part may . of Ireland , and go on shore with our boat have fresh drink , and two sheep of the country people , which be wild kern , and we give they gold for they , and buy further such other victual as we have need of , and thought will serve we till we arrive in England . the 14 day with the afternoon tide we go into their arrival the port of Bristol call hungrode , and there anchor at bnst ° u - in safety and give thanks to God for our safe arrival .