array like their captain with a great train after he , who salute we friendly , and one of the chief of they go and sit down under a tree , where the last year the captain be wont to sit : and at last we perceive a great many of they to stand at the end of a hollow way , and behind they the Portugal have plant a base , who sudden shoot at we but overshoot we , and yet we be in a manner hard by they , and they shoot at we again before we can ship our oar to get away but do no hurt . then the negro come to the rock hard by we , and discharge caliver at we , and again the Portugal shoot off their base twice more , and then our ship shoot at they , but the rock and hill defend they . then we go aboard to go from this place , see master Robert the negro bend against we , because that the last year Gains ^ * < 9 - m . gainsh do take away the captain son and three other from this place with their gold , and all that they have about they : which be the cause that they become friend with the Portugal , who before they hate , as do appear the last year by the courteous entertainment which the Trinity have there , when the captain come the english aboard the ship , and bring they to his town , and offer they ground to build a castle in , and there c , ^ wne they have good sale . the 14 day we weigh and ply back again to seek the hind , which in the morning we meet , and so we turn both back to the eastwardes to see what we can do at that place where the Trinity do sell she eight frise the last year . the hind have take eighteen ounce and a half moor of gold of other negro , the day after that we leave they . this day about one of the clock we espy certain boat upon the sand and man by they and go to they with merchandize , and take three ounce of gold for 18 fuff of cloth , every fuffe three yard and a half after one angel and 12 207 grain the fuffe , and then they make i sign that the next day i shall have gold enough : so the master take the hind with John Savill and John Makeworth , and go to seek the place aforesaid , and i with Richard Pakeman remain in this place to see what we can do the next day : and when the negro perceive our ship to go away , they fear that the other will follow , and so send forth 2 boat to we with 4 man in they , require we to tarry and to give they one man for a pledge , and 2 of they shall tarry with we for he , so Edward m . morlei [ ii two . 35 . ] servant see these man so earnest therein offer himself to be pledge , and we let he go for two of they , one whereof have his weight and scale , and a chain of gold about his neck , and another about his arm . they do eat of such thing as we have and be well content . in the night the negro keep a light upon the shore thwart of we , and about one of the clock we hear and see the light of a base which shoot off twice at the say light , and by and by discharge two caliver , a Portugal which in the end we perceive to be the Portugal brigantine . brigandine which follow we from place to place , to give warning to the people of the country , that they shall not deal with we . the 15 day in the morning the captain come down with 100 man with he , and bring his wife , and many other bring their wife also , because their town be 8 mile up in the country , and they determine to lie by the sea side till they have buy what they will . when he be come he send our man aboard , and require to have two man pledge , and he himself will come aboard , and i send he two , of who he take but one , and so come aboard we , he and his wife with diverse of his friend , and bring i a goat and two great root , and i give he again a latten basin , a white basin , 6 manillio , and a bottle of malmesy , and to his wife a small casket . after this we begin to make our measure and weight : and he have a weight of his own which hold one angel and 14 grain , and require a measure of 4 208 elles and a half . in fine we conclude the 8 part for one angel and 20 grain , and before we have do , they take my own weight and measure . the 16 day i take 8 livre . 1 ounce of gold : and since the departure of the hind i hear not of she , but when our pledge go into the country the first night , he say he see she cast anchor about five league from this place . the 17 day i sell about 17 piece of cloth , and take 4 . livre . 4 ounce and a half of gold . the 18 day the captain desire to have some of our wine , and offer half a ducat of gold for a bottle : but i give it he free , and make he and his train drink beside . and this day also i take 5 livre . 5 ounce of gold . the 19 day we sell about 18 clothes , and take 4 livre . 4 . ounce and one quarter of gold . the 20 day we take 3 livre . six ounce and a quarter of gold . the 21 we take 8 . livre . 7 . ounce and a