to be almost as big as the iide finger of a man hand , or iide less . the grain of this wheat be as big as our peason , round also , and very white , and somewhat shine , like pearl that have lose their colour . almost all the substance of they turn into flower , and make iide bran or none . i tell in one ear two hundred and threescore grain . the ear be enclose in three blade long than it self , and of two inch broad a piece . and by this fruitfulness the sun . the sun seem pardy to recompense such grief and molestation as they otherwise receive by the fervent heat thereof . it be doubdesse a worthy contemplation to consider the contrary effect of the sun : or rather the contrary passion of such thing as receive the influence of his beam , either to their hurt or benefit . their their drink . drink be either water , or the juise that drop from 174 1555 - the cut branch of the barren date tree , call Palmitos . for either they hang great gourd at the say branch every evening , and let they so hang all night , or else they set they on the ground under the tree , that the drop may fall therein . they say that this kind of drink be in taste much like unto whey , but somewhat sweet , and more pleasant . they cut the branch every evening , because they be sear up in the day by the heat of the sun . they have also great bean as big as chestnut , and very hard , with a shell in the stead of a husk . many thing more may be say of the manner of the people , and of the wonder and monstrous thing that be engender in Africa . but it shall suffice to have say thus much of such thing as our man partly see , and partly bring with they . and whereas before speak of the fruit of grain , grain i describe the same to have hole by the side ( as in deed it have , as it be bring hither ) yet be i afterward inform , that those hole be make to put string or twig through the fruit , thereby to hang they up to dry at the sun . they grow not past a foot and a half , or two foot from the ground , and be as red as blood when they be gather . the grain themselves be call of the physician Grana Paradisi . at their come home the keel of their ship ^ ms that be marvellous overgrow with certain shell of to ship . two inch length and more , as thick as they can stand , and of such bigness that a man may put his thumb in the mouth of they . they certain affirm that in these there grow a certain slimy substance , which at the length slip out of the shell and fall in the sea , become those fowl which we call barnacle . the like shell have be see in barnacle . ship return from Iseland , but these shell be not past half a inch in length . of the other that come from Guinea , i see the primerose lie in the dock , and in manner cover with the say shell , which in my 175 the death of our man . five black moor bring into England . [ ii two . 23 . ] cold may be better abiden than heat . judgement shall great hinder she sail . their ship be also in many place eat with the worm call Bromas or Bissas , whereof mention be make in the decade . Theise creep between the plank , which they eat through in many place . among other thing that chance to they in this voyage , this be worthy to be note , that whereas they sail thither in seven week , they can return in no less space than twenty week . the cause whereof they say to be this : that about the coast of Cabo Verde the wind be ever at the east , by reason whereof they be enforce to sail far out of their course into the main ocean , to find the wind at the west to bring they home . there die of our man at this last voyage about twenty and four , whereof many die at their return into the clime of the cold region , as between the island of azore and England . they bring with they certain black slave , whereof some be tall and strong man , and can well agree with our meat and drink . the cold and moist air do somewhat offend they . yet doubtless man that be bear in hot region may better abide cold , than man that be bear in cold region may abide heat , forasmuch as vehement heat resolve the radical moisture of man body , as cold constrain and preserve the same . this be also to be consider as a secret work of nature , that throughout all Africa , under the equinoctial line , and near about the same on both side , the region be extreme hot , and the people very black . whereas p such region of the west Indies as be under the same line be very temperate , and the people neither black , nor with curlde and short wool on their head , as they of Africa have , but of the colour of a olive , with long and black hair on their head : the cause of which variety be declare in diverse place in the decade . it be also worthy to be note that some of they that be at this voyage tell i : that be , that they 176 reissue . a pdf can be download from the web address give on page iv w library , on 30 Aug 2021 at 14 : 05 : 12 , subject to overtake the course of the sun , so that they have it north from they at noon , the 14 . day of march .. and to have say thus much of these voyage , it may suffice .