, a great quantity of water be sudden lift up and carry about with the moon , etc by which word of Aristotle it do appear that such water be lift up in one place at one time , and sudden fall down in a other place at another time . and hereunto perhaps pertain it that Richard Chanceller tell i that he a strange hear Sebastian Cabot report , that ( as far as i remember ) either about the coast of Brasile or Rio de plata , his ship or pinnace be sudden lift from the sea , the power of anj cast upon land , i wot not how far . the which nature . thing , and such other like wonderful and strange work of nature while i consider , and call to remembrance the narrowness of man understanding and knowledge , in comparison of her mighty power , i can but cease to marvel and confess with Pliny , that nothing be to her impossible , the least part of who power be not yet know to man . many thing more our man see and consider in this voyage , worthy to be note , whereof i have think good to put some in memory , that the reader may aswell take pleasure in the variety of thing , as knowledge of the history . among other thing therefore , touch the manner and nature of the people , this may seem strange , that their prince and noble man they raze use to pounce and raze their skin with pretty knot in thetr skin . diverse form , as it be branch damask , think that to be a decent ornament . and albeit they go in manner all naked , yet be many of they , and especial their woman , tine jewel , in manner lade with collar , bracelet , hoop , and chain , either of gold , copper , or ivory . i my self have one a bracelet . of their bracelet of ivory , weigh two pound and six ounce of Troy weight , which make eight and thirty ounce : this one of their woman do wear upon her arm . it be make of one whole piece of the big part of the tooth , turn and somewhat carve , with a hole in 172 the midst , wherein they put their hand to wear it on their arm . some have on every arm one , and as many on their leg , wherewith some of they be so gall , that although they be in manner make lame thereby , yet will they by no mean leave they off . some wear also on their leg great shackle of bright copper , which shackle . they think to be no less comely . they wear also collar , bracelet , garland , and girdle , of certain blue stone like bead . likewise some of their woman wear on their bare arm certain foresleeve make of the plate of beat gold . on their finger also they wear ring , make of golden wire , with a knot or wreath , like ring . unto that which child make in a ring of a rush . among other thing of gold that our man buy of they for exchange of their ware , be certain dog - dogschaine chain and collar . of glide . they be very wary people in their bargain , and will not lose one spark of gold of any value , use weight and measure , and be very circumspect in occupy the same . they that shall have to do with they , must use they gentle : for they will not traffic or bring in any ware if they be evil use . at the first voyage that our man have into these party , it so chance , that at their departure from the first place where they do traffic , one of they either steal a musk cat , or a musk cat . take she away by force , not mistrust that that shall have hinder their bargain in another place whither they intend to go . but for all the haste they can make with full sail , the fame of their misusage so prevent they , that the people of that place also , offend thereby , will bring in no ware : insomuch that they be enforce either to restore the cat , or pay for she [ ii two . 22 . ] at their price , before they can traffic there . their house be make of four post or tree , and their house . cover with bough . their common feed be of root , and such fish as theirfeed . they take , whereof they have great plenty . there be also such fly fish as be see in the fly fish . * 73 * 555 - sea of the west Indies . our man salt of their fish , hope to provide store thereof : but they will take no salt , and must therefore be eat forthwith as some say . howbeit other affirm , that if they be salt immediady after they be take , they will last uncor - a strange thing . rupt ten or twelve day . but this be more strange , that part of such flesh as they carry with they out of England , which putrify there , become sweet again at their return to the clime of temperate region . their bread . they use also a strange make of bread , in this manner . they grind between two stone with their hand as much corn as they think may suffice their family , and when they have thus bring it to flower , they put thereto a certain quantity of water , and make thereof very thin dough , which they stick upon some post of their house , where it be bake by the heat of the sun : so that when the master of the house or any of his family will eat thereof they take it down and eat it . their wheat . they have very fair wheat , the ear whereof be two handful in length , and as big as a great bulrush , and almost four inch about where it be big . the stem or straw seem