and to have say thus much of elephant and ivory , it may suffice . now therefore i will speak somewhat of the people the people of and their manner , and manner of live , with a other brief description of Africa also . it be to be understand , that the people which now inhabit the region of the coast of Guinea , and the middle part of Africa , as Libya the inner , and Nubia , with diverse other great and large region about the same , be in old time call TEthiopes and Nigritae , which we now call moor , Moorens , or negro , a people of beastly live , without a god , law , religion , or common wealth , and so scorch and vex with the heat of the sun , that in many place they curse it when it rise . of the region and people about the inner Libya ( call Libya interior ) gemma Phrysius Libyainterior . write thus . Libya interior be very large and desolate , in the which be many horrible wilderness and mountain , replenish with diverse kind of wild and monstrous beast and serpent . first from Mauritania or Barbary towards the south be Getulia , a rough and savage region , who in - GetuSa . habitant be wild and wander people . after these follow the people call Melanogetuli and Pharusii , which wander in the wilderness , carry with they great gourd of water . the ethiopian call Nigritae occupy je mope . a great part of Africa , and be extend to the west ocean . southward also they reach to the river Nigritis , the river who nature agree with the river of Nilus , forasmuch nigritistr as it be increase and diminish at the same time , and e ” sa ' bring forth the like beast as the crocodile . by reason whereof , i think this to be the same river which the Portugal call Senega : for this river be also of the same strange nature . it be furthermore marvelous and very strange thing . 167 that be say of this river : and this be , that on the one side thereof , the inhabitant be of high stature and black , and on the other side , of brown or tawny colour , and low stature , which thing also our man confirm to be true . Garamantes . there be also other people of Libya call Garamantes , who woman be common : for they contract no matrimony , neither have respect to chastity . after these people of be the nation of the people call Pyrei , Sathiodaphnitae , Odrangi , Mimaces , Lynxamatae , Dolopes , Aganginae , Leuci Ethiope , Xilicei Ethiope , Calcei Ethiope , and Nubi . Theise have the same situation in Ptolome that they now give to the kingdom of Nubia . here be [ ii two . 20 . ] certain Christians under the dominion of the great prester John . emperor of . / Ethiopia , call Prester John . from these towards the west be a great nation of people call Aphricerones , who region ( as far as may be gather Regnum by conjecture ) be the same that be now call regnum orguene . orguene , confine upon the east part of Guinea . from hence westward , and somewhat towards the north , Gambra . be the kingdom of Gambra and Budomel , not far from the river of Senega . and from hence towards the inland region , and along by the sea coast , be the region Guinea . of Ginoia or Guinea , which we common call ginnee . on the Westside of these region towards the ocean , be Cabo Verde . the cape or point call Cabo verde , or caput viride , the Portugal ( that be ) the green cape , to the which the Portugal Kf ' 9 ” i0 first direct their course when they sail to America , or ‘ the land of Brasile . then depart from hence , they turn to the right hand towards the quarter of the wind call Garbino , which be between the west and the south . but to speak somewhat more of . / Ethiopia : although there be many nation of people so name , yet Aethiopia . be Aethiopia chief divide into two part , whereof the one be call Aethiopia under Aegypt , a great and rich the island of region . to this pertain the island Meroe , embrace round about with the stream of the river Nilus . in this island woman reign in old time . Josephus write , 168 that it be sometime call Sabea : and that the queen the queen of Saba come from thence to Jerusalem , to hear the wisdom of Salomon . from hence towards the east reign the say christian emperor Prester John , who prester John some call papa Johannes , and other say that he be call Pean Juan ( that be ) great John , who empire reach it far beyond Nilus , and be extend to the coast of the red sea and indian sea . the middle of the region be almost in 66 . degree of longitude , and 12 . degree of latitude . about this region inhabit the people call people of the clodi , Risophagi , Babylonii , Axiunitae , Molili , and molibse . after these be the region call Troglodytica , ' who inhabitant dwell in cave and den : for these be their house , and the flesh of serpent their meat , as write Pliny , and Diodorus Siculus . they have no speech , but rather a grin and chatter . there be also people without head , call Blemines , have their people without eye and mouth in their breast . likewise Strucophagi , and naked Ganphasantes : satyr also , which have nothing of man but only shape . Moreover oripei , great hunter . Mennones also , and the region of Smyrnophora , which bring forth myrrh . after these be the region of myrrh . Azania , in the which many elephant be find . a great Alania . part of the other region of Africa that be beyond the Aequinoctiali line , be now ascribe to the kingdom of melinde