tropic of cancer . the 21 day we find ourselves to be in 20 degree and a half , which be the heighth of cape blank . the 25 we have sight of the land in the bay to the northward of cape Verde . Francis the 26 i take Francisco and Francis Castelin with Castehn . i , anj went ; unto p [ nnessej anj so go to the tiger which be near the shore then the other ship , and go aboard she , and with she and the other ship we run west and by south , and westsouthwest , until about four of the clock , at which time we be cape verde . hard aboard the cape , and then we run in Southwest , and beyond the cape about four league we find a four hand , fair hand , and beside that two or three hand , which 236 be of very high rock , be full of diverse sort of seafowl , and of pigeon , with other sort of land - fowl , and so many , that the whole hand be cover with the dung thereof , and seem so white as if the whole hand have be of chalk ; and within those hand be a very fair bay , and hard aboard the rock eighteen fathom water , and fair ground . and when we perceive the bay , and understand that the Frenchman have a great trade there , which we be desirous to know , we come to a anchor with the tiger . and after that the minion and the Christopher anchor in like case : than we cause the pinnace to run beyond another cape of land , to see if there be any place to trade in there . it be near night i take our cock and the tiger skiff , and go to the hand , where we get certain fowl like unto Gannards : and then . i come a great trade of the Frenchman at Cape verde . aboard again and take two of the gannard which we have take , and carry they to the captain of the Christopher , and when i have talk with he , i find he not willing to tarry there , neither be i desirous to spend any long time there , but only to attempt what be to be do . the master of the Christopher tell i he will not tarry , be not bind for that place . the 27 the captain of the tiger and Edward Selman come to i , and John Makeworth from the Christopher , and then we agree to take the pinnace , and to come along the shore , because that where we rid no negro come to we , and the night before our pinnace bring we word that there be a very fair fare hand hand . and when i come beyond the point i find it v ^ re ^ c ^ ietrade so , and withal a goodly bay , and we see upon the main > a e ' certain negro which wave we on shore , and then we come to a anchor with the pinnace , and go a shore with our cock , and they show we where their trade be , and that they have elephant tooth , musk , and hide , and elephant offer we to fetch down their captain , if we will ‘ send a man with they , and they will leave a pledge for ' 237 he : than we ask they when any ship have be there ; and some of they say not in eight month , other , in six month , and other in four , and that they be Frenchmen . then our perceive the Christopher not will to tarry , depart from they , and set sail with the pinnace and go aboard the tiger . the io day of march we fall with the coast of Guinea , five league to the eastward of cape de monte , beside a river call Rio das Palmas . the two we go to the shore , and find one man that can speak some portuguise , who tell we that there be three french ship pass by ; one of they two month past , and the other one month past . at this place i receive nineteen elephant tooth , and two ounce and half a quarter of gold . the 12 we set sail to go to the river de Sestos . the 13 at night we fall with the same river . the 14 day we send in our boat to take water , and rummage our ship , and deliver such ware to the Christopher and tiger , as they have need of . the 15 we come together , and agree to send the tiger to another river to take in her water , and to see what she can do for grain . after that we take merchandise with we , and go into the river , and there we find a negro which be bear in Lisbon , leave there by a ship of Portugal which be burn the last year at this river in fight with three Frenchman ; and he tell we further , that two month pass there be three Frenchman at this place ; and six week pass there be two french ship at the river ; and fifteen day pass there be one . all which ship be go towards the Mina . this day we take but few grain . the 19 day consider that the Frenchman be go before we , and that by reason of the unwholesome air of this place fourteen of our man in the minion be fall sick , we determine to depart , and with all speed to go to the Mina . 238 the 2i we come to the river de Potos , where some [ ii two . 47 . ] of our boat go in for water , and i go in with Rio de Potos . our cock , and take 12 small elephant tooth . the 23 . day , after we have take as many tooth as we can get , about nine of the clock we set sail to go towards the Mina . the 31 we come to Hanta , and make sale of certain manillio . the first April we have sight of five sail of