Portugal , they descry whereupon we set sail and go off to sea to get the s ^ ile ° f wind of they , which we shall have have if the wind * e ortu ^ a have keep his ordinary course , which be all the day at the southwest , and westsouthwest : but this day with a flaw it keep all the day at the east , and eastsoutheast , so that the Portugal have the wind of we , and come room with the tiger and we until night , and bring themselves all save one , which sail not so well as the rest , within shot of we : than it fall calm , and the wind come up to the southwest , howbeit it be near night , and the Christopher , by mean of her boat , be about four league to the leeward of we . we tack and run into the weather of the admiral , and three more of his company , and when we be near he we speak to he , but he will not answer . than we cast about and lay the fight . in the weather of he ; and cast about he shoot at we , and then we shoot at he , and shoot he four or five time thorough . they shoot diverse time through our sail , but hurt no man . the tiger and the pinnace , because it be night , keep out their sail , and will not meddle with they . after we have thus fight together 2 hour or more , and will not lay he aboard because it be night , we leave shoot one at the other , and keep still the weather of they . then the tiger and the pinnace keep about and come to we , and afterward be near the shore , we three keep about and lay to the sea , and shoot off a piece to give warning to the Christopher . this night about 12 of the clock , be very little wind , and the master of the tiger asleep , by the ill 239 work of his man the ship fall aboard of we , and with her shear - hook cut our main sail , and her boat be betwixt we be break and sink , with certain merchandise in she , and the ship wale be break with her outleger : yet in the end we clear she without any more hurt , but she be in hazard to be break down to the water . the second day we have sight of the Christopher , and be near unto she , so that i take our boat and go to she . and when i come thither , they show i , that after the Portugal have leave we , they go all room with he , and about twelve a clock at night meet he , and shoot at he , and he at they , and they shoot he through the sail in diverse place , and do not other great hurt . and when we have understand that they have be with he as well as with we , we agree altogether to seek they ( if we may find they ) and keep a weather our place of traffic . the three day we run all day to the southwestwards to seek the Portugal , but can have no sight of they , and hail into the shore . the four day , when we have sight of land , we find that the currant have set we thirty league to the eastwards of our reckon , which we wonder at : for the Lagua . first land we make be Lagua . than i cause our boat to be man , and then Christopher also , and go to the shore and take our negro with we . and on shore we learn that there be four french ship upon the perinnen . coast ; one at perinnen , which be six league to the weamba . Westward of Laguoa : another at Weamba , which be four league to the eastward of Laguoa : a three at Perecow . Perecow , which be four league to the eastward of Egrand . Weamba : and the four at Egrand , which be four league to the eastward of Perecow . when we have intelligence of these news we agree to go to the eastwards with the french man to put they from their traffic , and shoot off two or three piece in our boat to cause the ship to way : and have be 340 about one hour under sail , we have sight of one of the french man under sail , hail off from Weamba to who we give chase , and agree in the night for fear of overshoot they , that the minion shall first come to anchor , and after that about three hour , the tiger and the Christopher to bear along all night . the 5 . day we find three of the french ship at anchor : one call la foye de Honfleur , a ship of 220 ton , another call the Ventereuse or small roebarge of Honfleur , of 100 ton , both appertain to Shawdet of Honfleur , the three be call the mulet de Batuille a ship of 120 ton , and this ship belong to certain merchant of roan . when we come to they , we determine to lay the admiral aboard , the Christopher the vice - admiral , and the tiger the small : but when we come near they they weigh , and the Christopher be the headmost and the weathermost man , go room with the admiral : the roebarge go so fast that we can not fetch she . the first that we come to be the mulet , and she we lay aboard , and our man enter and take she , which ship be the rich except the admiral : for the admiral have take about 80 pound of gold , and the Roeberge have take but 22 pound ; and all this we learn of the Frenchman , who know it very well : for they be all in consort together , and have be upon the coast of Mina two month and odd day : howbeit the Roeberge have be there before they with another ship of diepe , and a caravel ,