the second voyage make by master William towrson to the coast of Guinea , and the castle of Mina , in the year 1556 . with the tiger of London , a ship of 120 ton , the hart of London of 60 ton , and a pinnace of sixteen ton . November . December . sierra Leona . he fourteenth day of September , the year abovesaid , we depart from Harwich , and direct our course for the isle of silly , to meet there with the hart and pinnace , which be rig and victual at Bristol , but arrive there the eight and twenty day we find they not , and therefore after long lie at hull to tarry for they , but not espy they , we turn back to Plymouth the 12 day of October , and be there , the hart and the pinnace come to we , so that the 15 of November we all depart together from Plymouth at one of the clock in the after noon , and the 28 day we have sight of the isle of Porto Santo , and the next day in the morning of Madera . the three day of December we fall with the he of Palma , and the 9 we be thwart of cape blank , and find there certain caravel fish for pargoe . the 19 we find our self in the height of Sierra Leona , and all this day we run thwart of certain currant , which do set to the west sou that westward so fast as if it have be the overfall of a sand , make a great noise like unto a stream or tide - gate when the water be shoal : and to prove whither we can find ground in this place , we sound and have 150 fathom , and no ground , and so depart . the 30 of December we fall with the coast of Guinea , and have first sight of it about 4 league off . the best mark that we can take of the place to know it be three hill , which lie Northeast and by east from we : 212 betwixt the nothermost two hill there be two high and great tree stand in sight as it be a sail breadth one from another , and a little more to the northwestwards be certain hommock . Having sail somewhat into the shore we take our self to be shoot somewhat past the river de Sestos , so that we keep about to fetch it . and a little after we have sight of three sail of ship and two pinnace which be in the weather of we , and have sight of they we make our self ready to meet they , and hail off our ship to fetch the wind as near as we can : and have sail about a hour or two , they also go about , and go as we go to make themselves ready , and when we have they in chase , they go away from we : but when they have make themselves ready , they keep about again , and come with we very fine appoint with their streamer , and pendant and ensign , and noise of trum - [ ii two . 37 . ] pet very brave : so when we meet , they have the weather of we , and we be determine to fight , if they have be Portugal , wave they to come under our lee , which they deny stout : than we demand of they whence they be , and they say of France , we tell they again that we be of London in England . they ask of we what Portugal we have see , we answer , none but fisherman : then they tell we that there be certain Portugal ship go to the Mina to defend it , and that they meet with another at the river de Sestos , the river of which be a ship of two hundred which they have burn , sestos - and have save none but the master and two or three negro , and certain other which be sore burn which they leave a shore there . than they desire to come aboard of we with their boat to talk with we , and we give they leave . then the captain of the admiral and diverse other come aboard very friendly , desire we to keep they company because of the Portugal , and to go to the Mina with they : we tell they that we have not water , and that we be but now fall with the coast , and they show we that 213 they admit certain Frenchman into their company . we be fifty league past the river de Sestos : notwithstanding there be water enough to be have , and they will help we to water with their own boat because they will have our company . And tell we further , that they have be six week upon the coast , and have get but three ton of grain among they all : and when we have hear they , we make our reckon that although the Mina be clear , yet if they do go before we , they will mar our market ; and if it be not clear , then if the Portugal be there and do take they , they will understand that we be behind , and so will wait for we . and further we make account that if we go with they we shall do as well as they , if the coast be clear : if it be not clear , then by they we be assure to be the strong . therefore have consider thus much of their gentle offer , we tell they that the next day we will confer more large of the matter . whereupon they desire i to come the next day to dinner to they , and to bring the master of our ship with i , and such merchant as i think good , promise to give we water out of their own ship if we will take it , or else to tarry with we and help we to water with their own boat and pinnaces . the 31 day in the morning the admiral send his boat aboard for i , and i take our master and certain of our merchant and go to he , who have provide a notable banquet for we , and entreat we very friendly , desire we still to keep his company , promise that what victual be in his ship , or other thing that may do we pleasure until the end , we shall have the one half of it , offer we if we will to