, and show they all the friendship they can , when they have tell they that they be the man that be take away be now again bring by we . the negro here show we that a month since there be 3 ship that fight together , and the two ship put the other to flight : and before that at the castle of Mina there be 4 ship of the Portugal which meet with one Frenchman , which Frenchman cause they all to flee , which ship we take to be the roebarge : for the Frenchman of our company judge she to be thereabouts that time with her pinnace also . and further , that after she go a ship of twelve score name the Shaudet all alone , and after she a ship of fourscore , and both for the Mina . and there be two other also 217 Shamma . which they leave , one at cape Verde call the leuriere of diepe , and another at the river de Sestos , beside these 3 which all this time be in our company , who name be these : the espoier of Hableneff which be the admiral , who captain be Denis Blundell . the leuriere of Roan vice - admiral , who master be Jerome Baudet . the other be of Hunfleur who master be call John de Orleans . the sixteenth day i go along the shore with two pinnace of the Frenchman , and find a bay and a fresh river , and after that go to a town call Hanta , twelve league beyond the cape . at this town our negro be well know , and the man of the town weep for joy when they see they , and demand of they where Anthony and be have be : and they tell they that they have be at London in England , and shall be bring home the next voyage . so after this , our negro come aboard with other negro which bring a weight with they , which be so small that we can not give they the half of that which they demanded for it . the negro here tell we that there be five Portugal ship at the castle and one pinnace , and that the Portugal do much harm to their country , and that they live in fear of they , and we tell they again , that we will defend they from the Portugal whereof they be very glad . the 17 day we go a shore and the Frenchman with we , but do no great good , the negro be so unreasonable , we sell 80 manellio for one ounce of gold . then we depart and go to Shamma , and go into the river with five boat well appoint with man and ordinance , and with our noise of trumpet and drum , for we think here to have find some Portugal but there be none : so we send our negro on shore , and after they go diverse of we , and be 218 very well receive , and the people be very glad of our negro , special one of their brother wife , and one of their aunt , which receive they with much joy , and so do all the rest of the people , as if they have be their natural brethren : we comfort the captain and tell he that he shall not fear the Portugal , for we will defend he from they : whereupon we cause our boat to shoot off their base and harquebuss , and cause our man to come on shore with their long bow , and they shoot before the captain , which he , with all the rest of the people , wonder much at , special to see they shoot so far as they do , and assay to draw their bow but can not . when it grow to be late , we depart to our ship , for we look every hour for the Portugal . * and here the negro show we that there be a english ship at the Mina , which have bring one of the negro again , which Robert gaynsh take away . the 18 day we go into the river with no less strength than before , and conclude with the negro to give they for every fuffe two yard and three nail of cloth , and to take for it one angel - duckat : so that we take in all 70 ducat , whereof the Frenchman have forty , and we thirty . the nineteenth day we go a shore every man for himself , and take a good quantity of gold , and i for my part take four pound and two ounce and a half of gold , and our heart boat take one and twenty ounce . at night the negro show we that the next day the Portugal will be with we by land or by sea : and when we be ready to depart , we hear diverse harquebuss shoot off in the wood by we which we know to be Portugal , which dare come no near to we , but shoot off in the wood to see if they can fear we and so make we to leave our traffic . the 20 day we man our five boat , and also a great boat of the frenchmens with our man and the admiral , 12 of they in their morion and corslet , and the negro bring home by our man . * note . Robert Gaynsh . 219 five sail of Portugal descry . the rest all well appoint , with four trumpet , a drum and a fife , and the boat all hang with streamer of silk and pendant very fair , and go into the river and traffic , our man of war lie off and on in the river to waft we , but we hear no more of the Portugal . this day the negro tell we that there be certain ship come into Hanta , which town be about 2 league to the westward of this place . this 21 day we man our boat again and go to a place a league from this to the westwards , and there find many negro with another captain , and sell at the same rate that we have do with the other . the 22 day we go a shore again and traffic in like sort quiet , and i take 4 pound and six ounce of gold . the 23 day about night the negro with their captain come to we and tell we that the king of Portugal ship be depart from the castle , mean the next day to ply to the windward to come to we , give