: but they dare not sell any thing , their subjection be so great to the Portugal . the 11 day run by the shore we have sight of a little town four league from the last town that we come from , and about half a league from that , of another town upon a hill , and half a league from that also of another great town upon the shore : whither we go to see what can there be do : if we can do nothing , than to return to the other town , because we think that the Portugal will leave the town upon our departure . along from the castle unto this place be very high hill which may be see above all other hill , but they be full of wood , and great red cliff by the sea side . 204 the boat of these place be somewhat large and big , for one of they will carry twelve man , but their form be alike with the former boat of the coast . there be about these town few river : their language differ not from the language use at don Johns town : but every one can speak three or four word of portuguise , which they use altogether to we . we see this night about 5 of the clock 22 boat run along the shore to the westward , whereupon we suspect some knavery intend against we . the 12 day therefore we set sail and go further along the coast , and descry more town wherein be great house than in the other town , and the people come out of the town to look upon we , but we can see no boat . two mile beyond the eastermost town be black rock , which black rock continue to the uttermost cape of the land , which be about a league off , and then the land run in Eastnortheast , and a sandy shore again : upon these black rock come down certain negro , which wave we with a white flag , but we perceive the principali place to be near , will not stay , but bear still along the shore : and as soon as we have open the point of the land , we raise another headland about a league off the point , which have a rock lie off it into the sea , and that they think to be the [ ii two . 34 . ] place which we seek . when we come thwart the place they know it , and we put ware into our boat , and the ship be within half a mile of the place anchor in five fathom water and fair ground . we go on shore with our boat , and anchor about ten of the clock in the forenoon : we see many boat lie upon the shore , and diverse come by we , but none of they will come near we , be as we judge afraid of we : because that four man be take perforce the last year from this four man place , so that no man come to we , whereupon we go aboard again , and think here to have make no sail : to nst ’ yet towards night a great sort come down to the water side , and wave we on shore with a white flag , and 205 the like they do in the country of Prete Janni . afterward their captain come down and many man with he , and sit he down by the shore under a tree : which when i perceive , i take thing with i to give he : at last he send a boat to call to we , which will not come near we , but make we sign to come again the next day : but in fine , i get they to come aboard in offer they thing to give to their captain , which be two elles of cloth , one latten basin , one white basin , a bottle , a great piece of beef , and six biscuit cake , which they receive make we sign to come again the next day , say , that their captain be grand captain as appear by those that attend upon he with their dart and target , and other weapon . this town be very great and stand upon a hill among tree , so that it can well be see except a man be near it : to the eastward of it upon the hill hard by the town stand 2 . high tree , which be a good mark to know the town . and under the town lie another hill low than it , whereupon the sea beat : and that end next the sea be all great black rock , and beyond the town in a bay lie another small town . the 13 day in the morning we take our boat and go to shore , and stay till ten a clock and no man come to we : we go about therefore to return aboard , and when the negro see that , they come run down with a flag to wave we again , so we anchor again , and then one show we that the captain will come down by and by : we see a sail in the mean time pass by we but it be small , and we regard it not . be on shore we make a tilt with our oar and sail , and then there come a boat to we with five man in she , who bring we again our bottle , and bring i a hen , make sign by the sun , that within two hour the merchant of the country will come down and buy all that we have : so i give they six manillio to carry to their captain , and they make sign to have a pledge of we , and they will leave we another man : and we willing to do so , put one of our man in their 206 boat , but they will not give we one of they , so we take our man again , and there tarry for the merchant : and short after one come down