frenchmens pinnaces to we lade with cloth , and will have make sale , but i will not suffer he , and therefore take he and send he aboard of our ship , and cause he to ride there all day . we take five pound six ounce and a half . the 14 day we take of some negro 4 ounce of gold . vi 225 p the offer of the king to the english to build a fort a town in circuit as big as London . the 16 we come to another town . the 17 day i go a shore and understand that 3 of the Portugal ship be at the castle , and the other two at Shamma . the captain of this town be go to the principali town , to speak with their king , and will return short as they tell i , and so he do , and bring i a weight and measure , and i send a man to see that principali town , and their king . the Portugal ship rid so near we , that within 3 hour they may be with we , yet be all content to tarry for sale . the 18 day certain of the king servant come to we , and we take one pound two ounce , and one eight part of gold . the 10 day we take five pound one ounce . the 20 day one pound and four ounce . the 21 i take four pound and one ounce , and the negro inquire for fine cloth , and i open two piece which be not fine enough , as they say , but see that we have no other , they buy of they . at night i provide a gift , or present , and send one merchant and a mariner with it to the king , to certify he of our want of victual , by reason whereof we can not stay long : for in deed we search our ship , and the most part of our beer be leak out of all our barrel . the 22 day we take three ounce and a half . the 23 our man come from the king Abaan , and tell we , that he have receive they very friendly , but he have little gold , but promise , if we will tarry , to send into all his country for gold for we , and he will our man at their come home to speak to our king to send man and provision into his country , to build a castle , and to bring tailor with they , to make they apparel , and good ware , and they shall be sure to sell they : but for that present the Frenchman have fill they full of cloth . this town stand about four league up in the land , and be , by the estimation of our man , as big in circuit as London , but the building be like to the rest of 226 the country . they have about this town great store of the wheat of the country , and they judge , that on one side of the town there be one thousand rike of wheat , and another sort of corn which be call mill , which be much use in Spain . about this town they keep good watch every night , and have to warn the watchman certain cord make fast over their way , which lead into the town , and certain bell upon they , preAe so that if any man touch the cord , the bell ring , and then the watchman run forth of their watch house to see what they be : and if they be enemy , if they pass the cord , they have provision with certain net hang over the way , where they must pass , to let fall upon they , and so take they , and otherwise then by the way it be not possible to enter the town , by reason of the thicket and bush which be about the same , and the town be also wall round abqut with long cord , and bind together with sedge and certain bark of tree . when our man come to the town , it be about five of the clock in the morning , for there they travel always in the night by reason of the heat of the day : and about nine of the clock , the king send for they , for there may no man come to he before he be send for , and then they will have carry their present with they : but the negro tell they , that they must be three time bring before he , before they may offer their gift : and when they come to he , he talk with they , and receive they very friendly , and keep they about half a hour , and then they depart , and after that send for they again three time , and last of all , they bring he their present , which he receive thankful , and then cause a pot of wine of palm to be bring forth , and make they drink : and before they drink , both here and in all the country , they use certain ceremony . first , they bring forth their pot of drink , and then they make a hole in the ground , and put some of the drink into it , and they cast the earth upon it , which the king friendly entertainment of our man . their ceremony in drink . 227 they dig forth before , and then they set the pot upon the same , than they take a little thing make of a gourd , and with that they take out of the same drink , and put it upon the ground in three place , and in diverse place they have certain bunch of the pill of palm tree set in the ground before they , and there they put in some drink , do great reverence in all place to the same palm tree . all these ceremony first do , the king take a cup of gold , and they put he in wine , and he drink of it , and when he drink , the people cry all with one voice , Abaan , Abaan , with certain other word , like as they cry common in Flanders , upon the twelve night , the kinning drink : and when he have drink , than they give drink to every one , and that do , the king license they to depart , and every one that depart from he bow 3 time towards he , and wave with both