candle : and cast some of their beef over 233 board , and spoil they so much , that of very pity we give they a compass , a run glass , a lead and a line , certain bread and candle , and what apparel of they we can find in their ship , we give they again , and some money also of that which William Crompton take for the ransom of a poor Frenchman , who be their pilot down the river of Bordeux , they be not able to set he a shore again , by reason of the foul weather . the tiger also take out of the small hulk six or seven ton of wine , one hogshead of aquavitae , and certain rosin , and two base he take out of the great hulk . the first day of February in the morning we all come together again save W . Crompton who send we word that he be content to agree to that order which we shall take . now Edward Selman be of this opinion , that it be not best to let the ship depart , but put man into they to carry they into England , which thing neither we nor our master will agree unto , because we think it not good to unman our ship go outward , consider how dangerous the time be : so that in fine we agree to let they depart , and give they the rest of the wine which they have in their ship of the frenchmens for the fraught of that which we have take , and for their ordinance , rosin , aquavitae , chestnut , and other thing which the company have take from they . so we receive a bill of their hand , that they confess how much frenchmens good they have , and then we let they depart . the io day we reckon our self to be 25 league from the grand canary , and this day about nine of the clock our pinnace break her rudder , so that we be force to tow she at the stern of the minion , which we be able to do , and yet keep company with the rest of our ship . about eleven of the clock this day we have sight of the grand canary . 234 the 11 day when we come to the hand we perceive that it be the he of tenerif , 8c then in deed we have sight of the grand canary , which lie 12 league to the eastwards of tenerif : and because the road of tenerif be foul ground , and nothing be there to be get for the help of our pinnace , have the wind large , we agree to go with the grand canary . the 12 day we come into the road of the town of Canarie , which lie one league from the same town . and after we have shoot off diverse piece of ordinance to salute the town and the castle , the governor and captain of the hand send to we which be the captain , of the ship , require we to come a shore . and when we come to they they receive we very friendly , offer we their own jennet to ride to the town , and what other friendship they can show we : and we go to the town with two english merchant which lie there , and remain in their house that day . the second day follow we come aboard to deliver our merchandise , and to get our pinnace mend . the 14 day come into the road the spanish fleet which be bind to the emperor Indies , which be in number nineteen sail , whereof six be ship of four hundred and five hundred a piece , the rest be of two hundred , a hundred and fifty , and of a hundred . when they be come to a anchor they salute we with ordinance , and so we do they in like case . and afterward the admiral ( who be a knight ) send his pinnace to desire i to come to he ; and when i come to he he receive i friendly , and be desirous to hear somewhat of the state of England and Flanders . and after he have make i a banquet , i depart ; and i be go unto the boat , he cause one of his gentleman to desire Francisco the Portugal , which be my interpreter , to require i to furle my flag , declare that he be general of the emperor fleet . which thing ( be come aboard ) Francisco show i : and because i refuse to furle it , and keep it forth still , 235 A . D . ! 577 - two english merchant liter in the grand canary . the spanish west indian fleet of nineteen sail . certain of the soldier in the ship shoot diverse harquebus shoot about the ship , and over the flag : and at the same time there come certain gentleman aboard our ship to see she : to who i say , that if they will not cause those their man to leave shoot , i will shoot the best ordinance i have through their side . and when they perceive that i be offend , they depart , and cause their man of war and soldier to shoot no more , and afterward they come to i again , and tell i that they have punish their man . that do , i show they the ship , and make they such cheer as i can , which they receive very thankful : and the day follow they send for i to dine with they , and send i word that their general be very sorry that any [ ii two . 46 . ] man shall require i to furle my flag , and that it be without his consent : and therefore he request i not to think any ungentleness to be in he , promise that no man of he shall misdemean himself . the 17 day we set sail in the road of grand canary , and proceed on our voyage . the 20 in the morning we have sight of the coast of Barbary , and run along the shore we have sight Rio del Oro . of Rio del oro , which lie almost under the