a description of the fortunate hand , otherwise call the hand of Canaria , with their strange fruit and commodity : compose by Thomas Nicols english man , who remain there the space of seven year together . ine intent be particular to speak of the Canaria hand , which be seven in number , wherein i dwell the space of seven year and more , because i find such variety in sundry writer , and especial great untruth , in a book call the new find world antarctike , set out by a french man call Andrew Thevet , the which his book he dedicate to the Cardinali of Sens , keeper of the great seal of France . it appear by the say book that he have read the work . of sundry philosopher , astronomer , and cosmographers , who opinion he gather together . but 125 touch his own travel , which he affirm , i refer to the judgement of the expert in our day , and therefore for my own part 1 write of these Canaria hand , as time have teach i in many year . the hand of Canaria . the hand of Canaria be almost equal in length and breadth , contain 12 league in length , touch they which as principali and the residue , the Spaniard hold opinion , that they discover the same in their navigation towards America , but the Portugal say , that their nation first find the say hand in their navigation towards Aethiopia and the east Indies . english man but truth it be that the Spaniard first conquer these at the first conquest of the hand , with diverse english gentleman in their company , canary . who posterity this present day enjoy they . some write that this hand be name Canaria by mean of the number of dog which there be find : as for example , Andrew Thevet say , that one Juba carry two dog from thence : but that opinion can i never learn by any of the natural people of the country , although i have talk with many in my time , and with many of their child . for truth it be , that there be dog , but such as be in all the northwest land , and some part of the west India , which serve the people in stead of sheep for victuali . but of some of the conqueror of those hand i have hear say that the reason why they be call the Canaria Islands be , because there grow general in they all foursquare cane in great multitude together , which be touch will cast out a liquor as [ ii two . 4 . ] white as milk , which liquor be rank poison , and at the first entry into these hand some of the discoverer be therewith poison : for many year after that conquest the inhabitant begin to plant both wine and sugar , so that Canaria be not so call by sugar cane . the people which first inhabit this land be call canary by the conqueror , they be clothe in goat skin make like unto a loose cassock , they dwell in 126 cave in the rock , in great amity and brotherly love . they speak all one language : their chief feed be geld dog , goat , and goat milk , their bread be make of barley meal and goat milk , call gofia , which they use at this day , and thereof i have eat diverse time , for it be account exceed wholesome . touch the originali of these people some hold opinion , that the roman which dwell in Africa exile they thither , aswell man as woman , their tongue be cut out of their head , for blasphemy against the roman god . but howsoever it be , their language be speciali , and not mix with roman speech or arabian . this hand be now the principall of all the rest , not in fertility , but by reason it be the seat of justice and government of all the residue . this hand have a speciali governor for the hand only , yet notwithstanding there be three judge call Audi tour , who be superior judge , and all in one joint proceed as the lord Chanceller of any realm . to this city from all the other hand come all such by appeal , as have sustain any wrong , and these good judge do remedy the same . the city be call Civitas palmarum , it have a beautiful cathedral church , with all dignity thereunto pertain . for the public weal of the hand there be sundry aiderman of great authority , who have a council house by themselves . the city be not only beautiful , but the citizen curious and gallant in apparel . and after any rain or foul weather a man may go clean in velvet slipper , because the ground be sandy , the air very temperate , without extreme heat or cold . they reap wheat in February , and again in may , which be excellent good , and make bread as white as snow . this hand have in it other three town , the one call telde , the second Galder , and the three Guia . it have also twelve sugar house call ingenios , in which they make great quantity of good sugar . 127 Civitas palmarum , the plant the manner of the growth of sugar be in this sort , a and growth of good ground give forth fruit nine time in 18 year : sugar cane .. g first be pianta > which be lay along in a furrow , so that the water of a sluice may come over every root be cover with earth : this root bring forth sundry cane , and so consequent all the rest . it grow two year before the yield of profit , and not six month , as Andrew Thevet the french man write . the make then be they cut even with the ground , and the top of sugar . and ieave call coholia cut off , and the cane bind into bundle like faggot , and so be carry to the sugar house call ingenio , where they be grind in a mill , and the juice thereof convey by a conduct to a great vessel make for the purpose , where it be boil till it wax thick , and then be it put into a furnace of earthen pot of the mould of a sugar loaf , and then be it carry to another house , call a purge house where it be place to purge the blackness with a certain clay that be lay thereon . of the remainder in the cauldron be make a second sort call Escumas , and of the purge liquor that drop from the white sugar be make a three sort , and the remainder be call Panela or Netas , the refuse of all the purge be call Remiel or malass : and thereof be make another sort call refinado . when this first fruit be in this sort gather , call Planta , than the cane - field where it grow be burn over with sugar straw to the stump of the first cane , and be husband , water and trim , at the end of other two year it yield the second fruit call Zoea . the three fruit be call tertia Zoea , the four Quarta Zoea , and so orderly the rest , till age cause the old cane to be plant again . wine . this hand have singular good wine , especial in the town of telde , and sundry sort of good fruit , as batatas , melon , pear , apple , orange , lemon , pomgranate , fig , peach of diverse sort , and many other fruit : but especial the Plantano which grow 128 the material original position here be too large for reproduction