, nor yet like a honest boy , but glad to find favour at the cook hand . then depart they , leave one of their ship behind - they , which they sink for lack of man to carry she . after this , within 6 or 7 day sail , die also Pinteado for very pensiveness the death of and think that strike he to the heart . a man worthy pinteacio - to serve any prince , and most vile use . and of sevenscore man come home to Plymouth scarce forty , and of they many die . and that no man shall suspect these word which i have say in commendation of Pinteado , to be speak upon favour otherwise then truth , 1 have think good to add hereunto the copy of the letter which the king of Portugal and the infant his brother write unto he to reconcile he , at such 151 time as upon the king his master displeasure ( and not for any other crime or offence , as may appear by the say letter ) he be only for poverty enforce to come Pinteado first into England , where he first persuade our merchant to ^ ™ adldwir - attempt they say voyage to Guinea . but as the king age of Guinea . of Portugal too late repent he that he have so punish Pinteado , upon malicious information of such as envy the man good fortune : even so may it hereby appear that in some case even lion themselves may either be hinder by the contempt , or aid by the help of the poor mouse , accord unto the fable of Aesop . the copy of Anthony anes Pinteado his letter patent , whereby the king of Portugal make he knight of his house , after all his trouble and imprisonment , which , by wrong information make to the king , he have sustain of long time , be at the last deliver , his cause know and manifest to the king by a grey friar the king confessor . i the king do give you to understand lord Francis Desseaso , one of my counsel and overseer of my house , that in consideration of the good service which Anthony anes Pinteado , the son of John anes , dwell in the town call the port , have do unto i , my will and pleasure be , to make he knight of my Seven hun - house , allow to he in pension seven hundred reis dfen sWinl monthly » and every day one alcayre of barley , as long as Alca ^ u he keep a horse , and to be pay accord to the halfea bushel , ordinance of my house . provide always that he shall receive but one marriage gift . and this also in such condition , that the time which be accept in our ordinance , forbid such man to marry for get such child as may succeed they in this allowance , which be 6 year after the make of this patent , shall first expire before he do marry . 1 therefore command you to cause this to be enter in the book call the J52 matricula of our household , under the title of knight . and when it be so enter , let the clarke of the matricula , [ ii two . 14 . ] for the certainty thereof , write on the backside of this Alvala , or patent , the number of the leaf wherein this our grant be enter . which do , let he return this writing unto the say Anthony anes Pinteado for his warrant . i Diego Henriques have write this in Almarin the two and twenty day of September , in the year of our lord 1551 . and this benevolence the king give unto Anthony anes Pinteado , the five and twenty day of July this present year . Rey . the secretary declaration write under the king grant . your majesty have vouchsafe , in respect and consideration of the good service of Anthony anes Pinteado , dwell in the port , and son of John anes , to make he knight of your house , with ordinary allowance , of seven hundred reis pension by the month , and one alcaire of barley by the day , as Jong as he keep a horse : and to be pay accord to the ordinance of your house , with condition that he shall have but one marriage gift : and that not within the space of six year after the make of these letter patent . the secretary note . enter in the book of the matricula . fol . 683 . Francisco de Siquera . the copy of the letter of don Lewes the infant , and brother to the king of Portugal , send into England to Anthony anes Pinteado . ANthony anes Pinteado , i the infant brother to the king , have i hearty commend unto you . Peter Gonsalves be go to seek you , desire to bring you home again into your country . and for that purpose he have with he a safe conduct for you , grant by the 153 king , that thereby you may free and without all fear come home . and although the weather be foul and stormy , yet fade not to come : for in the time that his majesty have give you , you may do many thing to your contentation and gratify the king , whereof i will be right glad : and to bring the same to pass , i will do all that lie in i for your profit . but forasmuch as Peter Gonsalves will make further declaration hereof unto you , i say no more at this present . write in Lisbon , the eight day of December . anno 1552 . the infant don Lewes . a li these foresay write i see under seal , in the house of my friend Nicholas Liese , with who Pinteado leave they , at his unfortunate depart to Guinea . but , notwithstanding all these friendly letter and fair promise , Pinteado dare not attempt to go home , neither to keep company with the Portugal his country man , without the - presence of other : forasmuch as he have secret admonition that they intend to slay he , if time and place may have serve their wicked intent .