another : and within one half hour after the fog break up , and we be within 4 . league of the shore upon the coast of Barbary , and we sound and have 14 . fathom water . the bark also come room with we and there anchor by reason of the contrary wind . when we fall with the land , we can not judge just what part of the land it be , because the most part of that coast be low land , and no part to be judge of it T79 but the forepart of the shore , which be white like chalk or sand , and very deep unto the hard shore : there immediate we begin to fish , and find great store of a kind of fish which the Portugal common fish for upon that coast , which they call pergoss , the Frenchman call they saders , and our man salt - water bream . before the clear up of the fog , the ship which we follow shape we such a course that we can see she no more , by reason of our shoot off to find the hind again . this part of the coast of Barbary , by our pilot reckon , be about 16 . league to the eastwards of the river deal Oro . the 13 . day in the afternoon we spy a sail come towards we , which we judge to be the sail that we see the day before , and as soon as we spy he , we cause the hind to weigh her anchor and to go towards he , and man out our skiffe in like case to lay he aboard , or to discern what he be , and we our self within half a hour after weigh also : but after the sail have espy we , he keep about , and turn back again , and short after there fall such another fog , that we can not see he : which fog continue all that night , so that we be constrain to leave the chase . this afternoon the wind come about , and we go our course Southwest and by west , to go clear off the coast , we run that night sixteen league . the fourteen day in the morning be very foggy : but about twelve a clock we espy a Carvell of 60 . ton which be fish , and we send our skiff to he with five man , and all without any weapon save their oar . the Carvell for haste let slip her anchor , and set sail ; and they see that , fear that they shall not fetch she , will tarry for no weapon , and in the end overtake the Carvell , and make she to strike sail , and bring she away , although they have fourteen or fifteen man aboard , and every man his weapon , but they have not the heart to resist our man . 180 after they be come to we , they let fall their anchor , for we have cast anchor because the wind be not good : i cause then the skiff to come for i , and i go aboard of they to see that no harm shall be do to they , nor to take any thing but that which they may spare we for our money . so we take of they 3 . tapnets of fig , two small pot of oil , two pipe of water , four hogshead of saltfish which they have take upon the coast , and certain fresh fish which they do not esteem , because there be such store upon that coast , that in a hour and sometime less , a man may take as much fish as will serve great store ° f twenty man a day . for these thing , and for some wine which we drink aboard or they , and three or Barbary , four great can which they send aboard of our ship , i pay they twenty and seven pistolet , which be twice as much as they willing will have take : and so let they go to their anchor and cable which they have let slip , and get it again by our help . after this we set sail , but the wind cause we to anchor again about twelve league off the river del oro , as the Portugal tell we . there be five caravel more in this place , but when they see we , they make all away for fear of we . the 15 . day we rid still because of the wind . the 16 . day we set sail and run our course 40 . league . this day , by the reckon of our pilot , we be right under the Tropike of Cancer . the 17 . day TheTropike we run 2c . league within sight for the most part of ° fGancerin the coast of Barbary . the 18 . day we run thirty league , and at twelve of the clock by the reckon of our pilot we be thwart of cape blank . cape blank . the 22 . day our pilot reckon we to be thwart [ H . two . 25 . i cape Verde . cape er ^ - the 12 . day of December we have sight of land of the coast of Guinea , which as soon as we see we hail into the land Northeast , and about 12 . of the clock at night 181 we be near the shore within less than 2 . league : and then we keep about and sound , and find 18 . fathom water . afterwards we see a light towards the shore , which we think to have be a ship , and thereby judge it to be the river de Sestos , which light as soon as we espy , we come to a anchor and arm our top , and make all thing ready to fight , because we doubt that it may be some Portugal or french man : this night we remain at a anchor , but in the morning we see no man , only we espy 4 . rock about 2 . English mile from we , one