and northnorthwest , and sometime north and by west and north , until we come into 31 degree , where we reckon our self a hundred and fourscore league Southwest and by south of the island de los flores , and there we meet with the wind at southsoutheast , and set our course Northeast . in 23 degree we have the wind at the south and Southwest , and then we set our course Northnortheast , and so we run to 40 degree , and then we set our course Northeast , the wind be at the southwest , and have the isle de flores east of we , and 17 league off . in the 41 degree we meet with the wind at Northeast , and so we run northwestward , than we meet with the wind westnorthwest , and at the west within 6 league , run towards the northwest , and then we cast about , and lie Northeast , until we come in 42 degree , where we set our course Eastnortheast , judge the he of Corvo south and by west of we , and six and thirty league distant from we . a remembrance , that the 21 day of may we commune with John Ralph , and he think it best to go Northeast , and judge himself 25 league eastward to the isle de flores , and in 39 degree and a half . note , that on the four day of September , under nine degree , we lose the sight of the north star . note also , that in 45 degree , the compass be vary 8 degree to the west . item , in 40 degree the compass do vary 15 degree in the whole . item , in 30 degree and a half , the compass be vary 5 degree to the west . be it also in memory that two or three day before we come to cape de 3 punta , the pinnace go alongst the shore , think to sell some of our ware , and so j 1 & 2 * 555 - we come to anchor three or four league west and by south of the cape the 3 punta , where we leave the Trini tie . then our pinnace come aboard with all our man , the pinnace also take in more ware . they tell i moreover that they will go to a place where the primrose be , and have receive much gold at the first the primrose . voyage to these party , and tell i furthermore that it be a good place : but i fear a brigantine that be then upon the coast , do weigh and follow they , and leave the Trinity about four league off from we , and there we ride against that town four day : so that Martine by his own desire , and assent of some of the commissioner that be in the pinnace , go a shore to the town , and there John Berin go to traffic from we , be three mile off traffic at a other town . the town be call Samma or Samva , for Samma and to ™ ™ of Sammaterra , be the name of the two first town , where samma - we do traffic for gold , to the north - east of cape the 3 gold . puntas . hitherto continue the course of the voyage , as it be describe by the say pilot now therefore i will speak somewhat of the country and people , and of such thing as be bring from thence , r they bring from thence at the last voyage four golifonre hundred pound weight and odd of gold , of two and twenty carrat and one grain in fineness : also six and * ' thirty butt of grain , and about two hundred and fifty grain . elephant tooth of all quantity . of these i see and elephant measure some of nine span in length , as they be crooked . some of they be as big as a man thigh above the knee , and weigh about fourscore and ten pound weight a piece . they say that some one have be see of a hundred and five and twenty pound weight . other there be which they call the tooth of calf , of one or two or three year , whereof some be a foot and a half , some two foot , and some 3 or moor , accord to you age of the beast . Theise great tooth or 163 tusk grow in the upper jaw downward , and not in the nether jaw upward , wherein the painter and arras worker be deceive . at this last voyage be bring the head of from Guinea the head of a elephant , of such huge a elephant . bigness , that only the bone or cranew thereof , beside the nether jaw and great tusk , weigh about two hundred weight , and be as much as i can well lift from the ground : insomuch that consider also herewith the weight of two such great tooth , the nether jaw with the less tooth , the tongue , the great hang ear , the big and long snout or troonke , with all the flesh , brain , and skin , with all other part belong to the whole head , in my judgement it can weigh little less than five hundred weight . this head diverse have see in and ir Andrew the house of the worthy merchant sir Andrew Judde , jf ^ dde . where also i see it , and behold it , not only with my plation of bodily eye , but much more with the eye of my mind god work , and spirit , consider by the work , the cunning and wisdom of the workemaister : without which consideration , the sight of such strange and wonderful thing may rather seem curiosity , then profitable contemplation . the descrip - the elephant ( which some call a Oliphant ) be the non andpn - big of all four footed beast , his foreleg be long ‘ than his hinder , he have ankle in the low part of his hinder leg , and five toe on his foot undivided , his snout or trunk be so long