in this reissue . a pdf can be download from the web address give on page iv c . 1550 . near brook side , it be a tree that have no timber in it , but grow direct upward with the body , have marvelous thick leaf , and every leaf at the top of two yard long and almost half a yard broad . the tree never yield fruit but once , and then be cut down ; in who place spring another , and so still continue . the fruit grow on a branch , and every tree yield two or three of those branch , which bear some more and some less , as some forty and some thirty , the fruit be like a Cucumber , and when it be ripe it be black , and in eat more delicate than any conserve . this hand be sufficient provide of ox , cow , camel , goat , sheep , capon , hen , duck , and pigeon , and great partridge . wood be the thing that most want : and because i have particular to [ ii two . 5 . ] entreat of the other six hand , i leave further enlarge of Canaria , which stand in 27 degree distant from the equator . the he of tenerif . the hand of tenerif stand in 27 degree and a half from the equator , and be distant from Canaria 12 league northward . this hand contain 17 league in length , and the land lie high in form of a ridge of sow land in some part of England , and in the midst of the say place stand a round hill call Pico Deteithe , situate in this sort . the top of this pike contain of heighth direct upward 15 league and more , which be 45 English mile , out of the which often time proceed fire and brimstone , and it may be about half a mile in compass : the say top be in form or likeness of a caldron . but within two mile of the top be nothing but ash and pumish stone : yet beneath that two mile be the cold region cover all the year with snow , and somewhat lower be mighty huge tree grow , call Vinatico , which be exceed heavy , and will not rot in any water , although they lie a thousand vi 129 1 year therein . also there be a wood call Barbusano , of like virtue , with many savin tree and pine tree . and beneath these sort of tree be wood of bay tree of 10 and 12 mile long , which be a pleasant thing to travel through , among the which be great number of small bird , which sing exceed sweet , but especial one sort that be very title , and of colour in all respect like a swallow , save that he have a little black spot on his breast as broad as a penny . he sing more sweet than all the rest , but if he be take and imprison in a cage , he live but a small while . this hand bring forth all sort of fruit , as Canaria do : and also all the other hand in general bring forth shrub or bush , out of the which issue a juice as white as milk , which after a while that it have come out lime . wax thick , and be exceed good birdlime , the bush be call Taybayba . this hand also bring forth another tree call dragon , which grow on high among rock , and by incision at the foot of the tree issue out a liquor like blood , which be a common drug among apothecary . of the wood of this tree be make target great esteem , because if any sword or dagger hit thereon , they stick so fast that it be hard pluck they out . this be the most fruitful hand of all the rest for corn , and in that respect be a mother or nurse to all the other in time of need . there grow also a Orchel good certain moss upon the high rock call Orchel , for die . which be buy for dyer to die withal . there be 12 sugar house call ingenios , which make great quantity of sugar . there be also one league of ground which stand between two town , the one call Larotava , and the other Rialeio , and it be think that the like plot of ground be not in all the world . the reason be , that this one league of ground produce sweet water out of the cliff or rocky mountain , corn of all sort , fruit of all sort , and excellent good silk , flax , wax , and honey , and very good wine in abundance , with great 130 a description of the canary a . d . c . 1550 . store of sugar and firewood . out of this hand be lade great quantity of wine for the west India , and other country . the best grow on a hill side call the Ramble . there be in that hand a fair city , stand three league from the sea , near unto a lake call Laguna , wherein be two fair parish church , there dwell the governor who rule all that hand with justice . there be also aiderman for the public weal , who buy their office of the king : the most of the whole inhabitant of this city be gentleman , merchant , and husband man . there be other four town call Santa Cruz , Santa Cruz . Larotava , Rialeio , and Garachico . in this hand before the conquest dwell seven king , who with all their people dwell in cave , and be clothe in goat skin , as the Canaria people be , and use such like order of diet as they have . their order of burial be , that when any die , he be carry naked to a great cave , where he be prop up against the wall stand on his foot . but if he be of any authority among they , then have he a staff in his hand , and a vessel of milk stand by he . i have see cave of 300 of these corpse together , the flesh be dry up , the body remain as light as parchment . Theise people be call guanche , natural they speak another language clean contrary to the canarians , and so consequent every hand speak a several language . note ( gentle reader ) that the hand of Canaria , than he of tenerif , and the he of Palma appertain to the king of Spain , unto who they pay fifty thousand ducat yearly for custom and other profit . all these hand joint be one bishopric , which pay to the bishop twelve thousand ducat yearly . and thus i conclude of they he of tenerif , which stand in 27 degree and a half , as i have before declare . [ Gomera 131 the hand of Gomera stand westward from tenerif , in distance six league : this be but a small hand contain eight league in length . it be a [ ii two . 6 . ] earldom , and the lord thereof be call the earl of Gomera . but in case of any controversy the vassal may appeal to the king superior judge which reside in Canaria . this hand have one proper town call Gomera , which have a excellent good port or harbour for ship , where often time the indian fleet take refresh for their voyage . there be also sufficient grain and fruit for the maintenance of themselves . there be one ingenio or Sugar - house , with great plenty of wine and other sort of fruit , as Canaria and tenerif have . this hand