, and in such form , that it be to he in the stead of a hand : for he neither eat nor drink but by bring his trunk to his mouth , therewith he help up his master or keeper , therewith he overthrow tree . beside his two great tusk , he have on every side of his mouth four tooth , wherewith he eat and grind his meat : either of these tooth be almost a span in length , as they grow along in the jaw , and be about two inch in height , and almost as much in thickness . the tusk of the male be great than of the female : his tongue be very little , and so far in his mouth , that it can be see : of all beast they be most gentle and tractable , for by many sundry way 164 they be teach , and do understand : insomuch that they learn to do due honour to a king , and be of quick sense and sharpness of wit . when the male have once season the female , he never after touch she . the male elephant live two hundred year , or at the least one hundred and twenty : the female almost as long , but the flower of their age be but threescore year , as some write . they can suffer winter or cold : they love river , and will often go into they up to the snout , wherewith they blow and snuff , and play in the water : but swim they can , for the weight of their body . Pliny and Soline write , that they use none adultery . if they happen to meet with a man in wilderness be out of the way , gentle they will go before he , and bring he into the plain way . join in battle , they have no small respect unto they that be wound : for they bring they that be hurt or weary into the middle of the army to be defend : they be make tame by drink the juise of barley . they have debate continual war against dragon , which desire their between fa blood , because it be very cold : and therefore the dragon fa ^ agin lie await as the elephant pass by , wind his tail ( be of exceed length ) about the hinder leg of the elephant , and so stay he , thrust his head into his trunk and exhaust his breath , or else bite he in the ear , whereunto he can reach with his trunk , and when the elephant wax faint , he fall down on [ H . two . 19 ] the serpent , be now full of blood , and with the poise of his body break he : so that his own blood with the blood of the elephant run out of he mingle together , which be cold , be congeal into that substance which the apothecary call sanguis draconis , sanguis dram - ( that be ) dragon blood , otherwise call Cinnabaris , conis - although there be a other kind of Cinnabaris , come - Cinnabaris . mon call cinnabar or vermilion , which the painter use in certain colour . they be also of three kind , as of the marsh , the three kind plain , and the mountain , no less differ in con - ° f ^ bant $ . 165 dition . Philostratus write , that as much as the elephant of Libya in bigness pass the horse of Nysea , so much do the elephant of India exceed they of Libya : for the elephant of India , some have be see of the height of nine cubit : the other do so great fear these , that they dare not abide the sight of they . of the indian elephant only the male have tusk , but of they of Ethiopia and Libya both kind be tusked : they be of diverse height , as of twelve , thirteen , and fourteen dodrant , every dodrant be a measure of nine inch . some write that a elephant be big than three wild ox or buff . they of India be black , or of the colour of a mouse , but they of Ethiope or Guinea be brown : the hide or skin of they all be very hard , and without hair or bristle : their ear be two dodrant broad , and their eye very little . our man see one drink at a river in Guinea , as they sail into the land . of other property and condition of the elephant , as of their marvelous docility , of their fight and use in the war , of their generation and chastity , when they be first see in the theater and triumph of the roman , how they be take and tame , and when they cast their tusk , with the use of the same in medicine , who so desire to know , let he read Pliny , in the eight book of his natural history . he also write in his twelve book , that in old time they make many goodly work of ivory or elephant tooth : as table , tressel , post of house , rail , lattess for window , image of their god , and diverse other thing of ivory , both colour and uncolour , and intermix with sundry kind of precious wood , as at this day be make certain chair , lute , and virginal . they have such plenty thereof in old time , that ( as far as i remember ) Josephus write , that one of the gate of Jerusalem be call porta Eburnea , ( that be ) the ivory gate . the whiteness thereof be so much esteem , that it be think to represent the natural fairness of man skin : insomuch that such as 166 1555 - went about to set forth ( or rather corrupt ) natural beauty with colour and paint , be reprove by this proverb , Ebur atramento candefacere , that be , to make ivory white with ink . the poet also describe the fair neck of beautiful virgin , call they Eburnea colla , that be , ivory neck .