yield no other commodity but only orchell ; it stand in 27 degree distant from the equator towards the pole arcticke . the he of Palma . the he of Palma stand twelve league distant from the lie of Gomera northwestward . this hand be fruitful of wine and sugar : it have a proper city call the city of Palma , where be great contraction for wine , which be lade for the west India and other place . this city have one fair church , and a govern our , and aiderman to maintain and execute justice . it have also another pretty town , call S . Andrew . it have also four ingenios which make excellent sugar , two of the which be call zauze , and the other two , Tassacort . this hand yield but little breadcorn ; but rather be thereof provide from tenerif and other place . their best wine grow in a soil call the Brenia , where yearly be gather twelve thousand butt of wine 132 like unto malmsy . this hand stand round , and contain in circuit near five and twenty league . it have plenty of all sort of fruit , as Canaria and tenerif have , it stand in twenty seven degree and a half . the hand of iron , call Hierro . this hand stand ten league distant from the hand of Palma westward : it be but a little hand , which contain six league in circuit , and have but small extension . it appertain to the earl of Gomera . the chief commodity of this hand be goat flesh and orchell . there be no wine in all that hand , but only one vineyard that a english man of Taunton in the west country plant among rock , his name be John hill this hand have no kind of fresh water , but only in the middle of the hand grow a great tree with leaf like a olive tree , which have a great cistern at the foot of the say tree . this tree continual be cover with cloud , and by mean thereof the leaf of the say tree continual drop water , very sweet , into the say cistern , which come to the say tree from the cloud by attraction . and this water suffice the hand for all necessity , aswell for the cattle , as for the inhabitant . it stand in 27 degree . the only vineyard in Hierro plant by Joh . hill of Taunton . the hand of Lanzarota . the hand of Lanzarota stand eighteen league distant from grand Canaria southeastward . the only commodity of this hand be goat flesh and orchell . it be a earldom , and do appertain to don Augustine de Herrera , with title of earl of Fortaventura and Lanzarota . but the vassal of these earldom may in any cause of wrong appeal to the king judge , which reside in Canaria , as i have say before : because although the king have reserve to himself but only the three fruitful hand , call Canaria , tenerif , and Palma , yet he also reserve the rod of justice to him - 133 self , because otherwise the vassal may be evil entreat of their lord . from this hand do weekly resort to Canaria , Tenerifj and Palma , boat lade with dry goat flesh , call Tussmetta , which serve in stead of bacon , and be very good meat . this hand stand in 26 degree , and be in length twelve league . the lie of Forteventura . the he of Forteventura stand fifty league from the promontory of Cabo de Guer , in the firm land of Africa , and four and twenty league distant from Canaria eastward . this hand do appertain to the lord of Lanzarota . it be reasonable fruitful of wheat and barley , and also of kine , goat , and orchel : this he be fifteen league long and ten league broad . on the north side it have a little hand about one league distant from the main hand , between both of the which it be navigable for any ship , and be call Graciosa . both Forteventura and Lanzarota have very little wine of the growth of those hand . it stand in 27 degree . [ ii two . 7 . ] thus much have i write of these seven hand by experience , because i be a dweller there , as i have say before , the space of seven year in the affair of master Thomas lock , master Anthony Hickman , and master Edward Castelin , who in those day be worthy merchant , and of great credit in the city of London . a description of the hand of Madera . the hand of Madera stand in 32 degree distant from the equinoctinall line , and seventie league from the he of tenerif northeastward and southwest from Hercules pillar . this hand be first discover by one Macham a Englishman , and be after conquer and inhabit by the Portugal nation . it be first call the hand of Madera , by reason of the great wilderness of sundry sort of tree that there do 134 grow , and yet do , as cedar , cypress , Vinatico , bar - buzano , pine tree , and diverse other , and therefore the say hand continue still with the same name . howbeit they hold opinion , that between the say hand and the he of Palma be a hand not yet discover , which be the true hand Madera call saint Brandon . this hand yield a great sum of money to the king of Portugal yearly : it have one fair city call Fouchall , which have one fair port or harbour for ship , and a strong bulwark , and a fair cathedral church , with a bishop and other dignity thereunto appertain . there be also justice and government accord to the Portugal use . but cause of appellation be remit to the city of Lisbon in Portugal to the king superior judge there . this hand have another town call Machico , which have likewise a good road for ship , which town and road be so call after the name of Macham the Englishman , who first discover the same . there be also sixteen sugar house call ingenios , which make excellent good sugar . there be beside the goodly timber before declare , great store of diverse sort of fruit , as pear , apple , plum , wild date , peach of diverse sort , melon , batatas , orange , lemon , pomgranate , citron , fig , and all manner of garden herb . there be many dragon tree , such as grow in the canary hand , but chief this land produce great quantity of singular good wine which be lade for many place . on the north side of this land three league distant from the main hand stand another little hand call porto santo : the people thereof live by husbandry , for the hand of Madera yield but little corn , but rather be thereof provide out of France and from the hand of tenerif . on the east side of the he of Madera six league distant stand another little hand call the desert , which produce only Orchell , and nourish a great number of goat , for the provision of the main hand , which may be thirty league in circuit : and the land be of great 135 A . D . c . 1550 . heighth where the foresay tree grow . it be wonder to see the conveyance of the water to the ingenios by mine through the mountain . in the mid way between tenerif and the hand of Madera stand a little solitary hand call the savage , which may be about one league in compass , which have neither tree nor fruit , but be only food for goat .