. the 24 day the master of the tiger come aboard we , and tell we that his man be so weak , and the ship so leak , that he be not able to keep she above the water , and therefore request we to go back again to the hand , that we may discharge she , and give she up : but we entreat he to take pain with she a while , and we put a french carpenter into she , to see if he can find the leak . this day we take a view of all in our man , both those that be hole , and the sick also , and we find that in all the three ship , be not above the coast thirty sound man . of guinie . the 25 we have sight of they he of saint Nicholas , and the day follow , of the other isle , saint Lucia , saint Vincent , 249 and S . Anthony ; which four isle lie the one from the other northwest and by west , southeast and by east . the 26 we come again with the hand of S . Anthony , and can not double the cape . this day Philip Jones , the master of the Christopher , come aboard we , who have be aboard the tiger , and tell we that they be not able to keep the tiger , because she be leak , and the master very weak , and say further , he have agree with the master and the company , that if the next day we can double the hand , we shall run to the leeward of it , and there discharge she : but if we can not double it , than to put in betwixt the hand of S . Vincent and S . Anthony , to see if we can discharge she . the three day of September i go aboard the tiger , with the master and merchant with i , to view the ship and man : and we find the ship very leak , and only six labour man in she , whereof one be the master gunner : so that we see that they be not able to keep the ship , agree to take in the man , and of the good what we can save , and then to put the ship away . the five day we go to discharge the tiger . the eight day , have take out the artillery , good , the tiger victual , and gold of the tiger , we give she up 25 give up . degree by north the line . the 27 we have sight of two of the isle of the azore , s . mary , and saint Michael . the four of October we find our self to be 41 degree and a half from the line . the sixth day the Christopher come to we , and will we to put with the cape , for they also be so weak , that they be not able to keep the sea , and we be weak also , agree to go for Vigo , be a place which many english man frequent . the 10 day the Christopher go room with the cape , but we have a merry wind for England , and fear the danger of the enemy , which ordinary lie 25 ° about the cape : beside , not know the state of ’ our country and Spain , and although it be peace , yet there be little hope of friendship at their hand , consider the voyage that we have make , and we also be so weak , that by force and violence we can come by nothing , and doubt also that the king of Portugal know of our be there , may work some way with the council of Spain to trouble we : and further , consider that if we do put in with any harbour , we shall not be able to come out again , till we send for more man into England , which will be a great charge , and loss of time , and mean of many danger . all these thing ponder , we agree to shoot off two piece of ordinance , to warn the Christopher , and then we go our course for England : she hear our piece follow we , and we carry a light for she , but the next day in the morning it be thick , and we can not see she in the afternoon neither , so that we suspect that either she be go with Spain , or else that she shall put forth more sail than we in the night , and be shoot a head of we , so that than we put forth our topsail , and go our course with England . at the time when the Christopher leave we , we be within 120 league of England , and 45 league northwest and by west from cape Finister : and at the same time in our ship we have not above six mariner and six merchant in health , which be but a weak company for such a ship to seek a foreign harbour . the 16 day , about six of the clock at night , we meet with a great storm at the westsouthwest , and west , and our man be weak , and not able to extreme handle our sail , we lose the same night our main « eaineueof sail , foresail , and spreetsaile , and be force to lie a mrman ' hull , until the eighteenth day , and then we make ready a old course of a foresail , and put it to the yard , and therewith find our self far shoot into the [ ii two . 52 . ] sleeve , we bear with our own coast ; but that fore - ’ S1 sail continue not above two hour , before it be blow from the yard with a fret , and then we be force to lie a hull again , until the nineteenth day of October in the morning , and then we put a old bonnet to our foreyard , which , by the good blessing and providence of God , bring we to the he of wight , where we arrive the 20 of October in the afternoon .