usher by two man at the least , that cry unto the people to give place , howbeit they need it not , for that reverence the common people have unto they . they have also in their company certain sergeant with their mace either silver or altogether silver , some two , some four , other six , other eight , convenient for each one his degree . the more principal and chief Louteas have go orderly before these sergeant , many other with staff , and a great many catchpoule with rod of indish cane drag on the ground , so that the street be pave , you may hear afar off as well the noise of the rod , as the voice of the crier . Theise fellow serve also to apprehend other , and the better to be know they wear livery red girdle , and in their cap peacock feather . behind these Louteas come such as do bear certain table hang at staff end , wherein be write in silver letter , the name , degree , and office of that Loutea , who they follow . in like manner they have bear after they hat agreeable unto their title : if the Loutea be mean , then have he bring after he but one hat , and that may not be yealowe : but if he 3 ° 3 A . D . c . 1565 . we , that be the Italians andSpaniards . be of the better sort , then may he have two , three , or four : the principali and chief Louteas may have all their hat yellow , the which among they be account great honour . the Loutea for war , although he be but mean , may notwithstanding have yellow hat . the tutans and chians , when they go abroad , have beside all this before they lead three or four horse with their guard in armour . furthermore the Louteas , yea and all the people of China , be wont to eat their meat sit on stool at high table as we do , and that very clean , although they use neither table - clothe nor napkin . whatsoever be set down upon the board be first carve before that it be bring in : they feed with two stick , refrain from touch their meat with their hand , even as we do with fork : for the which respect they less do need any table clothes . ne be the nation only civil at meat , but also in conversation , and in courtesy they seem to exceed all other . likewise in their deal after their manner they be so ready , that they far pass all other gentile and Moores : the great state be so vain , that they line their clothes with the best silk that may be find . the Louteas be a idle generation , without all manner of exercise and pastime , except it be eat and drink . sometime they walk abroad in the field to make the soldier shoot at prick with their bow , but their eat pass : they will stand eat even when the other do draw to shoot . the prick be a great blanket spread on certain long pole , he that strike it , have of the best man there stand a piece of crimson taffeta , the which be knit about his head : in this sort the winner be honour , and the Louteas with their belly full return home again . the inhabitant of China be very great idolater , all general do worship the heaven : and , as we be wont to say , God know it : so say they at every word , Tien Tautee , that be to say , the heaven do know it . some do worship the son , and some the 304 moon , as they think good , for none be bind more [ ii two . 72 . ] to one then to another . in their temple , the which they do call Meani , they have a great altar in the same place as we have , true it be that one may go round about it . there set they up the image of a certain Loutea of that country , who they have in great reverence for certain notable thing he do . at the right hand stand the devil much more ugly paint than we do use to set he out , whereunto great homage be do by such as come into the temple to ask counsel , or to draw lot : this opinion they have of he , that he be malicious and able to do evil . if you ask they what they do think of the soul depart , they will answer that they be immortali , and that as soon as any one depart out of this life , he become a devil if he have live well in this world , if otherwise , that the same devil change he into a bufle , ox , or dog . wherefore to this devil they do much honour , to he doe they sacrifice , pray he that he will make they like unto himself , and not like other beast . they have moreover another sort of temple , wherein both upon the altar and also on the wall do stand many idol well proportion , but bare head : these bear name Omithofon , account of they spirit , but such as in heaven do neither good nor evil , think to be such man and woman as have chaste live in this world in abstinence from fish and flesh , feed only with rise and salate . of that devil they make some account : for these spirit they care title or nothing at all . again they hold opinion that if a man do well in this life , the heaven will give he many temporali blessing , but if he do evil , then shall he have infirmity , disease , trouble , and penury , and all this without any knowledge of God . final , this people know no other thing then to live and die , yet because they be reasonable creature , all seem good unto they we speak in our language , though it be not very sufficient : our manner of pray especial please they , and true after the dutchfashion . Pythagorean like . vi 3 ° 5 they be well enough dispose to receive the knowledge of the truth . our lord grant for his mercy all thing so to be dispose , that it may sometime be bring to pass , that so great a nation as this be perish not for want