be marry receive their place in honour : this place neither increase nor diminish in any respect as long as the king live , the king appoint they their wife and family , allow they by the 324 month all thing necessary abundant , as he do to his governor of shire and city , howbeit , not one of these have as long as he live any charge or government at all . they give themselves to eat and drink , and be for the most part burly man of body , insomuch that espy any one of they who we have not see before , we may know he to be the king his cousin . they be nevertheless very pleasant , courteous , and fair condition : neither do we find , all the time we be in that city , so much honour and good entertainment any where as at their hand . they bid we to their house to eat and drink , and when they find we not , or we be not willing to go with they , they bid our servant and slave , cause they to sit down with the first . notwithstanding the good lodging these gentleman have , so commodious that they want nothing , yet be they in this bondage , that during life they never go abroad . the cause , as i do understand , wherefore the king so use his cousin be , that none of they at any time may rebel against he : and thus he shut they up in three or four other city . most of they can play on the lute , and to make that kind of pastime peculiar unto they only , all other in the city where they do live be forbid that instrument , the courtesan and blind folk only except , who be musician and can play . this king furthermore , for the great security of his realm and the avoid of tumult , let not one in all his country to be call lord , except he be of his blood . many great estate and governor there be , that during their office be lodge lordlike , and do bear the port of mighty prince : but they be so many time displace and other place a new , that they have not the time to become corrupt . true it be that during their office they be well provide for , as afterward also lodge at the king charge , and in pension as long as they live , pay they monthly in the city where they dwell by certain officer appoint for that purpose . the 325 goa be a city of the portu - gals in the east Indies . king then be a lord only , not one beside he as you have see , except it be such as be of his blood . a nephew likewise of the king , the king sister son , lie continual within the wall of the city in a strong palace build castlewise , even as his other cousin do , remain always within door , serve by eunuch , never deal with any matter . on their festival day , new moon , and full moon the magistrate make great banquet , and so do such as be of the king his blood . the king nephew have to name Vanfuli , his palace be wall about , the wall be not high , but foursquare , and in circuit nothing inferior to the wall of goa , the outside be paint red , in every square a gate , and over each gate a tower make of timber excellent well wrought : before the principali gate of the four that open into the high street not Loutea , be he never so great , may pass on horseback , or carry in his seat . amid this quadrangle stand the palace where that nobleman lie , doubtless worth the sight , although we come not in to see it . by report the roof of the tower and house be glaze green , and the great part of the quadrangle set with savage tree , as Okes , chestnut , cypress , pineapple , cedar , and other such like that we do want , after the manner of a wood , wherein be keep stag , ox , and other beast , for that lord his recreation never go abroad as i have say . one pre - eminence this city have above the rest where we have be , and that of right , as we do think , that beside the multitude of market place wherein all thing be to be sell through every street continual be cry all thing [ ii two . 80 . ] necessary , as flesh of all sort , freshfish , herb , oil , vinegar , meal , rise : in summa , all thing so plentiful , that many house need no servant , every thing be bring to their door . Most part of the merchant remain in the suburb , for that the city be shut up every night , as i have say . the merchant therefore , the better to attend their business , do choose rather to make their abode without in the suburb then within 326 the city . i have see in this river a pretty kind of fish , not to be omit in my opinion , and therefore i will set it down . the king have in many river Odmcus good store of barge full of sea - crowe that breed , be the feed and do die therein , in certain cage , allow ' monthly a certain provision of rise . Theise barge the king bestow upon his great magistrate , give to some two , to some three of they as he think good , to fish therewithal ! after this manner . at the hour appoint to fish , all the barge be bring together in a circle , where the river be shallow , and the crow tie together under the wing be let leap down into the water , some under , some above , worth the look upon : each one as he have fill his bag , go to his own barge and empti it , which do , he return to fish again . thus have take good store of fish , they set the crow at liberty , and do suffer they to fish for their own pleasure . there be in that city where i be , twenty barge at the least of these aforesaid crow . i go almost every day to see they , yet can i never be thorough satisfy to see so strange a kind of fish .