other thing . the negro answer again , they have civet , musk , gold and grain , which please our captain and merchant very well . then the negro desire to have a sight of some of our ware , to the which our merchant be content , and forthwith send aboard one of the boat for part of their merchandise , and in the mean time while the boat go to the ship , our five man be walk on the shore with the negro , and our general and merchant stay in the other boat by the sea side , have the 3 negro with they . our boat then come again and bring iron and other merchandise , with bread , wine , and cheese which they give unto they . than two of the negro ( which be the pledge ) make themselves sick , desire to go a shore , promise to send other two for they . 271 [ ii two . 59 ] civet , musk , gold and grain , the commodity of case Verde . captain haiward perceive that our man have let the negro come a shore , ask what they mean , and doubt the worst begin to draw towards the boat , and two or three of the negro follow he . and when he come to the boat they begin to stay he , and he make sign unto they that he will fetch they more drink and bread : notwithstanding , when he be enter into the boat , one of they catch he by the breech and will have stay he , but he spring from he and leap into the boat , and as soon as he be in , one of the negro a shore begin to blow a pipe , and present the other negro that be in our boat sit on the boat side , and master worm sword by he , sudden draw the sword out of the scabbard , and cast himself into the sea and swim a shore , and present the negro lay hand on our man that be on shore , and take three of they with great violence , and tear all their apparel from their back and leave they nothing to cover they , and many of they shoot so thick at our man in our boat , that they can scarce set hand to any oar to row from the shore , yet ( by the help of God ) they get from they with their boat , although many of they be hurt with their poison arrow : and the poison be uncurable , if the arrow enter within the skin and draw blood , and except the poison be present suck out , or the place where any man be hurt be forthwith cut away , he die within four day , and within three hour after they be hurt or prick , wheresoever it be , although but at the little toe , yet it strike up to the heart , and take away the stomach , and cause the party marvellous to vomit , be able to brook neither meat nor drink . the Negros have use our man with such cruelty , who name be Nicholas Day , William Bats and John Tomson , lead they away to a town which be within a mile of the water side , or thereabouts . the 20 day we send to land a boat or skiff wherein 272 be eight person , and one of they be the foresay John Tomson and our interpreter which be a Frenchman , ( for there be one of the negro which speak good french : ) and they carry with they two harquebuss , two target and a manteli . the cause of send they be to learn what ransom they demand for bat and day who they detain . and when they come to the shore and tell the negro what they desire , they go and fetch they from among the tree , and bring they loose among forty or fifty of they . And be come within a stone cast of the sea side , William Bats break from they , and run as fast as he can into the sea towards the boat , and he be not so soon in the water but he fall down , either be out of breath or his foot fail he in the sand be soft : so that the negro come and fall on he and take he and hale he , that we think they have tear he in piece : for they tear again all the apparel from his back , so that some of they carry our man again to the town , and the rest shoot at we with their poison arrow , and hurt one of our man call androwe in the small of the leg , who be come aboard , ( for all that our surgeon can do ) we think he will have die . our general ( notwithstanding all this villainy ) send again to they , and offer they any thing that they desire for the ransom of our man , but they will not deliver they : give we this answer : that there be in the foresay road , three week before we come , a english ship which have take three of their people , and until we do bring or send they again , we shall not have our man although we will give our three ship with their furniture . the 2i day a french ship of the burden of 80 ton ( or thereabouts , ) come to the place where we be , be bind to traffic at the cape : we tell they of the detain of our two man by the negro : and see that these Frenchmen be very well welcome vi 273 sister A . D . 1567 . a french interpreter far cape Verde . the danger of poison arrow . the answer of the negro . [ ii two . 60 . ] to the negro , we wish they to see whether they can procure they again of the negro , and bring they along with they , and our general promise the Frenchman 100 livre . to obtain they . so we commit the matter to the Frenchman and depart . of our man that be hurt by the negro arrow , four die , and one to save his life have his arm cut off . androwes that