king of Spain seek to disgrace the queen if her ambassador . place on both side of my horse , and so bring i to the king palace . the king sit in his chair with his counsel about he , as well the moor as the elchy , and accord to his order give unto i before , i there declare my message in spanish , and make delivery of the queen majesty letter , and all that i speak at that present in spanish , he cause one of his elchy to declare the same to the moor present , in the larbe tongue . which do , he answer i again in spanish , yield to the queen majesty great thanks , and offer himself and his country to be at her grace commandment , and then command certain of his counselor to conduct i to my lodging , not be far from the court . the house be fair after the fashion of that country , be daily well furnish with all kind of victuali at the king charge . the same night he send for i to the court , and i have conference with he about the space of two hour , where i thorough declare the charge commit unto i from her majesty , find he conformable , willing to pleasure and not to urge her majesty with any demand , more than convenient she may willing consent unto , he know that out of his country the realm of England may be better serve with lack , than he in comparison from we . further he give i to understand , that the king of Spain have send unto he for a licence , that a ambassador of his might come into his country , and have make great mean that if the queen majesty of England send any unto he , that he will not give he any credit or entertainment , albeit ( say he ) i know what the king of Spain be , and what the queen of England and her realm be : for i neither like of he nor of his religion , be so govern by the inquisition that he can do nothing of himself . 288 therefore when he come upon the licence which i have grant , he shall well see how little account i will make of he and Spain , and how great i will extol you for the queen majesty of England . he shall not come to my presence as you have do , [ ii two . 66 . ] and shall daily : for i mind to accept of you as my companion and one of my house , whereas he shall attend twenty day after he have do his message . after the end of this speech i deliver sir Thomas Gresham letter , when as he take i by the hand , and lead i down a long court to a palace where there run a fair fountain of water , and there sit himself in a chair , he command i to sit down in another , and there call for such simple musician as he have . then i present he with a great base lute , which king ° f he most thankful accept , and then he be desirous hoary scent to hear or the musician , and 1 tell he that there be fa musician . great care have to provide they , and that i do not doubt but upon my return they shall come with the first ship . he be willing to give they good entertainment with provision of victuali , and to let they live accord to their law and conscience wherein he urge none to the contrary . i find he to be one that live great in the fear of God , be well exercise in the scripture , as well in the old testament as also in the new , and he bear a great affection to our nation then to other because of our religion , which forbid worship of idol , and the moor call he the christian king . the same night be the first of June , i continue with he till twelve of the clock , and he seem to have so good like of i , that he take from his girdle a rich gift short dagger be set with 200 stone , ruby and turkey , bestow and do bestow it upon i , and so i be conduct ambassador . return to my lodging for that time . the next day because he know it to be Sunday and our sabbath day he do let i rest . but on the Monday in the afternoon he send for i , and i have conference with he again , and music . vi 289 t likewise on the Tuesday by three of the clock he send for i into his garden , find he lay upon a silk bed complain of a sore leg : yet after long conference he walk into another orchard , where as have a fair banqueting - house and a great water , and a new galley in it , he go aboard the galley and take i with he , and pass the space of two or three hour , show the great experience he have in galley , wherein ( as he say ) he have exercise himself eighteen year in his youth . after supper he show i his horse and other commodity that he have about his house , and since that night i have not see he , for that he have keep in with his sore leg , but he have send to i daily . June , the 13 of June at six of the clock at night i have again audience of the king , and i continue with he till midnight , have debate as well for the queen commission as for the well deal with her merchant for their traffic here in these part , say , he will do much more for the queen majesty and the realm , take offer of offering that all english ship with her subject may with t £ nkllsft00ur good security enter into his port and dominion as merchant . we ^ in trade of merchandise , as for victuali and water , as also in time of war with any her enemy to bring in prize and to make sale as occasion shall serve , or else