you come in to either of they , there stand so great and mighty a bridge , that the like thereof i have never see in Portugal nor else where . i hear one of my fellow say , that he tell in one bridge 40 . arch . the occasion wherefore these bridge be make so great be , for that the country be towards the sea very plain and low , and overflow ever as the sea water increase . the breadth of the bridge , although it be well proportion unto the length thereof , yet be they equal build , no high in the middle then at either end , in such wise that you may see direct from the one end to the other : the side be wonderful well engrave after the manner of rome - worke . but that we do most marveile at be therewithal ! the hugeness of the stone , the like whereof , as we come in to the city , we do . see many set up in place dis - habited by the way , to no small charge of they , howbeit to little purpose , whereas no body see they but such as do come by . the arch be not make after our fashion , vaunt with sundry stone set together : but pave , as it be , whole stone reach from one pillar to a other , in such wise that they lie both for the arch head , and gallant serve also for the high way . i have be astonish to behold the hugeness of the aforesaid stone : some of they be twelve . pase long and upward , the least 11 . good pase long , and a half . the way echwhere be gallant pave with foursquare stone , except it be where for want of stone they use to lay brick : in this voyage we travail over certain hill , where the way be pitch , and in many place no worse pave then in the plain ground . This cause we to think , that in all the world there be no better workman for building , than the inhabitant of China . the country be so well inhabit , that no one foot of ground be leave until : small store of cattle have we see this day , we see only certain ox wherewithal ! the countryman do blow their ground . 298 one ox draw the plough alone , not only in this shire , but in other place also , wherein be great store of cattle . Theise countryman by art do that in tillage , which we be constrain to do by force . here be sell the voiding of close stool , although there want not the dung of beast : and the excrement of man be good merchandise throughout all china . the dungfermer seek in every street by exchange to buy this dirty ware for herb and wood . the custom be very good for keep the city clean . there be great abundance of hen , goose , duck , swine , and goat , wether have they none : the hen be sell by weight , and so be all other thing . two pound of hen flesh , goose , or duck , be worth two foy of their money , that be , d . ob . sterling . swine flesh be sell at a penny the pound . beef bear the same price , for the scarcity thereof , howbeit northward from Fuquieo and far off from the seacoast , there be beef more plenty and sell better cheap ; we have have in all the city we pass through , great abundance of all these victual , beef only except . and if this country be like unto India , the inhabitant whereof eat neither hen , beef , nor pork , but keep that only for the Portugal and moor , they [ ii two . 70 . ] will be sell here for nothing . but it so fall out , that the chineans be the great eater in all the world , they do feed upon all thing , special on pork , which , the fat it be , be unto they the less loathsome . the high price of these thing aforesaid 1 have set down , better cheap shall you sometime buy they for the great plenty thereof in this country . frog be sell at the same price that be make of hen , and be good meat among they , as also dog , cat , rat , snake , and all other unclean meat . the city be very gallant , special near unto the gate , the which be marvellous great , and cover with iron . the gatehouse be build on high with tower , and the low part thereof be make of brick and stone , proportional with the wall , from the wall upward the 299 build be of timber , and many story in it one above the other . the strength of their town be in the mighty wall and ditch , artillery have they none . the street in Cinceo , and in all the rest of the city we have see be very fair , so large and so straight , that it be wonderful to behold . their house be build with timber , the foundation only except , the which be lay with stone : in each side of the street be pentise or continual ! porch for the merchant to walk under : the breadth of the street be nevertheless such , that in they 15 . man may ride commodious side by side . as they ride they must needs pass under many high arch of triumph that cross over the street make of timber , and carve diverse , cover with tile of fine clay : under these arch the mercer do utter their small ware , and such as listen to stand there be defend from rain and the heat of the sun . the great gentleman have these arch at their door : although some of they be not so mighty build as the rest . i shall have occasion to speak of a certain order of gentleman that be call Louteas . 1 will first therefore Loutea . expound what this word signify . Loutea be as much to say in our language as sir , and when any of they call his name , he answer sir : and as we do say , that the king have make some gentleman , so say they , that there be make a Loutea . and for that among they the degree be diverse both in name and office , i will tell