be last of all hurt , lay lame not able to help himself : only two recover of their hurt . so we place other man in the room of those that we lose , and set sail . the 26 day between cape Verde and bona vista we see many fly fish of the bigness of herring , whereof two fly into our boat , which we tow at our stern . the 28 day we fall with a hand call bona vista , which be from cape Verde 86 league . the northside of the say hand be full of white sandy hill and dale , and somewhat high land . the say day we come to a anchor within the westermost point , about a league within the point , and find in our sound fair sand in ten fathom water , but you may go near till you be in five or six fathom , for the ground be fair . as soon as we be at a anchor , our general send his pinnace a land , and find five or six small house , but the people be flee into the mountain : and the next day he send a shore again , and meet with two Portugal , who willing go aboard with his man , and at their come he welcome they , although they be but poor and simple , and give each of they a pair of shoe , and so set they a shore again . the 30 day we weigh and sail into a bay within a small hand about a league from we , and take plenty of diverse sort of fish . the foresay hand lie in sixteen degree . and if you mean to anchor in the say bay , you may borrow in four or five fathom of the southermost point of the say hand , which you may see 274 ... I567 ' when you ride in the road . but beware of the middle of the bay , for there lie a ledge of rock , which at a admonttl , > n - lowe water break , yet there be three fathom water over they . the last day of Januarie our general with certain of his man go a shore in the bay to the house , where he find 12 Portugal . in all the island there be not banish above 30 person , which be banish man for a time , portu & a ^- some for more year , some for less , and among they there be one simple man which be their captain . they live upon goat flesh , cock , hen , and fresh water : other victual they have none , save fish , which they esteem not , neither have they any boat to take they . they report that this island be give by the king of Portugal to one of his gentleman , who have let it forth to rend for one hundred ducat a year , which rent be rear only in goat skin . for by their great steer of speech there have be send forth of the say island spates - into Portugal 40000 skin in one year . we be to these man marvelous welcome , and to their power very well entertain , and they give we the flesh of as many hee - goate as we will have , and take much pain for we in take they , and bring they from the mountain upon their ass . they have there great store of the oil of tortoise , which tortoise be a fish which swim in the sea , with a shell on his back as broad as a target . it rain not in this island but in three month of the year , from the midst of July to the midst of October , and it be here always very hot . kine have be bring hither , but by reason of the heat and drought they have die . the 3 of February we depart from this island , and the same day fall with another island call the island of the lie of Maiyo , which be 14 league from the other island : there hoi in the midst of the way between these two hand a danger which be always to be see . we anchor in the northwest side of the say he in a fair bay of eight fathom water and fair sand , but 275 here we stay not , but the four day weigh and sail to another hand call S . Jago , which lie off the say hand of Maiyo east and by south , and about five league one from the other . be come within the westermost point , we see a fair road , and a small town by the water side , and also a fort or platform by it : there we purpose to come to anchor , and our merchant to make some sale . but before we come within their shot , they let fly at we two piece , whereupon we go roomer and sail along the shore two or three league from the road , where we find a small bay and two or three small house , where we come to a anchor in 14 fathom fair ground . within a hour after we have anchor we may see diverse horseman and footman on the land right against we ride and run to and fro . the next day be the five of February , a great company of their horseman and footman appear on the shore side , unto who our general send to understand whether they will quiet traffic with they : and they send he word again , desire that they may speak with he , promise that if he come to traffic as a merchant he shall be welcome , and also that he shall have any thing that he or the merchant will with reason demand . when this answer be bring unto our general he be very glad thereof and the whole company , and present ( with as much speed as he can ) he cause his boat to be make ready : but doubt the villainy of the Portugal , he arm his boat put a double base in the head of his pinnace , and two single base in the head of the skiff , and so send to the may - floure and the George , and will they in like sort to man