to depart again with they at their pleasure . likewise for all english ship that shall pass along his coast of Barbary , and through the strait into the Levant sea , that he will grant safe conduct that the say ship and merchant with their good may pass into the Levant sea , and so to the turk dominion , and the king of Algiers , as his own , and that he will write to the Turk and to the king of Argier his letter for the well use of our ship and good . also that hereafter no Englishmen that by any mean may be take captive , shall be sell within any of his dominion : whereupon i declare that the queen majesty accept of these his offer be please to confirm the intercourse and trade of our merchant within 290 .... i577 - this his country , as also to pleasure he with such commodity as he shall have need of , to furnish the a necessity and want of his country in trade of mar - prwiso - chandize , so as he require nothing contrary to her honour and law , and the breach of league with the christian prince her neighbour . the same night i present the king with the case of comb , and desire his majesty to have special regard that the ship may be lade back again , for that i find little store of saltpete in readiness in John bamptons hand . he answer i that i shall have all the assistance therein that he can , but that in sus he think to have some store in his house there , as also that the mountainer have make much in a readiness : i request that he will send down , which he promise to do . the eighteen day i be with he again and so continue there till night , and he show i his house with pastime in duck with water - spaniel , and bait bull with his english dog . at this time i move he again for the send down to sus , which he grant to do , and the 24 . day [ ii two . 67 . ] there depart alcay mammy , with Lionel Edgerton , and Rowland Guy to sus , and carry with they for our account and his company the king letter to his brother mulai Hammet , and alcay Shauan , and the viceroy . the 23 . day the king send i out of Morocco to his garden call shersbonare , with his guard , and alcay mamoute , and the 24 . at night i come to the court to see a morris dance , and a play of his elchy . he promise i audience the next day be Tuesday , but he put it off till Thursday : and the Thursday at night i be send for to the king after supper , and then he send alcay Rodwan , and alcay gowry to confer with i , but after a little talk i desire to be bring to the king for my dispatch . And be bring to he , i prefer two bill of John Bamptons which he have make for provision of saltpetre : also two bill for the 291 the emperor of Manco his privilege to the english . quiet traffic of our english merchant , and bill for sugar to be make by the Jew , as well for the debt past , as hereafter , and for . good order in the ingenios . also i move he again for the saltpetre , and other dispatch , which he refer to be agree upon by the two alcayde . but the Friday be the 20 . the alcayde can not intend it , and upon Saturday alcay Rodwan fall sick , so on Sunday we make mean to the king , and that afternoon i be send for to confer upon the bargain with the alcayde and other , but do not agree . upon Tuesday i write a letter to the king for my dispatch , and the same afternoon i be call again to the court , and refer all thing to the king , accept his offer of saltpetre . that night again the king have i into his galley , and the spaniel do hunt the duck . the Thursday i be appoint to way the 300 . kintal gross of saltpetre , and that afternoon the tabybe come unto i to my lodging , show i that the king be offend with John Bampton for diverse cause . the Sunday night late be the 7 . of July , i get the king to forgive all to John Bampton , and the king promise i to speak again with i upon Monday . upon Tuesday i write to he again for my dispatch , and then he send fray Lewes to i , and say that he have order to write . upon Wednesday i write again , and he send i word that upon Thursday i shall come and be dispatch , so that i shall depart upon Friday without fail , be the twelve of July . so the Friday after accord to the king order and appointment i go to the court , and whereas motion and petition be make for the confirmation of the demand which i have prefer , they be all grant , and likewise the privilege which be on the behalf of our english merchant request , be with great favour and readiness yield unto . and whereas the Jew there resident be to our man in certain round 292 sum indebt , the emperor pleasure and commandment be , that they shall without further excuse or delay , pay and discharge the same . and thus at length i be dismiss with great honour and speciali countenance , such as have not ordinary be show to other ambassador of the Christians . and touch the private affair entreat upon betwixt her majesty and the emperor , i have letter from he to satisfy her highness therein . so to conclude , have receive the like honourable conduct from his court , as i have for my part at my first land , i embark my self with my foresay company , and arrive not long after in England , i repair to her majesty court , and end my ambassage to her highness good like , with relation of my service perform .