you only of some principal , be not able to advertise you of all . the manner how gentleman be create Louteas , and do come to that honour and title , be by the give of a broad girdle , not like to the rest , and a cap , at the commandment of the king . the name Loutea be more general and common unto more , than the equality of honour thereby signify agree withal . such Louteas as doe serve their prince in weighty matter for justice , be create after trial make of their learning : but the other which serve in small affair , as captain , constable , 3 00 c 1565 . sergeant by land and sea , receiver and such like , whereof there be in every city , as also in this , very many , be make for favour : the chief Louteas be serve kneel . the whole province of China be divide , as i have say , into 13 . shire , in every shire at the least be one governor call there Tutan , in some shire there be two . chief in office next unto they be certain other name chians , that be , high commissioner as you will say , or chian , or , visiter , with full authority in such wise , that they do chaen - call unto a account the tutans themselves , but their authority last not in any shire long than one year . nevertheless in every shire be at the least 7 . city , yea , in some of they 15 . or 16 . beside other borough and town not well to be nurrtbr , these visiter where they come be so honour and fear , as though they be some great prince . at the year end , their circuit do , they come unto that ci tie which be chief of other in the shire , to do justice there : final busy themselves in the search out of such as be to receive the order of Louteas , whereof more shall | be say in another place . over and beside these officer , in the chief city of each one of these aforesaid 13 . province , be resident one Ponchiassi , captain thereof , and treasurer of all the king ponchiassi . revenue . this magistrate make his abode in one of the four great house that be in all these head city . and although the principali part of his function be to be captain , to be treasurer of the revenue in that province , and to send these revenue at appoint time to the court : yet have he notwithstanding by his office also to meddle with matter appertain unto justice . in the second great house dwell a other magistrate call Anchiassi , a great officer also , for he have ancmaui , or deal in all matter of justice . who although he be hexasisomewhat inferior in dignity unto the ponchiassi , yet for his great deal and generail charge of justice , whosoever see the affair of the one house and the other may judge this anchiassi to be the great . 3 ° i tuzi . Tuzi , a other officer so call , lie in the third house , a magistrate of importance , special in thing belong unto warfare , for thereof have he charge . there be resident in the 4 . house a four officer , taissu . bearing name taissu . in this house be the principali prison of all the city . each one of these magistrate aforesaid may both lay evil doer in prison , and deliver they out again , except you fact be heinous and of importance : in such a case they can do nothing , except they do meet all together . and if the deed deserve [ ii two . 71 . i death , all they together can determine thereof , without recourse make unto the chian wheresoever he be , or to the Tutan : and eftsoon it fall out , that the case be refer unto high power . in all city , not only chief in each shire , but in the rest also , be mean find to make Louteas . many of they do study at the prince his charge , wherefore at the year end they resort unto the head city , whither the chians do come , as it have be erst say , as well to give these degree , as to sit in judgement over the prisoner . the chians go in circuit every year , but such as be to be choose to the great office meet not but from three year to three year , and that in certain large hall appoint for they to be examine in . many thing be ask they , whereunto if they do answer licentiate , accord , and be find sufficient to take their degree , the chian by and by grant it they : but the cap and girdle , whereby they be know to be Louteas , they wear not before that they be confirm by the doctor . king . their examination do , and trial make of they , such as have take their degree wont to be give they with all ceremony , use to banquet and feast many day together ( as the chineans fashion be to end all their pleasure with eat and drink ) and so remain choose to do the king service in matter of learning . the other examinate find insufficient to proceed be send back to their study again . who ignorance be 302 perceive to come of negligence and default , such a one be whip , and sometime send to prison , where lie that year when this kind of act be , we find many thus punish , and demand the cause thereof , they say it be for that they know not how to answer unto certain thing ask they . it be a world to see how these Louteas be serve and fear , in such wise , that in public assembly at one shriek they give , all the servitor belong unto justice tremble thereat . at their be in these place , when they listen to move , be it but even to the gate , these servitor do take they up , and carry they in seat of beat gold . after this sort be they bear when they go in the city , either for their own business abroad , or to see each other at home . for the dignity they have , and office they do bear , they be all accompany : the very mean of they all that go in these seat be