that one may dwell therein . the stair they use be so easy make , that one may go they up and down a horseback , as eftsoon they do : the street be pave , as already it have be say : there be a great number of merchant , every one have write in a great table at his door such thing as he have to sei . in like manner every artisan paint out his craft : the market place be large , great abundance of all thing there be to be sell . the city stand upon water , many stream run through it , the bank pitch , and so broad that they serve for street to the city use . over the stream be sundry bridge both of timber and stone , which be make level with the street , hinder not the passage of the barge too and fro , the channel be so deep . where the stream come in and go out of the city , be certain arch in the wall , Parai . there go in and out their Parai , that be a kind of barge they have , 8c that in the day time only : at night these arch be close up with gate , so do they shut up all the gate of the city . Theise stream and barge do ennoblish very much the city , and make it as it be to seem another Venice . the building be even , well make , high , not loft , except it be some wherein merchandise be lay . it be a world to see how great these city be , and the cause be , for that the house be build even , as i have say , and do take a great deal of room . one thing we see in this city that make we all to wonder , and be worthy to be note : namely , over a porch at the come in to one of the aforesaid 4 . house , which the king have in every shire for his governor , as i have 314 erst say , stand a tower build upon 40 . pillar , each one whereof be but one stone , each one 40 . handful or span long : in breadth or compass 12 , as many of we do measure they . beside this , their greatness be such in one piece , that it may seem impossible to work they : they be moreover corner , and in colour , length and breadth so like , that the one nothing differ from the other . this thing make we all to wonder very much . we be wont to call this country China , and the people chineans , but as long as we be prisoner , not hear among they at any time that name , i determine to learn how they be call : and ask sometime by they thereof , for that they understand we not when we call they chineans , i answer they , that all the inhabitant of India name they chineans , wherefore i pray they that they will tell i , for what occasion they be so call , whether peradventure any city of they bear that name . hereunto they always answer i , y ‘ they have no such name , nor ever have . then do i ask they what name the whole country bear , and what they will answer be ask of other nation what countryman they be ? it be tell i that of ancient time in this country have be many king , and though present it be all under one , each kingdom nevertheless enjoy that name it first have , these kingdom be the province i speak of before . in conclusion they say , that the whole country be call tamen , and the inhabi - tamen the tants Tamegines , so that this name China or chineans , prtyer ™ i be not hear of in y ‘ country . 1 think that the near - tna ' ness of another province thereabout call Cochinchina , and the inhabitant thereof cochiness , first discover before China be , lie not far from Malacca , do give occasion to each of the nation , of that name chineans , as also the whole country to be name China . but their proper name be that aforesaid . i have hear moreover that in the city of Nanquim [ ii two . 76 . ] remain a table of gold , and in it write a king name , as a memory of that residence the king be wont to 3T5 mart age of the king child . keep there . this table stand in a great palace , cover always , except it be on some of their festival ! day , at what time they be wont to let it be see , cover nevertheless as it be , all the nobility of the city go of duty to do it every day reverence . the like be do in the head city of all the other shire in the palace of the Ponchiassini , wherein these aforesaid table do stand with the king name write in they , although no reverence be do thereunto but in solemn feast . i have likewise understand that the city Pachin , where the king make his abode , be so great , that to go from one side to the other , beside the suburb , the which be great than the city it self , it require one whole day a horseback , go hackney pase . in the suburb be many wealthy merchant of all sort . they tell i furthermore that it be mote about , and in the mote great store of fish , whereof the king make great gain . it be also tell i that the king of China have no king to wage battle withal , beside the Tartar , with who he have conclude a peace more than 80 . year ago . nevertheless their friendship be not so great , that the one nation may marry with the other . And demand with who they marry , they say , that in old time the chinish king when they will marry their daughter , accustom to make a solemn feast , whereunto come all sort of man . the daughter that be to be marry , stand in a place where she may see they all , and look who she like best , he do she choose to husband , and if happy he be of a base condition , he become by and by a gentleman : but this custom have be leave long since . now a