hill be round and somewhat small at the top , it have not be know that ever any man can go up to the top thereof . and although 268 it stand in 28 degree which be as hot in January , as it be in England at midsummer , yet be the top of the say hill winter and summer seidome without snow . in this island about two league from the say Santa Cruz be a city call Anagona . the three day we depart about the western point of the island , about 12 or 14 league from Santa Cruz , into a bay which be right against the house of one Petro de souse , in which bay we come to a anchor the 5 day , where we hear that our admiral have be there at a anchor 7 day before we , and be go thence to a island call Gomera , whereupon we set sail present to seek he . the 6 day we come to a anchor against the town of Gomera , where we find our admiral , which be very joyful of our come , and we also of his sight . in the say road we find Edward cook in a tall ship , and a ship of the coppersmith of London , which the Portugal have treacherous surprise in the bay of Santa Cruz , upon the coast of Barbary , which ship we leave there all spoil . our general and merchant buy in the say town for our provision , 14 butt of wine , which cost 15 ducat a but , which be offer we at Santa Cruz in tenerif for 8 , 9 , and 10 ducat . the 9 day we depart from this road to another bay , about 3 league off , and there take in fresh water : and so the 10 day we set sail towards cape blank , which be on the coast of Guinea . they meet their admiral again . the 12 day we fall into a bay to the eastward of cape Pargos , which be 35 league from cape blank . but have no knowledge of that coast , we go with cape blank , and at the fall of the land we sound and have 16 fathom water two league from the shore . the land be very low and white sand . upon the fall of the a good caveat . say coast beware how you borrow in 12 or 10 fathom , for within 2 or 3 cast of the lead you may be on ground . 269 the foolish rashness of Wil . Bats persuade the company to land arm . the 17 day we set sail from cape blank , direct our course south and by east , and south among , and so fall into a bay to the eastward of cape Verde , about 16 league , and about six league from the shore . the say land seem unto we as if it have be a great number of ship under sail , be in deed nothing else but the land which be frill of hammok , some high some low , with high tree on they . we bear with the say land till we be within 3 league of the shore , and then we sound , and find 28 fathom water , black oase . this day we see much fish in sundry skull swim with their nose with the brim of the water . pass along this coast we may see two small round hill , seem to we about a league one from the other , which be the cape , and between they be great store of tree , and in all our day sail we see no land so high as the say two hill . the 19 day we come to a anchor at the cape , in a road fast by the westermost side of two hill in 10 fathom of water where you may ride in five or six fathom , for the ground be fair , and always you shall have the wind off the shore . and as soon as we be all at a anchor , our general come aboard we , and with he the master of the admiral , who name be William Bats , and with they the captain of the vice - admiral , who name be master Edward Fenner , and Robert curtise the master , and dine aboard of we be in the George , wherein be captain John Heiwood , and John smith of Hampton master , and there we conclude to go aland , which be half a mile from we : and by the counsel of William bat both captain and merchant and diverse of the company go without armour : for he say , that although the people be black and naked , yet they be civil : so that he will needs give the venture without the consent of the rest to go without weapon . thus they row to shore , where , we be in the ship may see a great company of negro naked , walk to and fro by the sea side where the 270 land place be , wait for the come of our man , who come too soon , and land to their loss as it fall out afterward . there go a shore the admiral skiff , and then may flower boat , and in they the number of 20 person or thereabouts , as m . George Fenner the general , his brother m . Edward Fenner , Thomas Valentine , John worm and Francis Leigh merchant , John Haward , William Bats , Nicholas day , John Tomson and other . at their come to the shore there be 100 negro or upward , with their bow and arrow : our captain and merchant talk with they , and accord to the use of the country , the one demand pledge of the other , and they be content to deliver 3 of their negro for 5 of our man . Oure 5 man name be these , John Haward , Wil . Bats , Nich . day , Joh . Tomson , and John curtise : these be deliver they , and we receive 3 negro into our admiral skiff . our man be a shore among the negro , begin to talk with they , declare what ware and merchandise we have , as woollen cloth , linen cloth , iron , cheese and