cause our gunner to make all our ordinance ready with crossebarre , chaineshotte and hailshot : so the ship and caravel come up , and as soon as they be right in our side , they shoot at we as much ordinance as they can , think to have lay we present aboard : whereupon we give they such a heat with both our side , that they be both glad to fall astern of we , and so pause the space of two or three hour be a very small gale of wind . then come up the other five and shoot all at we , and so fall all astern of we , and then go to counsel together . then our small bark name the George come to we , and we confer together a great space . and as the Portugal ship and caravel be come to we again , our bark mind to fall astern of we and so to come up again , fall quick upon the lee , and by reason of the little wind , it be so long before she can fill her sail again , that both the ship and caravel be come up to we , and she fall in among they make reasonable shift with they , but they get a head of she , so that she can not fetch we : then 5 of the caravel follow she , but we see she defend her self against they all . then come the great ship and the caravel to we , and fight with we all that day with their ordinance . the may - floure our other consort be very good by the wind , take the benefit thereof and halde all that day close by the wind , but can not come near we . so when night again be come , they give over their fight and follow we all the night . 282 in these many fight it can not otherwise be but needs some of our man must be slay , ( as they be indeed ) and diverse hurt , and our tackle much spoil : yet for all this we do our best endeavour to repair all thing , and to stand to it to the death with our assure trust in the mercy and help of God . this night the may - floure come up to we , and our captain tell they his harm and spoil , and wish they if they can spare half a dozen fresh man to hoist out their boat and send they to he , but they can not spare any , and so bear away again . which when our enemy see in the next morning that we be one from another , they come up to we again and give we a great fight with much hallow and hoop , make account either to board we or else to sink we : but although our company be but small , yet lest they shall see we any whit dismay , when they hallow we hallow also as fast as they , and wave to they to come and board we if they dare , but that they will not , see we still so courageous : and have give we that day four fight , at night they forsake we with shame , as they come to we at the first with pride . they have make in our ship some leak with their shot which we again stop with all speed , and that be do , we take some rest after our long labour and trouble . the next day in the morning the may - floure come to we , and bring we six man in her boat which do we much pleasure , and we send to they some of our hurt the 7 Portugal : depart with shame from one english ship . man . then we direct our course for our own country , and by the second day of June we be near to our June . own coast and sound be thwart the lyzard . the three day we have sight of a ship which be a Portugal , who bear with we , and at his come to we [ 11 . two . 64 . ] ( the weather be calm ) our captain cause he to hoist forth his boat to come aboard to speak with he , and at their come our captain and merchant 283 demand of they what ware they have , and whither they be bind , and they make answer that their lade be sugar and cotton . than our captain and merchant show they five negro that we have , and ask they whether they will buy they , which they be very desirous to do , and agree to give for they 40 chest of sugar , which chest be small have not above 26 loaf in a piece : so they with their boat do fetch five of the chest and deliver they and go for more , and when they have lade their boat and be come again , we may see bear with we at Portugal a great ship and a small , which our captain suppose tandin ^ au ' to man war or rover , and then will they their mame ) Portugal to carry their sugar to their ship again , defend by purpose to make our self ready for our defence . our man from but the Portugal earnest entreat our captain not wer - so to forsake they , and promise he ( if he will safeguard they ) to give he above the bargain ten chest of sugar : whereupon our captain be content , and the Portugal not be good of sail , we spare our topsail for she : so at last the foresay ship bear with we , and ( see that we do not fear they ) give we over . and the next morning come two other bear with we , and see we not about to fly a jot from they forsake we also . the 5 day of June we have sight of the start , and about noon we be thwart of the bay of lime , and so sound and have 35 fathom water . the sixth day we come in at the needle and so come to a anchor under the isle of wight at a place call meadhole , and from thence sail to Southampton where we make a end of this voyage .