prison , and afterward to be send abroad into certain city , where they remain perpetuali slave unto the king . to this city come by hap man and woman threescore and odd , who at this day be bring to five man and four woman , for it be now twenty year since this happen . their offspring pass the number of two hundred , and they in this city , as the rest in other city whither they be send , have their * Moscheas , whereunto they all resort every Friday to keep their holy day . but , as i think , that will no long endure , than while they do live that come from thence , for their posterity be so confuse , that they have nothing of a moor in they but abstinence from swine flesh , and yet many of they do eat thereof privy . they tell i that their native country have name camarian , a firm land , wherein be many king , and the indish country well know unto they . it may so be : for as soon as they do see our servant ( our servant be preuzarete ) they judge they to be Indians : many of their word sound upon the persian tongue , but none of we can understand they . i ask they whether they convert any of the chinish nation unto their sect : they answer i , that with much a do they convert the woman with who they do marry , yield i no other cause thereof , but the difficulty they find in they to be bring from eat swine flesh and drink of wine . i be persuaded therefore , that if this country be in league with we , forbid they neither of both , it will be a easy matter to draw they to our religion , from their superstition , whereat they themselves do laugh when they do their idolatry . i have learn moreover that the sea , whereby these 322 c . 1565 . Moores that come to China be wont to travail , be a it seem very great gulf , that fall into this country out from fme up Tartary and Persia , leave on the other side all the he ' c ^ splan1 country of China , and land of the Mogores , draw sea always towards the south : and of all likelihood it be at Catan . even so , because that these moor , the which we have rin ” owr - seene , be rather brown then white , whereby they show themselves to come from some warm country than China be near to Pachin , where the river be freeze in the winter for cold , and many of they so vehement , that cart may pass over they . we do see in this ci tie many Tartar , Mogores , all avoin . Brames , and laoyne , both man and woman . the Tartar be man very white , good horseman and archer , Tartars . confine with China on that side where Pachin stand , separate from thence by great mountain that be mount Usont . betwixt these kingdom . over they be certain way to pass , and for both side , castle continual keep with soldier : in time past the Tartar be wont always to have war with the chineans , but these fourscore year past they be quiet , until the second year of our imprisonment . the Mogores be in like Mogores . manner white , and heathen , we be advertise that of one side they border upon these Tartar , and confine with the persian Tartars on the other side , whereof we see in they some token , as their manner of clothes , and that kind of hat the Saracen do wear . the moor affirm , that where the king lie , there be many Tartar and Mogores , that bring into China certain blow of great value : all we think it to be vanil of Blewes of Cambaia wont to be sell at ormus . so that this be ™ the true situation of that country , not in the north - ‘ part , as many time i have hear say , confine with Germany . as for the brame we have see in this city brame . chenchi certain man and woman , among who there be one that come not long since , have as yet her hair tie up after the Pegues fashion : this woman , 323 and other more with who a black moor damsel in our company have conference , and do understand they well enough , have dwell in Pegu . this new come woman , [ ii two . 79 . ] imagine that we mean to make our abode in that city , bid we to be of good comfort , for that her country be not distant from thence above five day journey , and that out of her country there lay a high way for we home into our own . be ask the way , she answer that the first three day the way lie over certain great mountain and wilderness , afterward people be meet withal again . Thence two day journey more to the brame country . where -^ outhward fore [ do conclude , that chenchi be one of the confine telhfsea1 ^ kingdom , separate by certain huge mountain , ’ as it have be already say , that lie out towards the south . in the residue of these mountain stand avoin . the province of Sian , the laoyn country , Camboia , campaa , and Cochinchina . chenchi . this city chief of other sixteen be situate in a pleasant plain abound in all thing necessary , sea - fish only except , for it stand far from the sea : of fresh fish so much store , that the market place be never empty . the wall of this city be very strong and high : one day do i see the Louteas thereof go upon the wall to take the view thereof , bear in their seat which i speak of before , accompany with a troop of horseman that go two and two : it be tell i they may have go three and three . we have see moreover , that within this aforesaid city the king have more than a thousand of his kin lodge in great palace , in diverse part of the city : their gate be read , and the entry into their house , that they may be know , for that be the king colour . Theise gentleman , accord to their nearness in blood unto the king , as soon as they