the ambassage of m . Edmund Hogan , one of the swear esquire of her majesty person , from her highness to mulai Abdelmelech emperor of Morocco , and king of fe and sus : in the year 1577 , write by himself . Edmund Hogan be appoint ambassador from the queen majesty to the above name emperor and king mulai Abdelmelech , depart with my company and servant from London the two and twenty day of April 1577 , be embark in the good ship call the Gallion of London , and arrive in Azafi a port of Barbary the one and twenty day of May next follow . immediate i send leonell Edgerton a shore with my letter direct to John Williams and John Bampton , who dispatch a Trottero to Morocco to know the king pleasure for my repair to the court , which letter come to their hand on the Thursday night . they with all speed give the king understanding of it , who be glad thereof speed the next day certain captain with soldier and tent , with other provision to Azafi : so that upon Whitsunday at night the say captain with John Bampton , Robert wash - borne , and Robert lion , and the king officer come late to Azafi . in the mean time i remain a board , and cause some of the good to be discharge for lightning of the ship , and i write in my letter that i will not land , till i know the king pleasure . the 22 day be Saturday , the make - speed arrive in the road about two of the clock in the afternoon . the 27 day , be Whitsunday , come aboard the Gallion John Bampton , and other , give i to understand how much the king rejoice of my safe 285 m . Hogan his arrival at Azafi in Barbary . May . in Barbary they have no inn but they lodge in open field where they can find water . arrival , come from the queen majesty , and how that for my safe conduct to the court he have send four captain and a hundred soldier well appoint , with a horse furnish which he use himself to ride on with all other furniture accord : they wish i also to come on land in the best order i can , as well for my self as my man , which i do , have to the number of ten man , whereof three be trumpeter . the ship be four appoint themselves in the best order they can for the best show , and shoot off all their ordinance to the value of twenty mark in powder . at my come a shore , i find all the soldier well appoint on horseback , the captain and the governor of the town stand as near the water side as they can , with a jennet of the king , and receive i from the boat declare how glad his majesty be of my safe arrival , come from the queen majesty my mistress , and that he have send they to attend upon i , it be his pleasure that i shall tarry there on shore five or six day for my refresh . so be mount upon the jennet , they conduct i through the town into a fair field upon the seaside where be a tent provide for i , and all the ground spread with turquoise carpet , and the castle discharge a peal of ordinance , and all thing necessary be bring into my tent , where i both take my table and lodging , and have other convenient tent for my servant . the soldier environ the tent , and watch about we day and night as long as i lie there , although i seek my speedy dispatch . on the Wednesday towards night , i take my horse and travel ten mile to the first place of water that we can find , and there pitch our tent till the next morning , and so travel till ten of the clock , 286 and then pitch our tent till four , and so travel as long as day light will suffer about 26 mile that day . the next day be Friday i travel in like order but eight and twenty mile at the most , and by a river be about six mile within sight of the city of Morocco we pitch our tent . immediate after come all our english merchant , and the french on horseback to meet i , and before night there come a alcay from the king with fifty man , and diverse mule lade with victuali and banquet , for my supper , declare unto i how glad the king show himself to hear of the queen majesty , and that his pleasure be i shall be receive into his country as never any Christian the like : and desire to know what time the next day i will come into his city , because he will that all the Christians as also his nobility shall meet i , and will John Bampton to be with he early in the morning , which he do . about seven of the clock be accompany with the french and english merchant , and a great number of soldier , i pass towards the city , and by that time i have travel 2 mile , there meet i all the Christians of the Spaniard and Portugal to receive i , which i know be more by the king commandment then of any good will of themselves : for some of they although they speak i fair hang down their head like dog , and especial the Portugal , and i countenance they accord . so i pass on till i come within two english mile of the ci tie , and then John Bampton return , show i that the king be so glad of my come , that he can not devise to do too much , to show the good will that he do owe to the queen majesty , and her realm . he counsellor meet i without the gate , and at the entry of the gate , his footman and guard be 287 A . D . 1577 - the singular humanity of the king to our ambassador . the Spaniard and Portugal be command by the king in pain of death , to meet the english ambassador . the