of help . our manner of pray so well like they , that in prison importunate they beseech we to write for they somewhat as concern heaven , the which we do to their contentation with such reason as we know , howbeit not very cunning . as they do their idolatry they laugh at themselves . if at any time this country may be join in league with the kingdom of portugal , in such wise that free access be have to deal with the people there , they may all be soon convert . the great fault we do find in they be sodomy , a vice very common in the mean sort , and nothing strange among the best . this sin be it leave of they , in all other thing so well dispose they be , that a good interpreter in a short space may do there great good : if , as i say , the country be join in league with we . furthermore the Louteas , with all the people of China , be wont to solemnize the day of the new and full moon in visit one a other , and make great banquet : for to that end , as i erst say , do tend all their pastime , and spend their day in pleasure . they be wont also to solemnize each one his birth day , whereunto their kindred and friend do resort of custom , with present of jewel or money , receive again for their reward good cheer . they keep in like manner a general feast with great banquet that day their king be bear . but their most principali and great feast of all , and best cheer , be the first day of their new year , namely the first day of the new moon of February , so that their first month be march , and they reckon the time accord , respect be have unto the reign of their prince : as when any deed be write , they date it thus , make such a day of such a moon , and such 306 c 1565 . a year of the reign of such a king . and their ancient write bear date of the year of this or that king . now will i speak of the manner which the chineans do observe in do of justice , that it may be know how far these Gentiles do herein exceed many Christians , that be more bind than they to deal just and in truth . because the chinish king make his abode continual in the city Pachin , his kingdom so great , and the shire so many , as tofore it have be say : in it therefore the governor and ruler , much like unto our sheriff , be appoint so sudden and speedy discharge again , that they have no time to grow nought . Furthermore to keep the state in more security , the Louteas that govern one shire be choose out of some other shire distant far off , where they must leave their wife , child and good , carry nothing with they but themselves . true it be , that at their come thither they do find in a readiness all thing necessary , their house , furniture , servant , and all other thing in such perfection and plenty , that they want nothing . thus the king be well serve without all fear of treason . in the principali city of the shire be four chief Louteas , before who be bring all matter of the inferior town , throughout the whole realm . diverse other Louteas have the manage of justice , and receive of rent , bind to yield a account thereof unto the great officer . other do see that there be no evil rule keep in the city : each one as it behoove he . Generally [ ii two . 73 . ] all these do imprison malefactor , cause they to be whip and rack , hoist they up and down by the arm with a cord , a thing very usual there , and the italian account no shame . Theise Louteas do use great diligence in the apprehend of thief , so that it be it a wonder to see a thief escape away in any city , town or village . upon the sea near unto the shore many be take , and look even as they be take , so be they first whip , and afterward lay in prison , where short after they all die for hunger and cold . at that time 307 when we be in prison , there die of they above threescore and ten . if happy any one , have the mean to get food , do escape , he be set with the condemn person , and provide for as they be by the king , in such wise as hereafter it shall | be say . their whip be certain piece of cane , cleave in the middle , in such sort that they seem rather plain than sharp . he that be to be whip lie grovelong on the ground : upon his thigh the hangman lay on blow mighty with these cane , that the standard by tremble at their cruelty . ten stripe draw a great deal of blood , 20 . or 30 . spoil the flesh altogether , 50 . or 60 . will require long time to be heal , and if they come to the number of one hundred , then be they incurable . the Louteas observe moreover this : when any man be bring before they to be examine , they ask he open in the hear of as many as be present , be the offence never so great . thus do they also behave themselves with we : for this cause among they can there be no false witness , as daily among we it fall out . this good come thereof , that many be always about the judge to hear the evidence , and bear witness , the process can be falsify , as it happen sometime with we . the moor , Gentiles , and Jew have all their sundry oath , the moor do swear by their mossafo , the brachmans by their fili , the rest likewise by the thing they do worship . the chineans though they be wont to swear by heaven , by the moon , by the sun , and by all their idol , in judgement nevertheless they swear not at all . if for some offence a oath be use of any one , by and by with the least evidence he be torment , so be the witness he bring , if