they tell not the truth , or do in any point disagree , except they be man of worship and credit , who be believe without any further matter : the rest be make to confess the truth by force of torment and whip . beside this order observe of they in examination , they do fear 308 so much their king , and he where he make his abode keep they so low , that they dare not once stir . again , these Louteas as great as they be , notwithstanding the multitude of notary they have , not trust any other , do write all great process and matter of importance themselves . Moreover one virtue they have worthy of great praise , and that be , be man so well regard and account as though they be prince , yet they be patient above measure in give audience . we poor stranger bring before they may say what we will , as all to be lie and fallacy that they do write , ne do we stand before they with the usual ceremony of that country , yet do they bear with we so patient , that they cause we to wonder , know special how little any advocate or judge be wont in our country to bear with we . for wheresoever in any town of Christendom shall be accuse unknown man as we be , i know not what end the very innocent cause will have : but we in a heathen country , have our great enemy two of the chief man in a whole town , want a interpreter , ignorant of that country language , do in the end see our great adversary cast into prison for our sake , and deprive of their office and honour for not do justice , yea not to escape death : for , as the rumour go , they shall | be behead . somewhat be now to be say of the law that i have be able to know in this country , and first , no theft or murder be at any time pardon : adulterer be put in prison , and the fact once prove , be condemn to die , the woman husband must accuse they : this order be keep with man and woman find in that fault , but thief and murderer be imprison as i have say , where they short die for hunger and cold . if any one happy escape by bribe the jailer to give he meat , his process go further , and come to the court where he be condemn to die . sentence be give , the prisoner be bring in public with a terrible band of piihry man that lie he in iron hand and foot , with a board board . 309 at his neck one handful broad , in length reach down to his knee , cleave in two part , and with a hole one handful downward in the table fit for his neck , the which they enclose up therein , nail the board fast together ; one handful of the board stand up behind in the neck : the sentence and cause wherefore the felon be condemn to die , be write in that part of the table that stand before . this ceremony end , he be lay in a great prison in the company of some other condemn person , the which be find by the king as long as they do live . the board aforesaid so make torment the prisoner very much , keep they both from rest , and eke let they to eat commodious , their hand be manacle in iron under that board , so that in fine there be no remedy but death . in the chief city of every shire , as we have erst say , there be four principali house , in each of they a prison : but in one of they , where the taissu make his abode , there be a great and a more principal prison then in any of the rest : and although in every city there be many , nevertheless in three of they remain only such as be condemn to die . their death be much prolong , for that ordinary there be no execution do but once a year , though many die for hunger and cold , as we have see in this prison . execution be do in this manner . the chian , to wit , the high commissioner or lord chief justice , at the year end go to the head city , where he hear again the cause of such as be condemn . many time he deliver some of they , declare the board to have be wrongful put about their neck : the visitation end , he choose out seven or eight , not many more or less of the great malefactor , the which , to fear and keep in awe the people , be bring into a great market place , where all the great Louteas meet together , and after many ceremony and superstition , as the use of the country be , be behead . this be do once a year : who so escape that day , may be sure that he shall not 310 be put to death all that year follow , and so remain at the king charge in the great prison . in that prison where we lie be always one hundred and more of these condemn person , beside they that lie in other prison . these prison wherein the condemn caitiff do remain be so strong , that it have not be hear , that any prisoner in all china have escape out of prison , for in deed it be a thing impossible . the prison be thus build . first all the place be mighty wall about , the wall be very strong and high , the gate of no less force : within it three other gate , before you come where the prisoner do lie , there many great lodging be to be see of the Louteas , notary , parthion , that be , such as do there keep watch and ward day and night , the court large and pave , on the one side whereof stand a prison , with two mighty gate , wherein be keep such prisoner as have commit enormous offence . this prison be so great , that in it be street and market place wherein all thing necessary be sell . yea some prisoner live by that kind of trade , buy and sell , and let out bed to hire : some be daily send to prison , some daily deliver , wherefore this place be never void of 7