certain report of the province of China learn through the Portugal there imprison , and chief by the relation of Galeotto Perera , a gentleman of good credit , that lie prisoner in that country many year . Done out of italian into english by Richard will . he land of China be part into 13 . shire , the which sometime be each one a kingdom by it self , but these many year they have be all subject unto one king . fuquien be make by the fuquien . Portugal the first shire , because there their trouble begin , and they have occasion thereby to know the rest . in this shire be 8 . city , but one principal more famous than other call Fuquieo , the other seven be reasonable great , the best know whereof unto the Portugal be Cinceo , in respect of a Cinceo . certain haven join thereunto , whither in time past they be wont for merchandise to resort . cantan be the second shire , not so great in quantity , cantan . as well account of , both by the king thereof , and also by the Portugal , for that it lie near unto Malacca then any other part of China , and be first descry by the Portugal before any other shire in that province : this shire have in it seven city . chequeam be the three shire , the chief city therein chequeam . be donchion , therein also stand Liampo , with other 13 . or 14 . borough : country town therein be too too many to be speak of . the four shire be call Xutiamfu , the principali Xutiamfu . city thereof be great Pachin , where the king be always resident . in it be fifteen other very great city : of other town therein , and borough well wall and trench about , i will say nothing . the five shire have name Chelim : the great city Chelim . Nanquin chief of other fifteen city be herein of 295 [ ii two . 69 . ] ancient time the royal seat of the chinish king . from this shire , and from the aforesaid chequeam forward bear rule the other king , until the whole region become one kingdom . the 6 . shire bear the name Quianci , as also the principal city thereof , wherein the fine clay to make vessel be wrought . the Portugal be ignorant of this country , and find great abundance of that fine clay to be sell at Liampo , and that very good cheap , think at the first that it have be make there , howbeit in fine they perceive that the stand of Quinzi more near unto Liampo then to Cinceo or Cantan be the cause of so much fine clay at Liampo : within the compass of Quinci shire be other 12 . city . the 7 . shire be quicin , the 8 . quansi , the 9 Confu , the 10 . Urnan , the 11 . Sichiva . in the first hereof there be 16 . city , in the next 15 : how many town the other 3 . have , we be ignorant as yet , as also of the proper name of the 12 . and 13 . shire , and the town therein . this final may be general say hereof , that the great shire in China province may be compare with mighty kingdom . in each one of these shire be set Ponchiassini and Anchiassini , before who be handle the matter of other city . there be also place in each one a Tutan , as you will say , a governor , and a chian , that be a visitor , as it be : who office be to go in circuit , and to see justice exact do . by these mean so upright thing be order there , that it may be worthy account one of the best govern province in all the world . the king make always his abode in the great city Pachin , as much to say in our language , as by the name thereof i be advertise , the town of the kingdom . this kingdom be so large , that under five month you be not able to travail from the town by the sea side to the court , and back again , no not under three 296 month in post at your urgent business . the posthorse in this country be little of body , but swift of foot . Many do travel the great part of this journey by water in certain light bark , for the multitude of river commodious for passage from one city to another . the king , notwithstanding the hugeness of his king - theirmoneth . dome , have such a care thereof , that every moon ( for by the moon they reckon their month ) he be advertise full of whatsoever thing happen therein , by these mean follow . the whole province be divide into shire , and each shire have in it one chief and principali city , whereunto the matter of all the other city , town and borough , be bring , there be draw in every chief city aforesaid intelligence of such thing as do monthly fall out , and be send in write to the court . if happy in one month every post be not able to go so long a way , yet do their notwithstanding once every month arrive one post out of the shire . who so come before the new moon stay for the delivery of his letter until the moon be change . then likewise be dispatch other post back into all the 13 . shire again . before that we do come to Cinceo we have to pass through many place , and some of great importance . for this country be so well inhabit near the sea side , that you can go one mile but you shall see some town , borough or hostry , the which be so abundant provide of all thing , that in the city and town they live civil . nevertheless such as dwell abroad be very poor , for the multitude of they every where be so great , that out of a tree you shall see many time swarm a number of child , where a man will not have think to have find any one at all . from these place in number infinite , you shall come unto two city very populous , and , be compare with Cinceo , not possible to be discern which be the great 297 of they . Theise city be as well wall as any city in all the world . as