the inhabitant report that about three year past the whole island be like to be burn with the abundance of fire that come out of it . about a league from the say chapel to the westward be a goodly spring of fresh water , where we have as much as we will . wheat they have none grow here , but a certain seed that they call mill , and certain peason mill like guinie peason , which mill make good bread , but they have here good store of rother beast and goat . their merchandise be cotton , which grow there . Cotton in the inhabitant be Portugal which have command - fuesp - ment from the king to traffic neither with Englishmen nor Frenchmen for victuali or any other thing , except they be force so to do . there lie off this island another call ilha brava , the isle of which be not pass two league over , it have good store Brava - 279 Afrill . wood . may . of goat and many tree , but there be not pass three or four person dwell in it . the 25 day of February we depart towards the island of azore : and on the 23 day of march we have sight of one of they call Flores , and then we may see another island to the northward of it call Cuervo , lie two league or thereabouts off the other . the 27 we come to a anchor in Cuervo over against a village of about twelve simple house ; but in the night by a gale of wind , which cause we to draw our anchor after we , we hoist sail and go to the aforesaid island of Flores , where we see strange stream of water run down from the high cliff by reason of the great abundance of rain that have sudden fall . the 29 day we come again to Cuervo and cast anchor , but a storm arise and continue seven or eight hour together , so that we let slip a cable and anchor , and after the storm be allay we come again think to have recover the same , but the Portugal have either take it , or spoil it : the cable be new and never wet before , and both the cable and anchor be better worth than 40 livre . so that we account our self much behold to the honest Portugal . the 18 day of April we take in water at the island of Flores , and have anchor , our cable be fret in sunder with a rock and so burst , where we lose that cable and anchor also , and so depart to our coast . then we set sail to a island name faial , about the which lie three other island , the one call Pico , the other saint George , and the other Graciosa , which we have sight of on the eight and twenty day . the 29 we come to a anchor in the southwest side of faial in a fair bay , and 22 fathom water against a little town where we have both fresh water and fresh victuali . in this island by the report of the inhabitant , there grow certain green woad , which by their speech be far better than the woad of saint Michael or of Tercera . the 8 day of may we come to Tercera where we meet 280 with a Portugal ship , and be destitute of a cable and anchor , our general cause we to keep her company , to see if she can convenient spare we any . the next morning we may see bear with we a great ship and two caravel , which we judge to be of the king of Portugal armada , and so they be , whereupon we prepare our self for our defence . the say ship be Portugal one of the king Galliasses , about the burden of four ga ^ u if hundred ton , with about three hundred man in she , the +°° ume ' ship be well appoint with brass piece both great and small , and some of they so big that their shot be as great as a man head , the other two caravel be also very warlike and well appoint both with man and munition . as soon as they be within shot of we , they wave we amain with their sword , we keep our course , the great ship shoot at we free and the caravel also , and [ ii two . 63 . ] fight between one English ship we prepare our self , and make all thing clear for our safeguard as near as we can . then the great ship shoot at we all her broad side , and her four great piece Portugal . that lie in her stern , and therewith hurt some of our man , and we do the best we can with our shot to requite it . at last two other caravel come off the shore , and two other pinnace full of man , and deliver they aboard the great ship , and so go back again with two man in a piece of they . the ship and the caravel give we the first day three fight , and when the night be come they leave off shoot , yet notwithstanding keep hard by we all the night . in the mean time we have as much as we can do all the night to mend our rope , and to strengthen our bulwark , put our trust in God , and resolve our self rather to die in our defence then to be take by such wretch . the next day be the 10 of may in the morning , there be come to aid the say Portugal four great armada or caravel more which make seven , of which 4 three of they be at the least 100 ton a piece , the other not so big , but all well appoint and full of man . 281 all these together come bear with we being in our admiral , and one of the great caravel come to lay we aboard ( as we judge ) for they have prepare their false netting , and all thing for that purpose , so that the gallia come up in our larboard side , and the caravel in our starboard side . our captain and master perceive their pretence ,