. or eight hundred man that go at liberty . into one other prison of condemn person shall you go at three iron gate , the court pave and vaunt round about , and open above as it be a cloister . in this cloister be eight room with iron door , and in each of they a large gallery , wherein every night the prisoner do lie at length , their foot in the stock , their body hamper in huge wooden grate that keep they from sit , so that they lie as it be in a cage , sleep if they can : in the morning they be lose again , that they may go into the court . notwithstanding the strength of this prison , it be keep with a garrison of man , part whereof watch within the house , part of they in the court , some keep about the prison with lantern and watch - bell answer one another 3 ” A . D . c . 1565 . five time every night , and give warning so loud , that the Loutea rest in a chamber not near thereunto , may hear they . in these prison of condemn person remain some 15 , other 20 . year imprison , not execute , for the love of their honourable friend that seek to prolong their life . many of these prisoner be shoemaker , and have from the king a certain allowance of rise : some of they work for the keeper , who suffer they to go at liberty without fetter and board , the better to work . howbeit when the Loutea call his check roll , and with the keeper view they , they all wear their livery , that be , board at their neck , yron hand and foot . when any of these prisoner die , he be to be see of the Loutea and notary , bring out of a gate so narrow , that there can but one be draw out there at once . the prisoner be bring forth , one of the aforesaid partition strike he thrice on the head with a iron sledge , that do he be deliver unto his friend , if he have any , otherwise the king hire man to carry he to his burial in the field . thus adulterer and thief be use . such as be imprison for debt once know , lie there until it be pay . the taissu or Loutea call they many time before he by the virtue of his office , who understand the cause wherefore they do not pay their debt , appoints they a certain time to do it , within the compass whereof if they discharge not their debt be debtor in deed , than they be whip and condemn to perpetuali imprisonment : if the creditor be many , and one be to be pay before another , they do , contrary to our manner , pay he first of who they last borrow , and so ordinary the rest , in such sort that the first lender be the last receiver . the same order be keep in . of like the pay legacy : the last name receive his portion themere ^ rst ’ they account it nothing to show favour to such wealthy . a one as can do the like again : but to do good to they that have little or nothing , that be worth thank , therefore 312 c . 1565 . pay they the last before the first , for that their intent seem rather to be virtuous then gainful . when i say , that such as be commit to prison for theft and murder be judge by the court , i mean not they that be apprehend in the deed do , for they need no trial , but be bring immediate before the [ ii two . 75 . ] Tutan , who out of hand give sentence . other not take so open , which do need trial , be the malefactor put to execution once a year in the chief city , to keep in awe the people : or condemn , do remain in prison , look for their day . thief be take be carry to prison from one place to another in a chest upon man shoulder , hire therefore by the king , the chest be 6 . handful high , the prisoner sit therein upon a bench , the cover of the chest be two board , amid they both a pillery - like hole , for the prisoner neck , there sit he with his head without the chest , and the rest of his body within , not able to move or turn his head this way or that way , nor to pluck it in : the necessity of nature he void at a hole in the bottom of the chest , the meat he eat be put into his mouth by other . there abide he day and night during his whole journey : if happy his porter stumble , or the chest do jog or be set down careless , it turn to his great pain that sit therein , all such motion be unto he hang as it be . thus be our companion carry from Cinceo , 7 . day journey , never take any rest as afterward they tell we , and their great grief be to stay by the way : as soon as they come , be take out of the chest , they be not able to stand on their foot , and two of they die short after . when we lie in prison at Fuquieo , we come many time abroad , and Fuquieo . be bring to the palace of noble man , to be see of they and their wife , for that they have never see any Portugal before . many thing they ask we of our country , and our fashion , and do write every thing , for they be curious in novelty above measure . the gentleman show great courtesy unto stranger , and so hereof tofore . 3 * 3 do we find at their hand , and because that many time we be bring abroad into the city , somewhat will i say of such thing as i do see therein , be a gallant city , and chief in one of the 13 . shire aforesaid . the city Fuquieo be very great , and mighty wall with square stone both within and without , and , as it may seem by the breadth thereof , fill up in the middle with earth , lay over with brick and cover with tile , after the manner of porch or gallery ,