the voyage of m . George Fenner to guinie , and the island of cape Verde , in the year of 1566 . with three ship , to wit , the admiral call the castle of comfort , the may flower , and the George , and a pinnace also : write by Walter wren . he 10 day of December , in the year abovesaid , we depart from Plymouth , and the 12 day we be thwart of Ushant . the 15 day in the morning be Sunday , we have sight of cape Finister , and the same night we lose the company of our admiral , wherefore we sail along the coast of Portugal , hope that our admiral have be before we . the 18 day we meet with a french ship of who we make inquiry for our admiral , but he can not tell we news of he : so we follow our course to the hand of the canary . the 25 day in the morning we fall with a small hand call porto Santo , and within 3 hour we have sight of another hand call Madera which be 6 league from Porto Santo . the say 25 day be the day of the nativity , we hoist out our boat , and fetch master Edward Fenner captain of the may flower aboard we , be in the George , with the master who name be Robert cortise and other of the say ship , and feast they with such cheer as God have send we . the 28 day we fall with a hand call tenerif , which be 27 league from the say hand , and on the east side thereof we come to a anchor in 40 fathom water , within a base shot of the shore , in a little bay wherein be 3 or 4 small house : which bay and house be distant from a little town call Santa Cruz , a league or thereabouts , and as we ride in the say bay , we may see 266 a hand call the grand canary which be 6 or 7 league from we . the 29 day the may flower for that she can not fetch into you road where we be at a anchor , by reason the wind be off the shore , and because she bear more roomer from the land than we do , in the morning come bear in with the town of Santa Cruz , think to come to a anchor in the road against the town , and before she come within the reach of any of their ordinance , they shoot at her four piece which cause she to come room with we , and come at last to a anchor by we . and about one of the clock in the afternoon , the forename captain of the may flower write a letter a shore , direct it to the head officer of the town of Santa Cruz , to the intent to understand the pretense of the shoot off the say ordinance . the letter be write , Robert courtise master of they may flower , and Walter wren be appoint to deliver the same a land at 3 or 4 house to be convey to the foresay town , and so go with six man in the boat , and row to the shore as near as they may , for set the boat on ground , for the sea go cruel at the shore . the people stand in number 30 person with such armour as they have : the foresay wren call to they in spanish , declare to they that they have a letter which they will very glad have convey unto the town , show that they will traffic with they as merchant , desire their help for the conveyance of the same letter . with that one of the Spaniard will we to come on land , and we shall be welcome , but doubt the worst , the say Walter answer they that they will not come on land , until they have answer of their letter which they have bring . whereupon one of the Spaniard unray himself , and leap into the water , and swim to the boat , who we receive . and he salute we , and demand what our request be : we make he answer , that by misfortune 267 we lose the company of our admiral , and be bind to this hand to traffic for wine and other thing necessary for we , do here mind to stay until he come . concern our letter he make we answer , that he will with all diligence carry it , and deliver it accord to the direction , and so the say Walter knit the letter in a bladder , and deliver it unto he , and also give he four royal of spanish money for his pain : and promise that we shall have answer of it , he take his leave and swim again on shore , where the people stand ready to receive he . and after that they have talk with he , and understand our meaning , some of they throw up their hat , and the other put they off hold they in their hand , and make we very courteous sign , always desire that the boat will come a land , but we resalute they row back again aboard . the 30 day the governor brother of Santa Cruz come aboard the may flower with six or seven Spaniard with he , who conclude with the captain that we may come a shore and traffic with they , but that day we do not , for we have no sufficient pledge of they for our assurance . our captain entertain they well , and at their departure give they four piece of ordinance for a farewell , and bestow upon they two cheese with other thing . the say governor brother promise our captain that he shall have sufficient pledge the morrow follow , which be not do , whereupon we grow suspicious , and go not that day a shore . the first day of January our captain send Nicholas day and John Sumpter a shore , who be very well entertain with as many of our company as go after they . in the say hand be a marvelous high hill call the pike , which be a far off more like a cloud in the air , than any other thing : the