their two boat . these boat be thus man and well appoint , our general enter into his skiff , and with the rest row to the shore where be threescore horseman or more , and two hundred footman ready to receive they . our general marveil that they come in so great a 276 number and all arm , and therefore with a flag of truce send to they to know their pleasure : and they answer he with many fair promise and oath , that their pretence be all true , and that they mean like gentleman and merchant to traffic with he , declare also that their captain be come to speak with he , and therefore desire our general to come and speak with he himself . with this answer the boat return , and then our general cause his pinnace to row to they , and as he come near the shore they come in a great company with much obeisance , open their hand and arm abroad , bow themselves with their bonnet off , with as much humble salutation outward as they may : earnest desire our general and merchant to come on land to they , whereunto he will not agree without sufficient gage of gentleman and merchant . at length they promise to send two gage to our general contentment , promise fresh water , victuali , money , or negro for ware , if it be such as they like : and therefore desire our general and merchant to send they a shore in write the quantity of their ware , and the name of they : all which our general depart to perform , look for their answer the morrow follow . And be go a little from the shore , he cause his base , currier , and harquebuss to be shoot off , and our ship in like case shoot off five or six piece of great ordinance , and so come aboard to prepare the note . the Portugal most of they depart , save those that be leave to watch and to receive the note , which about four or five a clock in the afternoon be send , and it be receive . but all the purpose of the Portugal be treason of villainous to betray we ( as shall appear hereafter ) although we mean in truth and honesty , friendly to our man 0 traffic with they . there be to the westwards of we and about two league from we , a town behind a point fast by the sea side , where they have certain caravel , or ship and 277 also two brigandine , whereof they ( with all the speed that they may ) make ready four caravel , and both the brigandine which be like two galley , and furnish they both with man and ordinance as much as they can carry , and as soon as it be night , they come row and fall towards we : so that the land be high and weather somewhat cloudy or misty , and they come all the way close under the shore we can not see they till they be right against one of our ship call the may - floure . by this time it be about one or two of the clock in the morning , and the may - floure ride near they than the other two by a base shot , so that they make a sure account either to have take she or burn she . in the mean time our man that have the watch ( little think of such villainous treachery after so many fair word ) be sing and play one with the other , and make such a noise , that ( be but a small gale of wind , and ride near the land ) they may hear we from the shore : so that we suppose that they make account that we have espy they , which indeed we have not , neither have any one piece of ordinance prime , or any other thing in a readiness . they come so near we that they be within gunshot of we , and then one of our man chance to see a light , and then look out spy the 4 ship , and sudden cry out , galley , galley , at which cry we be all amaze , and forthwith they shoot at we all the great ordinance that they have , and their harquebuss , and currier , and so light certain tronke or piece of wild fire , and all of they with one voice ( as well they on the shore as they in the ship ) give a great shout , and so continue hallow with great noise , still approach near and near unto the may - floure . we ( with all the speed that we may ) make ready one piece of ordinance and shot at they , which cause they somewhat to stay , so they charge their ordinance and shot at we fresh again , and while they shoot this second time at we , we have 278 make ready three piece which we shoot at they , but they approach still so near , that at last we may have shoot a sheaf arrow to they . whereupon we have a gale of wind off the shore hoist our foresail , and cut our cable at the hawse , and go toward our admiral , and they continue follow and shoot at we , and sometime at our admiral , but our admiral shoot one such piece at they , that it make they to retire , and at length to warp away like traitorous villain , and although they thus sudden shoot all their shot at we , yet they hurt neither man nor boy of we , but what we do to they we know not . but see the villainy of these man we think it best to stay there no long , but immediate set sail towards a hand call Fuego , 12 league from the say the isle of island of S . Jago . at which island of Fuego we come to a anchor the 11 day of this month , against a white chapel in the west end of the say island , within half a league of a little town , and within a league or thereabouts of the uttermost point of the say island . in this island be a marvellous high hill which do burn continual , and