be open , be so near the shore , that nothing can pass without touch the same . to stay the barge at their pleasure , that they go no further forward , be use certain iron instrument . the bridge consist of 112 . barge , there stay we until the evening that they be open , loathsome oppress by the multitude of people that come to see we , so many in number , that we be enforce to go aside from the bank until such time as the bridge be open : howbeit we be nevertheless throng about with many boat full of people . and though in other city and place where we go , the people come so importunate upon we , that it be needful to withdraw our self : yet be we here much more molest for the number of people : and this bridge be the principali way out of the city unto another place so well inhabit , that be it wall about , it may be compare to the city . when we have shoot the bridge , we keep along the city until it be night , and then meet we with a other river that join with this , we row up that by the wall until we come to another bridge gallant make of barge , but lesser a great deal than that other bridge over the great stream : here stay we that night , and other two day with more 3r9 quiet , be out of the press of the people . Theise river do meet without at one corner point of the city . in either of they be so many barge great and small , that we all think they at the least to be above three thousand : the great number thereof be in the lesser river , where we be . among the rest here lie Parai . certain great vessel , call in their language Parai , that serve for the Tutan , when he take his voyage by other river that join with this , towards Pachin , where the king make his abode . for , as many time i have erst say , all this country be full of river . desirous to see those Parai we get into some of they , where we find some chamber set forth with gild bed very rich , other furnish with table and seat , and all other thing so neat and in perfection , that it be wonderful . quiacim shire , as far as i can perceive , lie upon the south . on that side we keep at our first entry thereinto , travail not far from the high mountain we see there . ask what people dwell beyond those mountain , it be tell i that they be thief and man of a strange language . and because that unto sundry place near this river the mountain do approach , whence the people issue down do many time great harm , this order be take at the entry into quiacim shire . to guard this river whereon continual go to and from Parai great and small fraught with salt , fish powder fish powder with peper , and other necessary for that wtth peper . country , they do lay in diverse place certain Parai , and great barge arm , wherein watch and ward be keep day and night on both side of the river , for the safety of the passage , and security of such Parai as do remain there , though the traveller never go but many in company . in every ride there be at the least thirty , in some two hundred man , as the passage require . this guard be keep usual until you come to the city Onchio , where continual the Tutan of this shire , and eke of Cantan , make his abode . from that city upward , 320 where the river wax more narrow , and the passage more dangerous , there be always arm one hundred and fifty Parai , to accompany other vessel fraught with merchandise , and all this at the king charge . This seem to i one of the strange thing i do see in this country . when we lie at fuquien , we do see certain moor , who know so little of their sect , that they can say nothing else but that Mahomet be a moor , my father be a moor , and i be a moor , with some other word of their Alcoran , wherewithal ! , in abstinence from swine flesh , they live until the devil take they all . This when i see , 8c be sure that in many chinish [ ii two . 78 , ] city the relic of Mahomet be keep , as soon as we come to the city where these fellow be , i inform my self of they , and learn the truth . these moor , as they tell i , in time past come qre ^^ ts in great ship fraught with merchandise from Pachin cam from ward , to a port grant unto they by the king , as the north . he be wont to all they that traffic into this country , where they be arrive at a little town stand in the haven mouth , in time convert unto their sect the great Loutea there . when that Loutea with all his family be become moorish , the rest begin likewise to do the same . in this part of China the people be at liberty , every one to worship and follow what he like best . wherefore no body take heed thereto , until such time as the moor perceive that many follow they in superstition , and that the Loutea favour they , they begin to forbid whole the eat of swine flesh . but all these countryman and woman choose rather to forsake father and mother , than to leave off eat of pork , by no mean will yield to that proclamation . for beside the great desire they all have to eat that kind of meat , many of they do live thereby : and therefore the people complain unto the magistrate , accuse the moor of a conspiracy pretend betwixt they and the Loutea against their king . vi 321 ten it shouldseeme by their voyage to be Cardandan in Ortelius , a northern sea in this country , as no suspicion , no not one traitorous word be long bear withal , so be the king speedy advertise thereof , who give commandment out of hand that the aforesaid Loutea shall be put to death , and with he the moor of most importance : the other to be lay first in