day the king marry his daughter at his own pleasure , with great man of the kingdom : the like order he observe in the marriage of his son . they have moreover one thing very good , and that which make we all to marveile at they be gentile : namely , that there be hospital in all their city , 316 c . 1565 . always full of people , we never see any poor body beg . we therefore ask the cause of this : answer he speak it be , that in every city there be a great circuit , wherein be many house for poor people , for blind , lame , old t ^ cltie ^ fir folk , not able to travail for age , nor have any other i „ other placet mean to live . Theise folk have in the aforesaid house there be beg - eve plenty of rice during their life , but nothing else . as ^ u such as be receive into these house , come in after this e ' manner . when one be sick , blind or lame , he make a swarm out supplication to the ponchiassi , and prove that to be of tree . true he write , he remain in the aforesaid great lodging as long as he live : beside this they keep in these place swine and hen , whereby the poor be relieve without go a beg . i say before that China be full of river , but now i mind to confirm the same anew : for the far we go into the country , the great we found the river . sometime we be so far off from the sea , that where we come no sea fish have be see , and salt be there very dear , of fresh water fish yet be there great abundance , and that fish very good : they keep it good after this manner . where the river do meet , and so pass into the sea , there lie great store of boat , special where no salt - water come , and that in march and April . Theise boat be so many that it seem wonderful , ne serve they for other then to take small fish . by the river side they make leyre of fine and strong net , that lie three handful under water , and one above to keep and nourish their fish in , until such time as other fisher do come with boat , bring for that purpose certain great chest line with paper , able to hold water , wherein they carry their fish up and down the river , every day renew the chest with fresh water , and sell their fish in every city , town and village where they pass , unto the people as they need it : most of they have net leyre to keep fish in always for their provision . where the great boat can pass any further forward , they take lesser , and because the whole country be very well water , there be so great plenty of diverse sort of fish , that it be wonderful to see : assure we be amaze to behold the manner of their provision . mean to fat their fish be chief nourish with the dung of Bufles and ox , that great fat it . although i say their fish to be in march and April at what time we see they do it , nevertheless they tell we . that they fish at all time , for that usual they do feed on fish , wherefore it behoove they to make their provision continual . he speak when we have pass fuquien , we go into quicin offuquien shire , where the fine clay vessel be make , as i say before : s m ' and we come to a city , the one side whereof be build upon the foot of a hill , whereby pass a river navigable : there we take boat , and go by water towards the sea : on each side of the river we find many city , town and village , wherein we see great store of merchandise , but special of fine clay : there do we land by the way to buy victual and other necessary . go down this river southward , we be glad that we draw near unto a warm country , from whence we have be far distant : this country we pass through in eight day , for our journey lie down the stream . [ ii two . 77 . ] before that i do say any thing of that shire we come into , i will first speak of the great city of quicin , wherein always remain a Tutan , that be a governor , as you have see , though some tutans do go verne two or three shire . that Tutan that be condemn for our cause , of who i speak before , be bear in this country , but he govern foquien shire : nothing it avail he to be so great a officer . this country be so great , that in many place where we go , there have be as yet no talk of his death , although he be execute a whole alias cenchi . year before . at the city Quanchi whither we come , the river be so great that it seem a sea , though it be so little where we take water , that we need small boat . one day about 9 of the clock , begin to row near the wall with the stream , we come at noon to a bridge 318 make of many barge , overlink all together with two mighty chain . there stay we until it be late , but we see not one go either up thereon or down , except two Louteas that about the go down of the sun , come and set they down there , the one on one side , the other on the other side . then be the bridge open in many place , and barge both great and small to the number of six hundred begin to pass : those that go up the stream at one place , such as come down at a other . when all have thus shoot the bridge , then be it shut up again . we hear say that every day they take this order in all principali place of merchandise , for pay of the custom unto the king , special for salt , whereof the great revenue be make that the king the king have in this country . the passage of the bridge revenues - where it