wear white under , and black upper garment , other go apparel in ash colour , and their idol have to name Denichi : from these the Amidanes differ very much . again the man Bonzii for the most part dwell in sumptuous house , and have great revenue . Theise fellow be chaste by commandment , marry they may not upon pain of death . in the midst of their temple be erect a altar , whereon stand a wooden idol of Amida , naked from the girdle upward , with hole in his ear after the manner of italian gentlewoman , sit on a wooden rose goodly to behold . they have great library , and hall for they all to dine and sup together , and bell wherewith they be at certain hour call to 336 prayer . in the evening the superintendent give each one a theme for meditation . after midnight before the altar in their temple they do say matin as it be out of Xaca his last book , one quire one verse , the other quire a other . early in the morning each one give himself to meditation one hour : they shave their head and beard . their cioyster be very large , and within the precinct thereof , chapel of the fotoquiens , for by that name some of the japanish saint be call : their holiday yearly be very many . most of these Bonzii be gentleman , for that the japanish nobility charge with [ ii two . 84 . ] many child , use to make most of they Bonzii , not be able to leave for each one a patrimony good enough . the Bonzii most covetous bend , know all the way how to come by money . they sell unto the people many scroll of paper , by the help whereof the common people think it self warrant from all power of the devil . they borrow likewise money to be repay with great usury in a other world , give by obligation unto the lender a assurance thereof , the which depart out of this life he may carry with he to hell . there be another great company of such as be call inambuxu . inambuxu , with curl and stare hair . they make profession to find out again thing either lose or steal , after this sort . they set before they a child who the devil invade , call up thither by charm : of that child then do they ask that which they be desirous to know . these man prayer both good and bad be think great to prevail , insomuch that both their blessing and their curse they sell unto the people . the novice of this order , before they be admit , go together two or three thousand in a company , up a certain high mountain to do penance there , threescore day voluntary punish themselves . in this time the devil show himself unto they in sundry shape : and they like young graduat , admit as it be fellow into some certain company , be set forth with vi 337 five white tassel hang about their neck , and black bonnet that scarce cover any more than the crown of their head . thus attire they range abroad in all Japan , to set out themselves and their cunning to sale , each one beat his basin which he carry always about with he , to give notice of their come in all town where they pass . there be also a other sort call genguis , that make profession to show by soothsay where steal thing be , and who be the thief . Theise dwell in the top of a high mountain , black in the face : for the continual heat of the sun , for the cold wind , and rain they do continual endure . they marry but in their own tribe and line : the report go that they be horn beast . they climb up most high rock and hill , and go over very great river by the only art of the devil , who to bring those wretch the more into error , bid they to go up a certain high mountain , where they stand miserable gaze and earnest look for he as long as the devil appoint they . at the length at nonetide or in the evening come that devil , who they call Amida among they to show himself unto they : this show breed in the brain and heart of man such a kind of superstition , that it can by no mean be root out of they afterward . the devil be wont also in another mountain to show himself unto the japanish nation . who so be more desirous than other to go to heaven and to enjoy paradise , thither go he to see that sight , and have see the devil follow he ( so by the devil persuade ) into a den until he come to a deep pit . into this pit the devil be wont to leap , and to take with he his worshipper who he there murder . this deceit be thus perceive . a old man blind with this superstition , be by his son dissuade from thence , but all in vain . wherefore his son follow he privy into that den with his bow and arrow , where the devil gallant appear unto he in the shape of a man . while the old man 338 fall down to worship the devil , his son speedy shoot a arrow at the spirit so appear , strike a fox in stead of a man , so sudden be that shape alter . this old man his son track the fox so run away , come to that pit whereof i speak , and in the bottom thereof he find many bone of dead man , deceive by the devil after that sort in time past . thus deliver he his father from present death , and all other from so pestilent a opinion . there be furthermore a place bear name Coia , very famous for you multitude of abbey which the Bonzii have therein . the beginner and founder whereof be think to be one Combendaxis a subtle crafty fellow , that get the name of holiness by cunning speech , although the law and ordinance he make be altogether devilish : he be say to have find out the japanish letter use at this day . in his latter year this Sim subtle bury himself in a fou resquare grave , four cubit deep , severe forbid it to be open , for that then he die not , but rest his body weary with continual business , until many thousand thousand of year be pass , after the which time a great learned man name Mirozu shall come into Japan , and then will he rise up out of his grave again .