superstition which be now become stale and almost wear out , they do live altogether after the chinians fashion , their predecessor be , bring into the same kingdom about four hundred year ago . Linus . now ( Michael ) let we hear you say somewhat of the christian religion , which as we hope have set most happy foot in that kingdom . Michael . i can say much concern those most wish and acceptable beginning , be they not already publish in japon by the letter of the father : howbeit i will make a brief rehearsal of all thing , that i may not seem altogether to have abandon this labour . you know that from the time wherein the father of the society arrive in our hand , to the end they may augment Christian religion , they be in like sort most careful how they may insinuate themselves into the innermost part of the kingdom of China . in the midst of this endeavour and travel Francis Xavier , a most devout man of the foresay society , depart out of this present life at the he of sancian ( which some call 374 sangiam ) leave a example unto the rest of his associate , how they shall likewise do their best to plant the religion of Christ in that nation . this man be second by other , who use all mean , and leave no practice attempt , that they may bring these good beginning unto a prosperous issue : howbeit they be great hinder by reason of a ancient custom in China , in ancient regard whereof they do not without great difficulty and circumspection admit any stranger into their dominion , ’ except those which have a long time execute the office of ambassador do ordinary every three year present themselves before the king : in the admission of who likewise there be marvellous care use , that they may not easy espy and become acquaint with the affair of the realm . hereunto may be add , that the chinians chinians be great contemner or other nation , and most constant i ° r , • - i , ’ . „ .. , nation .. observer or their own law and custom : in all which respect it come to pass , that there be wonder labour and diligence employ above thirty year together , only to get a entrance , until in the year one thousand five hundred fourscore and three , two father of the foresay society , that have pretty skill in the letter and language of China , utter despair of man help , and depend upon the providence of almighty God , obtain licence of the Tutan or viceroy to build they a house and a church in the city of Xauquin , which by reason of the commodiousness thereof be the seat of the viceroy himself . this work be begin , the say father of the society , for the novelty thereof , be a few year right well entreat by the magistrate : insomuch that two other out of India have free and easy access unto they , one couple remain still in their foresay house at Xauquin , and the other two take their journey for the inner province , to convert more people unto the faith : who notwithstanding afterward , other magistrate not approve of their attempt , be constrain to retire . now all the time wherein the foresay father abode at Xauquin 375 ( be more than five year ) certain of the common people be restrain from false superstition to christian religion , and seventy person be baptize . but the enemy of mankind , who omit none opportunity for the hindrance of christian religion , suggest into the mind of the chinians ( be , as i say , of their own nature , a people estrange from the traffic and acquaintance of other nation , and always be too too suspicious of stranger ) that they shall exhibit letter of supplication unto the caien and i the Tutan their principali magistrate , to have the father expel out of Xauquin : which magistrate repair unto their foresay house and church enter consultation how they may banish they out of they ( say city of Xauquin : in which thing very they use great moderation , not any way offend or exasperate the mind of the father , but only signify that they have regard unto the estate of their commonwealth . for the Tutan or viceroy call the father unto he , and ( to let pass other accident ) use courteous and familiar conference with they , declare by many argument , that their habitation in the city of Xauquin be not convenient , especial since so many magistrate resort unto that city , who will take great offence at the presence of stranger . for the which cause he persuade they to accept some part of the money which they have bestow in the build of their house , and so to return either home into their own country , or unto the port of Macao . howbeit , such be the instant supplication of the father , and so worthy of compassion , that the Tutan or viceroy , in the extreme and mediterrane border of the province of Coantum , assign unto they a new habitation at the city call Xaucheo , commend they also to a certain magistrate , who be come from the same place to salute he . thither therefore the say father , not without great sorrow and grief of the christian , hie themselves , and as we be inform by 376 their last letter , they have even now lay the foundation of their first build , and have also write that they be like to live much more peaceable and convenient for the propagate of Christian religion . these be the first beginning of Christianity in China , where , even as in other place of the christian commonwealth , the seed be to be sow with , great labour and tear , that acceptable fruit may be reap with gladness . leo . it be even as you have say ( Michael ) and now for this your pleasant and eloquent discourse we do acknowledge our self much bind unto you .