Bonzii be wont to make , not so many as we in number , but assure very well provide for . the pulpit be erect in a great temple with a silk canopy over it , therein stand a costly seat , before the seat a table with a bell and a book . at the hour of sermon each sect of the japans resort to their own doctor in diverse temple . up go the doctor into the pulpit , and be set down , after that he have lordlike look he about , signify silence with his bell , and so read a few word of that book we speak of , the which he expound afterward more at large . Theise preacher be for the most part eloquent , and apt to draw with their speech the mind of their hearer . wherefore to this end chief ( such be their greediness ) tend all their talk , that the people be bring under the colour of godliness to enrich their monastery , promise to each one so much the more happiness in the life to come , how much the great cost and charge they be at in church matter and obsequy : notwithstanding this multitude of superstitious sect and company , and the diversity thereof among themselves : yet in this principal all their superintendents do travel so to persuade their novice in their own tale and lie , that they think nothing else truth , nothing else sure to 345 come by everlasting salvation , nothing else worth the hear . whereunto they add other subtlety , as in go gravity , in countenance , apparel , and in all outward show , comeliness . whereby the japans mind be so nousle in wicked opinion , and do conceive thereby such trust and hope of everlasting salvation , that not only at home , but also abroad in every corner of the town continual almost they run over their bead , humble ask of Amida and Xaca , wealth , honour , good health , and everlasting joy . thus then , dear brethren , may you think how great they need the help of God , that either do bring the gospel into this country , or receive it bring unto they , do forsake idolatry and join themselves with Christ , be assault by so many snare of the devil , trouble with the daily dissuasion of their Bonzii , and final , so injurious , so hardly , so sharp vex of their kindred and friend , that except the grace of God obtain by the sacrifice and prayer of the catholique church do help we , it can be choose but that the faith and constancy of many , if not of all , in these first beginning of our church , will great be put in j eopardie . so much the more it stand you upon that so earnest long for the health of soul , to commend special these japanish flock unto our lord . we come to Sacaio the eight and twenty day of January : Aloisius Almeida first for business , but afterward let by sickness , stay there some while , but i part the next day from thence come thirteen league off to Meaco the last of Januarie . of my come all the christian take great comfort , but special Gaspar Vilela who in 6 year have see none of our company at Meaco : he year be not yet forty , but his grey hair show he to be seventie , so vehement be his little body afflict and wear with extreme cold . he speak japanish so skilful after the phrase of Meaco ( the which for the renown of this people and royal seat of the king be best account of ) that he do 346 both confess and preach in that language . certain godly book also he have do into that speech , not omit to translate other as laisure suffer he . to make a end , our lord for his goodness vouchsafe to preserve we all continual , and to give we aid both right to interpret his will , and well to do the same . from Meaco the 19 of February 1565 . other such like matter be handle both in other his letter , and also in the epistle write by his companion to be see at large in the aforesaid volume . among the rest this seem in my judgement one of the principali , and therefore the rather i take upon i to do it into english . of the isle beyond Japan in the way from China to the Moluccas . a among other isle in the asian sea betwixt Cantan both a chinish haven in Cathaio and the Moluccas , much speak of in the indian history and paint out in map , Ainan and Santianum be very famous . Ainan Ainan . stand 19 degree on this side of the equinoctial line near China , from whence the chinish nation have their provision for ship and other necessary requisite for their navy . there stay Balthasar Gagus a great traveller 5 month , who describe that place after this de reb . jap . manner . Ainan be a goodly country full of indian fruit 4 -& all kind of victual , beside great store of jewel and pearl , well inhabit , the town build of stone , the people rude in condition , apparel in diverse colour rug , with two ox home , as it be , make of fine cypress hang down about their ear , and a pair of sharp cyzer at their forehead . the cause wherefore they go in such attire i can not [ ii two . 88 ] understand , except it be for that they do counterfeit the devil in the form of a brute beast , offer themselves up to he . Santianum be a he near unto the haven Cantan in Santianum . the confine likewise of China , famous for the death 347 of that worthy traveller and godly professor and painful doctor of the indian nation in matter concern religion , Francis Xavier , who after great labour , many injury , and calamity infinite sufired with much patience , singular joy and gladness of mind , depart in a cabben make of bow and rush upon a desert mountain , no less void of all worldly commodity , then endue with all spirituali blessing , out of this life , the 2 day of December , the year of our lord 1552 . after that many thousand of these Easterling be bring by he to the knowledge of Christ . of this holy man , his particular virtue , and special travel , and wonderful work in that region , of other many little isle ( yet not so little , but they may right well be write of at laisure ) all the latter history of the indian region be full .