our man , whereof the one be disease with the skurvie , and the other have be nine month sick of the flux , in short time while they be on the hand , recover their perfect health . we find in this place great store of very wholesome and excellent good green fig , orange , and lemon very fair , abundance of goat and hog , and great plenty of partridge , guiniecock , and other wild fowl . our mariner somewhat discontent be now water and hay some provision of fish , contrary to the will of the capitaine , will strait home . the capitaine because 402 he be desirous to go for Phernambuc in Brasil , grant their request . and about the 12 of April 1593 . we depart from saint Helena , and direct our course for the place aforesaid . the next day our capitaine calling upon the sailor to finish a foresail which they have in hand , some of they answer that unless they may go direct home , they will lay their hand to nothing ; whereupon he be constrain to follow their humour . and from thenceforth we direct our course for our country , which we keep until we come 8 degree to the northward of the equinoctial , between which 8 degree and the line , we spend some six week , with many calm and contrary wind at north , and sometime to the eastward , and sometime to the westward : which loss of time and expense of our victual , whereof we have very small store , make we doubt to keep our course : and some of our man grow into a mutiny threaten to break up other man chest , to the overthrow of our victual and all our self , for every man have his share of his victual before in his own custody , that they may be sure what to trust to , and husband it more thrifty . Oure capitaine seek to prevent this mischief , be advertise by one of our company which have be at the he of Trinidada in m . Chidleis voyage , that there we shall be sure to have refresh , hereupon direct his course to that hand , and not know the current , we be put past it in the night into the gulf of Paria in the begin of June , wherein we be 8 day , find the current continual set in , and oftentimes we be in 3 fathom water , and can find no go out until the current have put we over to the Westernside under the main land , where we find no current at all , and more deep water ; and so keep by the shore , the wind off the shore every night do help we out to the northward . be clear , within four or five day after we fall with the he of Mona where we anchor and ride some eighteen day . in which time the Indians of Mona give we some refresh . 403 the gulf of Paria , or bocca del Dragpne pass . a good note . the he of Mona . the I | will of Savona environ with flat . cape de Ttberon . [ ii two . 109 . ] the old chanel pass . and in the mean space there arrive a french ship of cane in which be capitaine one monsieur de barbaterre , of who we buy some two butt of wine and bread , and other victual . than we water and fit our ship , and stop a great leak which break on we as we be beat out of the gulf of Paria . and have thus make ready our ship to go to sea , we determine to go direct for newfoundland . but before we depart , there arise a storm the wind be northerly , which put we from a anchor and force we to the southward of Santo Domingo . this night we be in danger of shipwreck upon a hand call Savona , which be environ with flat lie 4 or 5 mile off : yet it please God to clear we of they , and so we direct our course westward along the hand of Santo Domingo , and double cape Tiberon , and pass through the old channel between saint Domingo and Cuba for the cape of Florida : and here we meet again with the french ship of Caen , who captain can spare we no more victual , as he say , but only hide which he have take by traffic upon those hand , wherewith we be content and give he for they to his good satisfaction . after this , pass the cape of Florida , and clear of the channel of Bahama , we direct our course for the bank of newfoundland . thus run to the height of 36 degree , and as far to the east as the isle of Bermuda the 17 of September find the wind there very variable , contrary to our expectation and all man write , we lay there a day or two the wind be northerly , and increase continual more and more , it grow to be a storm and a great frete of wind : which continue with we some 24 hour , with such extremity , as it carry not only our sail away be furl , but also make much water in our ship , so that we have six foot water in hold , and have free our ship thereof with bal , the wind shift to the northwest and become dullerd : but present upon it the extremity of the storm be such that with 404 the labour of the ship we lose our foremaste , and our ship grow as full of water as before . the storm once cease , and the wind contrary to go our course , we fall to consultation which may be our best way to save our life . our victual now be utter spend , and have eat hide 6 or 7 day , we think it best to bear back again for Dominica , and the island adjoin , know that there we may have some relief , whereupon we turn back for the say island . but before we they return can get thither the wind scant upon we , which do great endanger we for lack of fresh water and victual : ' so that we be constrain to bear up to the westward to certain other