such abundance of ware within one and the same city , ( which perhaps be the great mart city of throughout the whole kingdom ) that they be very Coanchefu , persuade , that the same region , of all other , most abound with merchandise : which notwithstanding be to be understand of the orientali region : albeit there vi 353 z be some kind of merchandise , wherewith the land of China be better store than any other kingdom . this region afford especial sundry kind of metal , of which the chief , both in excellency and in abundance , great abun - js gold , whereof so many Pezoes be bring from China china ‘ s to India > and to our country of japon , that i hear say , tn that in one and the same ship , this present year , 2000 such piece consist of massy gold , as the Portugal common call golden loaf , be bring unto we for merchandise : and one of these loaf be worth almost 100 ducat . hence it be that in the kingdom of China so many thing be adorn with gold , as for example , bed , table , picture , image , litter wherein nice and dainty dame be carry upon their servant back . neither be these golden loaf only buy by the Portugal , but also great plenty of gold - twine and leaf of gold : for the chinians can very cunning beat and great store of extenuate gold into plate and leaf . there be also great nzw . store of silver , whereof ( that i may omit other argument ) it be no small demonstration , that every year there be bring into the city common call cantam by the Portugal merchant to buy ware , at the least 400 Sestertium thereof , and yet nothing in a manner be convey out of the chinian kingdom : because the people of China abound with all necessary , be not great inquisitive or desirous of any merchandise from other kingdom . i do here omit the silver mine whereof there be great number in China , albeit there be much circumspection use in dig the silver thereout : for the king stand much in fear lest it may be a occasion to stir up the covetous and greedy humour of many . now their silver which they put to use be for the most part pass fine , and purify from all dross , and therefore in try it they use great diligence . what shall i speak of their iron , copper , lead , tin , and other metal , and also of their quicksilver ? of all which in the realm of China there be great abundance , and from thence they be transport into diverse country . hereunto may be 354 add the wonderful store of pearl , which , at the he pearl . of Hainan , be find in shellfish take very cunning by certain diverse , and do much enlarge the king revenue . but now let we proceed unto the silk or eat store of Bombycine fleece , whereof there be great plenty in China : sllkemchtna - so that even as the husbandman labour in manure the earth , and in sow of rice ; so likewise the woman do employ a great part of their time in preserve of silkworm , and in keem and weave of silk . hence it be that every year the king and queen with great solemnity come forth into a public place , the one of they touch a plough , and the other a mulberry tree , with the leaf whereof silkworm be nourish : and both of they by this ceremony encourage both man and woman unto their vocation and labour : whereas otherwise , all the whole year throughout , no man beside the principali magistrate , may once attain to the sight of the king . of this silk or Bombycine fleece there be such abundance , that three ship for the most part come out of India to the port of Macao , and at the bring lest one every year come unto we , be lade mt0 especial with this freight , and it be use not only in India , but carry even unto Portugal . neither be the fleet it self only transport thence , but also diverse and sundry stuff weave thereof , for the chinians do great excel in the art of weave , and do very much resemble our weaver of Europe . Moreover the kingdom of China abound with most costly spice and odour , and sp ^ h cam - especially with cinnamon ( albeit not comparable to the y cinnamon of Zeilan ) with camphire also and musk , which ’ be very principal and good . musk derive his name from a beast of the same name ( which beast resemble a beaver ) from the part whereof bruise and putrify proceed a most delicate and fragrant smell which the Portugal high esteem , common call those part of the fdresay beast ( because they be like unto the gorge of fowl ) Papos , and convey great plenty of they [ ii two . 91 . ] into India , and to we of japon . but who will believe , 355 Cotton wool , whereof cali - cut - cloth be make . three quality of porcellan . plant . that there be so much gossipine or cotton - wool in China ; whereof such variety of clothes be make like unto linen ; which we our self do so often use , and which also be convey by sea into so many region ? let we now entreat of that earthen or pliable matter common call porcellan , which be pure white , and be to be esteem the best stuff of that kind in the whole world : whereof vessel of all kind be very curious frame . i say , it be the best earthen matter in all the world , for three quality ; namely , the cleanness , the beauty , and the strength thereof . there be indeed other matter to be find more glorious , and more costly , but none so free from uncleanness , and so durable :