against the enemy . Linus . tell we ( Michael ) whether the kingdom of China be so frequent with inhabitant , as we have often be inform , or no ? Michael . it be ( Linus ) in very deed a most populous abundance kingdom , as i have be certify from the father of ° f the society : who have see sundry province of tn tna ' Europe renown for the multitude of their inhabitant , do notwithstanding great admire the infinite swarm of people in China . howbeit these multitude be not pellmell and confusive disperse over the land , but most convenient and orderly distribute in their town and famous city : of which assembly there be diverse kind among the chinians . for they have certain principal city call by the name of fu : other inferior city and city call Cheu : and of a three kind also name townes - hien , which be indeed wall town , but be not privilege with the dignity and prerogative of city . to these may be add two other kind of lesser town , which be partly village , and partly garrison of soldier . of the first and principali kind be that most noble city stand near unto the port of Macao , call by the chinians Coanchefu , but by the Portugal common term cantam , which be rather the common name of the province , than a word of their proper imposition . unto the three kind appertain a town , which be yet nigh unto the port of Macao , call by the Portugal ansam , but by the chinians Hiansanhien . all the foresaid province therefore have their great city name fu , and their lesser city call Cheu , unto both of which the other town may be add . Moreover , in every pro - 351 the chinian river great inhabit . wholesome air , plenty y peace in China . Vince there be a certain principal city which be call the metropolitan thereof , wherein the chief magistrate have their place of residence , as the principal city by i last mention , which be the head of the whole province call coantum . the number of the great city throughout the whole kingdom be more than 150 , and there be the same or rather a great multitude of inferior city . of wall town not endue with the privilege of city there be more than 1120 : the village and garrison can scarce be number : over and beside the which convent it be incredible what a number of country farm or grange there be : for it be not easy to find any place desert or void of inhabitant in all that land . now in the sea , in river , and in bark there be such abundance of people , and of whole family inhabit , that even the europaean themselves do great wonder thereat : insomuch that some ( albeit beyond measure ) have be persuade that there be as many people dwell upon the water as upon the land . neither be they induce so to think altogether without probability : for whereas the kingdom of China be in all part thereof interfuse with commodious river , and in many place consist of water , barge and boat be everywhere very common , it may easy be suppose , that the number of waterman be equal unto the land - inhabitant . howbeit , that be to be understand by amplification , whereas the city do swarm so full with citizen and the country with peasant . leo . the abundance of people which you tell we of seem very strange : whereupon i conjecture the soil to be fertile , the air to be wholesome , and the whole kingdom to be at peace . Michael . you have ( friend Leo ) full judicial conjecture those three : for they do all so excel , y ‘ which of the three in this kingdom be more excellent , it be not easy to discern . and hence it be that this common opinion have be rife among the Portugal , namely , that the kingdom of China be never visit with those three 352 most heavy and sharp scourge of mankind , war , famine , and pestilence . but that opinion be more common than true : since there have be most terrible intestine and civil war , as in many and most authentical history it be record : since also that some province of the chinian say kingdom , even in these our day , have be afflict stortes - with pestilence and contagious disease , and with famine . howbeit , that the foresay three benefit do mighty flourish and abound in China , it can be deny . for ( that i may first speak of the salubrity of the air ) the father of the society themselves be witness , that [ ii two . 90 . ] scarce in any other realm there be so many find that live unto decrepit and extreme old age : so great a multitude be there of ancient and grave personage : neither do they use so many confection and medicine , nor so manifold and sundry way of cure disease , as we see accustom in Europe . for among they they have no phlebotomy or let of blood : but all their cure , as we also in japon , be achieve by fast , decoction of herb , and light or gentle potion . but in this behalf let every nation please themselves with their own custom . now , in fruitfulness of soil this kingdom certes do excel , far surpass all other kingdom of the east : yet be it nothing comparable unto the plenty and abundance of Europe , as i have declare at large in the former treatise . but the kingdom of China be , in this regard , so high extol , because there be not any region in the east part that abound so with merchandise , and from whence so much traffic be send abroad . for whereas this kingdom be most large and full of navigable river , so that commodity may easy be convey out of one province into another : the Portugal do find