divine power unto heaven and °^ the earth as unto the parent of all , and with great solemnity ' sacrifice unto they . he hath - divers most sumptuous temple dedicate unto his ancestor , whereunto likewise he ascribe divine honour , and yet cease he not to favour priest of other sect , yea he erect temple unto their patron , endow they with most rich revenue ; and so often as any urgent necessity require , he enjoin continual fast and prayer [ ii two . 96 . ] unto they : and after this sort he do in a manner patronize all the idolatrous sect of his realm , and show himself ready to embrace any false religion whatsoever , he live in sundry and manifold kind of superstition . out of all the former particular by i cwt ^ allege , you may easy conjecture that the administration of the kingdom of China do , for the most part , agreeable to agree with the instinct of nature , authority be come - the instinct of mit , not unto rude and unskilful person , but unto « ature . such as have be conversant in the use and exercise or learning , yea , and in promote learned man unto magistracy , great consideration be have of their wisdom , justice , and of other virtue esteem by the chinians : wherefore the way be open for all man , without any respect of degree or parentage , to obtain any of the foresay dignity , it can not be but that this most mighty and famous kingdom must needs enjoy exceed peace and tranquillity . vi 369 2 a the five virtue principal esteem among the chinians . urbanity . the chinians great piety towards their parent . leo . i will now ( Michael ) right glad understand , what kind of urbanity or civil demeanour both the common people and the magistrate do use one towards another : for it be not likely that where such due administration of justice be , common civility , which so well beseem eth all man , shall be want . Michael . you have hit even the very nail on the head : for among the five virtue , which the chinians principal regard , urbanity or courtesy be one ; the rest be piety , a thankful remembrance of benefit , true deal in contract or bargain , and wisdom in achieve of matter : with the praise and commendation of which virtue the chinian book be full fraught . now as touch their urbanity , it be much unlike unto we in Japan , and unto that of Europe : howbeit under two principali kind the rule of their urbanity or courtesy may be comprehend : whereof one be observe between equal , and the other betwqene superior and inferior . for when man of equal dignity meet together , they stand bend their back , and bow their head down to the ground , and this they do either once or twice , or sometime thrice . now , when the inferior meet with his superior , the say inferior , for the most part kneel low on his knee , incline his countenance down to the earth . but how often and when this obeizance be to be perform it be wonder what a number of rule and prescription be set down , which to recount will require a long time . somewhat also i will say as touch their piety , and especial of the piety which they use towards their parent , which very be so exceed great , that for the space of three whole year together , the son be clothe in mourn vesture do bewail the death of their parent , which duty be perform not only by the common sort , but even by all the magistrate themselves , and that most curious and diligent . And , that all man may whole give their attendance unto this business , it be provide by a most 37 ® inviolable law among the chinians , that magistrate , upon the death of their parent , must forthwith renounce their authority , and three whole year , for the performance of their father exequy , must betake themselves unto a private kind of live : which also be most due put in practice by the senator of the king own council . for albeit a man be right gracious in the eye of his prince , yea , and such a one , as upon who the administration of the realm do principal depend ; yet have hear of the death of his parent , that be , of his father or his mother , he hie himself immediate home to solemnize their funeral : insomuch that if the king will retain he still in his office , he shall be esteem by the people , as a transgressor of the law and custom of China : which accident ( as it be record ) in ancient time fall out even so . for whenas a certain king most a memorable familiar use a certain senator of he about the storymanage and expedition of public affair , and understand well how necessary the help of his foresay senator be , will glad , after the death of his father , have retain he still in his office : yet a certain other man , be a wellwiller unto the chinian law , can in no case abide it , but check his prince with sharp rebuke , object the transgression of the law against he . the king wax wrath menace present death unto the man : but when the party be no wit daunt with the terror of death , persist still in his say , the king change his determination dismiss the senator to mourn for his father , but as for his repre - hend he advance he unto a high dignity . Linus . i perceive ( Michael ) that draw to a end of these dialogue , and be weary of your long race , you begin to affect brevity : yet let it not seem troublesome unto you to speak somewhat of the religion of China , the religion which only thing seem to be want in this present ° fchina - dialogue