of the hand Japan , and other little isle in the east ocean . by R . will . he extreme part of the know world unto we be the noble hand Giapan , write otherwise japon and Japan . this island stand in the east ocean , beyond all Asia , betwixt Cathayo and the west Indies six and thirty degree northward from the equinoctial line , in the same clime with the south part of Spain and portugal , distant from thence by sea six thousand league : the travail thither , both for civil discord , great piracy , and often shipwrack be very dangerous . this country be hilly and pester with snow , wherefore it be neither so warm as Portugal ! , nor yet so wealthy , so far as we 327 can learn , want oil , butter , cheese , milk , egg , sugar , honey , vinegar , saffron , cinnamon and pepper . barley - bran the hander do use in stead of salt : medi - cinable thing wholesome for the body have they none at all . nevertheless in that hand sundry fruit do grow , not much unlike the fruit of Spain : and great etore of great store of silver mine be therein to be see . Stiver mine . people be tractable , civil , witty , courteous , without deceit , in virtue and honest conversation exceed all other nation late discover , but so much stand upon their reputation , that their chief idol may be think honour . the contempt thereof cause among they much discord and debate , manslaughter and murde : even for their reputation they do honour their parent , keep their promise , abstain from adultery and robbery , punish by death the least robbery do , hold for a principle , that whosoever steal a trifle , will , if he see occasion , steal a great thing . it may be theft be so severe punish of they , for that the nation be oppress with scarcity of all thing necessary , and so poor , that even for misery they strangle their own child , prefer death before want . Theise fellow do neither eat nor kill any foul . they live chief by fish , herb , and fruit , so healthful , that they die very old . of rice and wheat there be no great store . no man be ashamed there of his poverty , neither be their gentleman therefore less honour of the mean people , neither will the poor gentleman there match his child with the base sort for any gain , so much they do make more account of gentry then of wealth . the great delight they have be in armour , each boy at fourteen year of age , be he bear gende or otherwise , have his sword and dagger : very good archer they be , contemn all other nation in comparison of their manhood and prowess , put not up one injury be it never so small in word or deed , among themselves . they feed moderate , but they drink large . the use of vine they know not , their 328 drink they make of rice , utter they do abhor dice , and all game , account nothing more vile in a man , than to give himself unto those thing that make we greedy and desirous to get other man good . if at any time they do swear , for that seidome they be wont to do , they swear by the sun : many of they be teach good letter , wherefore they may so much the soon be bring unto Christianity . each one be content with one wife : they be all desirous to learn , and natural incline unto honesty and courtesy : godly talk they listen unto willing , especial when they understand it thorough . their government consist of 3 estate . the first place be due unto the high priest , by who law and decree all public and private matter appertain to religion be decide . the sect of their clergy man , who they do call Bonzi , be of no estimation or authority except the high priest by letter patent do confirm the same : he confirm and allow of their tundi , who be as it be bishop , although in many place they be nominate by sundry prince . Theise tundi be great honour of all sort : they do give benefice unto inferior minister , and do grant licence for many thing as to eat flesh upon those day they go in pilgrimage to their idol with such like privilege . final , this high priest wont to be choose in China for his wisdom and learning , make in Japan for his gentry and birth , have so large a dominion and revenue so great , that eftsoon he beard the petty king and prince there . their second principal magistrate , in their language vo , be the chief herehaught , make by succession and birth , honour as a God . this gentleman never touch the ground with his foot without forfeit of his office , he never go abroad out of his house , nor be at all time to be see . at home he be either carry about in a litter , or else he go in wooden chopine a foot high from the ground : common he sit in his chair with a sword in one side , and a bow and arrow in the 329 [ ii two . 81 . ] other , next his body he wear black , his outward garment be read , all shadow over with cypress , at his cap hang certain Lambeaux much like unto a bishop miter , his forehead be paint white and red , he eat his meat in earthen dish . this herehaught determine in all Japan the diverse title of honour , whereof in that hand be great plenty , each one particular know by his badge , common see in seal up their letter , and daily alter accord to their degree . about this vo every noble man have his soliciter , for the nation be so desirous of praise and honour , that they strive among themselves who may bribe he best . by these mean the herehaught grow so rich , that although he have neither land nor any revenue otherwise , yet may he be account the wealthy man in all Japan . for three cause this great magistrate may loose his office : first , if he touch the ground with his foot , as it have be already say : next , if he kill any body : three , if he be find a enemy unto peace and quietness , howbeit neither of these aforesaid cause be sufficient to put he to death . their three chief officer be a judge , his office be to take