the bottom , and two way wax hard and red ’ the da7 of Peri11 be the nine and beyond you cape twenty of July . and you shall understand that , then of good hope . Cape pass , there be two way to India : one within 382 the lie of saint Laurence , which they take willing , because they refresh themselves at Mosambique a fortnight or a month , not without great need , and thence in a month more land in goa . the other be without the he of saint Laurence , which they take when they set forth so late , and come so late to the point , that they have no time to take the foresay Mosambique ^ and then they go heavy , because in this way they take no port . and by reason of the long navigation , and want of food and water , they fall into sundry disease , their gum wax great , and swell , and they be fain to cut they away , their leg swell , and all the body become sore , and so benumb , that they can not stir hand nor foot , and so they die for weakness , other fall into flux and ague , and die thereby . and this way it be our chance to make : yet though we have more than one hundred and fifty sick , there die not past seven and twenty ; which loss they esteem not much in respect of other time . though some of we be disease in this sort , yet , thank be to God , i have my health all the way , contrary to the expectation of many : God send i my health so well in the land , if it may be to his honour and service . this way be full of privy rock and quicksand , so that sometime we dare not sail by night , but by the providence of God we see nothing , nor never find bottom until we come to the coast of India . when we have pass again the line , and be come to the three degree or somewhat more , we see crab swim on the water that be red as though they have be sodden : but this be no sign of land . after , about the eleven degree , the space of many day , more than ten thousand fish by estimation follow round about our ship , whereof we catch so many , that for fifteen day we do eat nothing else , and they serve our turn very well : for at this time we have neither meat nor almost any thing else to eat , our navigation grow so long that it draw near to seven month , where as common they go it 3 ^ 3 A . D . x579 - they common sail from Lisbon to goa in 5 month . run sea very dangerous . certain sign of land . they arrive at goa the 24 of October . in five , i mean when they sail the inner way . but these fish be not sign of land , but rather of deep sea . at length we take a couple of bird , which be a kind of hawk , whereof they joy much , think that they have be of India , but indeed they be of Arabia , as we find afterward . and we that thought we have be near India , be in the same latitude near zocotoro , an he in the mouth of the red sea . but there God send we great wind from the north - east or Northnortheast , whereupon unwilling they bear up towards the east , and thus we go ten day without see sign of land , whereby they perceive their error : for they have direct their course before always Northeast , covet to multiply degree of latitude , but partly the difference of the needle , and most of all the run sea , which at that time run northwest , have draw we to this other danger , have not God send we this wind , which at length wax large , and restore we to our right course . Theise run sea be so perilous that they deceive the most part of the governor , and some be so little curious , content themselves with ordinary experience , that they care not to seek out any mean to know when they swerve , neither by the compass , nor by any other trial ! . the first sign of land be certain fowl which they know to be of India : the second , bough of palm and sedge : the three , snake swim on the water , and a substance which they call by the name of a coin of money , as broad and as round as a groat , wonderful print and stamp of nature , like unto some coin . and these two last sign be so certain , that the next day after , if the wind serve , they see land , which we do to our great joy , when all our water ( for you know they make no beer in those part ) and victual begin to fail we . and to goa we come the four and twenty day of October , there be receive with pass great charity . the people be tawny , but not disfigure in their lip 8c nose , as the moor and caffe of Ethiopia . they that be not of reputation , or at least the most part , go naked , save a apron of a span long , and as much in breadth before they , and a lace two finger broad before they , gird about with a string and no more : and thus they think they as well as we with all our trim . of the fruit and tree that be here i can now speak , for i shall make another letter as long as this . for hitherto i have not see a tree here , who like i have see in EurOpe ? the vine except , which nevertheless here be to no purpose , so that all the wine be bring out of Portugal . the drink of this country be good water , or wine of the palm tree , or of a fruit call Cocos . and this shall suffice for this time . if God send i my health , i shall have opportunity to write to you once again . now the length of my letter compel i to take my leave : and thus i wish your most prosperous health . from goa the ten of November , 1579 . our love son Thomas Stevens .