fire . last of all follow a great number of people in such cap as i erst speak of . when they be all come to you place appoint for the obsequy , all the Bonzii wl the whole multitude for the space of one hour , beat pan and bason with great clamour , call upon the name of that devil , the which be end , the obsequy be do in this manner . in the midst of a great quadrangle rail about , hang with course linen , and agreeable unto the four part of the world make with four gate to go in and out at , be dig a hole : in the hole be lay good store of wood , whereon be raise gallant a wave roof : before that stand two table furnish with diverse kind of meat , especial dry fig , pomegranate and tart good store , but neither fish nor flesh : upon one of they stand also a chaffer with coal , and in it sweet wood to make perfume . when all this be ready , the cord wherewith the litter be carry , be throw by a long rope into the fire : as many as be present strive to take the rope in their hand , use their aforesaid clamour , which do , 342 they go in procession as it be round about the quadrangle thrice . then set the litter on the wood build up ready for the fire that Bonzius who then be master of the ceremony , say a verse that no body there understand , whirl thrice about over his head a torch light , to signify thereby that the soul of the dead man have neither any beginning , ne shall have at any time a end , and throw away the torch . two of the dead man his child , or of his near kin , take it up again , and stand one at the east side of the litter , the other at the west , do for honour and reverence reach it to each other thrice over the dead corpse , and so cast it into the pile of wood : by and by they throw in oil , sweet wood , and other perfume , accord as they have plenty , and so with a great flame bring the corpse to ash : his child in the mean while put sweet wood into the chaffer at the table with odour , do solemn and religious worship their father as a saint : which be do , the Bonzii be pay each one in his degree . the master of the ceremony have for his part five ducat , sometime ten , sometime twenty , the rest have ten julies a piece , or else a certain number of other present call Caxae . the meat that be ordain , as soon as the dead corpse friend and all the Bonzii be go , be leave for such as serve at the obsequy , for the poor and impotent lazar . the next day return to the place of obsequy the dead man his child , his kindred and friend , who gather up his ash , bone , and tooth , do put they in a gild pot , and so carry they home , to be set up in the same pot cover with cloth , in the midst of their house . many Bonzii return likewise to these private funeral , and so do they again the seven day : then carry they out the ash to be bury in a place appoint , lay thereupon a foursquare stone , wherein be write in great letter draw all the length of the stone , the name of that devil the which the dead man worship in his life time . Every day afterward his 343 A . D . I565 - child resort unto the grave with rose and warm water that the dead corpse thirst not . nor the seven day only , but the seven month and year , within their own house they renew this obsequy , to no small commodity and gain of the Bonzii : great rich man do spend in these their funeral 3000 ducat or thereabouts , the mean sort two or three hundred . such as for poverty be not able to go to that charge , be in the night time darkelong without all pomp and ceremony bury in a dunghill . they have another kind of burial , especial near the sea side , for they that be not yet dead . Theise fellow be such , as have religious with much devotion worship Amida , now desirous to see he , do slay themselves . and first they go certain day beg alm , the which they thrust into their sleeve , then preach they in public a sermon unto the people , declare what they mind to do , with the great good like of all such as do hear they : for every body wonder at such a kind of holiness . then take they hook to cut down brier and thorn that may hinder they in their way to heaven , and so embark themselves in a new vessel , tie great stone about their neck , arm , loin , thigh , and foot : thus they launch out into the main sea be either drown there , their ship bouge for that purpose , or else do cast themselves overboard headlong into the sea the empty bark be out of hand set a fire for honour sake by their friend that follow they in another boat of their own , think it blasphemy that any mortali creature shall afterward once touch the bark that have be so religious hallow . true when we go to Meaco , eight day before we come to the he of Hiu at before town , six man and two woman so die . to all such as die so the people erect a chapel , and to each of they a pillar and a pole make of pineapple for a perpetuali monument , hang up many shred of paper in stick all the roof 344 over , with many verse set down in the wall in commendation of that bless company . wherefore unto this place both day and night many come very super - stitiously in pilgrimage . it happen even then as Aloisius Almeida and i go to christen a child we travel that way at what time four or five old woman come forth out of the aforesaid chapel with bead in their hand ( for in this point also the devil counterfeit Christianity ) who partly scorn at we for [ ii two . 87 . ] folly , partly frown and taunt at our small devotion , for pass by that holy monument without any reverence or worship do thereunto at all . it remain now we speak two or three word of those sermon the