unknow unto 389 great store of penguin and seal . case de Buona speransa double . Cape do Corrientes . here they be sever from the Penelope . four man slay with a clap of thunder . [ ii two . 104 . ] we . here be also great store of overgrown monkei . as touch our proceed upon our voyage , it be think good rather to proceed with two ship well man , then with three evil man : for here we have of sound and whole man but 198 , of which there go in the Penelope with the admiral 101 , and in the Edward with the worshipful m . captain Lancaster 97 . we leave behind 50 man with the royal merchant , whereof there be many pretty well recover , of which ship be master and governor Abraham Kendal , which for many reason we think good to send home . The . disease that have consume our man have be the skurvie . our soldier which have not be use to the sea , have best hold out , but our mariner drop away , which ( in my judgement ) proceed of their evil diet at home . six day after our send back for England of the merchant royal from Agoada de Saldanha , our admiral m . captain Raimond in the Penelope , and m . James Lancaster in the Edward Bonaventure , set forward to double the cape of Buona esperansa , which they do very speedy . but be pass as far as cape do Corrientes , the 14 of September we be encounter with a mighty storm and extreme gust of wind , wherein we lose our general company , and can never hear of he nor his ship any more , though we do our best endeavour to seek he up and down a long while , and stay for he certain day at the hand of Comoro , where we appoint to stay one for another . four day after this uncomfortable separation in the morning towards ten of the clock we have a terrible clap of thunder , which slay four of our man outright , their neck be wring in sunder without speak any word , and of 94 man there be not . one untouched , whereof some be strike blind , other be bruise in their leg and arm , and other in their breast , so that they void blood two day after , other be draw out at length as though they have be rack . but ( God be thank ) they all recover save 39 ° ... I591 , only the four which be slay out right . also with the same thunder our main mast be tear very grievous from the head to the deck , and some of the spike that be ten inch into the timber , be melt with the extreme heat theereof . from thence we shape our course to the north - east , and not long after we fall upon the northwest end of the mighty hand of s . Laurence : which one of our man espy by god ' shouldt of good blessing late in the evening by moon light , who saint - lienee . see afar off the break of the sea , and call to certain of his fellow , ask they what it be : which eftsoon tell he that it be the break of the sea upon the should . whereupon in very good time we cast about to avoid the danger which we be like to have incur . thus pass on forward , it be our luck to overshoot Mozambique , and to fall with a place call Quitangone two league to the northward quitangpne of it , and we take three or four bark of Moores , n ^ r ^ qzam - which bark in their language they call Pangaias , lade ’ with Millio , hen , and duck , with one Portugal ! boy , go for the provision of Mozambique . within few day follow we come to a hand a hundred league to the north - east of Mozambique call Comoro , which I | will ° f we find exceed full of people , which be moor of tawny colour and good stature , but they be very treacherous and diligent to be take heed of . here we desire to store our self with water , whereof we stand in great need , and send sixteen of our man well arm on shore in our boat : who the people suffer quiet to land and water , and diverse of they with their king come aboard our ship in a gown of crimosine satin pink after the moorish fashion down to the knee , who we entertain in the best manner , and have some conference with he of the state of the place and merchandises , use our Portugal ! boy which we have take before for our interpreter , and in the end license the king and his company to depart , and send our man again for more water , who then also dispatch their business , and 39 » return quiet : the three time likewise we send they for more , which also return without any harm . and though we think our self furnish , yet our master William mace of Radcliffe pretend that it may be long before we shall find any good water place , will needs go himself on shore with thirty man , 32 oj our man much against the will of our captain , and he and 16 betray at they be company , together with one boat which be all we of Comoro . we anj l6 that be a wash over - against our ship , be betray of the perfidious moor , and in our sight for the most part slay , we be not able for want of a boat to yield they any succour . from hence with heavy heart we shape our course for Zanzibar Zanzibar the 7 of November , where short after we hand . arrive and make we a new boat of such board as we have within board , and rid in the road until the 15 of February , where , during our abode , we see diverse Pangaias or boat , which be pin with wooden pin , and sow together with Palmito cord , and calk with the husk of cocos shell beat , whereof they make Occam . at length a Portugal Pangaia coming out of the harbour