indifferency of justice all of they do lead their life , and how orderly the public law be administer . which thing notwithstanding shall be handle more at large , when we come to entreat of the government . 358 Linus . tell we now ( Michael ) of the industry of that laborpeople , whereof we have hear great report . ittduttry . Michael . their industry be especial to be discern in manuary art and occupation , and therein the chinians do surpass most of these easterly nation . for there be such a number of artificer ingenious and cunning frame sundry device out of gold , silver , and other metal , as likewise of stone , wood , and other matter convenient for man use , that the street of city be replenish with their shop and fine workmanship , be very wonder to behold . beside who also there be very many painter , use either the paint . pencil or the needle ( of which the last sort be call embrotherer ) and other also that curious work gold - twine upon cloth either of linen or of cotton : who operation of all kind be diligent convey by the Portugal into India . their industry do no less appear in sound of gun and in make of gun - gun . powder , whereof be make many rare and artificiali firework . to these may be add the art of print , print . albeit their letter be in manner infinite and most difficult , the portraiture whereof they cut in wood or in brass , and with marvellous facility they daily publish huge multitude of book . unto these mechanical and illiberali craft you may add two more ; that be to say , navigation and discipline of war ; both of which have navigation . bene in ancient time most diligent practise by the inhabitant of China : for ( as we have before signify in the three dialogue ) the chinians sail even as far as India , subdue some part thereof unto their own dominion : howbeit afterward , lest they shall diminish the force of their realm by disperse they into many province , alter their counsel , they determine to contain themselves within their own limit : within which limit ( as i have say ) there be in old time vehement and cruel war , both between the people of China yartar themselves , and also against the tartarian king , who ^ ramizeii invade their kingdom , and by himself and his sue - over china . 359 cessours , for a long season , usurp the government thereof . howbeit the king of the tartarian race be wear out , and their stock and family be utter abolish , the chinians begin to lift up their head , and to advance themselves , enjoy for these 200 year last past exceed peace and tranquillity , and at this day the posterity of the same king that expel the Tartar , with great dignity wear the crown , and wield the royal sceptre . albeit therefore the people of China ( especial they that inhabit southerly from the province of Paquin ) be , for the most part , by reason of continual ease and quiet , grow effeminate , and their courage be abate , notwithstanding they will prove notable and brave soldier , if they join use and exercise unto their natural fortitude . as a man may easy observe in they , that maintain continual war against the most barbarous and cruel Tartar . howbeit in this kingdom of China there be so great military regard of military discipline , that no city nor town discipline . there be destitute of a garrison , the captain and gover - nours keep each man his order ; which all of they , in every province , be subject unto the king lieutenant general for the war , who they call Chumpin , and yet he himself be subject unto the Tutan or viceroy . let we now come unto that art , which the chinians do most of all profess , and which . we may , not unfit , we literature call literature or learning . for although it be common of China . report , that many liberali science , and especial natural and moral philosophy be study in China , and that they have university there , wherein such ingenuous art be deliver and teach , yet , for the most part , this opinion be to be esteem more popular than true : but i will declare , upon what occasion this conceit first grow . the people of China do , above all thing , profess the art of literature ; and learn it most diligent , they employ themselves a long time and the better part of their age therein . for this cause , in all city and town , yea , and in petty village also , there be 360 certain schoolmaster hire for stipend to instruct child : and their literature be ( as we in japon be also ) in manner infinite , their child be put to school even from their infancy and tender year , from whence notwithstanding such be take away , as be judge to be unfit for the same purpose , and be train up to merchandise or to manuary science : but the residue do so dedicate themselves to the study of learning , that ( a strange thing it be to consider ) be conversant in the principali book , they will easy tell you , if they be ask the question , how many letter be contain in every page , and where each letter be place . now , for the great progress and increase of learning , they ( as the manner be in Europe ) do appoint three degree to the degree attain of noble science : that be to say , the low , in leamins - the middle degree , and the high . graduate of the first degree be call Siusai , of the second Quiugin , and of the three Chinzu . and in each city or wall [ ii two . 93 . ] town there be a public house call the school , and unto that all they do resort