this i add , in regard of glass , which indeed be immaculate and clean , but may easy be break in piece . this matter be dig , not throughout the whole region of China , but only in one of the fifteen province call quiansi , wherein continual very many artificer be employ about the same matter : neither do they only frame thereof small vessel , as dish , platter , saltseller , ewer , and such like , but also certain huge ton , and vessel of great quantity , be very fine and cunning wrought , which , by reason of the danger and difficulty of carriage , be not transport out of the realm , but be use only within it , and especial in the king court . the beauty of this matter be much augment by variety of picture , which be lay in certain colour upon it , while it be yet new , gold also be add thereunto , which make the foresay vessel to appear most beautiful . it be wonderful how high the Portugal do esteem thereof , see they do , with great difficulty , transport the same , not only to we of japon and into India , but also into sundry province of Europe . unto the merchandise abovementioned may be add diverse and sundry plant , the root whereof be right wholesome for man body , and very medicinable , which be bring unto our isle of japon , and unto many other hand , among the which that wood may be 356 reckon , which ( by a synecdoche ) be call the wood of China , be of notable force to expel out of man body those humour , which will breed contagious disease . to these you may add sugar - cane ( for in the realm of China there be great store of excellent sugar ) sugar . which be convey by the Portugal very plentiful , both into our country , and also into India . my speech utter immediate before concern merchandise only , in regard whereof this kingdom be beneficial not to itself alone , but most profitable to many other nation also . as for those fruit which pertain to yearly sustenance and common food , they can scarce be number ; albeit , of those three commodity which they of Europe so great account of ; namely of corn , vine , and olive china in a the land of China be not very capable : for the chinians ” £ , ™ tute know not so much as the name of a olive tree ( out of the fruit whereof oil be express ) neither yet the y oil . name of a vine . the province of Paquin be not altogether destitute of wine , but whether it be bring from other place , or there make , i be not able to say : although it abound with many other , and those not unpleasant liquor , which may serve in the stead of wine it self . now , as touch corn , there be indeed wheat sow in all the province , howbeit rise be in far more use and request than it : and so in regard of these two commodity profitable for man life ; namely , wine and corn ; the kingdom of China and our country of japon may be compare together . leo . you have discourse ( Michael ) of the fruitfulness of china , whereof i have often hear , that it be no less pleasant than fruitful , and i have be especial Chinian map . induce so to think , at the sight of the chinian map . Michael . the thing it self agree right well with the picture : for they that have see they mediterran or inner part of the kingdom of China , do report it to be a most amiable country , adorn with plenty of wood , with abundance of fruit and grass , and with wonder variety of river , wherewith the chinian kingdom be 357 the disposition in manner of the chinians . their language . their loyalty unto their superior . [ ii two . 92 . ] water like a garden ; diverse of which river do natural flow , and other by art and industry be derive into sundry place . but now i will entreat of the tranquillity and peace of China , after i have speak a word or two concern the manner of the inhabitant . this nation be endue with excellent wit and dexterity for the attain of all art , and , be very constant in their own custom , they light regard the custom or fashion of other people . they use one and the same kind of vesture , yet so , that there be some distinction between the apparel of the magistrate and of the common subject . they all of they do wear long hair upon their head , and , after the manner of woman , do curious keame their dainty lock , hang down to the ground , and , have twine and bind they up , they cover they with call , wear sundry cap thereupon , accord to their age and condition . it seem that in old time one language be common to all the province : notwithstanding , by reason of variety of pronunciation , it be very much alter , and be divide into sundry idiom or propriety of speech , accord to the diverse province : howbeit , among the magistrate , and in public assembly of judgement , there be one and the very same kind of language use throughout the whole realm , from the which ( as i have say ) the speech of each province differ not a little . Moreover this people be most loyal and obedient unto the king and his magistrate , which be the principali cause of their tranquillity and peace . for whereas the common sort do apply themselves unto the discretion and beck of inferior magistrate , and the inferior magistrate of the superior , and the superior magistrate of the king himself , frame and compose all their action and affair unto that level : a world it be to see , in what equability and