. Michael . i confess indeed that i endeavour to be brief , not so much in regard of wearisomeness , as for 371 [ ii two . 97 - ] three principali sect among the chinians . Confucius author of the first sect . Confucius his doctrine . fear least i have be over tedious unto you : howbeit i will not fail but accomplish that which i have undertake , and ( accord to your request ) add somewhat more concern religion . whereas therefore the kingdom of China have hitherto be destitute of true religion , and now the first beginning thereof be include in most narrow bound , that nation be otherwise a people most ingenious , and of a extraordinary and high capacity , have always live in great error and ignorance of the truth , be distract into sundry opinion , and follow manifold sect . and among these sect there be three more famous than the rest : the first be of they that profess the doctrine of one Confucius a notable philosopher . this man ( as it be report in the history of his life ) be one of most upright and incorrupt manner , whereof he write sundry treatise very pithy and large , which above all other book , be serious read and peruse by the chinians . the same doctrine do all magistrate embrace , and other also that give their mind to the study of letter , a great part whereof Confucius be say to have invent : and he be have in so great honour , that all his follower and client , upon the day of the new and full moon , do assemble themselves at the common school , which i have above mention , and before his image , which be worship with burn of incense and with taper , they do thrice bend their knee , and bow their head down to the ground ; which not only the common scholar , but the chief magistrate do perform . the sum of the foresay doctrine be , that man shall follow the light of nature as their guide , and that they shall diligent endeavour to attain unto the virtue by i before mention : and last , that they shall employ their labour about the orderly government of their family and of the commonwealth . all these thing be in very deed praiseworthy , if Confucius have make any mention of almighty God and of the life to come , and have not ascribe so much unto the heaven , and unto fatal necessity , nor yet have so curious entreat 37 « of worship the image of their forefather . in which regard he can very hardly or not at all be excuse from the crime of idolatry : notwithstanding it be to be grant , that none other doctrine among the chinians approach so near unto the truth as this do . the second sect xequiam avis of they which follow the instruction of Xaquam , or as the chinians call he xequiam , who opinion , because whosefollower they be well know among we , it be bootless for be call cen i to repeat ; especial since , in the catechism come - or Bonzi . pose by our grave visitor , they be notable refute . this doctrine do all they embrace , which be in China call Cen , but with we at japon be name Bonzi . for this i do brief and by the way give you to understand , that all word of the chinians language be of one syllable note . only , so that if there be any word that consist of more syllable than one , it consist also of more word than one . Theise sectary call cen do shave their beard and their head , and do for the most part , together with diverse of their associate , inhabit the temple of Xaquam , or of other which in regard of the same profession have in their calendar be canonize for saint , and do rehearse certain prayer after their manner , either upon book or bead , use other ceremony after the manner of our Bonzi . Theise man have some inkling of the life to come , and of the reward of good man , and the punishment of the wicked : howbeit all their asser - tion be fraught with error . the three sect be of they the three sect . which be call Tauzu : and those do imitate a certain other man , to be adore , as they think , for his holiness . these also be priest after their kind , howbeit they let their hair grow , and do in other observation differ from the former . now , because the sect of Confucius be the most famous of all the three , and the two other sect call Cen and Tauzu be not much addict unto learning , their religion prevail only among the common sort , the priest of both the say sect do lead a most base and servile life among the chinians , insomuch that they kneel down before the magistrate , and 373 christian religion plant in China . [ il two . 98 . ] be not permit to sit beside they , and sometime , if the magistrate please , be abase unto the punishment of the bastonado : whereas in our isle of japon it be far otherwise , priest , even of false religion , be have in so great honour among we . leo . i hear also ( Michael ) that the Saracen superstition take place in China : now , whether it do or not , you can resolve we . Michael . that foreign superstition be bring into China what time the Tartar invade the kingdom , and usurp the government thereof . all the Saracen therefore in China be original descend of the Tartar , who , because they be a infinite number , can not utter be expel and root out of the kingdom , but remain still there , have propagate their posterity , though not their religion . Theise therefore be soldier for the great part of they , and sometime do obtain martial dignity : and except a few ceremony of their