the other two have lade at Pera , which be a place on the main 30 league Pera . to the south . beside the aforesaid three ship , we take another ship of Pegu lade with pepper , and perceive she to be lade with merchant good of Pegu only , we dismiss she without touch any thing . thus have stay here 10 day and discharge her good into the Edward , which be about the begin of September , our sick man be somewhat refresh and lusty , with such relief as we have find in this ship , we weigh anchor , determine to run into the Pulo strait of Malacca to the hand call Pulo Sambilam , Sambilam . 397 the galeon of Malacca of 700 take . which be some five and forty league northward of the city of Malacca , to which hand the Portugal must need come from goa or s . some , for the Malucos , China , and Japan . and when we be there arrive , we lay too and again for such ship as shall come that way . thus have spend some five day , upon a Sunday we espy a sail which be a Portugal ship that come from Negapatan a town on the main of India over - against the north - east part of the lie of Zeilan ; and that night we take she be of 250 ton : she be lade with rice for Malacca . captain Lancaster command their captain and master aboard our ship , and send Edmund Barker his lieutenant and seven more to keep this prize , who be aboard the same , come to a anchor in thirty fathom water : for in that channel three or four league from the shore you shall find good ankorage . be thus at a anchor and keep out a light for the Edward , another Portugal ship of Sant Thome of four hundred ton , come and anchor hard by we . the Edward be put to leeward for lack of help of man to handle her sail , be not able the next morning to fetch she up , until we which be in the prize with our boat , go to help to man our ship . then come aboard we go towards the ship of Sant Thome , but our ship be so foul that she escape we . after we have take out of our Portugal prize what we think good , we turn she and all her man away except a pilot and four moor . we continue here until the sixth of October , at which time we meet with the ship of the captain of Malacca of seven hundred ton which come from goa : we shoot at her many shot , and at last shoot her mainyard through , she come to a anchor and yield . we command she captain , master , pilot and Purser to come aboard we . but the captain accompany with one soldier only come , and after certain conference with he , he make excuse to fetch the master and Purser , which he say will not come 398 unless he go for they : but be get from we in the edge of the evening , he with all the people which pl . two . 107 . ] be to the number of about three hundred man , woman and child , goat a shore with two great boat and quite abandon the ship . at our come aboard we find in her sixteen piece of brass , and three hundred butt of canary wine , and nipar wine , which be make of the palm tree , and raisin wine which be also very strong : as also all kind of haberdasher ware , as hat , ware fit to red cap knit of spanish wool , worsted stocking knit , shoe , velvet , taffeta , chamlet , and silk , abundance ’ of sucket , rice , Venice glass , certain paper full of false and counterfeit stone which a italian bring from Venice to deceive the rude Indians withal , abundance of play card , two or three pack of french paper . whatsoever become of the treasure which usual be bring in royal of plate in this gallion , we can not find it . after that the mariner have disordered peel this rich ship , the captain because they will not follow his commandment to unlade those excellent wine into the Edward , abandon she and let she drive at sea , take out of she the choice thing that she have . And doubt the force of Malaca , we depart thence to a baie in the kingdom of junsalaom , which be between kingdom Malacca and Pegu eight degree to the northward , to ° f ^ unsalaom - seeke for pitch to trim our ship . here we send our soldier , which the captain of the aforesaid galion have leave behind he with we , because he have the malaian language , to deal with the people for pitch , which he do faithful , and procure we some two or three quintal with promise of more , and certain of the people come unto we . we send commodity to their king to barter for amber - griese , and for the home of Abath , whereof ambergreese . the king only have the traffic in his hand . now the horn this Abath be a beast which have one horn only in she of Abath . forehead , and be think to be the female unicorn , and the female be high esteem of all the moor in those part as unicorn . a most sovereign remedy against poison . we have 399 some small quantity hereof may be cart to pleasure those king . they arrive at the isle of Nicubar , which be inhabit by Moores . they return homeward . they arrive at " ieuan . tanaseri in the kingdom of Siam . commodity of Bengala . only two or three of these home which be of the colour of a brown grey , and some reasonable quantity of amber - griese . at last the king go about to betray our Portugal with our merchandise : but he to get aboard we , tell he that we have gild armour , shirt of mail and halberd , which thing they great desire : for hope whereof he let he return aboard , and so he escape the danger . thus we leave this coast and