of authority , which for the most part be perform by the senator of Paquin . for first they be make judge of town : then of city : afterward they be elect to be of that order , which decree punishment in case criminali without further appeal , or of their order , that be the king fosterer . and in both of these order , which be very honourable , there be many place and degree , so that from the inferior place they must ascend unto the superior , until they have attain unto the high dignity of all : and immediate after that they come to be viceroys . howbeit this gradation be not always accomplish in one and the same province , but in change their office they change place and province also . Moreover , next after the office of viceroy they be capable to be choose senator of Nanquin , and last of all to be elect into the senate of Paquin . now , there be such a order and 366 method observe in the ascend unto these dignity , that all man may easy conjecture , what office any one be to undertake . and there be so great diligence and celerity use for the substitution of one into the room of another , that , for the same purpose , messenger be dispatch by land , upon swift post - horse , unto diverse ride post . province , almost twenty day journey from the king court . And , to be short , there be such district severity in degrade those that unjust or negligent demean themselves , from a honourable unto a inferior and base office , or altogether in deprive they of the king authority : that all magistrate do stand in fear of nothing in the world more than of that . the same order , almost , be observe among the captain and lieutenant general for the war : except only in they , that their birth and offspring be respect : for many there be , who descend by parentage from such Martiali man as have in time past achieve brave exploit in warfare , so soon as they come to sufficient year , be create centurion , colonel , and governor , until at last they attain to be lieutenant generail and protector of some whole province : who notwithstanding ( as i have say ) be in all thing subject unto the viceroy . all the foresay magistrate both of war and of peace have a set number of attendant allot unto they , enjoy a stipend , and carry certain ensign and peculiar badge of their office : and ( beside the ordinary watch , which soldier appoint for the same purpose do in the night season , after the city gate be shut , keep in their fort ) wheresoever any magistrate be , either at his house or in his barge , the say attendant strike upon a cymbali of brass , at certain appoint time , do keep most circumspect and continual watch and ward about his person . Linus . you have ( Michael ) sufficient discourse of the magistrate : inform we now of the king himself , who name be so renown and spread abroad . Michael . concern this matter i will say so much 367 the succession of the ci ' owne . the king young brethren . only as by certain rumour have come to . my knowledge : for of matter appertain unto the king court we have no eye - witness , since the father . of the society have not as yet proceed unto Paquin , who so soon as ( by God assistance ) they shall there be arrive , will by their letter more full advertise we . the king of China therefore be honour with wondered reverence and submission throughout his whole realm : and whensoever any of his chief magistrate speak unto he , he call he van - svi , signify thereby that he wish ten thousand of year unto he . the succession of the kingdom depend upon the blood royal : for the elder son bear of the king first and lawful wife obtain the kingdom after his father decease : neither do they deprive themselves of the kingly authority in their life time ( as the manner be in our hand of japon ) but the custom of Europe be there observe . now , that the safety and life of the king may stand in more security , his young brethren , and the rest bear of concubine be not permit to live in the king court : but place of habitation be by the king himself assign unto they in diverse province far distant asunder , where they dwell most com - modiously , be comparable unto king for their building and revenue : howbeit they exercise no authority over the people , but all the government of those city wherein they dwell , concern the magistrate , who notwithstanding have the say prince in high regard and honour , and do visit they twice in a month , and salute they kneel upon their knee , and bow their face down to the earth : and yet they communicate nothing unto they as touch the administration of the commonwealth . these be they which may proper be call the peer or prince of the realm of China : for they derive their house and revenue unto their posterity , and so be these royal family continual preserve . but to return unto the king himself , he be most chary in observe the chinian law and custom , 368 and diligent exercise himself in learning so much as concern his estate , show himself daily unto his chief magistrate , and commune of matter appertain to the public commodity of the realm . his palace be off wonder largeness and capacity , out of the which he very seidome take his progress ; and whensoever he do so , there be twelve chariot twelve bring forth , all of they most like one to another charmts - both in workmanship and in value , that no man may discern in which the king himself be place . he follow in religion especial the opinion of the the idolatrous magistrate , attribute