a letter write from goa , the principali city [ ii two . 99 ] of all the east Indies , by one Thomas Stevens a english man , and send to his father , m . Thomas Stevens : anno 1579 . ft most humble commendation : these shall be to crave your daily blessing , with like commendation unto my mother ; and withal , to certify you of my be : accord to your will and my duty . i write unto you take my journey from Italy to Portugal , which letter i think be come to your hand , so that presume thereupon , i think i have the less need at this time to tell you the cause of my depart , which nevertheless in one word i may conclude , if i do but name obedience . i come to Lisbon towards the end of march , eight day before the departure of the ship , so late that if they have not be stay about some weighty matter , they have be long go before our come : insomuch that there be other ordain to go in our place , that the king provision and we also may not be in vain . nevertheless our sudden come take place , and the four of April five ship depart for goa , wherein beside shipman 377 and soldier , there be a great number of child which in the sea bear out better than man , and no marvel , when that many woman also pass very well . the set forth from the port i need not to tell how solemn it be with trumpet , and shoot of ordinance , you may easy imagine it , consider that they go in the manner of war . the ten of the foresay month we come to the sight of Porto Santo near unto Madera , where a english ship set upon we ( which be then also alone ) with a few shot , which do no harm , but after that our ship have lay out her great ordinance , they straight depart as they come . the english ship be very fair and great , which i be sorry to see so ill occupy , for she go rove about , so that we see she again at the canarian isle , unto the which we come the thirteenth of the say month , and good leisure we have to wonder at the high mountain of the hand tenerif , for we wander between that and great Canaria four day by reason of contrary wind : and brief , such evil weather we have until the fourteen of May , that they despair , to compass the cape of good hope that year . nevertheless , take our voyage between Guinea and the hand of Capo Verde , without see of any land at all , we arrive at length unto the coast of guinie , which the Portugal so call , chief that part of the burn zone , which be from the sixth degree unto the equinoctial ! , in which part they suffer so many inconvenience of heat , and lack of wind , that they think themselves happy when they have pass it : for sometime the ship stand there almost by the space of many day , sometime she go , but in such order that it be almost as good to stand still . and the great part of this coast not clear , but thick and cloudy , full of thunder and lightning , and rain so unwholesome , that if the water stand a little while , all be full of worm , and fall on the meat which be hang up , it make 378 .. I579 , it straight full of worm . along all that coast we often time see a thing swim upon the water like a cock comb ( which they call a ship of Guinea ) but the colour much fair ; which comb stand upon a thing almost like the swimmer of a fish in colour and bigness , and bear underneath in the water , string , which save it from turn over . this thing be so poisonous , that a man can touch it without great peril . in this coast , that be to say , from the sixth degree unto the equinoctial , we spend no less than thirty day , partly with contrary wind , partly with calm . the thirty of May we pass the equinoctial with contentation , direct our course aswell as we can to pass the promontory , but in all that gulf , and in all the way beside , we find so often calm , that the expert mariner wonder at it . and in place where be always wont to be most horrible tempest , we find most quiet calm which be very troublesome to those ship which be the great of all other , and can go without good wind . insomuch , that when it be tempest almost intolerable for other ship , and make they main all their sail , these hoist up , and sail excellent well , unless the water be too too furious , which seidome happen in our navigation . you shall understand , that be pass the line , they can straightway go the next way to the promontory : but accord to the wind , they draw always as near south as they can to put themselves in the latitude of the point , which be 35 degree and a half , and then they take their course towards the east , and so compass the point . but the wind serve we so , that at 33 degree we do direct our course towards the point or promontory of good hope . you know that it be hard to sail from east to west , or contrary , because there be no fix point in all the sky , whereby they may direct their course , wherefore i shall tell you what help God provide for these man . there be not a foul that appear , or 379 sign about the cape of Bona Speransa . sign in the air , or in the sea , which they have not write , which have make the voyage heretofore . wherfote , partly by their own experience , and ponder withal what space the ship be able to make with such a wind , and such direction , and partly by the experience of other , who book and navigation they have , they guess whereabout they be , touch degree of longitude , for of latitude they be always sure : but the great and best industry of all be to mark the variation of the needle or compass , which in the meridian of the hand of