from all private and petty - school that be mind to obtain the first degree ; the first where they do amplify a sentence or theme propound unto they by some magistrate : and they , who stile be more elegant and refine , be , in each city , grace with the first degree . of such as aspire unto the second degree second trial be make only in the metropolitan or principali city de & ree - of the province , whereunto , they of the first degree , every three year , have recourse , and , in one public house or place of assembly , do , the second time , make a oration of another sentence obscure than the former , and do undergo a more severe examination . now , there be common such a huge multitude of people , that this last year , in the foresay famous city of cantam , by reason of the incredible assembly of person flock to that public act or commencement , at the first entrance of the door , there be many tread under foot , and quell to death , as we have be most certain inform . three and moreover they that sue for the high degree be subject high degree . 361 note the extraordinary honour vouchsafe by the great king of China upon his learned graduate . motall philosophy . natural philosophy . excellent astronomer in China . unto a most severe and exact censure , whereby they be to be examine at the king court only , and that also every three year next ensue the say year wherein graduate of the second degree be elect in each province , and , a certain number be prescribe unto every particular province , they do ascend unto that high pitch of dignity , which be in so great regard with the king himself , that the three principali graduate do , for honour sake , drink off a cup fill even with the king own hand , and be grace with other solemnity . out of this order the chief magistrate be choose : for after that they have attain unto this three degree , be a while train up in the law of the realm , and in the precept of urbanity , they be admit unto diverse function . neither be we to think that the chinians be altogether destitute of other art . for , as touch moral philosophy , all those book be fraught with the precept thereof , which , for their instruction sake , be always conversant in the hand of the foresay student , wherein such grave and pithy sentence be set down , that , in man void of the light of the gospel , more can not be desire . they have book also that entreat of thing and cause natural , but herein it be to be suppose , that aswell their book as we do abound with error . there be other book among they , that discourse of herb and medicine , and other of chivalry and martial affair . neither can i here omit , that certain man of China ( albeit they be but few , and rare to be find ) be excellent in the knowledge of astronomy , by which knowledge of they then day of the new moon incident to every month be true dispose and digest , and be commit to writing and publish : beside , they do most infallible foretell the eclipse of the sun and moon : and whatsoever knowledge in this art we of japon have , it be derive from they . leo . we do free confess that ( Michael ) since our book entreat of the same art be , a great part of they , write in the character or letter of China . 362 * 59 ° ' but now , instruct you we as touch their manner of the politic government , wherein the chinians be say great to ° ? excel . ’ Michael . that , that , in very deed , be their chief art , and unto that all their learning and exercise of letter be direct . whereas therefore , in the kingdom of China , one only king bear rule over so many province , it be strange what a number of magistrate be by he create to administer public affair . for ( to omit they which in each town and city have jurisdiction over the townsman and citizen ) there be three principali three magistrate in every province . the first be he that have Pnnc ^ 11 . • • 11 . 1 • „ , , magistrate in to deal in case criminali , and be call Ganchasu : the province . second be the king fosterer , and be call Puchinsu : the three be the lieutenant - general for the war , name , as we say before , Chumpin . Theise three therefore have their place of residence in the chief city of the province : and the two former have certain associate of their own order , but of inferior authority , appoint in diverse city and town , unto who , accord to the variety of cause , the governor of town , and the major of city do appeal . howbeit the three forename magistrate be in subjection unto the Tutan , that be , the viceroy , ordain in each province . and all these magistrate bear office for the space of three year together : yet so , that for the govern of each province , not any of the same province , but stranger , that be , man of another province , be select : whereof it come to pass , that the judge may give sentence with a far more entire and incorrupt mind , than if they be among their own kinsfolk and ally . over and beside all these , there be a annuali or yearly magistrate , which be call chaien , who duty it be to make inquisition of all crime , and especial the crime of magistrate , and also to punish common offence : but concern the fault of the great magistrate to admonish the king himself . of this order , every year , be send out of the king