court , for each province , one ; and go over all 363 two senate or counsel continual hold in China . the cause of peace in China . learn the only step to honour in China . the city and town thereof , they do most diligent ransack and search out all crime , and upon they which be imprison they inflict due punishment , or , be find not guilty , they dismiss they unpunished . hence it be , that all magistrate great fear to be call in question by the chaien be well keep within the limit of their calling . beside all these magistrate there be at either court , namely in the north , and in the south , a senate or honourable assembly of grave counselor , unto the which , out of all province , accord to the nearness and distance of the place , affair of great weight and moment be refer , and by their authority diverse magistrate be create : howbeit the manage and expedition of principali affair be commit unto the senate of Paquin . Moreover there be every year certain magistrate appoint in each province , to go unto the king : and every three year all the governor of city and of town do visit he at once , what time trial be make of they that aspire unto the three degree : upon which occasion there be at the same time a incredible number of people at the king court . by reason of this excellent order and harmony of magistrate place one under another , it can scarce be imagine , what sweet peace and tranquillity flourish throughout the whole realm , especial since , after speedy inquisition , person that be guilty be put ( as the manner be there ) to the punishment of the bastonado : neither yet be suit or action any long time delay . also it be not to be omit , that for the obtain of any dignity or magistracy , the way be open , without all respect of gentry or blood , unto all man , if they be learned , and especial if they have attain unto the three and high degree aforesaid . neither can it be express how obedient and dutiful the common sort be unto their magistrate , and with what magnificence and pomp the say magistrate come abroad : for the most part of they have fifty or threescore sergeant attend upon they , and go before they , two and two in a rank : some of 364 procession of the chinian magistrate . they carry halberd , mace , and battle - ax : some the stately if trail iron chain upon the ground : other hold great rod or staff of a certain kind of reed , wherewith malefactor be punish , in their hand : and two there be that carry , enclose in a case , the king seal peculiar for each office : and many other also , that show sundry spectacle unto the people : whereunto may be add the horrible outcry and shout , which between while they utter , to strike a terror into the heart of all man : and at length come the magistrate themselves , be carry in a throne upon the back of four man , six man , or eight man , accord to the dignity of their office . now , as concern their house , they be very large and stately , be build and furnish with all necessary stuff , at the king own cost , in the which , so long as their magistracy last , they lead a brave and a honourable life . the say house be without variety of story one above another , which in the kingdom of China and in our isle of japon also be not ordinary use for habitation , but either to keep watch and ward , or else for solace and recreation sake ( for the which purpose , eight most lofty turret of nine story high be build ) or else for the defence of city . howbeit in other regard these building do show forth no small magnificence : for they have their cistern for the receit of rainwater , which be adorn with beautiful tree , set in order , round about they : and they have also their place design for the administration of justice , and diverse other convenient room to bestow their wife and family in . within the door of the foresay habitation a certain number of sergeant and officer , have cabin or little house allot they on both side , do always give their attendance ; and so long as matter of judgement be in decide , they be always ready at hand , that , at the direction of the magistrate they may either beat malefactor , or by torment constrain they to tell the truth . the say magistrate also have their peculiar barge wherein to 365 the house of the chinian magistrate . the magistrate barge . the manner of elect magistrate in China . degree unto honour . [ ii two . 95 . ] take the water ; be in breadth and length not much unlike to the galley of Europe , but for swiftness and multitude of oar , far inferior unto they . the rower , sit upon gallery without the hatch or compass of the barge , do move it on forward with their oar : whereupon it come to pass , that the middle part of the barge afford sufficient room for the magistrate themselves to abide in , contain chamber therein almost as convenient and handsome , as in any of their foresay public house , together with buttery and kitchen , and such other place necessary for the provision and stowage of victual . leo . all these thing agree right well with the report , which we have hear of the stately and renown kingdom of China : i will now right glad know somewhat concern the order which be observe in the obtain of magistracy . Michael . you have inquire of a matter most worthy to be know , which i have almost omit to entreat of . the chinians therefore do use a kind of gradation in advance man unto sundry place