of Zanzibar , where they have a Portugal a small factory , send a Canoa with a moor which have Zanzibar ene christen , who bring we a letter wherein they ’ desire to know what we be , and what we seek . we send they word we be Englishmen come from don Antonio upon business to his friend in the Indies : with which answer they return , and will not any more come at we . whereupon not long after we man out our boat and take a Pangaia of the moor , which have a priest of they in it , which in their language they call a sheriff : who we use very courteous : which the king take in very good part , have his priest in great estimation , and for his deliverance furnish we with two month victual , during all which the Portugal } time we detain with we . Theise Moores inform towards } the we the false and spiteful deal of the Portugal engluh . towards we , which make they believe that we be cruel 392 people and men - eater , and will they if they love their safety in no case to come near we . which they do only to cut we off from all knowledge of the state and traffic of the country . while we ride from the end of November until the middle of February in this harbour , which be sufficient for a ship of 500 tun to ride in , we set upon a Portugal Pangaia with our boat , but because it be very little , and our man not able to stir in it , we be not able to take the say Pangaia , which be arm with 10 good shot like our long foul piece . this place for the goodness of the harbour excellent and water , and plentiful refresh with fish , whereof re ~ we take great store with our net , and for sundry sort i of fruit of the country , as Cocos and other , which be bring we by the moor , as also for ox and hen , be careful to be seek for by such of our ship , as shall hereafter pass that way . but our man have need to take good heed of the Portugal : for while we lie here the Portugal admiral of the coast from melinde to Mozambique , come to view and to betray our boat if he can have take at any time advantage , in a galley frigate of ten ton with 8 or 9 oar on a side . of the strength of which frigate and their treacherous meaning we be advertise by a arabian moor which come from the king of Zanzibar diverse time unto we about the delivery of the priest aforesaid , and afterward by another which we carry thence along with we : for wheresoever we come , our care be to get into our hand some one or two of the country to learn the language and state of those part where we touch . Moreover , here again we have another clap of thunder which do shake our foremast very much , which we fish and repair with timber from the shore , whereof there be good store thereabouts of a kind of tree some forty foot high , which be a red and tough wood , and as i suppose , a kind of cedar . here our surgeon Arnold negligent catch a great heat in his head be on heat in the land with the master to seek ox , fall sick and short head dcadh - 393 a galley frigate . [ ii two . 105 . ] another thunderclap . a Junco lade with pepper and drug . the current set to the northward . zocotora . die , which may have be cure by let of blood before it have be settle . before our departure we have in this place some thousand weight of pitch , or rather a kind of grey and white gum like unto frankincense , as clammy as turpentine , which in melt grow as black as pitch , and be very brittle of it self , but we mingle it with oil , whereof we have 30 ° jar in the prize which we take to the northward of the equinoctial , not far from guinie , bind for Brasil . six day before we depart hence , the cape merchant of the factory write a letter unto our captain in the way of friendship , as he pretend , request a jar of wine , and a jar of oil , and two or three pound of gunpowder , which letter he send by a negro his man , and moor in a Canoa : we send he his demand by the moor , but take the negro along with we because we understand he have be in the east Indies and know somewhat of the country . by this negro we be advertise of a small bark of some thirty ton ( which the moor call a Junco ) which be come from goa thither lade with pepper for the factory and service of that kingdom . thus have trim our ship as we lay in this road , in the end we set forward for the coast of the east India , the 15 of February aforesaid , intend if we can to have reach to cape Comori , which be the headland or promontory of the main of Malavar , and there to have lie off and on for such ship as shall have pass from Zeilan , Sant Tome , Bengala , pegu , Malacca , the moluccos , the coast of China , and the he of Japan , which ship be of exceed wealth and riches . but in our course we be very much deceive by the current that set into the gulf of the red sea along the coast of melinde . and the wind shorten upon we to the north - east and Easterly , keep we that we can not get off , and so with the put in of the current from the westward , set we in further unto the northward within fourscore league of the he of Zocotora , far from our 394 determine course and expectation . but here we never want abundance of dolphin , bonito and fly fish . now while we find our self thus far to the northward , and the time be so far spend , we determine to go