a excellent treatise of the kingdom of China , and of the estate and government thereof : print in latin at Macao a city of the Portugal in China , An . Dom . 1590 . and write dialogue - wise . the speaker be Linus , Leo , and Michael . Linus . oncern the kingdom of China ( Michael ) which be our next neighbour , we have hear and daily do hear so many report , that we be to request at your hand rather a true than a large discourse and narration thereof . and if there be aught in your knowledge beside that which by continual rumour be wax stale among we , we will right glad give diligent ear unto it . Michael . because the report of this most famous kingdom be grow so common among we , reduce diverse and manifold particular into order , i will especial aim at the truth of thing receive from the father 348 of the society , which even now at this present be conversant in China . first of all therefore it be not un - the situation know , that of all part of the main continent this kingdom of China be situate most easterly : albeit it certain hand , as our native japon , and the he of Manilia stand more easterly than China it self . as touch the limit and bound of this kingdom , we may appoint the first towards you west to be a certain he common call Hainan , which stand in 19 degree of northerly latitude . for the continent next adjoin unto this he trend towards the east , and that especial , where the promontory of the city call Nimpo or Liampo do extend it self . howbeit , from that place decline northward , it stretch forth a huge length , insomuch that the far chinian inhabitant that way do behold the north pole elevate , at least 50 degree , and perhaps more also : whereupon a man may easy conjecture ( that i may speak like a astronomer ) how large the latitude of this kingdom be , when as it contain about more than 540 league in direct extension towards the north . but as concern the longitude which be account from east to west , it be not so exact find out , that it may be distinguish into degree . howbeit certain it be , that accord to the map wherein the people of China describe the form of their kingdom , Chinian cos - the latitude thereof do not much exceed you longitude , her . this kingdom therefore be , without all peradventure , of all earthly kingdom the most large and spacious : for albeit diverse other king under their jurisdiction contain in dimension more length and breadth then all china , do possess very many kingdom and far distant asunder : yet none of they all enjoy any one kingdom so large and so ample , as the most puissant king of China do . now , if we shall make enquiry into his the rich revenue and tribute , true it be , that this king of all other , be endue with the great and the rich , both china . in regard of the fertility and greatness of his dominion , and also by reason of the severe collection and exaction 349 fifteen great province in China . the seat royal of the hingofChina . [ ii two . 89 . ] the warlike munition of China , in a marvelous wall . of his duty : yea , tribute be impose upon his subject , not only for land , house , and impost of merchandise , but also for every person in each family . it be likewise to be understand , that almost no lord or potentate in China have authority to levy unto himself any peculiar revenue , or to collect any rent within the precinct of his signory , all such power belong only unto the king : whereas in Europe the contrary be most common see , as we have before signify . in this most large kingdom be contain 15 province , every one of which be in it self sufficient to be make one great kingdom . six of these province do border upon the sea , namely ( y * i may use the name of the chinians themselves ) coantum , foquien , chequiam , Nanquin , Xantum , Paquin : the other 9 be inland province , namely , quiansi , huquam , Honan , xiensi , xansi , Suchuon , queicheu , Junan , coansi . among all the foresay province , two be allot for the king court and seat royal , that be to say , Paquin for his court in the north , and Nanquin for his court in the south . for the king of China be wont to be resident altogether at the south court : but afterward , by reason of the manifold and cruel war move by the Tartar , they be constrain to defixe their princely seat and habitation in that extreme province of the north . whereupon it come to pass , that those northern confine of the kingdom do abound with many more fortress , martial engine , and garrison of soldier . leo . i have hear , among those munition , a certain strange and admirable wall report of , wherewith the people of China do repress and drive back the Tartar attempt to invade their territory . Michael . certes that wall which you have hear tell of be most worthy of admiration ; for it run alongst the border of three northerly province , xiensi , xansi , and Paquin , and be say to contain almost three hundred league in length , and in such sort to be build , that it hinder not the course and stream of any river , 35 ° their channel be overthwart and fortify with wonderful bridge and other defence . yet be it not unlikely , that the say wall be build in such sort , that only low and easy passage be therewith stop and environ ; but the mountain run between those low passage be , by their own natural strength , and inaccessible heighth , a sufficient fortification