for the red sea , or for the hand of Zocotora , both to refresh our self , and also for some purchase . but while we be in this consultation , the wind very lucky come about to the northwest and carry we direct towards cape Comori . before we shall have double this cape , we be determine to touch at the hand of mamale , of which we have ad ver - isle of tisement , that one have victual , stand in the northerly mamale - latitude of twelve degree . howbeit it be not our good luck to find it , which fall out partly by the obstinacy of our master : for the day before we fall with part of the hand the wind come about to the southwest , and then shift our course we miss it . so the wind increase southerly , we fear we shall not have be able to have double the cape , which will have great hazard our cast away upon the coast of India , the winter season and western Monsons already be come in , which Monsons continue on that coast until August . nevertheless it please God to bring the wind more westerly , and so in the month of May 1592 . we happy double cape Comori without cape Comori sight of the coast of India . from hence thus have < * « i592 - doubled this cape , we direct our course for the hand the ue of of Nicubar , which lie north and south with the western n ^ ar . part of Sumatra , and in the latitude of 7 degree to the northward of the equinoctial . from which cape of Comori unto the aforesaid hand we run in six day with a very large wind though the weather be foul with extreme rain and gust of wind . Theise hand be miss through our master default for want of due observation of the south star . and we fall to the southward of they within the sight of the hand the isle of of Gomes Polo , which lie hard upon the great hand of Gomes Pol °- Sumatra the first of June , and at the north - east side of 395 they we lay two or three day becalm , hope to Sumatra . have have a pilot from Sumatra , within two league whereof we lie off and on . now the winter come upon we with much contagious weather , we direct our then isle of course from hence with the hand of Pulo Pinaou , pulopinaou . ( where by the way be to be note that Pulo in the malaian tongue signify a hand ) at which hand we arrive about the begin of June , where we come to a anchor in a very good harbour between three hand : at which time our man be very sick and many fall . here we determine to stay until the [ ii two . 106 . i winter be overpast . this place be in 6 degree and a half to the northward , and some five league from the main between Malacca and Pegu . here we continue until the end of August . Oure refresh in this place be very small , only of oyster grow on rock , great wilk , and some few fish which we take with our hook . here we land our sick man on these uninhabited hand for their health , nevertheless 26 of they die in this place , whereof John hall our master be one , and m . Rainold Golding another , a merchant of great honesty and much discretion . in tree fit for these island be abundance of tree of white wood , so mast . right and tall , that a man may make mast of they be a hundred foot long . the winter pass and have water our ship and fit she to go to sea , we have leave we but 33 man and one boy , of which not pass 22 be sound for labour and help , and of they not past a three part sailor : thence we make sail to seek some place of refresh , and go over Malacca . to the main of Malacca . the next day we come to a anchor in a bay in six fathom water some two league from the shore . then master James Lancaster our captain , and m . Edmund Barker his lieutenant , and other of the company man the boat , go on shore to see what inhabitant may be find . And come on land we find the track of some barefooted people which be depart thence not long before : for we 396 see their fire still burn , but people we see none , nor any other live creature , save a certain kind of foul call ox bird , which be a grey kind of seafowl , like a snite in colour , but not in beak . of these we kill some eight dozen with hailshot be very tame , and spend the day in search , return towards night aboard . the next day about two of the clock in the afternoon we espy a Canoa which come near unto we , but will not come aboard we , have in it some sixteen naked Indians , with who nevertheless go afterward on land , we have friendly conference and promise of victual . the next day in the morning we espy three ship , be all of burden 60 or 70 ton , three ship of one of which we make to strike with our very boat : . * with pcppct , and understand that they be of the town of Mar - Martabam ' . tabam , which be the chief haven town for the great city of Pegu , and the good belong to certain Portugal Jesuit and a biscuit baker a Portugal , we take that ship and do not force the other two , because they be lade for merchant of Pegu , but have this one at our command , we come together to a anchor . the night follow all the man except twelve , which we take into our ship , be most of they bear in Pegu , flee away in their boat , leave their ship and good with we . the next day we weigh our anchor and go to the leeward of a hand hard by , and take in her lade be pepper , which she and