up and to end matter in controversy , to determine of war and peace , that which he think right , to punish rebel , wherein he may command the noble man to assist he upon pain of forfeit their good : nevertheless at all time he be not obey , for that many matter be end rather by might and arm , then determine by law . other controversy be decide either in the temporali court , as it seem good unto the prince , or in the spirituali consistory before the tundi . rebel be execute in this manner , especial if they be noble man or officer . the king look what day he give sentence against any one , the same day the party , wheresoever he be , be advertise thereof , and the day tell he of his execution . the condemn person ask of the messenger whether it may be lawful for 33 ° he to kill himself : the which thing when the king do grant , the party take it for a honour , put on his best apparel and lance his body a cross from the breast down all the belly , murder himself . this kind of death they take to be without infamy , neither do their child for their father crime so punish , loose their good . but if the king reserve they to be execute by the hangman , then flock he together his child , his servant , and friend home to his house , to preserve his life by force . the king commit the fetch of he out unto his chief judge , who first set upon he with bow and arrow , and afterward with pike and sword , until the rebel ! and all his family be slay to their perpetuali ignominy and shame . the indy - writer make mention of sundry great city in this hand , as cangoxima a haven town in the south part thereof , and Meaco distant from thence three hundred league northward , the royal seat of the king and most wealthy of all other town in that hand . the people thereabouts be very noble , and their language the best japonish . in Meaco be say to be ninety thousand house inhabit and upward , a famous university , and in it five principali college , beside close and cioyster of Bonzi , leguixil , and Hamacata , that be , priest , monk and nun . other five notable university there be in Japan , namely , Coia , Negru , Homi , Frenoi , and Bandu . the first four have in they at the least three thousand and five hundred scholar : in the five be many more . for bandu province be very great and possess with six prince , five whereof be vassal unto the sixth , yet he himself subject unto the japonish king , usual call the great king of Meaco : lesser school there be many in diverse place of this island . and thus much special concern this glorious hand , among so many barbarous nation and rude region , have i gather together in one sum , out of sundry letter write from thence into Europe , by no less faithful reporter 331 Petrus Ma ^ eius de rebusx Japonicis . than famous traveller . for confirmation whereof , as also for the knowledge of other thing not contain in the premise , the curious reader may peruse these 4 volume of indian matter write long ago in italian , and of late compendious make latin , by Petrus Maffeius my old acquaint friend , entitle the same , de rebus Japonicis . one whole letter out of the five book thereof , special entreat of that country , i have do into English word for word in such wise as follow . Aloisius froes to his companion in Jesus Christ that remain in China and India . the last year , dear brethren , i write unto you from Firando , how Cosmus Turrianus have appoint i to travail to Meaco to help Gaspar Vilela , for that there the harvest be great , the labourer few , and that i shall have for my companion in that journey Aloisius Almeida . it seem now my part , have by the help of God end so long a voyage , to signify unto you by letter such thing special as i may think you will most delight to know . and because at the beginning Almeida and i so part the whole labour of write letter betwixt we , that he shall speak of our voyage , and such thing as happen therein , i shall make relation of the meachians estate , and write what i can well learn of the japans manner and condition : set aside all discourse of our voyage , that which stand i upon i will discharge in this epistle , that you consider how artificial , how cunning , under the pretext of religion , that crafty adversary of mankind lead and draw unto perdition the japanish mind , blind with many superstition and ceremony , may the more pity this nation . the inhabiter of Japan , as man that never have great to do with other nation , in their Geography divide the whole world into three part , Japan , Sian , and China . and albeit the japans receive out of sian and China 332 their superstition and ceremony , yet do they nevertheless contemn all other nation in comparison of themselves , and stand in their own conceit do far prefer themselves before all other sort of people in wisdom and policy . touch the situation of the country and nature of the soil , unto the thing eftsoon erst write , this one thing i will add : in these hand , the summer to be most hot , the winter extreme cold . in the kingdom of Canga , as we call it , fall so much snow , that the house be bury in it , the inhabitant keep within door certain month of the year , have no way to come forth except they break up the tile . whirlwind most vehement , earthquake so common , that the japans dread such kind of fear little or nothing at all . the country be full of silver mine otherwise barren , not so much by fault of nature , as through the slothfulness of the inhabitant : howbeit ox they keep and that for tillage sake only . the air be wholesome , the water good , the people very fair and well body : bare head common they go , procure baldness with sorrow and tear , eftsoon root up with pinsar all the hair of their head as it grow , except it be a little behind , the which they knot and keep with all diligence . Even from their childhood they wear dagger and sword , the which they use to lay