about his tomb many lamp be light , send thither out of diverse province , for that the people be persuade that whosoever be liberali and beneficial towards the beautify of that monument shall not only increase in wealth in this world , but in the life to come be safe through Combendaxis help . such as give themselves to worship he , live in those monastery or abbey with shave head , as though they have forsake all secular matter , whereas in deed they wallow in all sort of wickedness and lust . in these house , the which be many ( as i say ) in number , do remain 6000 Bonzii , or thereabouts beside the multitude of lay man , woman be restrain from thence upon pain of death . another company of Bonzii dwell at Fatonochaiti . they teach a great multitude 339 [ ii two . 8 $ . ] a warlike people 300 league to the north of Meaco . the japanish funeral . of child all trick and sleight of guile and theft : who they do find to be of great towardness , those do they instruct in all the petigrue of prince , and fashion of the nobility , in chivalry and eloquence , and so send they abroad into other province , attire like young prince , to this end , that feign themselves to be noble bear , they may with great sum of money borrow under the colour and pretence of nobility return again . wherefore this place be so infamous in all Japan , that if any scholar of that order be happy take abroad , he incontinent die for it . nevertheless these cozener leave not daily to use their wont wickedness and knavery . north from Japan , three hundred league out of Meaco , lie a great country of savage man clothe in beast skin , rough body , with huge beard and monstrous muchache , the which they hold up with little fork as they drink . Theise people be great drinker of wine , fierce in war , and much fear of the japans : be hurt in fight , they wash their wound with salt water , other surgery have they none . in their breast they be say to carry look glass : their sword they tie to their head , in such wise , that the handle do rest upon their shoulder . service and ceremony have they none at all , only they be wont to worship heaven . to aquita a great town in that japonish kingdom , which we call Gevano , they much resort for merchandise , and the aquitane likewise do travel into their country , howbeit not often , for that there many of they be slay by the inhabiter . much more concern this matter i have to write : but to avoid tediousness i will come to speak of the japans madness again , who most desirous of vain glory do think then special to get immortali fame , when they procure themselves to be most sumptuous and solemn bury : their burial and obsequy in the city Meaco be do after this manner . about one hour before the dead body be bring forth , a great multitude of his friend apparel in their best array go before unto the 340 fire , with they go their kinswoman and such as bee of their acquaintance , clothe in white ( for that be the mourn colour there ) with a changeable colour veil on their head . each woman have with she also , accord to her ability , all her family trim up in white mockado : the better sort and wealthy woman go in litter of cedar artificial wrought and rich dress . in the second place march a great company of footman sumptuous apparel . then afar off come one of these Bonzii master of the ceremony for that superstition , brave clad in silk and gold , in a large and high litter excellent well wrought , accompany with 30 other Bonzii or thereabouts , wear hat , linen albe , and fine black upper garment . then attire in ash colour ( for this colour also be mourning ) with a long torch of pineapple , he show the dead body the way unto the fire , lest it either stumble or ignorant go out of the way . Well near 200 Bonzii follow he sing the name of that devil the which the party decease chief do worship in his life time , and therewithal ! a very great basin be beat even to the place of fire in stead of a bell . then follow two great paper basket hang open at staff end full of paper rose diverse colour , such as bear they do march but slow , shake ever now and then their staff , that the aforesaid flower may fall down by little and little as it be drop of rain : and be whirl about with wind . this shower say they be a argument that the soul of the dead man be go to paradise . after all this , eight beardy Bonzii orderly two and two drag after they on the ground long spear , the point backward , with flag of one cubit a piece , wherein the name also of that idol be write . than there be carry 10 lantern trim with the former inscription , overcast with a fine veil , and candle burn in they . beside this , two young man clothe in ash colour bear pineapple torch , not light , of three foot length , the which torch serve to kindle the fire wherein the dead corpse be to be burn . in the 341 they burn their dead . same colour follow many other that be on the crown of their head fair , little , threesquare , black lethren cap tie fist under their chin ( for that be honourable among they ) with paper on their head , wherein the name of the devil i speak of , be write . and to make it the more solemn , after come a man with a table one cubit long , one foot broad , cover with a very fine white veil , in both side whereof be write in golden letter the aforesaid name . at the length by four man be bring forth the corpse sit in a gorgeous litter clothe in white , hang down his head and hold his hand together like one that pray : to the rest of his apparel may you add a upper gown of paper , write full of that book the which his god be say to have make , when he live in the world , by who help and merit common they do think to be save . the dead man his child come next after he most gallant set forth , the young whereof carry likewise a pineapple torch to kindle the