S . Michael , which be one of the azore in the latitude of Lisbon , be just north , and thence swarve towards the east so much , that betwixt the meridian aforesaid , and the point of Africa it carry three or four quarter of 32 . and again in the point of Africa , a little beyond the point that be call Cape das Agulias ( in english the needle ) it return again unto the north , and that place pass , it swarve again towards the west , as it do before proportional . as touch our first sign , the near we come to the people of Africa , the more strange kind of fowl appear , insomuch that when we come within no less than thirty league ( almost a hundred mile ) and six hundred mile as we think from any hand , as good as three thousand fowl of sundry kind follow our ship : some of they so great that their wing be open from one point to the other , contain seven span , as the mariner say . a marvellous thing to see how God provide , so that in so wide a sea these fowl be all fat , and nothing want they . the Portugal have name they all accord to some propriety which they have : some they call rushtaile , because their tail be not proportionable to their body , but long and small like a rush , some fork tail because they be very broad and fork , some velvet sleeve , because they have wing of the colour of velvet , and bow they as a man bow his elbow . this bird be always welcome , for he appear 380 near the cape . i shall never make a end if i shall tell all particular : but it shall suffice brief to touch a few , which yet shall be sufficient , if you mark they , to give occasion to glorify almighty God in his wonderful work , and such variety in his creature . and to speak somewhat of fish in all place of calrne , especial in the burn zone , near the line ( for with - sej ^ ast out we never see any ) there wait on our ship fish as ' long as a man , which they call Tuberones , they come to eat such thing as from the ship fall into the sea , not refuse man themselves if they light upon they . and if they find any meat tie in the sea , they take it for they . Theise have wait on they six or seven small fish ( which never depart ) with guard blue and green round about their body , like comely serve man : and they go two or three before he , and some on every side . Moreover , they have other fish which cleave always unto their body , and seem to take such superfluity as grow about they , and they be say to enter into their body also to purge they if they need . the mariner in time pass have eat of they , but since they have see they eat man their stomach abhor they . nevertheless , they draw they up with great hook , and kill of they as many as they can , think that they have make a great revenge . there be another kind of fish as big almost as a herring , which have wing and fly , and they be together in great number . Theise have two enemy , the one in the sea , the other in the air . in the sea the fish which be call albocore , as big as a salmon , follow they with great swiftness to take they . this poor fish not be able swim fast , for he have no fin , but swim with move of his tail , shut his wing , lift himself above the water , and fly not very high : the albocore see that , although he have no wing , yet he give a great leap out of the water , and sometime catch he , or else he keep himself under the water go that way on as fast as he fly . and when the fish be weary of 381 the air , or think himself out of danger , return into the water , the albocore meet with he : but sometime his other enemy the sea - crow , catch he note . before he fall . with these and like sight , but always make our supplication to God for good weather and salvation of the ship , we come at length unto the point , so famous and fear of all man : but we find there no tempest , only great wave , where our pilot be a little oversee : for whereas common all other never come within sight of land , but see sign ordinary , and find bottom , go their way sure and safe , he think himself to have wind at will , shoot so nigh , the land that the wind turn into the south , and the wave be exceed great , roll we so near the land , that the ship stand in less than 14 fathom of water , no more than six mile from the cape , which be call Das Agulias , and there we stand as utter cast away : for under we be rock of main stone so sharp , and cut , that no anchor can hold the ship , the shore so evil , that nothing can take land , and the land itself so full of tiger , and people that be savage , and killer of all stranger , that we have no hope of life nor comfort , but only in God and a good conscience . notwithstanding , after we have lose ancres , hoist up the sail for to get the ship a coast in some safe place or when it shall please God , it please his mercy sudden , where no man look for help , to fill our sail with wind from the land , and so we escape , thank be to God . and the day follow , be in the place where they be always wont to catch fish , we also fall a fish , and so many they take , that they serve , all the ship for that day , and part of the next . and one of they pull coral . up a coral of great bigness and price . for there they [ ii n . 101 . ] say ( as we see by experience ) that the coral do grow in the manner of stalk upon the rock in