a voyage with three tall ship , the Penelope admiral , the merchant royal vice - admiral , and the Edward Bonaventure rearadmiral , to the east Indies , by the cape of Buona Speransa , to Quitangone near Mosambique , to the isle of Comoro and Zanzibar on the backside of Africa , and beyond cape Comori in India , to the isle of Nicubar and of Gomes Polo within two league of Sumatra , to the hand of Pulo pinaom , and thence to the main land of Malacca , begin by m . George Raymond , in the year 1591 , and perform by m . James Lancaster , and write from the mouth of Edmund Barker of Ipswich , his lieutenant in the say voyage , by m . Richard Hakluyt . ur fleet of the three tall ship abovenamed depart from Plymouth the 10 of April 1591 , and arrive at the canary - land the 25 of the same , from whence we depart the 29 of April . the second of may we be in the height of cape Blanco . the five we pass the tropique of cancer . the eight we be in the height of cape Verde . all this time we go with a fair wind 387 three occasion of slcknes near the line . at Northeast , always before the wind until ! the 13 of the same month , when we come within 8 degree of the equinoctial ! line , where we meet with a contrary wind . here we lay off and on in the sea until the sixth of June , on which day we pass the say line . Wliile we lay thus off and on , we take a Portugal caravel lade by merchant of Lisbon for Brasile , in which caravel we have some 60 ton of wine , 1200 jar of oil , about 100 jarte of olive , certain barrel of caper , three fat of peason , with diverse other necessary fit for our voyage : which wine , oil , olive and caper be better to we then gold . we have two man die before we pass the line , and diverse sick , which take their sickness in those hot climate : for they be wonderful unwholesome from 8 degree of northerly latitude unto the line , at that time of the year : for we have nothing but ternado , with such thunder , lightning , and rain , that we can not keep our man dry 3 hour together , which be a occasion of the infection among they , and their eat of salt victual , with lack of clothes to shift they . after we pass the line , we have the wind still at eastsoutheast , which carry we along the coast of Brasil 100 league from the main , till we come in 26 degree to the southward of the line , where the wind come up to the north , at which time we do account , that the cape of Buona esperansa do bear off we east and by south , betwixt 900 and 1000 league . pass this gulf from the coast of Brasil unto the cape we have the wind often variable as it be upon our coast , but for the most part so , that we may lie our course . the 28 of July we have sight of the foresay cape of Buona esperansa : until the 31 we lay off and on with the wind contrary to double the cape , hope to double it , and so to have go seventie league further to a place call Agoada de s . brass , before we will have seek to have put into any harbour . but our man be weak and sick in all our ship , we think good to seek some place to refresh they . with which consent we bear up with 388 the land to the northward of the cape , and go along the shore , we espy a goodly bay with a hand lie to seaward of it , into which we do bear , and find it very commodious for our ship to ride in . this bay be call Agoada de Saldanha , lie 15 league northward on the hither side of the cape . the first of August be Sunday we come to a anchor in the bay , send our man on land , and there come unto they certain black savage very brutish which will not stay , but retire from they . for the space of 15 or 20 day we can find no relief but only fowl which we kill with our piece , which be crane and goose : there be no fish but muscle and other shellfish , which we gather on the rock . after 15 or 20 day be here , our admiral go with his pinnace unto the hand which lie off this bay , where he find great store of penguine and seal , whereof he bring good plenty with he . and twice after that we send certain of our man , which at both time bring their bot lade unto our ship . after we have be here some time , we get here a negro , who we compel to march into the country with we , make sign to bring we some cattle ; but at this time we can come to the sight of none , so we let the negro go with some trifle . within 8 day after , he with 30 or 40 other negro , bring we down some 40 bullock and ox , with as many sheep : at bullock , ox , which time we buy but few of they . but within 8 and keep , day after they come down with as many more , and then we buy some 24 ox with as many sheep . we buy a ox for two knife , a stirke for a knife , and a sheep for a knife , and some we buy for less value than a knife . the ox be very large and well flesh , but not fat . the sheep be very big and very good meat , they have no will on their back but hair , and have great tail like the sheep in Syria . there be diverse sort of wild beast , as the antilope , ( whereof m . Lancaster kill one of the bigness of a young colt ) the red and fallow deer , with other great beast