under their pillow when they go to bed : in show courteous and affable , in deed haughty and proud . they delight most in warlike affair , and their great study be arm . Mens apparel diverse colour be wear down half the leg and to the elbow : woman attire make handsome like unto a veil , be somewhat long : all manner of dice and theft they do eschew . the merchant , although he be wealthy , be not account of . Gentlemen , be they never so poor , retain their place : most precise they stand upon their honour and worthiness , ceremonious strive among themselves in courtesy and fair speech . wherein if any one happy be less careful than he shall be , even 333 for a trifle many time he get evil will . want , though it trouble most of they , so much they do detest , that poor man cruel take pity of their infant new bear , especial girl , do many time with their own foot strangle they . noble man , and other likewise of mean calling general have but one wife a piece , by who although they have issue , yet for a trifle they diverse themselves from their wife , and the wife also sometime from their husband , to marry with other . after the second degree cousin may there lawful marry . adoption of other man child be much use among they . in great town most man and woman can write and read . this nation feed spare , their usual meat be rice and salad , and near the sea side fish . they feast one another many time , wherein they use great diligence , especial in drink one to another , insomuch that the better sort , lest they may rude commit some fault therein , do use to read certain book write of . duty and ceremony appertain unto banquet . to be delicate and fine , they put their meat into their mouth with title fork , account it great rudeness to touch it with their finger : winter and summer they drink water as hot as they may possible abide it . their house be in danger of fire , but fine make and clean , lay all over with straw - pallet , whereupon they do both sit in stead of stool , and lie in their clothes with billet under their head . for fear of defile these pallet , they go either barefoot within door , or wear straw pantofle on their buskin when they come abroad , the which they lie aside at their return home again . Gentlemen for the most part do pass the night in banquete , music , and vain discourse , they sleep the day time . in Meaco and Sacaio there be good store of bed , but they be very little , and may be compare unto our pue . in bring up their child they use word only to rebuke they , admonish as diligent and advise 334 1565 . boy of six or seven year of age , as though they be old man . they be give very much to entertain stranger , of who most curious they love to ask even in trifle what foreign nation do , and their fashion . such argument and reason as be manifest , and be make plain with example , do great persuade they . they detest all kind of theft , whosoever be take in that fault may be slay free of any body . no public prison , no common gayle , no ordinary justicer : private each householder have the hear of matter at home in his own house , and the punish of great crime that deserve death without delay . thus usual the people be keep in awe and fear . about four hundred year past ( as in their old record we find ) all Japan be subject unto one emperor who royal seat be Meaco , in the japonish language call Cubucama . but the nobility rebel against he , by little and little have take away the great part of his dominion , howbeit his title continual remaineth , and the residue in some respect do make great account of he still , acknowledge he for their superior . thus the empire of Japan , in time pass but one alone , be now divide into sixty six kingdom , the only cause of civil war continual in that hand , to no small hindrance of the gospel , while the king that dwell near together invade one another , each one covet to make his kingdom great . Furthermore in the city Meaco be the palace of the high priest , who that nation honour as a God , he have in his house 366 idol , one whereof by course be every night set by his side for a watchman . he be think of the common people so holy , that it may not be lawful for he to go upon the earth : if happy he do set one foot to the ground , he lose his office . he be not serve very but his alm sumptuous he be maintain by alm . the head and be beard | have - of his minister be shave , they have name cangue , and their authority be great throughout all Japan . the Cubucama use they for ambassador to 335 decide controversy betwixt prince and to end their war , whereof they be wont to make very great gain . it be now two year since or there about , that one of they come to Bungo , to entreat of peace betwixt the king thereof and the king of Amanguzzo . this agent favour the king of Bungo his cause more than the other , bring to pass that the foresay king of Bungo shall keep two kingdom , the which he have take in war from the king of Amanguzzo . wherefore he have for his reward of the king of Bungo above 30000 ducat . and thus far hereof . i come now to other superstition and ceremony , that you may see , dear brethren , that which i say in the beginning , how subtle the devil have deceive the japonish nation , and how diligent and ready they be to obey and worship he . and first , all remembrance and knowledge not only of Christ our redeemer , but also of that one God the maker of all thing be clean extinguish and utter abolish out of the japans heart . Moreover their superstitious sect be many , whereas it be lawful for each one to follow that which like he best : but the principali sect be two , namely the amidan and xacaians . wherefore in this country shall you see many monastery , not only of Bonzii man , but also of Bonziae woman diverse attire , for some do