go back again in sight of Sumatra , and thence to the hand of Nicubar , where we arrive and find they inhabit with Moores , and after we come to a anchor , the people daily come aboard we in their canoas , with hen , coco , plantans and other fruit : and within two day they bring unto we royal of plate , give we they for Calicut cloth : which royal they find by dive for they in the sea , which be lose not long before in two Portugal ship which be bind for China and be cast away there . they call in their language the Coco calambe , the plantaine Pison , a hen jam , a fish Iccan , a hog Babee . from thence we return the 21 of November to go for the hand of Zeilan , and arrive there about the three of December 1592 . and anchor upon the southside in six fathom water , where we lose our anchor , the place be rocky and foul ground . than we run along the southwest part of the say hand , to a place call Punta deal gall , where we anchor , determine there to have remain until the come of the Bengala fleet of seven or eight ship , and the fleet of pegu of two or three sail , and the Portugal ship of tanaseri be a great bay to the southward of Martabam in the kingdom of Siam : which ship , by diverse intelligence which we have , be to come that way within fourteen day to bring commodity to serve the carack , which common depart from Cochin for Portugal by the midst of Januarie . the commodity of the ship which come from Bengala be fine pavilion for bed , wrought quilt , fine Calicut cloth , pintado and other fine work , and rice , and they make this voyage twice 400 in the year . those of Pegu bring the chief stone , commodity as ruby and diamond , but their chief fraught be rice and certain cloth . those of tanaseri be chief commodity freight with rice and Nipar wine , which be very strong , ° f ^ anasm - and in colour like unto rock water somewhat whitish , and very hot in taste like unto aqua vitae . be shoot up to the place aforesaid , call Punta deal gall , we come to a anchor in foul ground and lose the same , and lie all that night a drift , because we have now but two anchor leave we , which be unstock and in hold . whereupon our man take occasion to come home , our captain at that time lie very sick moor like to die then to live . in the morning we set our foresail determine to lie up to the northward and there to keep our self to and again out of the current , which great cur - otherwise will have set we off to the southward from all * ° know land . thus have set our foresail , and in out war ’ hand to set all our other sail to accomplish our aforesaid determination , our man make answer that they will take their direct course for England and will stay there no long . now see they can not be persuade by any mean possible , the captain be constrain to give his consent to return , leave all hope of so great possibility . thus the eight of December 1592 . we set sail for the cape of Buona Speransa , pass by the hand of Maldiva , and leave the mighty hand of S . Laurence on the starreboord [ ii two . 108 . ] or northward in the latitude of 26 degree to the south . in our passage over from saint Laurence to the main we have exceed great store of bonito and albocore , a notable re - which be a great kind of fish : of which our captain , be now recover of his sickness , take with a hook as many in two or three hour as will serve forty person a whole day . and this skole of fish continue with our ship for the space of five or six week , . all which while we take to the quantity aforesaid , which be no small refresh to we . in February 1593 . we fall with the eastermost land of vi 401 2c they double the cape of Buona Speransa . s . Helena . John Segar a Englishman leave 18 month alone in the he of santa Helena . a miraculous effect of extreme fear or extreme joy . the description of the commodity of the isle of santa Helena . Africa at a place call Baia de Agoa some 100 league to the north - east of the cape of good hope : and find the wind contrary , we spend a month or five week before we can double the cape . after we have double it in march follow , we direct our course for the hand of Santa Helena , and arrive there the three day of April , where we stay to our great comfort nineteen day : in which mean space some one man of we take thirty goodly Congers in one day , and other rocky fish and some bonito . after our arrival at Santa Helena , i Edmund Barker go on shore with four or five peguin or man of Pegu which we have take , and our surgeon , where in a house by the chapel i find a Englishman one John Segar of bury in sufiblke , who be leave there eighteen month before by Abraham Kendal , who put in there with the royal merchant , and leave he there to refresh he on the hand , be otherwise like to have perish on shipboard : and at our come we find he as fresh in colour and in as good plight of body to our seem as may be , but craze in mind and half out of his wit , as afterward we perceive : for whether he be put in fright of we , not know at first what we be , whether friend or foe , or of sudden joy when he understand we be his old consort and countryman , he become idle - headed , and for eight day space neither night nor day take any natural rest , and so at length die for lack of sleep . here two of