island call the Nuebias or cloudy hand , towards the he of saint Juan de porto Rico , where at our arrival we find land - crab and fresh water , and tortoise , which come most on land about the full of the moon . here have refresh our self some 17 or 18 day , and have get some small store of victual into our ship , we resolve to return again for Mona : upon which our determination five of our man five english leave we , remain still on the isle of Nuebias for all persuasion that we can use to the contrary , which ' afterward come home in a english ship . from these isle we depart and arrive at Mona about the twenty of November 1593 , and there come to a anchor towards two or three of the clock in the morning , the captain , and Edmund Barker his lieutenant with some few other go on land to the house of the old indian and his three son , think to have get some food , our victual be all spend , and we not able to proceed any further until we have obtain some new supply . we spend two or three day in seek provision to carry aboard to relieve the whole company . And come down to go aboard , the wind then be northerly and the sea somewhat grow , they can not come on shore with the boat , which be a thing of small succour and not able to row in any rough sea , whereupon we stay until the next morning , think - 4 ° s ing to have have less wind and safe passage . but in the ship lose the night about twelve of the clock our ship do drive by drive away the five man and a boy only in it , our carpenter awa ^ ' secret cut their own cable , leave nineteen of we on land without boat or any thing , to our great discomfort . in the midst of these misery repose our trust in the goodness of God , which many time before have succour we in our great extremity , we content our self with our poor estate , and seek mean to preserve our life . and because one place be not able to . sustain we , we take our leaf one of another , divide our self into several company . the great famine , great relief that we six which be with the captain can find for the space of nine and twenty day be the stalk off purselaine boil in water , and now and then a pompion , which we find in the garden of the old indian , who upon this our second arrival with his three son steal from we , and keep himself continual aloft in the mountain . after the end of nine and twenty day we espy a french ship , which afterward we understand to be of diepe , call the Luisa , who captain be one mounsieur Felix , unto who we make a fire , at sight whereof he take in his topsail , bear in with the land , and show we his flag , whereby we judge he French : so come along to the western end of the island there be anchor , we make down with all speed unto he . at this time the indian and his three son come do to our captain master James Lancaster , and go along with two ship of he to the ship . this night he go aboard the dupe - french man , who give he good entertainment , and the next day fetch eleven more of we aboard entreat we all very courteous . this day come another french ship of the same town of diepe which remain there until night expect our other seven man come down : who , albeit we cause certain piece of ordinance to be shoot off to call they , yet come not down . whereupon we depart thence , be divide six into 406 one ship , and six into another , and leave this island , depart for the northside of saint Domingo , where we remain until April follow 1594 , and spend some two month in traffic with the inhabitant by permission for hide and other merchandise of the country . in this mean while there come a ship of New - haven to the place where we be , whereby we have intelligence of our seven man which we leave behind we at the isle of Mona : which be , that two of they break their neck with venture to take fowl upon the cliff , other three be slay by the Spaniard , which come from saint Domingo , upon knowledge give by our man which go away in the Edward , the other two this man of New - haven have with he in his ship , which escape the Spaniard bloody hand . from this place captain Lancaster and his lieutenant master Edmund Barker , ship themselves in another ship of diepe , the captain whereof be one John la Noe , which be ready first to come away , and leave the rest of their company in other ship , where they be well entreat , to come after he , on Sunday the seven of April 1594 they set homeward , and disbock through the cajico from thence arrive safe in diepe within two and forty day after , on the 19 of may , where after we have stay two day to refresh our self , and give humble thanks unto God , and unto our friendly neighbour , we take passage for rye and land there on Friday the 24 of May 1594 , have spend in this voyage three year , six week and two day , which the Portugal perform in half the time , chief because we lose our fit time and season to set forth in the begin of our voyage . we understand in the east Indies by certain Portugal which we take , that they have late discover the coast of China to the latitude of nine and fifty degree , find the sea still open to the northward : give great hope of the north - east or northwest passage . witness master James Lancaster . 407 A . D . 1594 . the french trajike to saint Domingo . [ ii two . no . ] m . Lancaster return to diepe , and so to England .