a voyage to Benin beyond the country of Guinea , set forth by master bird and master Newton merchant of London , with a ship call the Richard of Arundel , and a pinesse ; write by James welsh , who be chief master of the say voyage , begin in the year 1588 . Pon the twelve of October we weigh our anchor at Ratcliff and go to Blackwall . and the next day sail from thence , by reason of contrary wind and weather , we make it the 25 . of October before we be able to reach Plymouth , and there we stay ( to our great expense of victual ) for lack of wind and weather unto the 14 . of December . on Saturday the say 14 . of December we put from thence , and about midnight be thwart of the Lizart . Rio deal on be Thursday the second of January we have sight of the in 22 . degree , land near Rio del oro , God be thank , and there have a 47 . mm . 22 > jegree of latitude , and 47 . minute . 45 ° the third of January we have sight of cavo de las barbas , and it bear southeast five league off . the 4 . we have sight of the crosier in the morning . Tuesday the 7 . day we have sight of Cavo verde , and i find this place to be in latitude 14 . degree , and 43 . minute , be 4 . league from the shore . Friday the 17 . Cavo de monte bear off we north Northeast , we sound and have 50 . fathom black oase , and at 2 . of the clock it bear north northwest 8 . league off . and Cavo Mensurado bear of we east and by south , and we go Northeast with the main : here the currant set to the east southeast alongst the shore , and at midnight we sound and have 26 . fathom black oase . the 18 . in the morning we be thwart of a land much like cavo verde , and it be as i judge 9 league from cavo Mensurado ; it be a hill sadlebacked , and there be 4 . or 5 . one after another : and 7 . league to the southward of that , we see a row of hill sadleback also , and from cavo Mensurado be many mountain . the 19 we be thwart Rio de Sestos , and the 20 . Cavo do Baixos be north and by west 4 . league off the shore , and at afternoon there come a boat from the shore with 3 . negro , from a place ( as they say ) call tabanoo . and towards evening we be thwart of a island , and a great many of small island or rock to the southward , and the currant come out of the souther - boord : we sound and have 3 5 fathom . the 21 . we have a flat hill that bear north Northeast off we , and we be from the shore 4 . league , and at 2 . a clock in the afternoon we speak with a Frenchman ride near a place call ratire , and another place hard by call Crua . This Frenchman carry a letter from we to m . Newton : we lay it on hull while we be write of our letter ; and the current set we to the southward a good pace alongst the shore south southeast . the 25 . we be in the bite of the bay that be to the westward of Capo de tres puntas : the currant do set east Northeast . A . D . 1589 . cavo de las barbas . crosier . cavo Verde , in 14 . deg . 43 . m . cavo de monte . cavo mensurado . Rio de Sestos . Cavo do Baixos . tabanoo . a french ship at ratire . Crua . a currant to the southeastward . 451 the 28 . we lay six glass a hull tarry for the pinesse . cavo de tres the last of January the middle part of cape de tres funtas . puntas be thwart of we three league at seven of the clock in the morning : and at eight the pinesse come to a anchor : and we prove that the current set to the eastward : and at six at night the uttermost land bear east and by south 5 . league , and we go Southwest , and Southwest and by south . Saturday the first of February 1588 . we be thwart of a round foreland , which i take to be the eastermost part of Capo de tres puntas : and within the say round foreland be a great bay with a island in the say bay . the castle of the second of February we be thwart of the castle Mtna - of Mina , and when the third glass of our lookout be spend , we spy under our larboard - quarter one of their boat with certain negro , and one Portugal in [ ii two . 127 . ] the boat , we will have have he to come aboard , but he will not . and over the castle upon the high rock two white we do see as it may be two watch - house , and they do watch - house . show very white : and we go eastnortheast . the 4 in the morning we be thwart a great high hill , and up into the land be more high ragged hill , monte re - and those i reckon to be but little short of monte dondo . Redondo . than i reckon that we be 20 league southeastward from the Mina , and at 11 of the clock i see two hill within the land , these hill i take to be 7 league from the first hill . and to seaward of these hill be a bay , and at the east end of the bay another hill , and from the hill the land lie very low . we go Eastnortheast , and east and by north 22 league , and then east along the shore . Villa long . the 6 we be short of villa long , and there we meet with a Portugal caravel . the 7 a fair temperate day