the second voyage to Benin , set forth by master John Newton , and master John bird merchant of London in the year 1590 with a ship call the Richard of Arundel of the burden of one hundred ton , and a small pinnace , in which voyage master James welsh be chief master . he three of September 1590 we set sail from Ratcliff , and the 18 of the say month we come into Plymouth sound , and the two and twenty we put to sea again , and at midnight we be off the lisart , and so pass on our voyage until the 14 of October , on which day we have sight of Forteventura one of the canary island , which appear very ragged as we sail by it . the 16 of October , in the latitude of 24 degree and nine minute we meet with a great hollow sea , the like whereof i never see on this coast , and this day there come to the ship side a monstrous great fish ( i think it be a Gobarto ) which put up his head to the steep tub where you cook be in shift the victual , who i think the fish will have carry away . the 21 in this latitude of 18 degree we meet with a countersea out of the north board , and the last 461 voyage in this very place we have the countersea out of the south , be very calm weather as now it be also . the 24 we have sight of Cavo Verde , and the 25 we meet with a great hollow sea out of the north , which a take of a be a common sign that the wind will be northerly , northerly and so prove . wtnde ' the 15 of November we meet with three currant out of the west and northwest , one after another , with a hour time between each currant . this be in the latitude of 6 degree and 42 minute . great cur - then jg jay we meet with two other great currant rant it out of the southwest , and the 20 we see another current out of the north - east , and the 24 we have a great current out of the southsouthwest , and at 6 of the clock towards night we have 3 current more . the 27 we thought that we have go at the least 2 league and a half every watch , and it fall out that we sail but one league every watch for the space of 24 hour , by mean of a great billow and current that come still out of the south . [ ii two . 131 . ] the 5 of December in set the watch we cast about and lay east Northeast , and Northeast , and here in 5 degree and a half our pinnace lose we wilful . the 7 at the go down of the sun we see a great black spot in the sun , and the 8 . day both at rise and set we see the like , which spot to our seem be about the bigness of a shilling , be in 5 degree of latitude , and still there come a great billow out of the southerboord . the 14 we sound and have 15 fathom water and gross red sand , and 2 league from the shore the currant set southeast along the shore with a billow still out of the southerboord . the 15 we be thwart a rock somewhat like the Mewstone in England , it be 2 league from we , here we sound and have 27 fathom , but the rock be not two rock . above a mile from the shore , and a mile far we see another rock , and between they both break 462 1590 . ground ; here we sound and have but 20 fathom and black sand , and we may see plain that the rock go not along the shore , but from the land to the seaward , and about 5 league to the southward we see a great bay , here we have 4 degree and 27 minute . the 16 we meet with a french ship of Hunfleur , a french ship who rob our pin ness , we send a letter by he , and Hunfleur . this night we see another spot in the sun at his go down . and towards evening we be thwart of a river , and right over the river be a high tuft of tree . the 17 we anchor in the river mouth , and then we find the land to be cavo de las Palmas , and give between we and the cape be a great ledge of rock , palmas - one league and a half into the sea , and they bear to the west of the cape , we see also a island off the point of the foreland , thus it wax night that we can perceive no more of the land , but only that it trend in like a bay , where there run a stream as if it be in the river of Thames , and this be the change day of the moon . the 19 a fair temperate day , and the wind south , we go east , and the land a stern of we west , and it show low by the water side like island , this be the east of cavo de las Palmas , and it trend in with a great sound , and we go east all night , and in the morning we be but 3 or 4 league from the shore . the 20 we be thwart of a river call Rio de los barbos . barbos - the 21 we go along the shore east , and 3 or 4 league to the west of cavo de tres puntas , i find the bay to be set deep than it be by 4 league , and at 4 of the clock the land begin to show high , and the first part of it full of palm tree . the 24 still go by the shore , the land be very low and full of tree by the water side , and at 12 of the clock we anchor thwart of the river call , Rio de Rio de boila Boilas . here we send our boat a shore with the mar - 463 Januarie . Villa long . Rio de Lagoa . chant , but they dare not put into the river because of a great billow that continual break at the entrance upon the bar . the 28 we sail alongst the shore , and anchor at night in seven fathom because a great current will have put we back , which come from the east southeast from Papuas . the 29 at noon we be thwart of Arda , and there we take a caravel but the man be flee on land , than we go aboard she , but she have nothing in she but only a little oil of palm tree , and a few root . the next morning our captain and merchant go to meet Portugal , that come in a boat to speak with we , where they commune about the buy of the caravel of our man again , and the Portugal promise that we shall have for the caravel , certain bullock and elephant tooth , and they give we one tooth and one bullock present , and say they will bring we the rest the next day . the first of Januarie our captain go on land to speak with the Portugal , but when he see they do dissemble , he come aboard again , and present we unrig the caravel , and set she on fire before the town . than we set sail and go along the coast , where we see a date tree , the like whereof be not in all that coast upon the water side , also we fall on ground a little in one place : thus we go to villa long , and there anchor . the three