a voyage to the azore with two pinnace , the one call the serpent , and the other the mary spark of Plymouth , both of they belong to sir Walter Ralegh , write by John Evesham gentleman , wherein be take the governor , of the isle of saint Michael , and Pedro Sarmiento governor of the strait of magalane , in the year 1586 . the 10 . of June 1586 . we depart from Plymouth with two pinnace , the one name the serpent , of the burden of 35 . ton , and the other the mary spark of Plymouth of the burden of 50 . tun , both of they belong to sir Walter Ralegh knight ; and direct our course towards the coast of Spain , and from thence towards the isle of the azore , we take a small bark lade with sumacke and other commodity , wherein be the governor of saint Michael island , be a Portugal , have other Portugal and Spaniard with he . and from thence we sail to the island of Graciosa , to the westward of the island of Tercera , where we descry a sail , and bear with she we find she to be a Spaniard : but at the first not great respect who we take , so that we may have enrich our self , which be the cause of this our travail , and for that we will not be know of 434 1586 . what nation we be , we display a white silk ensign in our main top , which they see , make account that we have be some of the king of Spain armada , lie in wait for english man of war : but when we come within shot of she , we take down our white flag , and spread abroad the cross of S . George , which when they see , it make they to fly as fast as they may , but all their haste be in vain , for our ship be swift of sail than they , which they fear , do present cast their ordinance and small shot with many letter , and the draft of the strait of Magelan into the sea , and thereupon immediate we take she , wherein we also take a gentleman of Spain , name Pedro Sarmiento , governor of the Pedro sarmi - straight of Magelan , which say Pedro we bring entothe & ver - into England with we , and present he to our sovereign lady the queen . Magelan after this , lie off and about the island , we de - takenprisoner . scry another sail , and bear after she , we spend the main mast of our admiral , but yet in the night our vice - admiral take she , be lade with fish from cape a ship lade blank , the which ship we let go again for want with fish take of man to bring she home . the next day we descry andfie ^ ase ^ two other sail , the one a ship and the other a a ^ mne ’ caravel , to who we give chase , which they see , with all speed make in under the isle of Graciosa , to a certain fort there for their succour , where they come to a anchor , and have the wind of we we can not hurt they with our ship , but we have a small boat , which we call a light horseman , wherein my self be , be a musquet , and four more with caliver , and four that row , come near unto the shore against the wind , which when they see we come towards they they carry a great part of their merchandise on land , whither also the man of both vessel go and land , and as soon as we come within musket shoot , they begin to shoot at we with great ordinance and small shot , and we likewise at they , and in the end we 435 one of the ship take , and send away with 2 . person . the caravel be take . [ ii two . 121 . ] the prize send home . two carrack , 10 . galleon , 12 small ship . board one ship wherein be no man leave , so we cut her cable , hoist her sail , and send she away with two of our man , and the other 7 . of we pass more near unto the shore , and board the caravel , which do ride within a stone cast from the shore , and so near the land that the people do cast stone at we , but yet in despite of they all we take she , and one only negro therein ; and cut her cable in the hawse we hoist her sail and be becalm under the land , we be constrain to row she out with our boat , the fort still shoot at we , and the people on land with musket and caliver , to the number of 150 . or thereabouts : and we answer they with the small force we have ; in the time of which our shoot , the shot of my musket be a crossebarreshot happen to strike the gunner of the fort to death , even as he be give level to one of his great piece , and thus we part from they without any loss or hurt on our side . and now , have take these five sail of ship , we do as before , turn away the ship with the fish , without hurt they , and from one of the other ship we take she main mast to serve our admiral turn , and so send she away put into her all the Spaniard and Portugal , ( save that gentleman Pedro Sarmiento , with three other of the principal man and two negro ) leave they all within sight of land , with bread and water sufficient for 10 . day if need be . thus set our course for England , be oflf the island in the height of 41 . degree , or there about , one of our man be in the top descry a sail , than 10 . sail , than 15 . whereupon it be conclude to send home those prize we have , and so leave in both our pinass not above 60 . man . thus we return again to the fleet we have descry , where we find 24 . sail of ship , whereof two of they be carrack , the one of 1200 . and the other of a 1000 ton , and 10 . gallon , the rest be small ship and caravel all 436 lade with treasure , spice , and sugar , with which 24 . ship we with two small Pinasses do fight , and keep company the space of 32 . hour , continual fight with they and they with we , but the two carrack keep still betwixt the fleet and we , that we can not take any one of they , so want powder , we be force to give they over against our will , for that we be all whole bend to the gain of some of they , but necessity compel we , and that only for want of powder , without loss of any of our man , ( which be a thing to be wonder at consider the inequality of number ) at length we give they over . thus we again the 2 . pinass set our course for England , and so come to Plymouth r ‘ til ^ for within 6 . hour after our prize , which we send away n & an ’ 40 . hour before we , where we be receive with triumphant joy , not only with great ordinance then shoot off , but with the willing heart of all the people of the town , and of the country thereabouts ; and we not spare our ordinance ( with the powder we have leave ) to requite and answer they again . and from thence we bring our prize to Southampton , where sir Walter Ralegh be our owner , reward we with our share . our prize be lade with sugar , elephant tooth , wax , hide , rice , brazil , and cuser , as by the testimony of John Evesham himself , captain Whiddon , Thomas Rainford , Benjamin wood , William Cooper master , William Cornish master , Thomas Drake Corporali , John Ladd gunner , William Warefield gunner , Richard moon , John draw , Richard Cooper of Harwich , William bear of Ratcliff , John row of Saltash , and many other , may appear .