, and all this day we ride before villa long . the 8 at noon we set sail from villa long , and 452 1589 - ten league from thence we anchor again and stay all that night in ten fathom water . the 9 we set sail , and all alongst the shore be very thick wood , and in the afternoon we be thwart a river , and to the eastward of the river a little way off Rio de Lagos , be a great high bush - tree as though it have no leaf , and at night we anchor with fair and temperate weather . the 10 we set sail and go east , and east and by south 14 league along the shore , which be so full of thick wood , that in my judgement a man shall have much to do to pass through they , and towards night we anchor in 7 fathom with fair weather . the both we sail east and by south , and three league from the shore we have but 5 fathom water , and all the wood upon the land be as even as if it have be cut with a pair of gardener shears , and in run of two league we discern a high tuft of tree upon the brow of a land , which show like a porpose head , and when we come at it , it be but part of the land , and a league further we see a headland very low and full of tree , and a great way from the land we have very shallow water , very shallow then we lay south into the sea , because of the sand for water - to get into the deep water , and when we find it deep , we anchor in five fathom thwart the river of Jaya , in the river mouth . the 12 in the morning we ride still in the river mouth . this day we send the pinnace and the boat on land with the merchant , but they come not again until the next morning . the shallow part of this river be towards the west , where there be but 4 fathom and a half , and it be very broad . the next morning come the boat aboard , and they also say it be Rio the Jaya . Rio de Jaya . here the currant set westward , and the eastermost land be high than the westermost . Thursday the 13 we set sail , and lie south southeast along the shore , where the tree be wonderful even , and the east shore be high than the west shore , and when we have sail 18 league we have sight of a great river , 453 than we anchor in three fathom and a half , and the Rio Benin . currant go westward . this river be the river of Benin , and two league from the main it be very shallow . the 15 we send the boat and pinnace into the river with the merchant , and after that we set sail , because we ride in shallow water , and go southsoutheast , and the starboard tack aboard until we come to five fathom a currant water , where we ride with the currant to the westward : westward . then come our boat out of the harbour and go aboard the pinnace . the west part of the land be high browed much like the head of a Gurnard , and the eastermost land be low , and have on it three tuft of tree like stack of wheat or corn , and the next day in the morning we see but two of those tree , by reason that we go more to the eastward . and here we ride still from the 14 of February until the 14 of April , with the wind at Southwest . the 16 of February we ride still in 5 fathom , and the currant run still to the westward , the wind at Southwest , and the boat and pinnace come to we again tenfoote out of the river , and tell we that there be but ten foot t ^ b ^ tof water upon the bar . all that night be drowsy , and Rio de Benin . reasonable temperate . the 17 a close day the wind at Southwest . our merchant weigh their good and put they aboard the pinnace to go into the river , and there come a great currant out of the river and set to the westward . the 18 the merchant go with the boat and pinnace into the river with their commodity . this day be close and drowsy , with thunder , rain and lightning . the 24 a close morning and temperate , and in they . afternoon the boat come to we out of the river from our merchant . Tuesday the 4 of march , a close sultry hot morning , the currant go to the westward , and much trouble water come out of the river . the 16 our pinnace come a board and Anthony Ingram in she , and she bring in her 94 bag of pepper , 454 and 28 elephant tooth , and the master of she and all his company be sick . this be a temperate day and the wind at Southwest . the 17 . 18 . and 19 be fair temperate weather and the wind at Southwest . this day the pinnace go into the river again , and carry the purser and the surgeon . the 25 of the say month 1589 we send the boat into the river . the 30 our pinnace come from Benin , and bring sorrowful news , that Thomas Hemsted be dead and our captain also , and she bring with her 159 ceron or sack of pepper and elephant tooth . note that in all the time of our abide here , in the mouth of the river of Benin , and in all the coast hereabout it be fair temperate weather , when the wind be at Southwest . and when the wind be at north - east and northerly , than it rain , with lightning and thunder , and be very intemperate weather . the 13 of April 1589 we set sail homeward in the name of Jesus . in the morning we sail with the wind at Southwest , and lie west and by north