, but it prove calm all that night , and the currant southeast . the 14 the river of Benin be Northeast 7 league from the shore , and there be little wind and towards night calm . the 17 a fair temperate day the wind variable , and we have of latitude four degree and 20 minute . the 25 a fair temperate day the wind variable , and here we have three degree and 29 minute of latitude . the 8 of may we have sight of the shore , which be part of cavo de monte , but we do not think we have be so far , but it come so to pass by reason of the currant . in this place m . Towrson be in like manner deceive with the currant . the 9 we have sight of cavo de monte . the 17 a dark drowsy day , this be the first night that i take the north star . 455 A . D . 1589 . [ ii two . 128 . ] sickness among our man . the death of the captain . Pepper and elephant tooth . a good note . a deceitpfull currant . the 26 a temperate day with little wind , and we be in 12 degree and 13 minute of latitude . the 30 we meet a great sea out of they northwest . the 6 of June we find it as temperate as if we have be in England , and yet we be within the height of the sun , for it be decline 23 degree , and 26 minute to the northward , and we have 15 degree of latitude . the 8 fair and temperate as in England , here we meet with a counter sea , out of the southborde . the 15a fair temperate day , the wind variable , here we have 18 degree and fifty nine minute . Rockweed or the 12 of July in 30 degree of latitude we meet with Sa ^ aSa ^° al1 great store of rockwee , which do stick together like a hang t e sea . cjusjers o £ grapesj and this continue with we until the 17 of the say month , and then we see no more , at which 17 day we be in two and thirty degree six and forty minute of latitude . the 25 at six of the clock in the morning , we have sight of the isle of pike , it bear north and by east from we , we be 15 league off . the 27 we speak with the post of London and she tell we good news of England . the nine and twenty we have sight of the island of Cuervo , and the 30 we see the island of Flores . the 27 of August in 41 degree of latitude we see 9 sail of Briton , and three of they follow we until noon , and then give we over . the 30 we have sight of cape Finisterre . the eight of September at night we put into plymouth sound , and ride in Causon bay all night . the 9 we put into Catwater and there stay until the 28 of September , by reason of want of man and sickness . the nine and twenty we set sail from Plymouth , and arrive at London the second of October 1589 . the commodity that we carry in this voyage be cloth both linen and woollen , iron work of sundry sort , 456 ... 15891 manillio or bracelet of copper , glass bead , and coral . the commodity that we bring home be pepper and elephant tooth , oil of palm , cloth make of cotton wool very curious weave , and cloth make of the bark of palm tree . their money be pretty white [ ii two . 129 . ] shell , for gold and silver we see none . they have also great store of cotton grow : their bread be a kind of root , they call it Inamia , and when it be well sodden Inamla , akind i will leave our bread to eat of it , it be pleasant in ° fbrfa < lin eat , and light or digestion , the root thereof be as big as a man arm . our man upon fish - day have rather eat the root with oil and vinegar , than to eat good stockfish . there be great store of palm tree , out of the which they gather great store of wine , wine ° f which wine be white and very pleasant , and we shall buy tiee it two gallon of it for 20 shell . they have good store of soap , and it smell like beat violet . also many pretty fine mat and basket that they make , and spoon of elephant tooth very curious wrought with diverse proportion of fowl and beast make upon they . there be upon the coast wonderful great lightning and thunder , in so much as i never hear the like in no country , for it will make the deck or hatch tremble under our foot , and before we be well acquaint with it , we be fearful , but God be thank we have no harm . the people be very gentle and love , and they go naked both man and woman until they be marry , and then they go cover from the middle down to the abundance of knee . they will bring our man earthen pot of honey . the quantity of two gallon , full of honey and honey thispreser - combe for 100 shell . they will also bring great va11 ™ 6 ™ store of orange and plantan which be a fruit that cast into a grow upon a tree , and be very like unto a Cucumber hogshead of but very pleasant in eat . it have please God of water an his merceifull goodness to give i the knowledge how to preserve fresh water with little cost , which do serve the author tell we six month at the sea , and when we come into Plim - i . 457 mouth it be much wonder at , of the principal man of the town , who say that there be not sweet water in any spring in Plymouth . thus do God provide for his creature , unto who be praise now and for evermore , amen .