we be as far shoot as Rio de Lagoa , where our merchant go a shore and upon the bar they find 3 fathom flat , but they go not in because it be late . there be also to the eastward of this river a date tree high than all the rest of the other tree thereabouts . thus we go along the coast , and every night anchor , and all the shore as we go be full of tree and thick wood . the 6 day in the morning it be very foggy , so that we can not see the land , and at three of the clock in the afternoon it clear up , and then we find our 464 1591 . self thwart of the river of Jaya , and when we find the river of the shallow water , we bear into the sea south , as we do the voyage before , and come to a anchor in five fathom water . the next day we set sail again , and towards noon we be thwart of the river of Benin in the river of four fathom water . Benin . the 10 day our captain go on land with the shall - [ ii two . 132 . ] lop at 2 a clock in the afternoon . all this week it be very foggy every day until ten a clock , and all this time hitherto have be as temperate as our summer in England . this day we go into the road and anchor , and the west point of the road bare east north - east off we , we ride in four fathom water . the 21 a fair temperate day , this day m . Hassald go to the town of Goto , to hear news of the Goto . captain . the 23 come the caravel , and Samuell in she , and the caravel she bring 63 elephant tooth , and three bullock . aboord ^ the 28 a fair temperate day , and towards night there ' fell much rain , lightning , and thunder , this day our boat come aboard from Goto . the 24 of February , we take in 298 ceron or z98 - smh of sack of pepper , and 4 elephant tooth , and the wind be at southeast . and the 26 we put the rest of our good into the caravel , and m . Hassald go with she to Goto . the 5 of march you caravel come again and bring 21 ceron of pepper , and 4 elephant tooth . the 9 of April our caravel come aboard with water for our provision for the sea , and this day also we lose our shallope . the 17a drowsy rainy day , and in the afternoon three spout . we see 3 great spout of rain , two on our larboard side , and one right with the ship head , but God be thank , they come not at we , and this day we take in the last of our water for the sea , and the 26 we victual our caravel to go with we to the sea . they return the 27 we set sail to go homeward with the wind homeward . vi 465 2 g we depart in company of a prize . Corvo . at Southwest , and at two a clock in the afternoon , the river of Benin be Northeast 8 league from we . the 3 of may we have such a terrible gust with rain , lightning and thunder , that it tear and split our fore sail , and also the caravel foresail and maine - sail , with the wind at southeast . the 12 a fair temperate day , much like our summer morning in England , be but one degree and a half from the line , but at midnight we have a cruel gust of rain , and the wind at north - east . the 24 we be south from cavo de las Palmas 37 league . the first of July we have sight of the island of Brava , and it bear east 7 league off , and this island be one of the island of Cavo Verde . the 13 of August we speak with the queen ship , the lord Thomas Howard be admiral , and sir Richard greenevill vice - admiral . they keep we in their company until the 15 day at night , themselves lie a hull , in weight for purchase 30 league to the southwest of the island of Flores . the 15 we have leave to depart with a flyboat lade with sugar that come from Sant Thome , which be take by the queen ship , whereof my lord admiral give i great charge , not to leave she until she be harbour in England . the three and twenty the north - east part of the island of Corvo bear off we east and by south six league off . the 17 of September we meet with a ship of Plymouth that come out of the west Indies , but she can tell we no news . the next day we have sight of another sail , this day also one of our company name m . wood die . the 23 we speak with the dragon of my lord of Cumberland , whereof master ivy be master . the second of October we meet with a ship of Newcastle which come from Newfoundland , and out of she we have 300 couple of Newland fish . the 6 we have sight of silly , and with rain and wind 466 .. i591 - we be force to put into saint Mary sound , where we stay all night , and 4 day after . the both we set sail again , and come out have three fathom upon the bar at a high water , than we lay out southeast , through crow - sand , and short after we have sight of the land end , and at ten of the clock we be thwart of the Lysart . the 13 we be put into Dartmouth , and there we stay until the 12 of December . from thence we put out with the wind at west , and the 18 of December , God be praise , we anchor at limehouse in the Thames , where we discharge 589 sack of pepper , 150 elephant tooth , and 32 barrel of oil of palm tree . the commodity that we carry out this second voyage be broad cloth , kersey , bay , linen cloth , iron unwrought , bracelet of copper , coral , hawk bell , horsetaile , hat , and such like . this voyage be more comfortable unto we then the first , because we have good store of fresh water , and that very sweet : for as yet we have very good water in the ship which we bring out of the river of Benin the [ ii two . 133 . ] first day of April 1591 . and it be at this day ( be the 7 of June 1592 . ) to be see aboard the ship as clear and as sweet as any fountain can yield . in this voyage we sail 350 league within half of it be more degree of the equinoctial line , and there we find it « « ' more temperate , then where we ride . and under the line we do kill great store of small Delphines , and on the ’ coast of many other good fish , and so do we all the way , guinie and which be a very great refresh unto we , and the fish benin - neve forsake we , until we be to the northward of the hand of azore , and then we can see no more fish , but God be thank we meet with good company of our country ship which be great comfort unto we , be five month before at sea without any company . by i James Welsh master of the Richard of Arundel , in both these voyage to the river of Benin .