[ 11 . two . 134 . ] a true discourse write ( as be think ) by colonel Antony Winkfield employ in the voyage to Spain and Portugal , 1589 . send to his particular friend , and by he publish for the better satisfaction of all such as have be seduce by particular report , have enter into conceit tend to the discredit of the enterprise and actor of the same . lthough the desire of advance my reputation cause i to withstand the many persuasion you use to hold i at home , and the pursuit of honourable action draw i ( contrary to your expectation ) to neglect that advise , which in love i know you give i : yet in respect of the many assurance you have yield i of your kind friendship , i can suspect that you will either love or esteem i the less , at this my return : and therefore i will not omit any occasion which may make i appear thankful , or discharge any part of that duty i owe you ; which now be none other then to offer you a true discourse how these war of Spain and Portugal have pass since our go out of England the 18 of April , till our return which be the first of July . wherein i will ( under your favourable pardon ) for your further satisfaction , as well make relation of those reason which confirm i in my purpose of go abroad , as of these accident which have happen during our abode there ; thereby hope to persuade you that no light fancy do draw i from the fruition of your dear friendship , but a earnest desire , by follow the war to make my self more worthy of the same . have therefore determinate purpose to put on this habit of a soldier , 1 grow doubtful whether to employ my time in you war of the low country , which 470 be in auxiliary manner maintain by her majesty , or to follow the fortune of this voyage , which be a adventure of she and many honourable personage , in revenge of un supportable wrong offer unto the estate of our country by the castilian king : in argue whereof , i find that by how much the challenger be repute before the defendant , by so much be the journey to be prefer before those defensive war . for have the duke of Parma his turn be to defend , as it be his good fortune to invade : from whence can have proceed that glorious honour which these late war have lay upon he , or what can have be say more of he , then of a respondent ( though never so valiant ) in a private duel ? Even , that he have do no more than by his honour he be tie unto . for the gain of one town or any small defeat give more renown to the assailant , than the defence of a country , or the withstand of twenty encounter can yield any man who be bind by his place to guard the same : whereof as well the particular of our age , especial in the Spaniard , as the report of former history may assure we , which have still lay the fame of all war upon the invader . and do not we in these day live obscure in Flanders , either not have wherewithal ! to manage any war , or not put on arm , but to defend themselves when the enemy shall procure they ? whereas in this short time of our adventure , we have win a town by escalade , batter and assault another , overthrow a mighty prince power in the field , land our army in 3 several place of his kingdom , march 7 day in the heart of his country , lie three night in the suburb of he principali city , beat his force into the gate thereof , and possess two of his frontier fort , as shall in discourse thereof more particular appear : whereby i conclude , that go with a invader , and in such a action as every day give new experience , i have much to vaunt of , that my fortune do rather carry i thither then into the war of Flanders . 471 notwithstanding the vehement persuasion you use with i to the contrary , the ground whereof since you receive they from other , you must give i leave to acquaint you with the error you be lead into , by they , who labour to bring the world into a opinion that it stand more with the safety of our estate to bend all our force against the prince of Parma , than to follow this action by look into the true effect of this journey , will judicial convince themselves of mistake the matter . for , may the conquest of these country against the prince of Parma be think more easy for we alone now , than the defence of they be 11 year ago , with the man and money of the queen of England ? the power of the monsieur of France ? the assistance of the principal state of Germany ? and the nobility of their own country ? can not a army of more than 20000 horse , and almost 30000 foot , beat don John de Austria out of the country , who be possess of a very few frontier town ? and shall it now be lay upon her majesty shoulder to remove so mighty a enemy , who have leave we but 3 whole part of 17 unconquered ? it be not a journey of a few month , nor a auxiliary war of few year that can damnify the king of Spain in those place where we shall meet at every 8 or 10 mile end with a town , which will cost more the win then will yearly pay 4 or 5 thousand man wage , where all the country be quarter by river which have no passage unfortified , and where [ ii two . 135 . ] most of the best soldier of Christendom that be on our adverse party be in pension . but our army , which have not cost her majesty much above the three part of one year expense in the low country , have