army of 20000 royal furnish there , we shall not need to take much care for their payment : for shall not Lisbon be think able to make so few man rich , when the suburb thereof be find so abound in riches , as have we make enemy of they , they have large enrich we all ? which with what small loss it may be win , be not here to show ; but why it be not win by we , i have herein show you . or be not the spoil of Sivil sufficient to pay more than shall be needful to be send against it , who defence ( as that of Lisbon ) be only force of man , of who how many may for the present be raise , be not to be esteem , because we have discover what kind of man they be , even such as will never abide we in field , nor dare withstand any resolute attempt of we against they : for during the time we be in many place of their country , they can say that ever they make 20 of our man turn their face from they . and be there not many other place of less difficulty to spoil , able to satisfy our force ? but admit , that if upon this alarm that we have give he , he tender his natural and near soil before his further remmoove off government , do draw his force of old soldier out of the low country for his own defence , be not the victory then win by draw and hold they from thence , for the which we shall have keep a army there at a charge by many part great than this , and not stir they ? 5r9 admit further our army be impeach from land there , yet by keep the sea , and possess his principali road , be we not in possibility to meet with his indian merchant , and very like to prevent he of his provision come out of the east country ; without the which , neither the subject of Lisbon be long able to live , nor the king able to maintain his navy ? for though the country of Portugal do some year find themselves corn , yet be they never able to victuali the least part of that city . and albeit the king of Spain be the rich prince in Christendom , yet can he neither draw cable , hew mast , nor make powder out of his metal , but be to be supply of they all from thence . of who ( some will hold opinion ) it be no reason to make prize , because they be not our enemy : and that our dis - agreeance with they will impeach the trade of our merchant , and so impoverish our country . of who mind i can hardly be draw to be : for if my enemy fight with i do break his sword , so as i thereby have the advantage against he ; what shall i think of he that put a new sword into his hand to kill i withal ? and may it not be think more fit for we in these time to loose our trade of cloth , then by suffer these mischief , to put in hazard whether we shall have a country leave to make cloth in or no ? and yet though neither Hamburgh , Embden , nor stand do receive our cloth , the necessary use thereof in all place be such , as they will find mean to take it from we with our sufficient commodity . and admit ( which be impossible ) that we damnify he neither at sea nor land ( for unless it be with a much more mighty army than we , he shall never be able to withstand we ) yet shall we by hold he at his home , free our self from the war at our own wall : the benefit whereof let they consider that best can judge , and have observe the difference of invade , and be invade ; the one give courage to the soldier , in that it do set before he commodity and reputation ; the other a 520 the Portugal voyage fearful terror to the countryman , who if by chance he play the man yet be he never the rich : and who know many hole to hide himself in , will try they all before he put his life in peril by fight : whereas the invader cast up his account before he go out , and be abroad must fight to make himself way , as not know what place or strength to trust unto . i will not say what i observe in our countryman when the enemy offer to assail we here : but i wish that all England know what terror we give to the same people that fright we , by visit they at their own house . be not Alexander fortune great against the mighty Darius , only in that his macedonian thirst after the wealth of Persia , and be bind to fight it out to the last man , because the last man know no safe way to save himself then by fight ? whereas the persian either trust to continue still master of their wealth by yielding to the invader , begin to practise against their own king : or have moor inward hope , do hide themselves even to the last , to see what course the conqueror will take in his conquest . and do not the advice of Scipio , though mighty impugn at the first , prove very , sound and honourable to his country ? who see the roman wonderful amaze at the nearness of their enemy force , and the loss they daily sustain by they , give counsel rather by way of diversion to carry a army into Africa , and there to assail , then by a defensive war at home to remain subject to the common spoil of a assail enemy . which be put in execution draw the enemy from the gate of room , and Scipio return home with triumph : albeit his beginning at the first be not so fortunate against they , as we have be in this small time against the Spaniard . the good success whereof may