encourage we to take arm resolute against he . and i beseech God it may stir up all man that be particular interest therein , to bethink themselves how small a matter will assure they of their safety , by hold the Spaniard at a bay , so far off : 521 whereas , if we give he leave quiet to hatch and bring forth his preparation , it will be with danger to we all . he take not arm against we by any pretense of title to the crown of this realm , nor lead altogether with a ambitious desire to command our country , but with hatred towards our whole nation and religion . her majesty sceptre be already give by bull to another , the honour of our nobility be bestow for reward upon his attendant , our clergy , our gentleman , our lawyer , yea all man of what condition soever be offer for spoil unto the common soldier . let every man therefore , in defence of the liberty and plenty he have of long enjoy , offer a voluntary contribution of the small part of their store for the assurance of the rest . it be not much for every justice of peace , who by his blue coat protect the proper and most serviceable man at every muster from the war , to contribute the charge that one of these idle man do put he to for one year : nor for the lawyer , who rise by the dissension of his neighbour , to take but one year gift ( which they call fee ) out of his coffer . what will it hinder every officer of the exchequer , and other of her majesty court , who without check do sudden grow to great wealth , honest to bring forth the mystical commodity of one year profit ? or the clergy , who look precise for the ten of every man increase , simple to bring forth the ten of one year gather , and in thankfulness to her majesty , ( who have continue for all our safety a most chargeable war both at land and sea ) bestow the same for her honour and their own assurance , upon a army which may make this bloody enemy so to know himself and her majesty power , as he shall bethink he what it be to move a stir people ? who , though they have receive some small check by the sickness of this last journey , yet doubt i not , but if it be make know , that the like voyage be to be support by a generality , ( that may and will bear the charge of 522 .. 15891 a more ample provision ) but there will of all sort most willing put themselves into the same : some carry with a honourable desire to be in action , and some in love of such will affectionate follow their fortune ; some in thirst to revenge the death and hurt of their brethren , kindred , and friend : and some in hope of the plentiful spoil to be find in those country , have be there already and return poor , will desire to go again , with a expectation to make amends for the last : and all , in hatred of that cowardly proud nation , and in contemplation of the true honour of our own , will with courage take arm to hazard their life against they , who every good Englishman be in nature bind to hate as a implacable enemy to England , thirst after our blood , and labour to ruin our land , with hope to bring we under the yoke of perpetuali slavery . against they be true honour to be get , for that we [ ii two . 154 . ] shall no soon set foot in their land , but that every step we tread will yield we new occasion of action , which i wish the gallantry of our country rather to regard then to follow those soft unprofitable pleasure wherein they now consume their time and patrimony . and in two or three town of Spain be the wealth of all Europe gather together , which be the magasin of the fruit and profit of the east and west Indies , whereunto i wish our young able man , who , ( against the liberty they be bear unto ) term themselves serve man , rather to bend their desire and affection , than to attend their double livery and 40 shilling by the year wage , and the reversion of the old copyhold , for carry a dish to their master table . but let i here reprehend my self and crave pardon for enter into a matter of such state and consequence , the care whereof be already lay upon a most grave and honourable counsel , who will in their wisdom foresee the danger that may be threaten against we . and why do i labour to disquiet the security of these happy gentleman , and the trade of those 523 honest serve man , by persuade they to the war when i see the profession thereof so slender esteem ? for though all our hope of peace be frustrate , and our quarrel determinable by the sword : though our enemy have by his own force and his pensionary industry , confine the unite province into a narrow room , and almost disunit the same : if he be now in a good way to harbour himself in the principali haven of France , from whence he may front we at pleasure : yea though we be to hope for nothing but a bloody war , nor can trust to any help but arm ; yet how far the common sort be from reverence or regard any person of conduction , be too apparent in the return of this our journey , wherein the base and common soldier have be toilerate to speak against the captain , and the soldier and captain against the general , and wherein mechanical ! and man of base condition do dare to censure the do of they , of who act they be not worthy to talk . the ancient grave degree of the prelacy be uphold , though Martin rail never so much , and the lawyer be after the old manner worship , whosoever inveigh against he . but the