to give the alarm unto the enemy : which be well perform by they that have the charge thereof , but the enemy refuse to issue after they , so as the earl return assoon as it be light without do any thing , though he have in purpose , and be ready to have give a honourable charge on they . the 25 of may in the evening we come to the suburb of Lisbon : at the very entrance whereof sir Roger William call captain Anthony Wingfield with he , take thirty shot or thereabouts , and first scour all the street till they come very near the town ; where they find none but old folk and beggar , cry , viva el Rey don Antonio , and the house shut up : for they have carry much of their wealth into the town , and have fire some house by the water side , full of corn and other provision of victual , lest we shall be benefit thereby , but yet leave behind they great riches in many house . the four regiment that have the vanguard that day , which be colonel Devereux , sir Edward Norris , colonel Sidneys , and general drake ( who i name as they march ) the colonel generail cause to hold guard in the near street of the suburb : the battle and the arreward stand in arm all the night in the field near to Alcantara . before morning captain Wingfield , by direction from the colonel general sir Roger Williams , hold guard with sir Edward Norris his regiment in three place very near the town wall , and 500 so hold the same till the other regiment come in the morning . about midnight they within the town burn all their house that stand upon their wall either within or without , lest we possess they , may thereby great have annoy the town . the next morning sir Roger Williams attempt ( but not without peril ) to take a church call S . Antonio , which join to the wall of the town , and will have be a very evil neighbour to the town : but the enemy have moor easy entry into it than we gain it before we . the rest of that morning be spend in quarter the battle and arrereward in the suburb call bona vista , and in place musketeer in house , to front their shot upon the wall , who from the same scour the great street very dangerous . by this time our man be thorough weary with our six day march , and the last night watch , be desirous of rest : whereof the enemy be advertise , about one or two of the clock sally out of the town , and make their approach in three several street upon we , but chief in colonel brets quarter : who ( as most of the army be ) be at rest , with as much speed as he can , draw his man into arm , and make head against they so thorough , as himself be slay in the place , captain Carsey shoot through the thigh , of which hurt he die within four day after , captain Carre slay present , and captain cave hurt ( but not mortal ) who be all of his regiment . this resistance make aswell here , as in other quarter where colonel lane and colonel medkerk command , put they to a sudden foul retreat ; insomuch , as the earl of Essex have the chase of they even to the gate of the high town , wherein they leave behind they many of their best commander : their troop of horseman also come out , but be charge by captain York , withdraw themselves again . many of they also leave the street , and betake they to house which they find open : for the sergeant major captain Wilson slay in 501 1589 - one house with his own hand three or four , and cause they that be with he to kill many other . their loss i can assure you do triple we , aswell in quality as in quantity . during our march to this place , general drake with the whole fleet be come into Cascais , and possess the town without any resistance : many of the inhabitant [ ii two . 146 . ] at their discovery of our navy , flee with their baggage into the mountain , and leave the town for any man that will possess it , till general drake send unto they by a Portugal pilot which he have on board , to offer they all peaceable kindness , so far forth as they will accept of their king , and minister necessary to the army he have bring ; which ofler they joyful embrace , and present send two chief man of their town , to signify their loyalty to don Antonio , and their honest affection to our people . whereupon the general land his company not far from the cloister call San Domingo , but not without peril of the shot of the castle , which be guard with 65 Spaniards , hold still against he . as our fleet be cast anchor when they come first into that road , there be a small ship of Brasil that come from thence , which bear with they , and seem by strike her sail , as though she will also have anchor : but take her fit occasion hoist again , and will have pass up the river , but the general present discern her purpose , send out a pinnace or two after she , which force she in such sort , as she run herself upon the rock : all the man escape out of she , and the lade ( be many chest of sugar ) be make nothing worth , by the salt water . in his go thither also , he take ship of the port of Portugal , which be send from thence , with fifteen other from Pedro vermende Xantes sergeant major of the same place , lade with man and victual to Lisbon : the rest that escape put into Setuvel . the next day it please general Norris to call all the 502 colonel together , and to advise with they , whether it be more expedient to tarry