: which be confess by the say commissary of victual take there , to be the beginning of a magasin of all sort of provision for a new voyage into England : whereby you may conjecture what the spoil thereof have advantage we , and prejudice the king of Spain . the next morning about eight of the clock the enemy abandon their ship . and have overcharge the artillery of the gallion , leave she on fire , which burn in terrible sort two day together , the fire and overcharge of the piece be so great , as of fifty that be in she , there be not above sixteen take out whole ; the rest with overcharge of the powder be break , and melt with heat of the fire , be take out in break piece into diverse ship . the same day be the cloister on the south side of the town enter by we , which join very near to the wall of the town , 486 out of the chamber and other place whereof we beat into the same with our musketeer . the next day in the afternoon there come down some 2000 man , gather together out of the country , even to the gate of the town , as resolute ( lead by what spirit i know not ) as though they will have enter the same : but at the first defence make by we that have the guard there , wherein be slay about eighteen of they , they take they to their heal in the same disorder they make their approach , and with great speed than we be able to follow : notwithstanding we follow after they more than a mile . the second day colonel Huntley be send into the country with three or four hundred man , who bring home very great store of cow and sheep for our relief . the three day in the night the Gener all have in purpose to take a long munition - house build upon their wall , open towards we , which will have give we great advantage against they ; but they know the commodity thereof for we , burn it in the begin of the evening ; which put he to a new council : for he have likewise bring some artillery to that side of the town . during this time there happen a very great fire in the low end of the town ; which , have it not be by the care of the general heedily see unto , and the fury thereof prevent by pull down many house which be most in danger , as next unto they , have burn all the provision we find there , to our wonder hindrance . the four day be plant under the guard of the cloister two demy - canon , and two colvering against the town , defend or gabbion with a cross wall , through the which our battery lie ; the first and second tire whereof shake all the wall down , so as all the ordinance lie open to the enemy , by reason whereof some of the canonier be shoot and some slay . the lieutenant also of the ordinance , m . Spencer , be slay fast by sir Edward Norris , master thereof : who valour be 487 accompany with a honourable care of defend that trust commit unto he , never leave that place , till he receive direction from the general his brother to cease the battery , which he present do , leave a guard upon the same for that day ; and in the night follow make so good defence for the place of the battery , as after there be very few or none annoy therein . that day captain Goodwin have in commandment from the general , that when the assault shall be give to the town , he shall make a proffer of a escalade on the other side , where he hold his guard : but he ( mistake the signal that shall have be give ) attempt the same long before the assault , and be shoot in the mouth . the same day the general have plant his ordinance ready to batter , cause the town to be summon ; in which summons they of the town shoot at our drum : immediate after that there be one hang over the wall , and a parley desire ; wherein they give we to understand , that the man hang be he that shoot at the drum before : wherein also they entreat to have fair war , with promise of the same on their part . the rest of the parley be spend in talk of don Juan de luna , and some other prisoner , and somewhat of the render of the town , but not much , for they listen not great thereunto . general Norris have by his skilful view of the town ( which be almost all seat upon a rock ) find one place thereof mineable , do present set workman in hand withal ; who after three day labour ( and the seven after we be enter the base town ) have bed their powder , but indeed not far enough into the wall . [ ii two . 141 . ] against which time the breach make by the canon be think assaultable , and company appoint as well to enter the same , as that which be expect shall be blow up by the mine : namely , to that of the canon , captain Richard Wingfield , and captain Philpot , who lead the general foot - company , with who also captain York go , who principali commandment be over 488 the horseman . and to that of the i , captain John Samson , and captain Anthony Wingfield lieutenant colonel to the master of the ordinance , with certain select out of diverse regiment . all these company be in arm , and the assault intend to be give in all place at a instant , fire be put to the train of the i ; but by reason the powder break out backwards in a place where the cave be make too high , there can be nothing do in either place for that day . during this time captain hinder be send with some choose out of every company into the country for provision , whereof