he bring in good store , and return without loss . the next day captain Anthony Samson be send out with some 500 to fetch in provision for the army , who be encounter by they of the country , but he put they to flight , and return with good spoil . the same night the miner be set to work again , who by the second day after have wrought very well into the foundation of the wall . against which time the company aforesaid be in readiness for both place ( general drake on the other side , with two or three hundred man in pinnace , make proffer to attempt a strong fort upon a hand before the town , where he leave more than thirty man ) fire be give to the train of the mine , which blow up half the tower under which the powder be plant . the assailant have in charge upon the effect of the mine present to give the assault , perform it accord : but too soon : for have enter the top of the breach , the other half of the tower , which with the first force of the powder be only shake and make loose , fall upon our man : under which be bury about twenty or thirty , then be under that part of the tower . This so amaze our man that stand in the breach , not know from whence that terror carty , as they forsake their commander , and leave they among the ruin of the mine . the two ensign of general drake and captain Anthony Wingfield 489 be shoot in the breach , but their colour be rescue : the general by captain sampsons lieutenant , and captain Wingfields by himself . among they that the wall fall upon , be captain Sydenham pitiful lose ; who have three or four great stone upon his low part , be hold so fast , as neither himself can stir , nor any reasonable company recover he . notwithstanding the next day be find to be alive , there be ten or twelve lose in attempt to relieve he . the breach make by the canon be woonderfiil well assault by they that have the charge thereof , who bring their man to the push of the pike at the top of the breach . And be ready to enter , the loose earth ( which be indeed but the rubbish of the outside of the wall ) with the weight of they that be thereon slip outward from under their foot . whereby do appear half the wall unbattered . for let no man think that culverin or demy - canon can sufficient batter a defensible rampire : and of those piece which we have ; the better of the demy - canon at the second shot break in her carriage , so as the battery be of less force , be but of three piece . in our retreat ( which be from both breach through a narrow lane ) be many of our man hurt : and captain dolphin , who serve very well that day , be hurt in the very breach . the fail of this attempt , in the opinion of all the beholder , and of such as be of best judgement , be the fall of the i ; which have doubtless succeed , the rather , because the approach be unlooked for by the enemy in that place , and therefore not so much defence make there as in the other ; which make the general grow to a new resolution : for find that two day battery have so little beat their wall , and that he have no better preparation to batter withal : he know in his experience , there be no good to be do that way ; which i think he first put in proof , to try if by that terror he can get the upper town , have no other 490 way to put it in hazard so speedy , and which in my conscience have obtain the town , have not the defendant be in as great peril of their life by the displeasure of their king in give it up , as by the bullet or sword in defend the same . for that day before the assault , in the view of our army , they burn a cloister within the town , and many other house adjoining to the castle , to make it more defensible : whereby it appear how little opinion themselves have of hold it against we , have not God ( who will not have we sudden make proud ) lay that misfortune upon we . hereby it may appear , that the four canon , and other piece of battery promise to the journey , and not perform , may have make her majesty mistress of the groin : for though the mine be infortunate , yet if the other breach have be such as the earth will have hold our man thereon , i do not think but they have enter it thorough at the first assault give : which have be more than i have hear of in our age . And be as it be , be no more than the prince of Parma have in win of all his town [ ii two . 142 . ] endure , who never enter any place at the first assault , nor above three by assault . the next day the general hear by a prisoner that be bring in , that the conde de Andrada have assemble a army of eight thousand at Puente de Burgos , six mile from thence in the way to petance , which be but the begin of a army ; in that there be a great leavy ready to come thither under the conde de Altemira , either in purpose to relieve the groin , or to encamp themselves near the place of our embark , there to hinder the same ; for to that purpose have the marquess of Seralba write to they both the first night of our land , as the commissary take than confess , or at the least to stop our further entrance into the country , ( for during this time , there be many incursion make of three or four hundred at a time , who burn , spoil , and 491