much of the country as the day will give they leave to do ; which be a very pleasant rich valley : but they burn it all , house and corn , as do other on the other side of the town , both that and the next day , so as the country be spoil seven or eight mile in length . there be find great store of wine in the town , but not any thing else : for the other day warn of vi 513 2k the ship that come first in , give they a respite to carry all away . the next morning by break of the day the colonel general ( who in the absence of the general that be on board their ship , command that night on shore ) cause all our company to be draw out of the Vigo burn , town , and send in two troop to put fire in every house of the same : which do , we embark again . this day there be certain mariner which ( without any direction ) put themselves on shore , on the contrary side of the river from we for pillage ; who be beat by the enemy from their boat , and punish by the general for their offer , in go without allowance . the reason why we attempt nothing against Bayon be before show to be want of artillery , and may now be allege to be the small number of our man : who shall have go against so strong a place , man with very good soldier , as be show by Juan de vera take at the groin , who confess that there be six hundred old soldier in garrison there of Flanders , and the tercios of Naples , late also return out of the journey of England . capitan Puebla , Christofero Vasques de Viralta a soldier of Flanders . under the < do Pedro Camascho , del tercio de Napoles . lead of ] do Francisco de Cespedes . Cap . Juan de Solo , del tercio de Naples . don Diego de Cassava . Cap . Sauban . also he say there be 18 piece of brass , and four of iron , late lay upon the wall of the town , beside they that be there before . the same day the general see what weak estate our army be draw into by sickness , determine to man and victuali twenty of the best ship for the hand of azore with general drake , to see if he can meet with the indian fleet , and general Norris to return 5t4 home with the rest : and for the shift of man and victual accord , purpose the next morning to fall down to the hand of Bayon again , and to remain there that day . but general drake , accord to their appointment , be under sail never strike at the hand , but put straight to sea ; who all the fleet follow save three and thirty , which be in the river further than he , and at the entrance out of the same , find the wind and tide too hard against they , be enforce to cast anchor there for that night ; among who , by good fortune , be the foresight , and in her sir Edward Norris . [ ii two . 151 . ] and the night follow , general Norris be drive from the rest of the fleet by a great storm , ( for all that day be the great storm we have all the time we be out ) come again into the hand , but not without great peril , he be force to trust to a spanish fisherman ( who be take two day before at sea ) to bring he in . the next morning he call a council of as many as he find there , hold the purpose he have conclude with sir Francis Drake the day before , and direct all their course for England , tarry there all that day to water and help such with victuali , as be leave in wonderful distress by have the victual that come last , carry away the day before to sea . the next day he set sail , and the 10 day after , which their return be the 2 of July come into Plymouth , where he find 10 plmmouth - sir Francis Drake and all the queen ship , with many of the other but not all : for the fleet be disperse into other harbour , some lead by a desire of return from whence they come , and some be possess of the hulk , seek other port from their general eye , where they may make their private commodity of they , as they have do to their great advantage . present upon their arrival there , the general dissolve all the army save 8 company which be yet hold together , give every soldier five shilling in money , and the arm he bear to make money of , which 5 * 5 be more than can by any mean be due unto they : for they be not in service three month , in which time they have their victual , which no man will value at less than half their pay , for such be the allowance in her majesty ship to her mariner , so as there remain but 10 shilling a month more to be pay , for which there be not any private man but have apparel and furniture to his own use , so as every common soldier discharge , receive more in money , victual , apparel and furniture , than his pay do amount unto . notwithstanding , there be even in the same place where those thing have pass , that either do not or will not conceive the soldier estate , by compare their poverty and the shortness of the time together , but lie some injury upon the general and the action . where , and by the way , but especial here in London , i find there have be some false prophet go before we , tell strange tale . for as our country do bring forth many gallant man , who desirous of honour do put themselves into the action thereof , so do it many more dull spirit , who though