, and if they shall miscarry , be to command the army . and the same day there come unto we two small bark that bring tiding of some other ship come out of England with victual , which be pass upward to the cape : for meet with who , the second day after we set sail for that place , in purpose after our meeting with they to go with the isle of azore , the second day , which be the nine , we meet with they come back again towards we , who provision little answer our expectation . notwithstanding we resolve to continue our course for the hand . about this time be the marchant - royall , with three or four other ship , send to Peniche , to fetch away the company that be leave there ; but captain Barton have receive letter from the general that be send overland , be depart before , not be able by reason of the enemy speedy march thither , either to bring away the artillery , or all his man , accord to the direction those letter give he ; for he be no soon go , than the enemy possess the town and castle , and shoot at our ship as they come into the road . at this time also be the ambassador from the emperor of Morocco , call Reys Hamet bencasamp , return , and with he m . cyprian , a gentleman of good place and desert , be send from don Antonio , and captain Ousley from the general to the emperor . the next morning the nine galley which be send not five day before out of Andaluzia for the strengthen of the river of Lisbon ( which be join with the other twelve that be there before , though we lay hard by they at saint Julians , dare never make any attempt against we ) upon our departure from thence be return - 511 ing home , and in the morning be a very dead calm , in the dawn thereof , fall in the wind of our fleet , in the uttermost part whereof they assail one straggle bark of Plymouth , of the which captain Caverley be captain of the land company , with his lieutenant , the master , and some of the mariner abandon the ship , and betake they to the ship - boat , whereof one , in which the master and the captain be , be overrun with the galley , and they drown . there be also two hulk straggle far from the strength of the other ship , which be so calm , as neither they can get to we , nor we to they , though all the great ship tow with their boat to have relieve they , but can not be recover ; in one of which be captain min - shaw with his company , who fight with they to the last , yea after his ship be on fire , which whether it be fire by himself or Sy they we can not well discern , but may easy judge by his long and good fight , that the enemy can not but sustain much loss : who set also upon one other hulk wherein be but a lieutenant , and he very sick , be by the valour of the lieutenant put off , although they have first beat she with their artillery , and attempt to board she . And see also one other hulk a league off , a stern off we , they make towards she : but find that she make ready to fight with they , they dare not further attempt she : whereby it seem , their loss be great in the other fight , they be loath to proceed any further . from that day till the 19 of June , our direction from the general be , that if the wind be northerly , we shall ply for the azore ; but if southerly , for the isle of Bayon . we lay with contrary wind about that place and the rock , till the southerly wind prevail carry we to Bayon : part of our ship to the number of 25 , in a great wind which be two day before , have lose the admiral and fleet , accord to their direction , fall in the morning of that day with Bayon , among who be sir Henry Norris in the aid ; who have in purpose 512 .... I589 " ( if the admiral have not come in ) with some 500 man out of they all to have land , and attempt the take of Vigo . the rest of the fleet hold with general drake , who though he be two day before put upon those hand , cast off again to sea for the a $ ores : but remember how provide he be for that journey and see that he have lose company of his great ship , return for Bayon , and come in there that night in the evening , where he pass up the river more than a mile above Vigo . the next morning we land as many as be able to fight , which be not in the whole above 2000 man , ( for in the 17 day we continue on board we have cast many of our man overboard ) with which number the colonel general march to the town of Vigo , near the which when he approach , he send captain Anthony Wingfield with a troop of shot to enter one side of figo take . the same , who find upon every street end a strong barricade , but altogether abandon ; for have enter the town , he find but one man therein , but may see they make way before he to Bayon . on the other side of the town enter general drake with captain Richard Wingfield , who approach on that side ( i think ) make they leave the place they have so artificial make for defence : there be also certain ship send with the viceadmiral to lie close before the town , to beat upon the same with their artillery . in the afternoon be send 300 under the conduct of captain Petuin and captain Henry pour , to burn another village betwixt that and Bayon , call Borsis , and as