ancient english honour be take from our man of war , and their profession in disgrace , though never so necessary . either we commit idolatry to Neptune , and will put he alone still to fight for we as he do the last year , or we be enchant with some devilish opinion , that travel nothing more than to diminish the reputation of they , upon who shoulder the burden of our defence against the enemy must lie when occasion shall be oflr . for whensoever he shall set foot upon our land , it be neither the preach of the clergy that can turn he out again , nor the plead of any lawyer that can remove he out of possession : no , than they will honour they who now they think not on , and then must those man stand between they and their peril , who be now think unworthy of any estimation . 524 may the burn of one town ( which cost the king then be six time as much as this have do her majesty , wherein be lose seven time as many man as in any one service of this journey , and tarry not the ten part of our time in the enemy country ) be by our elder so high repute and sound out by the history of the realm ; and can our voyage be so mean esteem , wherein we burn both town and country without the loss of forty man in any such attempt ? do our king in former time reward some with the great title of honour for overthrow a number of poor Scot , who , after one battle lose , be never able to reinforce themselves against he ; and shall they in this time who have overthrow our mighty enemy in battle , and take his royal standard in the field , besiege the marquess of Saralba 15 day together , that shall have be the general of the army against we , bring away so much of his artillery ( as i have before declare ) be unworthy esteem of ? be it possible that some in some time shall receive their reward for look upon a enemy , and we in this time not receive so much as thank for have beat a enemy at handy stroke ? but it be true that no man shall be a prophet in his country : and for my own part i will lay aside my arm till that profession shall have more reputation , and live with my friend in the country , attend either some more fortunate time to use they , or some other good occasion to make i forget they . but what ? shall the blind opinion of this monster , a beast of many head , ( for so have the generality of old be term ) cause i to neglect the profession from whence i challenge some reputation , or diminish my love to my country , which hitherto have nourish i ? no , it be for her sake i first take arm , and for her sake i will handle they so long as i shall be able to use they : not regard how some man in private con - 525 venticle do measure man estimation by their own humour ; nor how every popular person do give sentence on every man action by the worst accident . but attend the gracious aspect of our dread sovereign , who never yet leave virtue unrewarded : and depend upon the justice of her most rare and grave advisor , who by their heedy look into every man worth , do give encouragement to the virtuous to exceed other in virtue : and assure you that there shall never any thing happen more please unto i , then that i may once again be a party in some honourable journey against the Spaniard in his own country , i will cease my complaint : and with they that deserve beyond i , patient endure the unadvised censure of our malicious reprover . if i have seem in the begin hereof troublesome unto you , in the discover of those impediment , and answer the slander which by the vulgar malicious and mutinous sort be lay as blemish upon the journey , and reproach upon the general ( have indeed proceed from other head : ) let the necessity of conserve the reputation of the action in general , and the honour of our general in particular , be my sufficient excuse : the one have by the virtue of the other make our country more dread and renown , than any act that ever England undertake before . or if you have think my perswasible discourse long in the latter end ; let the affectionate desire of my country good be therein answerable for i . and such as it be i pray you accept it , as only recommend to your self , and not to be deliver to the public view of the world , lest any man take offence thereat : which some particular man may seem just to do , in that have deserve very well , i shall not herein give they their due commendation : whereas my purpose in this private discourse have be only to gratify you with a touch of those principali matter that have pass , wherein i have only take note of those man who either command 526 every service , or be of chief mark : if therefore you shall impart the same to one , and he to another , and so it pass through my hand , i know not what construction will be make thereof to my prejudice ; for that the hare ear may happy be take for home . howbeit i hold it very necessary ( i must confess ) that there shall be some true manifestation make of these thing : but be it far from i to be the author thereof , as very unfit to deliver my censure of any matter in public , and most unwilling to have my weakness discover in private . and so i do leave you to the happy success of your accustom good exercise , earnest wish that there may be some better acceptance make of the fruit of your study , then there have be of our hazard in the war . from London the 30 of August 1589 .