the land of some artillery to beat upon the ship and galley , that they may not annoy we : which be put in execution , upon the plant of the first piece the galley abandon the road , and betake they to feroll , not far from thence : and the armada be beat with the artillery and musketeer that be place upon the next shore , leave she play upon we . the rest of the day be spend in prepare the company , and other provision ready for the surprise of the base town , which be effect in this sort . there be appoint to be land 1200 man under the conduct of colonel Huntley , and captain Fenner the vice - admiral , on that side next front we by water 483 in long boat and pinnace , wherein be place many piece of artillery to beat upon the town in their approach : at the corner of the wall which defend the other water side , be appoint captain Richard Wingfield lieutenant colonel to general Norris , and captain Samson lieutenant colonel to general drake to enter at low water with 500 man if they find it passable , but if not , to betake they to the escalade , for they have also ladder with they : at the other corner of the wall which join to that side that be attempt by water , be appoint colonel Umpton , and colonel bret with 300 man to enter by escalade . all the company which shall enter by boat be embark before the low water , and have give the alarm , captain Wingfield and captain Samson betake they to the escalade , for they have in commandment to charge all at one instant . the boat land without any great difficulty : yet have they some man hurt in the land . colonel Bret and colonel Umpton enter their quarter without encounter , not find any defence make against they : for captain hinder be one of they that enter by water , at his first entry , with some of his own company who he trust well , betake himself to that part of the wall , which he clear before that they offer to enter , and so still scour the wall till he come on the back of they who maintained the fight against captain Wingfield and captain Samson ; who be twice beat from their ladder , and find very good resistance , till the enemy perceive we enter in two place at their back , be drive to abandon the same . the reason why that place be long defend than the other , be ( as don Juan de Luna who command the same affirm ) that the enemy that day have resolve in council how to make their defence , if they be approach : and therein conclude , that , if we attempt it by water , it be not able to be hold , and therefore upon the discovery of our boat , they of the high town shall make a signail by fire from thence , that all the low town may make their retreat thither : 484 but they ( whether trouble with the sudden terror we bring upon they , or forget their decree ) omit the fire , which make they guard that place till we be enter on every side . then the town be enter in three several place with a huge cry , the inhabitant betake they to the high town : which they may with less peril do , for that we be stranger there , know not the way to cut they off . the rest that be not put to the sword in fury , flee to the rock in the hand , and other hide themselves in chamber and seller , which be every day find out in great number . among those don Juan de luna , a man of very good commandment , have hide himself in a house , do the next morning yield himself . there be also take that night a commissary of victual call Juan de vera , who confess that there be in the groin at our entry 500 soldier be in seven company which return very weak ( as appear by the small number of they ) from the journey of England , namely : ’ do diego Barran , a bastard son of the mark of Santa Cruz ; his company be that night in the Galeon . do Antonio de Herera then at Madrid . under don Juan de < luna . do Pedro de Manriques brother to the earl of Paxides . do Jeronimo de Mourray of the order of saint Juan , with some of the town be in the fort . do Gomez de Caramasal then at Madrid . captain man ^ o Caucaso de Socas . also there come in that day of our land from Retanzas the company of don Juan de Mosalle , and don Pedro pour the Leon . also he say that there be order give for bake of 300000 of biscuit , some in Batansas , some in Ribadeo , and the rest there . 485 there be then in the town 2000 pipe of wine , and 150 in the ship . that there be late come unto the mark of Seralba 300000 ducat .. that there be 1000 jar of oil . a great quantity of bean , pease , wheat , and fish . that there be 3000 quintal of beef . and that not twenty day before , there come in three bark lade with match and harquebuss . some other also find favour to be take prisoner , but the rest fall into the hand of the common soldier , have their throat cut , to the number of 500 , as i conjecture , first and last , after we have enter the town ; and in the entry thereof there be find every cellar full of wine , whereon our man , by inordinate drink , both grow themselves for the present senseless of the danger of the shot of the town , which hurt many of they be drink , and take the first ground of their sickness ; for of such be our first and chief mortality . there be also abundant store of victual , salt , and all kind of provision for ship and the war