semblance : or he like a silly lover , who promise himself favour by importune a coy mistress , think by our long be before his town , that in the end take pity on he , they will let he in . what end the friar have by follow he with such devotion , i know not , but sure i be , the Laity do respite their homage till they may see which way the victory will sway ; fear to show themselves apparent unto he , lest the Spaniard shall after our departure ( if we prevail not ) call they to account : yet 5 ° 5 send they under hand message to he of obedience , thereby to save their own , if he become king ; but indeed very well content to see the Spaniard and we try by blow , who shall carry away the crown . for they be of so base a mould , as they can very well subject themselves to any government , where they may live free from blow , and have liberty to become rich , be loath to endure hazard either of life or good . for dare they have put on any mind thorough to revolt , they have three wonder good occasion offer they during our being there . themselves do in general confess , that there be not above 5000 Spaniard in that part of the country , of which number the half be out of the town till the last day of our march : during which time , how easy they may have prevail against the rest , any man may conceive . but upon our approach they take they all in , and combine themselves in general to the Cardinali . the next day after our come thither , when the sally be make upon we by their most resolute Spaniards , how easy may they have keep they out , or have give we the gate which be hold for their retreat , if they have have any thought thereof ? and two day after our come to Cascais , when 6000 Spaniards and Portugal come against we as far as saint Julians by land , as you shall present hear ( all which time i think there be not many Spaniards leave in the town ) they have a more fit occasion to show their devotion to the king , than any can be offer by our tarry there . and they can not doubt , that if they have shut they out , but that we will have fight with they upon that advantage , have seek they in galitia upon disadvantage to beat they : and have take so much pain to seek they at their own house , whereof we give sufficient testimony in the same accident . but i think the fear of the Spaniard have take so deep impression within they , as they dare not attempt any thing against they upon any hazard . 506 for , what civil country have ever suffer themselves to be conquer by so few man as they be ; to be deprive of their natural king , and to be tyrannize over thus long , but they ? and what country , live in slavery under a stranger who they natural hate , have a army in the field to fight for they and their liberty , will lie still with the yoke upon their neck , attend if any stranger will unburthen they , without so much as rouse themselves under it , but they ? they will promise much in speech , for they be great talker , who the general have no reason to distrust without trial , and therefore march on into their country : but they perform little in action , whereof we can have have no proof without this thorough trial . wherein he have discover their weakness , and honorable perform more than can be in reason expect of he : which have he not do , will not these maligner , who seek occasion of slander , have report [ ii two . 148 . ] he to be suspicious of a people , of who infidelity he have no testimony : and to be fearful without cause , if he have refuse to give credit to their promise without any adventure ? let no frivolous questionist therefore further inquire why he march so many day to Lisbon , and tarry there so small a while . the next morning , see no performance of promise keep , he give order for our march away ; himself , the earl of Essex , and sir Roger William remain with the stand that be make in the high street , till the whole army be draw into the field , and so march out of the town , appoint captain Richard Wingfield , and captain Anthony Wingfield in the arrereward of they with the shot ; think that the enemy ( as it be most likely ) will have issue out upon our rise ; but they be otherwise advise . when we be come into the field , every battalion fall into that order which by course appertain unto they , and so march that night unto Cascais . have we march through his country as enemy , our soldier have be well 5 ° 7 supply in all their want : but have we make enemy of the suburb of Lisbon , we have be the rich army that ever go out of England : for beside the particular wealth of every house , there be many warehouse by the water side full of all sort of rich merchandize . in our march that day the galley which have somewhat , but not much , annoy we at Lisbon , ( for that our way lie along the river ) attend we till we be past saint Julians , bestow many shot among we , but do no harm at all , save that they strike off a gentleman leg , and kill the sergeant major mode under he . the horseman also follow we afar off , and cut off as many sick man as be not able to hold in march , nor we have carriage for . after we have be two day at Cascais , we have intelligence by a friar , that the enemy be march strong towards we , and then come as far