bring in victual plentiful ) the general , i say , hear of this army , have in purpose the next day follow to visit they , against who he carry but nine regiment : in the vanguard be the regiment of sir Roger Williams , sir Edward Norris , and colonel Sidney : in the battle , that of the general , of colonel lane , and colonel medkerk : and in the rearward , sir Henry Norris , colonel Huntley , and colonel bret regiment ; leave the other five regiment with general drake , for the guard of the cloister and artillery . about ten of the clock the next day , be the sixth of May , half a mile from the camp , we discover the enemy , sir Edward Norris , who command the vanguard in chief , appoint his lieutenant colonel captain Anthony Wingfield to command the shot of the same , who divide they into three troop ; the one he appoint to captain Middleton to be conduct in a way on the left hand : another to captain Erington to take the way on the right hand , and the body of they ( which be musketeer ) captain Wingfield take himself , keep the direct way of the march . but the way take by captain Middleton meet a little before with the way hold by captain Wingfield , so as he give the first charge upon the enemy , be in the instant second by captain Wingfield , who beat they from place to place ( they have very good place of defence , and cross wall which they may have hold long ) till they betake they to their bridge , which be over a creek come out of the sea , bud of stone upon arch . on the foot of the further side whereof , lie the camp of the enemy very strong entrench , who with our shot beat to the further end of the bridge , sir Edward Norris march in the point of the pike , without stay pass to the bridge , accompany with colonel Sidney , captain hinder , captain Fulford , and diverse other , who find the way clear over the same , but through a incredible volley of shot ; for that the shot of their army flank 492 upon both side of the bridge , the further end whereof be barricade with barrel : but they who shall have guard the same , see the proud approach we make , forsake the defence of the barricade , where sir Edward enter , and charge the first defendant with his pike , with very earnestness in overthrust , fall , and be grievous hurt at the sword in the head , but be most honourable rescue by the general his brother , accompany with colonel Sidney , and some other gentleman : captain hinder also have his cask shoot oflf , have five wound in the head and face at the sword : and captain Fulford be shoot into the left arm at the same encounter : yet be they so thorough second by the general , who thrust himself so near to give encouragement to the attempt ( which be of wondered difficulty ) as their brave man that defend that place be overthrdwen , their whole army fall present notable into rout , of who our man have the chase three mile in four sundry way , which they betake themselves ards ' at unto . there be take the standard with the king Puente de arm , and bear before the general . how many two Burgos . thousand man ( for of so many consist our vanguard ) may kill in pursuit of four sundry party , so many you may imagine fell before we that day . and to make the number more great , our man have give over the execution , and return to their stand , find many hide in the vineyard and hedge , which they dispatch . also colonel Medkerk be send with his regiment three mile further to a cloister , which he burn and spoil , wherein he find two hundred more , and put they to the sword . there be slay in this fight on our side only captain Cooper , and one private soldier ; captain Barton be also hurt upon the bridge in the eye . but have you see the strong baricade they have make on either side of the bridge , and how strong they lie encamp thereabouts , you will have think it a rare resolution of we to give so brave a charge upon a army so strong lodge . after the 493 fury of the execution , the general send the vanguard one way , and the battle another , to burn and spoil ; so as you may have see the country more than three mile compass on fire . there be find very good store of munition and victual in the camp , some plate and rich apparel , which the better sort leave behind , they be so hot pursue . our sailor also land in a hand next adjoin to our ship , where they burn and spoil all they find . thus we return [ ii two . 143 . ] to the groin , bring small comfort to the enemy within the same , who shoot many time at we as we march out ; but not once in our come back again . the next day be spend in ship our artillery land for the battery , and of the rest take at the groin , which have it be such as may have give we any assurance of a better battery , or have there be no other purpose of our journey but that , i think the general will have spend some more time in the siege of the place . , the two last night , there be that undertake to fire the high town in one place , where the house be build upon the wall by the water side ; but they within suspect as much , make so good defence against we , as they prevent the same . in our departure there be fire put into every house of the low town , insomuch as i may just say , there be not one house leave stand in the base town , or the cloister . the