the charge of raise their company be lay as a adventure , can provide themselves of all thing expedient for a war , which be always wont to be maintain by the purse of the prince . but admit every captain have his surgeon : yet be the want of cure never the less : for our english surgeon ( for the most part ) be unexperienced in hurt that come by shot ; because England have not know war but of late , from who ignorance proceed this discomfort , which i hope will warn those y ‘ hereafter go to the war to make preparation of such as may better preserve man life by their skill . from whence the want of carriage do proceed , you may conjecture in y ‘ we march through a country neither plentiful of such provision , nor willing to part from any thing : yet this i can assure you , that no man of worth be leave either hurt or sick in any place unprovide for . and that the general command all the mule and ass that be lade with any baggage to be unburden and take to that use : and the earl of Essex and he for money hire man to carry man upon pike . and the earl ( who true virtue and nobility , as it do in all other his action appear , so do it very much in this ) throw down his own stuff , i mean apparel and necessary which he have there , from his own carriage ; and let they be leave by the way , to put hurt and sick man upon they . of who honourable deserve i shall not need here to make any particular discourse , for that many of his action do hereafter give i occasion to observe the same . answer to the four . and the great complaint that these man make for the answer to want of victual may well proceed from their not know - the fift - ing the want of the war ; for if to feed upon good bieve , mutton and goat , be to want , they have endure great scarcity at land , whereunto they never want , two day together , wine to mix with their water , nor bread to eat vi 481 2 h with their meat ( in some quantity ) except it be such as have vow rather to starve then to stir out of their place for food : of who we have too many , who if their time have serve for it , may have see in many camp in the most plentiful country of the world for victual , man daily die with want of bread and drink in not have money to buy , nor the country yield any good or healthful water in any place ; whereas both Spain and Portugal do in every place afford the best water that may be , and much more healthful than any wine for our drink . and although some have most injurious exclaim against the small provision of victual for the sea , rather ground the same upon a evil that may have fall , than any that do light upon we : yet know you this , that there be no man so forgetful ! , that will say they want before they come to the groin , that whosoever make not very large provision for himself and his company at the groin , be very improvident , where be plentiful store of wine , beef and fish , and no man of place prohibit to lay in the same into their ship , wherewith some do so furnish themselves , as they do not only in the journey supply the want of such as be less provident than they , but in their return home make a round commodity of the remainder thereof . and that at Cascais there come in such store of provision into the fleet out of England , as no man that will have use his diligence can have want his due proportion thereof , as may appear by the remainder that be return to Plymouth , and the plentiful sale thereof make out of the merchant ship after their come into the Thames . but least encage shall seem unto you too studious in confute idle opinion , or answer frivolous question , i will address i to the true report of those action that have pass therein : wherein i protest , i will neither hide any thing that have happen against we , nor attribute more to any man or matter , than the just occasion thereof lead i unto : wherein it shall appear that there have be 482 nothing leave undo by the general which be before our go out undertake by they , but that there have be much more do then be at the first require by don Antonio , who shall have reap the fruit of our adventure . after 6 day sail from the coast of England , and our man land the 5 after we have the wind good be the 20 of April w ^ n in the evening , we land in a bate more than a english 2o oj mile from the groin , in our long boat and pinnace i / ril . without any impeachment : from whence we present march towards the town , within one half mile we be encounter by the enemy who be charge by we , retire into their gate . for that night our army lie in the village , house and mill next adjoin , and very near round about the town , into the which the Galeon name S . John ( which be the second of the last year fleet against England ) one hulk , two small ship and two galley which be find in the road , do beat upon we and upon our company as they pass too and fro that night and the next morning . general Norris have that morning before day view the town , find the same defend on the land side ( for it stand upon the neck of a hand ) with a wall upon a dry ditch : whereupon he resolve to try in two place what may be do against it by escalade , and in the mean time advise [ ii two . 139 . ] for