coming home . of these there be some , who have note the late flemish war do find that many young man have go over and safe return soldier within few month , in have learn some word of art use in the war , and think after that good example to spend like time among we : which be expire they begin to quarrel at the great mortali tie that be among we . the neglect of discipline in the army , for that man be suffer to be drink with the plenty of wine . the scarcity of surgeon . the want of carriage for the hurt and sick : and the penury of victual in the camp : thereupon divine that there will be no good do : and that therefore they can be content to lose their time , and adventure to return home again . these man have either conceive well of their own wit ( who by observe the passage of the war be become sufficient soldier in these few week , and do long to be at home , where their discourse may be wonder at ) or miss of their portague and milraye which they dream on in Portugal , will rather return to their former manner of life , then attend the end of the journey . for see that one hazard bring another ; and that though one escape the bullet this day it may light upon he to morrow , the next day , or any day ; and that the war be not confine to 478 1589 . any one place , but y * every place bring forth new enemy , they be glad to see some of the poor soldier fall sick , y ‘ fear to be infect by they they may just desire to go home . the sickness i confess be great , because any be answer to too much . but have it be great then be ordinary thefirst - amongst Englishman at their first entrance into the war , whithersoever they go to want the fullness of their flesh pot ? have not we decay at all time in France , with eat young fruit and drink new wine ? have they not abundant perish in the low country with cold , and rawness of the air , even in their garrison ? have there not more die in London in six month of the plague , then double our army be at the strong ? and can the spanish army the last year ( who have all provision that can be think on for a army , and take the fit season in the year for our climate ) avoid sickness among their soldier ? may it then be think that we can escape there , where they find inordinate heat of weather , and hot wine to distemper they withal ? but can it be , that we have lose so many as the common sort persuade themselves we have ? it have be prove by strict examination of our muster , that we be never in our fullness before our go from Plymouth 11000 . soldier , nor above 2500 . mariner . it be also evident that there return above 6000 . of all sort , as appear by the several payment make to they since our come home . and i have true show you that of these number very near 3000 . forsake the army at the sea , whereof some pass into France and the rest return home . so as we never be 13000 . in all , and have bring home above 6000 . with we , you may see how the world have be seduce , in believe that we have lose i6oot > . man by sickness . to they that have make question of the government answer to of the war ( little know what appertain thereunto the 479 in that there be so many drunkard among we ) i answer , that in their government of shire and parish , yea in their very household , themselves can hardly bridle their vassal from that vice . for we see it be a thing almost impossible , at any your fair or public assembly to find any quarter thereof sober , or in your town any alepole unfrequented : and we observe that though any man have any disorder person in their house , do lock up their drink and set butler upon it , that they will yet either by indirect mean steal themselves drink from their master table , or run abroad to seek it . if then at home in the eye of your justice , major , preacher , and master , and where they pay for every pot they take , they can be keep from their liquor : do they think that those base disorder person who themselves send unto we , as live at home without rule , who hear of wine do long for it as a dainty that their purse can never reach to in England , and have it there without money even in their house where they lie and hold their guard , can be keep from be drink ; and once drink , hold in any order or tune , except we have for every drunkard a officer to attend he ? but who be they that have run into these disorder ? Even our new man , our young man , and our idele man , and for the most part our slovenly press man , who the justice , ( who have always think unworthy of any war ) have send out as the scum and dregs of their country . and those be they , who distemper themselves with these hot wine , have bring in that sickness , which have infect honest man then themselves . but i hope , as in other place the recovery of their disease do acquaint their body with the air of the country where they be , so the remainder of these which have either recover , or pass without sickness will prove most fit for Martiali service . if we have want surgeon , may not this rather be lay upon the captain ( who be to provide for their 480 several company ) then upon the general , who care have be more general . and how may it be think that every captain , upon who most of