other two ship in company give several ! chase , and thereby lose the company each of other . in follow our chase above noon we make she to Portugal strike and yield , be a Portugal ! , lade with hide , prize take ' salsa - perilla and anile . at this very instant we espy another , and take our prize with we follow her , and somewhat before night obtain she , name the conception , Francisco Spinola be captain , which be ric ^ westladen with hide , Cochonillio , and certain raw silk . InfM prize and for that the sea be so grow , as neither with ‘ boat nor ship they be to be board , we keep they till fit opportunity . the same night a little before day there happen another into our company , suppose we by our two prize to be of their fleet , which we until the morning dissemble . the 20 day in the morning , the sail be shoot somewhat a head of we , have a speciali care for the safe keep of the two former , we purpose to cause our prize to put out more sail thereby to keep they near in give chase to the other : unto the which the master will not hearken nor be persuade , but that they will follow we : by the which his wilfulness by such time as we have cause the other to yield , and send man aboard , the conception , Francisco Spinola captain be bring a stern , and have get the wind of we , stand off with all her sail bear , so as we be force to make a new chase of she : and have not the wind enlarge upon we we have lose she . in the pursuit before we recover she and bring our self again in company of our other prize , the whole day be spend , and by this mean we lose the opportunity of that day , the weather fit serve to board the Portugal prize , which be in great distress , and make request to take they be ready to sink , and , as we well perceive , they cease not to pump day and night : the which ship to all our judgement the same night perish in the sea . the one and twenty day the conception , whereof Francisco Spinola be captain , be also in a leak , and the same still increase notwithstanding the continual pump , in such sort as not to be keep along above water , i take and discharge out of her two and forty chest of cochonillio and silk , and so leave she with 11 foot water in hold , and her furniture and 4700 hide , unto the sea . the other prize which we have bring into the harbour be name nostra sennora de los remedios , whereof Francisco Alvares be captain , lade with 16 chest of Cochonillio , certain fardel of raw silk , and about 4000 hide . upon the discharge of the good your worship shall be particular advertise thereof . in the board of the prize the disorder of the company be such , as that they let not present beside the rifle of the Spaniard to break open the chest and to purloin such money as be in they : notwithstanding that it be order at convenient leisure to have go aboard my self , and there in the presence of three or four witness to have take a just account thereof , and the same to have put in safe keep , accord to the effect of article receive in this behalf . and whereas there be also certain sum of money [ ii two . 178 . ] take from the company which they have thus purloin and embesele , and the same with some other parcel bring aboard my ship , amount unto 2129 pezoe and a half , the company as pillage due unto they demand to have the same share , which i refuse , and open at the main mast read the article firm by my lord treasurer and my lord admiral , whereby we aught to be direct , and that it be not in i any way to dispose thereof until the same be final determine at home . hereupon they mutine and at last grow into such fury , as that they will have it or else break down the cabbine , which they be also ready to put in practice , whereby i be force to yield , lest the Spaniard which we have aboard be many perceive the same , may have have fit opportunity to rise against we , which , after their brawl be appease , they seek to have put in execution . by the last advise from Castille the general of the king armada which be late come to sea have receive commandment to join his fleet with those of the Indies , and for to stay altogether at Tercera until the 15 of October : for that 6 patache with 7 or 8 million of the king treasure will come by that time , or else they stay their come from Havana until January next , or the king further pleasure therein to be know . Theise patache be say to be of 300 tun the piece , and to carry 30 piece of brass , and also of sail report to have the advantage of any ship . there perish of the Indies fleet sink in the sea before their come to Flores 11 sail , whereof the general be one , and not one man save . and it be by the Spaniard themselves presuppose that the storm which we have at Flores and at Tercera have devour many more of they , whereof in part we be eye witness . and so what by the sea and our man of war i presume that of 75 sail that come from Havana , half of they will never arrive in Spain . the 11 day of October at night we come to anchor in the sound of Plymouth , and the next morning with our prize come into Cattewater : for which God be thank : for that a vehement storm arise , and with such fury increase , as that the prize be force to cut over her main mast : otherwise with the violence of the storm , her ground tackle be bad , she have drive on shore : which be the most cause that move i to put in here ; intend now here to discharge the good without further adventure , and have certify thus much unto my lord admiral , and therewith also desire to understand the direction of the lord of the counsel together with you , insomuch as my lord Thomas Howard be not return . how the rest of our consort which be separate from we by weather have speed , or what prize they have take , whereof there be much hope by reason of the scatter of the west indian fleet , as yet we be able to say nothing . and thus expect your answer , and for all other matter refer i unto the bearer captain Furtho , i end . Plymouth the 24 of October . 1591 . your worship love friend Robert Flicke .