, his be command to be sink , and those appoint to she , she have hardly ever recover England . the rest , for the most part , be in little better state . the name of her majesty ship be these as follow , the defiance , which be admiral , the revenge vice - admiral , the Bonaventure command by captain cross , the lion by George Fenner , the foresight by m . Thomas Vavasour , and the crane by Duffild . the foresight and the crane be but small ship ; only the other be of the middle size ; the rest , beside the bark Ralegh , command by captain thin , be victualler , and of small force or none . the spanish fleet have shroud their approach by reason of the island ; be now so soon at hand , as our ship have scarce time to way their anchor , but some of they be drive to let slip their cable and set sail . sir Richard Grinvile be the last that weigh , to recover the man that be upon the island , which otherwise have be lose . the lord Thomas with the rest very hardly recover the wind , which sir Richard Grinvile not be able to do , [ ii two . 171 . ] be persuade by the master and other to cut his main sail , and cast about , and to trust to the sail of the ship ; for the squadron of Sivil be on his weather bow . but sir Richard utter refuse to turn from the enemy , allege that he will rather choose to die , than to dishonour himself , his country , and her majesty ship , persuade his company that he will pass through the two squadron , in despite of they , and enforce those of Sivil to give he way . which he perform upon diverse of the foremost , who , as the mariner term it , spring their luff , and fall under the lee of the revenge . but the other course have be the better , and may right well have be answer in so great a impossibility of prevail . notwithstanding out of the greatness of his mind , he can not be persuade . in the mean while as he attend those which be near he , the great San Philip be in the wind of he , and come towards he , becalm his sail in such sort , as the ship can neither make way , nor feel the helm : so huge and high carge be the spanish ship , be of a thousand and five hundred tun . who after lay the revenge aboard . when he be thus bereave of his sail , the ship that be under his lee luff up , also lay he aboard : of which the next be the admiral of the Biscayne , a very mighty and puissant ship command by Brittandona . the say fillip carry three tire of ordinance on a side , and eleven piece in every tire . she shoot eight forth right out of her chase , beside those of her stern port . after the revenge be entangle with this fillip , 42 four other board she ; two on she larboard , and two on her starboard . the fight thus begin at three of the clock in the afternoon , continue very terrible all that evening . but the great San Philip have receive the low tire of the revenge , discharge with crossebarshot , shift her self with all diligence from her side , utter mislike her first entertainment . some say that the ship founder , but we can report it for truth , unless we be assure . the spanish ship be fill with company of soldier , in some two hundred beside the mariner ; in some five , in other eight hundred . in we there be none at all beside the mariner , but the servant of the commander and some few voluntary gentleman only . after many interchanged voly of great ordinance and small shot , the Spaniard deliberate to enter the revenge , and make diverse attempt , hope to force she by the multitude of their arm soulder and musketeer , but be still repulse again and again , and at all time beat back into their own ship , or into the sea . in the begin of the fight , the George noble of London have receive some shot through she by the armada , fall under the lee of the revenge , and ask sir Richard what he will command he , be but one of the victualler and of small force : sir Richard bid he save himself , and leave he to his fortune . after the fight have thus , without intermission , continue while the day last and some hour of the night , many of our man be slay and hurt , and one of the great galleon of the armada , and the admiral of the hulk both sink , and in many other of the spanish ship great slaughter be make . some write that sir Richard be very dangerous hurt almost in the begin of the fight , and lie speechless for a time ere he recover . but two of the revenge own company , bring home in a ship of lime from the island , examine by some of the lord , and other , affirm that he be never so wound as that he forsake the upper deck , till a hour before midnight ; and then be shoot into the body with a musket as he be a dress , be again shoot into the head , and withal his chirurgeon wound to death . This agree also with a examination take by sir Francis Godolphin , of four other mariner of the same ship be return , which examination , the say sir Francis send unto master William Killegrue , of her majesty privy chamber . but to return to the fight , the spanish ship which attempt to board the revenge , as they be wound and beat off , so always other come in their place , she have never less than two mighty galleon by her side , and aboard she : so that ere the morning , from three of the clock the day before , there have fifteen several armada assail she ; and all so ill approve their entertainment , as they be by the break of day , far more willing to hearken to a composition , then hasty to make any more assault or entry . but as the day increase , so our man decrease : and as the light grow more and more , by so much more grow our discomfort . for none appear in sight but enemy , save one small ship call the pilgrim , command by Jacob Whiddon , who hover all night to see the success : but in the morning bear with the revenge , be hunt like a hare among many ravenous hound , but escape . all the powder of the revenge to the last barrel be now spend , all her pike break , forty of her best man slay , and the most part of the rest hurt . in the begin of the fight she have but