of the hulk and the ascension of Sivil be both sink by the side of the revenge ; one other recover the road of saint Michael , and sink also there ; a four run her self with the shore to save her man . sir Richard die as it be say , the second 47 or three day aboard the general , and be by they great bewail . what become of his body , whether it be bury in the sea or on the land we know not : the comfort that remain to his friend be , that he have end his life honourable in respect of the reputation win to his nation and country , and of the same to his posterity , and that be dead , he have not outlive his own honour . for the rest of her majesty ship that enter not so far into the fight as the revenge , the reason and cause be these . there be of they but six in all , whereof two but small ship ; the revenge engage past recovery : the hand of Flores be on the one side , 53 sail of the spanish , divide into squadron on the other , all as full fill with soldier as they can contain : almost the one half of our man sick and not able to serve : the ship grow foul , unroomage , and scarce able to bear any sail for want of ballast , have be six month at the sea before . if all the rest have enter , all have be lose : for the very hugeness of the spanish fleet , if not other violence have be offer , will have crush they between they into shiver . of which the dishonour and loss to the queen have be far great than the spoil or harm that the enemy can any way have receive . notwithstanding it be very true , that the lord Thomas will have enter between the squadron , but the rest will not condescend ; and the master of his own ship offer to leap into the sea , rather than to conduct that her majesty ship and the rest to be a prey to the enemy , where there be no hope nor possibility either of defence or victory . which also in my opinion have ill sort or answer the discretion and trust of a general , to commit himself and his charge to a assure destruction , without hope or any likelihood of prevail : thereby to diminish the strength of her majesty navy , and to enrich the pride and glory of the enemy . the foresight of the queen command by m . Thomas vavisor perform a very great fight , and stay two hour as near the revenge as the weather will permit he , not forsake the fight , till he be like to be encompass by the squadron , and with great difficulty clear himself . the rest give diverse volei of shot , and enter as far as the place permit , and their own necessity , to keep the weather gage of the enemy , until they be part by night . a few day after the fight be end , and the english prisoner disperse into the spanish and Indie ship , there arise so great a storm from the west and northwest , that all the fleet be disperse , as well the indian fleet which be then come unto they , as the rest of the armada that attend their arrival , of which 14 . sail together with the revenge , and in her 200 Spaniard , be cast away upon the isle of S . Michael . so it please they to honour the burial of that renown ship the revenge , not suffer she to perish alone , for the great honour she achieve in her life time . on the rest of the island there be cast away in this storm , 15 or 16 more of the ship of war : and of a hundred and odd sail of the Indie fleet , expect this year in Spain , what in this tempest , and what before in the bay of Mexico , and about the Bermuda , there be 70 and odd consume and lose , with those take by our ship of London , beside one very rich indian ship , which set her self on fire , be board by the pilgrim , and five other take by master wat his ship of London , between the Havana and Cape S . Antonio . the four of this month of November we receive letter from the Tercera , affirm that there be 3000 body of man remain in that hand , save out of the perish ship : and that by the Spaniard own confession , there be 10000 cast away in this storm , beside those that be perish between the hand and the main . thus it have please God to fight for we , and to defend the justice of our cause , against the ambitious and bloody pretence of the Spaniard , who seek to devour un 49 d all nation , be themselves devour . a manifest testimony how injust and displease , their attempt be in the sight of God , who have please to witness by the success of their affair , his mislike of their bloody and injurious design , purpose and practise against all christian prince , over who they seek unlawful and ungodly rule and empery . one day or two before this wrack happen to the spanish fleet , when as some of our prisoner desire to be set on shore upon the island , hope to be from thence transport into England , which liberty be former by the general promise : one Morice Fitz John , son of old John of Desmond , a notable traitor , cousin germane to the late earl of Desmond , be send to the english from ship to ship , to persuade they to serve the king of Spain . the argument he use [ ii two . 174 . ] to induce they be these . the increase of pay which he promise to be treble : advancement to the better sort : and the exercise of the true catholique religion , and safety of their soul to all . for the first , even the beggarly and unnatural behaviour of those english and irish rebel , that serve the king in that present action , be sufficient to answer that first argument of rich pay . for so poor and beggarly they be , as for want of apparel they strip their poor country man prisoner out of their ragged garment , wear to nothing by six month service , and spare not to despoil they even of their bloody shirt , from their wound body , and the very shoe from their foot ; a notable testimony of their rich entertainment and great wage . the second reason be hope of advancement if they serve well , and will continue faithful to the king . but what man can be so blockish ignorant ever to expect place or honour from a foreign king , have no other argument or persuasion than his own disloyalty ; to be unnatural to his own country that breed he ; to his parent that beget he