one hundred free from sickness , and fourscore and ten sick , lay in hold upon the ballast . a small troup to man such a ship , and a weak garrison to resist so mighty a army . by those hundred all be sustain , the volei , boording , and entering of fifteen ship of war , beside those which [ ii two . 172 . ] beat she at large . on the contrary , the spanish be always supply with soldier bring from every squadron : all manner of arm and powder at will . the last fight of the ‘ revenge ’ a . d . i59i - unto we there remain no comfort at all , no hope , no supply either of ship , man , or weapon ; the mast all beat over board , all her tackle cut asunder , her upper work altogether raze , and in effect even she be with the water , but the very foundation or bottom of a ship , nothing be leave over head either for flight or defence . sir Richard find himself in this distress , and unable any long to make resistance , have endure in this fifteen hour fight , the assault of fifteen several armada , all by turn aboard he , and by estimation eight hundred shot of great artillery , beside many assault and entry ; and that himself and the ship must needs be possess by the enemy , who be now all cast in a ring round about he . ( the revenge not able to move one way or other , but as she be move with the wave and billow of the sea ) command the master gunner , who he know to be a most resolute man , to split and sink the ship ; that thereby nothing may remain of glory or victory to the Spaniard : see in so many hour fight , and with so great a navy they be not able to take she , have have fifteen hour time , above ten thousand man , and fifty and three sail of man of the spanish war to perform it withal : and persuade they come - 5 3saile - pany , or as many as he can induce , to yield themselves unto God , and to the mercy of none else ; but as they have , like valiant resolute man , repulse so many enemy , they shall not now shorten the honour of their nation , by prolong their own life for a few hour , or a few day . the master gunner ready condescend and diverse other ; but the captain and the master be of another opinion , and beseech sir Richard to have care of they : allege that the Spaniard will be as ready to entertain a composition , as they be willing to offer the same : and that there be diverse sufficient and valiant man yet live , and who wound be not mortal , they may do their country and prince acceptable service hereafter . and whereas sir Richard have allege that the Spaniard shall never glory to have take one ship of her majesty , see they have so long and so notable defend themselves ; they answer , that the ship have six foot water in hold , three shot under water , which be so weak stop , as with the first work of the sea , she must needs sink , and be beside so crush and bruise , as she can never be remove out of the place . and as the matter be thus in dispute , and sir Richard refuse to hearken to any of those reason : the master of the revenge ( while the captain win unto he the great party ) be convoy aboard the general don Alfonso ba ^ an . who ( find none over hasty to enter the revenge again , doubt lest sir Richard will have blow they up and himself , and perceive by the report of the master of the revenge his dangerous disposition ) yield that all their life shall be save , the company send for England , and the better sort to pay such reasonable ransom as their estate will bear , and in the mean season to be free from Gaily or imprisonment . to this he so much the rather condescend as well , as i have say , for fear of further loss and mischief to themselves , as also for the desire he have to recover sir Richard greenvil ; who for his notable valour he seem great to honour and admire . when this answer be return , and that safety of life be promise , the common sort be now at the end of their peril , the most draw back from sir Richard and the master gunner , be no hard matter to dissuade man from death to life . the master gunner find himself and sir Richard thus prevent and master by the great number , will have slay himself with a sword , have he not be by force withhold and lock into his Cabben . then the general send many boat aboard the revenge , and diverse of our man fear sir Richard disposition , steal away aboard the the last fight of the ‘ revenge ’ a . d . ... ’ 591 - general and other ship . sir Richard thus overmatch , be send unto by Alfonso ba ^ an to remove out of the revenge , the ship be marvelous unsavoury , fill with blood and body of dead , and wound man like a slaughter house . sir Richard answer that he may do with his body what he list , for he esteem it not , and as he be carry out of the ship he swoon , and revive again desire the company to pray for he . the general use sir Richard with all humanity , and leave nothing unattempted that tend to his recovery , high commend his valour and worth inesse , and great bewail the danger wherein it he be , be unto they a rare spectacle , and a resolution seldom approve , to see one ship turn towards so many enemy , to endure the charge and board of so many huge armada , and to resist and repel the assault and entry of so many soldier . all which and more be confirm by a spanish captain of the same armada , and a present actor in the fight , who be sever from the rest in a storm , be by the lion of London a small ship take , and be now prisoner in London . the general commander of the armada , be don Alphonso ba ? a , brother to the mark of Santa Cruz . the admiral of the Biscaine squadron , be Britandona . of the squadron of Sivil , the mark of arumburch . [ ii two . 173 . ] the hulk and Flybotes be command by Luis Coutinho . there be slay and drown in this fight , well near one thousand of the enemy , and two speciali commander don Luis de sant John , and don George de Prunaria de Mallaga , as the spanish captain confesses , beside diverse other of speciali account , whereof as yet report be not make . the admiral