time • and place will suffer : which we have no soon do , but yet again we be trouble with as great extremity as before , so that again we be like to have lose our new main sail , have not master William Antony the master of the ship himself ( when none else will or dare ) venture with danger of drown by creep along upon the main yard ( which be let down close to the rail ) to gather it up out of the sea , and to fasten it thereto , be in the mean while ofttimes duck over head and ear into the sea . these storm be so terrible , that there be some in our company , which confess they have go to sea for the space of 20 . year , and have never see the like , and vow that if ever they return safe home , they will never come to sea again . the last of November at night we meet with a english ship , out of which ( because it be too late that night ) it be agree that we shall have have the next morning two or three ton of wine , which , as they say , be all the provision of drink they have , save only [ ii two . 165 . ] a but or two , which they must needs reserve for their own use : but after that , we hear of they no more , till they be set on ground upon the coast of Ireland , where it appear that they may have spare we much more than they pretend they can , so as they may well have relieve our great necessity , and have have sufficient for themselves beside , to bring they into England . the first of December at night we speak with another english ship , and have some beer out of she , but not sufficient to carry we into England , so that we be constrain to put into Ireland , the wind so serve . the next day we come to a anchor , not far from the saint kelme under the land and wind , where we be somewhat more quiet , but ( that be no safe harbour to ride in ) the next morning we go about to weigh anchor , but have some of our man hurt at the Capsten , we be fain to give over and leave it behind , hold on our course to Ventrie haven , where we safe arrive the same day , that place be a very safe and convenient harbour for we , that now we may sing as we have just cause , they that go down to the sea , etc so soon as we have anchor here my lord go forthwith to shore , and bring present fresh water and fresh victual , as mutton , pig , hen , etc to refresh his company withal . notwithstanding himself have late be very weak , and taste of the same extremity that his company do : for in the time of our former want , have a little fresh water leave he 26 remain in a pot , in the night it be break , and the water drink and dry up . soon after the sick and wound man be carry to the next principali town , call dingenacush , be about three mile distant from the foresay haven , where our ship road , to the eastwards , that there they may be the better refresh , and have the chirurgeon daily to attend upon they . here we well refresh our self while the irish harp sound sweet in our ear , and here we , who for the former extremity be in manner half dead , have our life ( as it be ) restore unto we again . this dingenacush be the chief town in all that part of Ireland , it consist but of one main street , from whence some small doe proceed on either side . it have have gate ( as it seem ) in time pass at either end to open and shut as a town of war , and a castle also . the house be very strong build with thick stone wall , and narrow window like unto castle : for as they confess , in time of trouble , by reason of the wild irish or otherwise , they use their house for their defence as castle . the castle and all the house in the town , save four , be win , burn , and ruinate by the earl of Desmond . Theise four house fortify themselves against he , and withstand he and all his power perforce , so as he can not win they . there remain yet a thick stone wall that pass overthwart the midst of the street which be a part of their fortification . notwithstanding while they thus defend themselves , as some of they yet alive confess , they be drive to as great extremity as the Jew , besiege by Titus the roman emperor , insomuch that they be constrain to eat dead man carcase for hunger . the town be now again somewhat repair , but in effect there remain but the ruin of the former town . common they have no chim - neis in their house , except they of the better sort , 27 so that the smoke be very troublesome to we , while we continue there . their fuel be turf , which they have very good , and whinne or fur . there grow little wood thereabouts , which make building chargeable there : as also want of lime ( as they report ) which they be fain to fetch from far , when they have need thereof . but of stone there be store enough , so that with they they common make their hedge to part each man ground from other ; and the ground seem to be nothing else within but rock and stone : yet it be very fruitful and plentiful of grass , and grain , as may appear by the abundance of cow and cattle there : insomuch that we have good mutton ( though somewhat less than we in England ) for two shilling or five groat a piece , good pig and hen for 3 . penny a piece . the great