the voyage of Richard Rainolds and Thomas Dassel to the river of Senega and Gambra adjoin upon Guinea , 1591 , with a discourse of the treason of certain of don Antonio his servant and follower . the name of the chief place of traffic between Senega y Gambra . [ ii two . 189 . ] y virtue of her majesty most gracious charter give in the year 1588 , and in the thirty year of her highness reign , certain english merchant be grant to trade , in and from the river of Senega to and in the river of Gambra , on the western coast of Africa . the chief place of traffic on that coast between these river , be these : 1 Senega river : the commodity be hide , gum , elephant tooth , a few grain , ostrich feather , amber - griece , and some gold . 2 Beseguiache , a town by Capo Verde * league from Senega river : the commodity be small hide , and a few tooth . 3 Refisca Viejo , a town 4 league from Beseguiache : the commodity be small hide , and a few tooth now and then . 4 Palmerin , a town 2 league from Refisca : the commodity be small hide , and a few elephant tooth now and then . 5 porto d ’ ally , a town 5 league from Palmerin : the commodity be small hide , tooth , amber - griece , and a little gold : and many Portugal be there . 6 candimal , a town half a league from Porto d ’ ally : the commodity be small hide , and a few tooth now and then . 7 Palmerin , a town 3 league from candimal : the commodity be small hide , and a few tooth now and then . 8 Joala , a town 6 league from Palmerin : the commodity be hide , wax , elephant tooth , rice , and some gold : and many Spaniards and Portugal be there . 9 Gambra river : the commodity be rice , wax , hide , elephant tooth , and gold . the Frenchman of diepe and New - haven have trade trade thither above thirty year : and common with four or five ship a year , whereof two small bark go into the ' river of Senega . the other be wont ( until within these four year , that our ship come thither ) to ride with their ship in the road of Porto d ’ ally and so send their small shaloup of six or eight ton to some of these place on the sea coast before repeat . where in all place general they be well belove and as courteous entertain of the negro , as if they have be natural bear in the country . and very often the negro come into France and return again , which be a further increase of mutual love and amity . since our come to that coast the Frenchman ride with their ship at Refisca Viejo , and suffer we to anchor with our ship at Porto d ’ ally . the Frenchman never use to go into the river of Gambra : which be a river of secret Gambra d trade and riches conceal by the Portugal . for long since one Frenchman enter the river with a small bark conceay . which be betray , surprise , and take by two galley of the Portugal . in our second voyage and second year there be by vile treacherous mean of the Portugal and the king v ° 3a &- of the negro consent in Porto d ’ ally and Joala about forty Englishman cruel slay and captive , and most forty English or all of their good confiscate : whereof there return mentramr - onely two , which be the merchant . and also by pro - and captive . curement of Pedro Gonsalves , one of don Antonio the king servant , Thomas Dassel and other have be betray , if it have not please almighty God to reveal the same , whereby it be prevent . from the south side of Senega river on the sea coast unto about Palmerin be all one kingdom of Negros . the king name be Melick Zamba , who dwell two day journey within the land from Refisca . the 12 of November 1591 , i Richard Rainolds and Thomas Dassel factor in a ship call the nightingale of London of 125 ton , and a pinnace call the cape Verde . messenger of 40 ton arrive near unto Capo Verde at a little hand call the hand of liberty . at this hand we set up a small pinnace , with which we carry our merchandise on land when we traffic . and in the mean time Thomas Dassel go with the great pinnace to traffic with Spaniards or Portugal in Porto d ’ ally or Joala . over against the say island on the main besegueache . be a habitation of the negro call besegueache . the alcay or governor thereof with a great train come aboard in their canoas to receive the king duty for ankerage and permit the quiet set up of our pinnace : who like pass well that no Portugal come in the ship , say , we shall be better think of by the king and people , if we never do bring Portugal , but come of our self as the Frenchman ever do and do . and to purchase the more love , i Richard Rainolds give he and all his company courteous entertainment . also upon his entreaty , have sufficient pledge aboard , i and other go on land with he . at this instant there be great war between this alcay and another governor of the next province . nevertheless upon our arrival truce be take for a space ; and i with our company conduct among both enemy to the governor besegueache . house in besegueache , and be gentle and friendly feast after their manner , and with some present return safe aboard again . the next day the alcay come aboard again , to will i to send some iron and other commodity in the boat to traffic with the negro , and also request i that i will go to Refisca with the ship ; which i do . and one thing i note , that a number of Negros attend the alcaid land in warlike manner with bow and poison arrow , dart poison , and sword , ( because that the enemy by 92 1591 . reason of the truce take be there also to view the ship ) who for the most part approach to he kneel down and kiss the back of his hand . the 17 of November we weigh anchor ; and by reason no french ship be yet come , i go to the road of Refisca : where i send for the alcaids interpreter , who come thither aboard , and receive of i the king duty for to have free traffic with the negro , with who daily i exchange my iron and other ware for hide and some elephant tooth