have invite to dinner in the victory , on the Sunday follow , so many of the inhabitant as will willing come ( save only Diego Gomes the governor , who come but once only to parley about the ransom ) only four come and be well entertain , and solemn dismiss with sound of drum and trumpet , and a peal of ordinance : to who my lord deliver his letter subscribe with his own hand , import a request to all other Englishmen to abstain from any further molest they , save only for fresh water , and victual necessary for their intend voyage . during our abode here ( viz . the 11 of September ) two man come out of Pico which have be prisoner there : also at Fayal we set at liberty a prisoner translate from saint Jago who be cousin to a servant of don Anthonio king of Portugal ! in England : these prisoner we detain with we . on Monday we send our boat a shore for fresh water , which ( by reason of the rain that fall the former night ) come plentiful run down the hill , and will 9 otherwise have be hard to be get there . on Tuesday likewise have not yet sufficient serve our turn , we send again for fresh water , which be then not so easy to be get as the day before , by reason of a great wind : which in the afternoon increase also in such sort , that we think it not safe to ride so near the land ; whereupon we weigh anchor and so depart northwest and by west , alongst the coast of Fayal island . some of the inhabitant come aboard to we this day , tell we that always about that time of the year such wind west Southwest blow on that coast . this day , as we sail near saint George island , a huge fish lie still a little under water , or rather even therewith , appear hard by a head of we , the sea break upon his back , which be black colour , in such sort as deem at the first it have be a rock , and the [ ii two . 159 . ] ship stem direct with he , we be put in a sudden fear for the time : till soon after we see he move out of the way . the 16 of September in the night it lighten much , whereupon there follow great wind and rain , which continue the 17 18 19 20 and 21 of the same . the 23 of September we come again into faial road to weigh a anchor which ( for haste and fear of foul weather ) we have leave there before , where we go on shore to see the town , the people ( as we think ) have now settle themselves there again , but notwithstanding many of they through too much distrustfulness , depart and prepare to depart with their packet at the first sight of we : until such time as they be assure by my lord , that our come be not any way to injury they , but especial to have fresh water , and some other thing needful for we , content they for the same . so than we view the town quiet , and buy such thing as we desire for our money as if we have be in England . and they help to fill we in fresh water , receive for their pain such satisfaction as content they . the 25 day we be force again to depart from thence , before we have sufficient water , by reason of a great tempest that sudden arise in the night , in so much , that my lord himself soon after midnight raise our man out of their cabin to weigh anchor , himself also together with they hale at the Capsten , and after cheer they up with wine . the next day we send our caravel and the Sawsie - Jacke to the road of saint Michael , to see what they can espy : our follow after they upon the 27 day , ply to and fro , come within sight of saint Michael , but by contrary wind the 28 29 and 30 day we be drive to leewarde , and can not get near the island . the first of October we sail alongst Tercera , and even against Brasill ( a promontory near to Angra the strong town in that island ) we espy some boat come to the town , and make out towards they : but be near to the land they run to shore and escape we . in the afternoon we come near to Graciosa , whereupon my lord forthwith send captain Lister to the hander , to let they understand that his desire be only to have water and wine of they , and some fresh victual , and not any further to trouble they . they answer they can give no resolute answer to this demand , until the governor of the hand have consult thereupon , and therefore desire he to send again to they the next day . upon the second day of October early in the morning , we send forth our long boat and pinnace , with empty cask , and about some fifty or sixty man together with the Margaret , and captain Davis his ship : for we now want all the rest of our consort . but when our man will have land , the hander shoot at they , and will not suffer they . and troop of man appear upon land , with ensign display to resist we : so our boat row alongst the shore , to find some place where they may land , not with too much 11 disadvantage : our ship and they still shoot at the hander : but no place can be find where they may land without great peril of loose many of their life , and so be constrain to retire without receive any answer , as be promise the day before . we have three man hurt in this conflict , while our boat be together in consult what be best to be do : two of they be strike with a great shot ( which the hander draw from place to place with ox ) wherewith