in all our ship . some hang up sheet tie with cord by the four corner , and a weight in the midst that the water may run down thither , and so be receive into some vessel set or hang underneath : some that want sheet , hang up nakins , and clout , and watch they till they be through wet , then wring and suck out the water . and that water which fall down and wash away the filth and soil of the ship , tread under foot , as bad as run down the kennel many time when it rain , be not lose i warrant you , but watch and attend careful ( yea sometime with strife and contention ) at every scupper - hole , and other place where it run down , with dish , pot , can , and jar , whereof some drink hearty draught even as it be , mud and all , without tarry to dense or settle it : other elense it first , but not often , for it be so thick and go so slow thorough , that they may ill endure to tarry so long , and be loath to loose too much of such precious stuff : some lick with their tongue ( like dog ) the board under foot , the side , rail , and mast of the ship : other that be more ingenious , fasten girdle or rope about the mast , daub tallow betwixt they and the mast ( that the rain may not run down between ) in such sort , that those rope or girdle hang low on the one side then on the other , a spout of leather be fasten to the low part of they , that all the rain drop that come run down the mast , may meet together at that place , and there be receive . he that get a can of water by these mean be speak of , sue to , and envy as a rich man . quam pulchrum digito monstrari and dicier hic est ? some of the poor Spaniard that we have take ( who notwithstanding have the same allowance that our own man have ) will come and crave of we , for the love of God , but so much water as they can hold in the hollow of their hand : and they have it , notwithstanding our great extremity , to teach they some humanity in stead of their accustom barbarity , both to we and other nation heretofore . 23 [ ii two . 164 . ] they put also bullet of lead into their mouth to slake their thirst . now in every corner of the ship be hear the lamentable cry of sick and wound man sound woeful in our ear , cry out and pitiful complain for want of drink , be ready to die , yea many die for lack thereof , so as by reason of this great extremity we lose many more man , than we have do all the voyage before : have before this time be so well and sufficient provide for , that we live in manner as well and healthful , and die as few as if we have be in England , whereas now light every day some be cast overboard . but the second day of December 1589 . be a festi vail day with we , for than it rain a good pace , and we save some pretty store of rain water ( though we be well wet for it , and that at midnight ) and fill our skin full beside : notwithstanding it be muddy and bitter with wash the ship , but ( with some sugar which we have to sweeten it withal ) it go merry down , yet remember we and wish for with all our heart , many a conduit , pump , spring , and stream of clear sweet run water in England : and how miserable we have account some poor soul who we have see drive for thirst to drink thereof , and how happy we will now have think our self if we may have have our fill of the same : yet shall we have fare the better with this our poor feast , if we may have have our meat and drink ( such and so much as it be ) stand quiet before we : but beside all the former extremity , we be so toss and tur - moiled with such horrible stormy and tempestuous weather , that every man have best hold fast he can , cup , and dish in his hand , yea and himself too , many time , by the rope , rail , or side of the ship or else he shall soon find all under foot . herewith our main sail be tear from the yard and blow overboard quite away into the sea without recovery , and our other sail so rend and tear ( from side to side some of they ) that hardly any of they escape hole . the rage wave and foam surge of the sea come roll like mountain one after another , and overrake the waste of the ship like a mighty river run over it , whereas in fair weather it be near 20 . foot above the water , that now we may cry out with the princely prophet psalm 107 . vers . 26 . they mount up to heaven , and descend to the deep , so that their soul melt away for trouble : they reel too and fro , and stagger like a drunken man , and all their cunning be go . with this extremity of foul weather the ship be so toss and shake , that by the crake noise it make , and by the leak which be now much more than ordinary , we be in great fear it will have shake in sunder , so that now also we have just cause to pray a little otherwise then the poet , though mar the verse , yet mend the meaning . deus maris and coeli , quid enim nisi vota supersunt , Solvere quassatae parcito membra ratis . notwithstanding it please God of his great goodness to deliver we out of this danger . then forthwith a new main sail be make and fasten to the yard , and the rest repair as