a report of master Robert Flicke direct to master Thomas Bromley , master Richard staper , and master Cordall concern the success of a part of the London supply send to my lord Thomas Howard to the isle of the azore , 1591 . orshipfull , my hearty commendation unto you premise : by my last of the twelve of August from this place i advertise you particular of the accident of our fleet until then . it remain now to relate our endeavour in accomplish the order receive for the join with my lord Thomas Howard , together with the success we have have . our departure from hence be the seventeenth of August , the wind not serve before . the next day follow i cause a flag of counsel to be put forth , whereupon the captain and master of every ship come aboard , and 1 acquaint they with my commission , firm by the right honourable the lord of her majesty counsel , and with all the advertisement of sir Edward Denny , of my lord determination to remain threescore league to the west of Fayal , spread north and south betwixt thirty seven and a half or thirty eight and a half degree . and not find he in this height to repair to the isle of Flores and Corvo , where a pinnace of purpose shall stay our come until the last of August , with intent after that day to repair to you coast of Spain , about the heighth of the rock , some twenty or thirty league off the shore . the which be advise consider off , have regard unto the shortness of time , by reason of our long abode in this place , and the uncertainty of the weather to favour we , it be general hold for the best and secure way to meet with my lord , to bear with the heighth of the rock , without make any stay upon the coast , and so direct for the island which be accord full agree and perform . the 28 day we have sight of the burling , and the 29 be thwart of Peniche , the wind serve we , without any stay we direct our course west for the island . the 30 day we meet with captain Royden in the red - rose , sometime call the golden dragon , separate from my lord of Cumberland in a storm : who certify we of 50 sail of the spanish king armada to be go for the hand , but can not inform we any news of my lord Thomas Howard , otherwise then upon presumption to remain about the island , and so we continue our course the wind stand with we . the 4 of September we recover Tercera , and range along all the island , both on the south and north side the space of four day : during which time it be not our hap to meet with any ship , whereby either to understand of my lord , or of the indian fleet : hereupon we direct our course to the west from Fayal , accord to the instruction of Sit * Edward Denny . the 11 day in the ply to the westwards we descry a sail out of our main top , and in the afternoon between two and three of the clock have raise her hull , the weather become calm , so that the ship can not fetch she . i send off " my skiff thorough man , furnish with shot and sword , the cherubin , and the Margaret and John do the like . upon this the sail stand off again , and the night approach , our boat lose she and so return . in this our pursuit after the sail the centurion be leave a stern , the next morning we miss she , and spend that day in ply up and down seek she . and for as much as every of the ship have receive order , that , if by extremity of weather or any other mischance they shall be sever from our fleet , they shall meet and join at Flores , we , accord to the instruction of sir Edward Denny , proceed to the find of my lord Thomas Howard , be in the heighth appoint and not able to hold the same by reason of extreme tempest which force we to the isle of Flores and Corvo , which we make the 14 day in the morning , and there also join again with the centurion , who company before we have lose : who declare unto we that the 12 day , be the same day they lose we , they meet with five and forty sail of the indian fleet . the same night upon these news we come to a anchor between Flores and Corvo , and the morrow follow at the break of day , a flag of counsel be put out , the captain and master come aboard i : where , for the desire to understand some tiding of my lord , as also the supply of our want of water , it be think good to send our boat furnish on shore , under the conduct of captain Brothus , and then it be also order after our departure thence to range along the southside of the island to the end we may either understand of my lord , or else light on the indian fleet ; and in the miss of our purpose to direct our course for cape Sant Vincente . the boat , accord to the foresay determination , be send on shore , it chance that the costly ride uttermost in the road , do weigh to bring her self more near among we for the succour of the boat send off , and in open the land discover two sail , which we in the road can not perceive : whereupon she give we a warn piece , which cause we to wave off our boat back , and before they can recover our ship , the descry ship appear unto we , towards the which we make with all haste , and in a very happy hour , as it please God . in that we have not so soon clear the land , and speak with one of they , which be a bark of Bristol , who have also seek my lord in the heigt appoint and can not find he , but a violent storm arise , in such manner , as if we have remain in the road , we have be in danger of perish : and the same extreme continue during the space of threescore hour . in which storm i be separate from our fleet , except the cherubin and the costly , which keep 58 company with i . and so sail among the hand , i view the road of Fayal , and find no reader there , go direct for the isle Tercera . the nineteenth day in the morning come unto you same with intent to edge into the road , a tempest arise and scant the wind , that we can not seize it : from the which be drive we fall among certain of the indian fleet , which the say storm disperse , and put they from the road : whereupon my self with the