return have find out such a place as we desire , but the wind will not suffer we to come near it , and again if we can have ankor there , it be think likely that they will rather run themselves a ground to save their life and liberty , and some of their good , then come forth to loose their liberty and good to we their enemy . so we shoot at they to see if we can reach they , but it fall far short . and thus we depart , think it not probable that they will come forth so long as we watch for they before the haven mouth , or within sight of they . for the space of five day after we put off to sea , and lie without sight of they , and send a pinnace to lie out of sight close by the shore , to bring we word if they shall come forth . after a while the pinnace return and tell we that those ship in the haven have take down their sail , and let down their top mast : so that we suppose they will never come forth , till they perceive we to be quite go . wherefore upon the 20 of October , hear that there be certain scottish ship at saint Michael , we sail thither , and find there one scottish reader , and two or three more at villa Franca , the next ride a league or two from the town of saint Michael , to the eastwards : of who we have for our relief some small quantity of wine ( viz . some five or six buttes of they all ) and some fresh water , but nothing sufficient to serve our turn . upon Tuesday the one and twenty of October , we send our long boat to shore for fresh water at a brook a little to the westwards from villa Franca . but the inhabitant espy we come down with two [ ii two . 161 . ] ensign display , and about some hundred and fifty man arm , to withstand our land . so our man have spend all their powder upon they in attempt to land , and not be able to prevail at so great odds , return frustrate . from hence we depart towards saint Mary island , mind to water there , and then to go for the coast of Spain . for we have intelligence that it be a place of no great force , and that we may water there very well : therefore upon Friday follow , my lord send captain Lister , and captain Amias Preston now sir Amias Preston ( who not long before come to we out of his own ship , and she loose we in the night , he be force to tarry still with we ) with our long boat and pinnace , and some sixty or seventie shot in they , with a friendly letter to the hander , that they will grant we leave to water , and we will no further trouble they . so we depart from the victory for the hand , about nine of the clock in the forenoon , and row fresh until about 3 a clock afternoon . at which time our man be something weary with row , and be within a league or two of the shore , and 4 or 5 league from the victory , they espy ( to their refresh ) two ship ride at anchor hard under the town , whereupon have shift some 6 or 7 of our man into captain Davis his boat , be too much pester in our own , and retain with we some 20 shot in the pinnace , we make way towards they with all the speed we can . by the way as we row we see boat pass betwixt the reader and the shore , and man in their shirt swim and wade to shore , who as we perceive afterwards , be labour to set those ship fast on ground , and the inhabitant as busy prepare themselves for the defence of those roader , their hand , and themselves . when we come near they , captain Lister command the trumpet to be sound , but prohibit any shot to be discharge at they , until they have direction from he : but some of the company , either not well perceive or regard what he say , immediate upon the sound of the trumpet discharge their piece at the islander , which for the most part lie in trench and fortify place unseen , to their own best advantage : who immediate shoot likewise at we , both with small and great shot , without danger to themselves : notwithstanding captain Lister earnest hasten forward the sailor that row , who begin to shrink at that shot , fly so fast about their ear , and himself first enter one of the ship that lie a little further from shore than the other , we speedy follow after he into she , still ply they with our shot . and have cut in sunder her cable and hauser , tow she away with our pinnace . in the mean time captain Davis his boat overtake we and enter into the other ship , which also ( as the former ) be forsake by all her man : but they be constrain to leave she and to come again into their boat ( while shoot and stone from shore fly fast among they ) find she to stick so fast a ground , that they can not stir she : which the townsman also perceive , and see that they be but few in number , and we ( busy about the other ship ) not come to aid they , be prepare to have come and take they . but they return unto we , and so together we come away towards the victory , tow after we the prize that we have now take , which be late come from Brasill , load with sugar . in this fight we have two man slay and 16 wound : and as for they , it be like they have little hurt , lie for the most part behind stone wall , which be build one above another hard by the sea side , upon the end of the hill whereupon the