the voyage of the right honourable George earl of Cumberland to the azore , etc write by the excellent mathematician and enginier master Edward Wright . he right honourable the earl of Cumberland have at his own charge prepare his small fleet of four sail only , viz . the victory one of the queen ship royal ; the Meg and Margaret small ship , ( one of which also he be force soon after to send home again , find she not able to endure the sea ) and a small caravel , and have assemble together about 400 man ( or few ) of gentleman , soldier , and sailor , embark himself and they , and set sail from the sound of Plymouth in Devonshire , the 18 day of June 1589 . be accompany with these captain and gentleman which hereafter follow . captain Christopher Lister a man of great resolution , captain Edward careless , alias wright , who in sir Francis drake west - indian voyage to saint Domingo and Carthagena , be captain of the hope . captain Boswell , m . Mervin , m . Henry long , m . partridge , m . Norton , m . William Mounson captain of the Meg , and his viceadmiral , now sir William Mounson , m . Pigeon captain of the caravel . about 3 day after our departure from Plymouth we meet with 3 french ship , whereof one be of Newhaven , another of saint Malos , and so find they to seven i a be leaguer and lawful prize , we take they and send two of they for England with all their load , which be fish for the most part from newfoundland , save that there be part thereof distribute among our small fleet , as we can find stowage for the same : and in the three , all their man be send home into France . the same day and the day follow we meet with some other ship , who ( when after some conference have with they , we perceive plain to be of Roterodam and Emden , bind for rochel ) we dismiss . the 28 and 29 day we meet diverse of our english ship , return from the Portugal voyage which my lord relieve with victual . the 13 day of July be Sunday in the morning , we espy 11 ship without sight of you coast of Spain , in the height of 39 degree , who we present prepare for , and provide to meet they , have first set forth captain Mounson in the Meg , before we , to descry whence they be . the Meg approach near , there pass some shot betwixt they , [ ii two . 156 . ] whereby , as also by their admiral and vice - admiral put forth their flag , we perceive that some fight be likely to follow . have therefore fit our self for they , we make what haste we can towards they with regard always to get the wind of they , and about 10 or 11 of the clock , we come up to they with the victory . but after some few shot and some little fight pass betwixt we , they yield themselves , and the master of they all come aboard we , show their several passport from the city of Hamburg and Lubeck , from Breme , Pomerania and Calais . they have in they certain bag of pepper and syna - mom , which they confess to be the good of a Jew in Lisbon , which shall have be carry by they into their country to his factor there , and so find it by their own confession to be lawful prize , the same be soon after take and divide among our whole company , the value whereof be esteem to be about 4500 pound , at two shilling the pound . the 17 day the foresay ship be dismiss , but 7 of their man that be willing to go along with we for sailor , we take to help we , and so hold on our course for the azore . the 1 of August be Friday in the morning , we have sight of the hand of S . Michael , be one of the eastermost of the azore towards which we sail all that day , and at night have put forth a spanish flag in our maintop , that so they may the less suspect we , we approach near to the chief town and road of that hand , where we espy 3 ship ride at anchor and some other vessel : all which we determine to take in the dark of the night , and accord attempt about 10 or 11 of the clock , send our boat well man to cut their cable and hausef , and let they drive into the sea . our man come to they , find y ‘ one of those great ship be the falcon of London be there under a scottish pilot who bear the name of she as his own . but 3 other small ship that lie near under the castle there , our man let loose and tow they away unto we , most of the Spaniard that be in they leap overboard and swim to shore with loud and lamentable outcry , which they of the town hear be in a uproar , and answer with the like cry . the castle discharge some great shot at our boat , but shoot without mark by reason of the darkness they do we no hurt . the Scot likewise discharge 3 great piece into the air to make . the Spaniard think they be their friend and our enemy , and short after the scottish master , and some other with he , come aboard to my lord do their duty , and ofire their service , etc Theise 3 ship be fraught with wine and sallet - oile from Sivil . the same day our caravel chase a spanish caravel to shore at saint Michael , which carry letter thither , by which we learn that the carack be depart from Tercera 8 day before . the 7 of August we have sight of a little ship which 3 3 ship forcible tow out of harbour we chase towards Tercera with our pinnace ( the weather be calm ) and towards evening we overtake she