resolve to return for Fayall , with intent to surprise the town , but until the nine of September , we have either the wind so contrary , or the weather so calm , that in all that time , we make scarce nine or ten league way , linger up and down not far from Pico . the ten of September , be Wednesday in the afternoon , we come again to Fayal ride . whereupon immediate my lord send captain Lister , with one of Graciosa ( who captain Munson have before take ) and some other , towards Fayal , who certain of the inhabitant meet in a boat , and come with captain Lister to my lord , to who he give this choice : either to suffer he quiet to enter into the platform there without resistance , where he and his company will remain a space without offer any injury to they , that they ( the inhabitant ) may come unto he and compound for the ransom of the town ; or else to stand to the hazard of war . with these word they return to the town : but the keeper of the platform answer , that it be against their oath and allegiance tp king Philip to give over without fight . whereupon my lord command the boat of every ship , to be present man , and soon after land his man on the sandy shore , under the side of a hill , about half a league to the northward from the platform : upon the top of which hill certain horseman and footman show themselves , and other two company also appear , with ensign display , the one before the town upon the shore by the sea side , which march towards our land place , as though they will encounter we ; the other in a valley to the southward of the platform , as if they will have come to help the townsman : during which time , they in the platform also play upon we with great ordinance . notwithstanding my lord ( have set his man in order ) march along the sea shore , upon the sand , betwixt the sea and the town towards the platform for the space of a mile or more , and then the shore grow rocky , and permit no further progress without much difficulty , he enter into the town and pass through the street take of without resistance , unto the platform ; for those company before mention at my lord approach , be paya ^ i soon disperse , and sudden vanish . likewise they of the platform , be all flee at my [ n . two . 158 . ] lord come thither , leave he and his company to scale the wall , to enter and take possession without resistance . in the mean time our ship cease not to batter the foresay town and platform with great shot , till such time as we see the redcross of England flourish upon the forefront thereof . 4 description this Fayal be the principali town in all that island , of the town of and js situate direct over against the high and mighty my mountain Pico , lie towards the west northwest from that mountain , be divide therefrom by a narrow sea , which at that place be by estimation about some two or three league in breadth between the isle of Fayal and Pico . the town contain some three hundred household , their house be fair and strong build of lime and stone , and double cover with hollow tile much like our roof - tile , but that they be less at the one end then at the other . every house almost have a cistern or well in a garden on the back side : in which garden grow vine ( with ripe cluster of grape ) make pleasant shadow , and tobacco now common know and use in England , wherewith their woman there dye their face reddish , to make they seem fresh and young : pepper indian and common ; figtree bear both white and red fig : peach tree not grow very tall : orange , lemon , quince , potato - root , etc sweet wood ( cedar i think ) be there very common , even for building and fire . my lord have possess himself of the town and platform , and be careful of the preservation of the town , give commandment , that no mariner or soldier shall enter into any house , to make any spoil thereof . but especial he be careful that the church and house of religion there shall be keep inviolate , which be accord perform , through his appointment of guarder arid keeper for those place : but the rest of the town either for want of the former inhibition , or for desire of spoil and prey , be rifle , and ransack by the soldier and mariner , who scarce leave any house unsearched , out of which they take such thing as like they , as chest of sweet wood , chair , cloth , coverlet , hang , bed , apparel : and further range into the country , where some of they 8 the earl of Cumberland also be hurt by the inhabitant . the friary there contain and maintain thirty Franciscan friar ( among who we can not find any one able to speak true latin ) be build by a friar of Angra in Tercera of the same order , about the year of our lord one thousand five hundred and six . the table in the hall have seat for the one side only , and be always cover , as ready at all time for dinner or supper . from Wednesday in the afternoon , at which time we enter the town , till Saturday night , we continue there , until the inhabitant have agree and pay for the ransom of the town , two thousand ducat , most part whereof be church - plate . we find in the platform eight and fifty iron piece of ordinance , whereof three and twenty ( as i remember ) or moor be ready mount upon their carriage , between barricado , upon a platform towards the seaside , all which ordinance we take , and set the platform on fire , and so depart : my lord