great piece of our ordinance at she , she strike sail , and approach near , we ask of whence they be , they answer from the West - indies , from Mexico , and saint John de Lowe ( true call Ulhua . ) this ship be of some three or four hundred ton , and have in her seven hundred hide worth ten shilling a piece : six chest of Cochinell , every chest hold one hundred pound weight , and every pound worth six and twenty shilling and eight penny , and certain chest of sugar and China dish , with some plate and silver . the captain of she be a italian , and by his behaviour seem to be a grave , wise , and civil man : he have put a adventure in this ship five and twenty thousand ducat . we take he with certain other of her chief man ( which be Spaniard ) into the victory : and captain Lister with so many other of the chief of our mariner , soldier , and sailor as be think sufficient , to the number of 20 . or there about , be send into she . in the mean time ( our stay ) our other prize which follow after , come up to we . and now we have our hand full and with joy shape our course for England , for so it be think meet , have now so many Portugal , Spaniard and Frenchman among we , that if we shall have take any more prize afterward , we have not be well able to have man they without endanger our self . so about 6 . of the clock in the afternoon ( when our other prize have overtake we ) we set sail for England . but our prize not be able to bear we company without spare they many of our sail , which cause our ship to roll and wallow , in such sort that it be not only very troublesome to we , but , as it be think , will also have put the main mast in danger of fall overboard : have acquaint they with these inconvenience , we give they direction to keep their course together , follow we , and so to come to Portsmouth . we take this last prize in the latitude of 39 degree , and about 46 . league to the westwards from the rock . she be one of those 16 . ship which we see go into the haven at Angra in Ter ^ era , October 8 . some of the man that we take out of she tell we , that while we be ply up and down before that haven , as before be show , expect the come forth of those ship , three of the great and best of they , at the appointment of the governor of Tergera , be unlade of their treasure and merchandise . and in every of they be put three hundred soldier , which be appoint to have come to lay the victory aboard in the night , and take she : but when this shall have be do the victory be go out of their sight . now we go merry before the wind with all the sail we can bear , insomuch that in the space of 24 . hour , we sail near 47 . league , that be sevenscore English mile , betwixt Friday at noon and Saturday at noon ( notwithstanding the ship be very foul , and much grow with long be at sea ) which cause some of our company to make account they will see what run at tilt there shall be at Whitehall upon the queen day . other be imagine what a Christmas they will keep in England with their share of the prize we have take . but so it befall , that we keep a cold Christmas with the bishop and 21 his clerk ( rock that lie to the westwards from silly , and the western part of England : ) for soon after the wind scant come about to the eastwards ( the worst part of the heaven for we , from which the wind can blow ) in such sort , that we can not fetch any part of England . and hereupon also our allowance of drink , which be scant enough before , be yet more more scant , because of the scarcity thereof in the ship . so that now a man be allow but half a pint at a meal , and that many time cold water , and scarce sweet . notwithstanding this be a happy estate in comparison of that which follow : for from half a pint we come to a quarter , and that last not long neither , so that by reason of this great scarcity of drink , and contrariety of wind , we think to put into Ireland , there to relieve our want . but when we come near thither , lie at hull all night ( tarry for the daylight of the next morning , whereby we may the safely bring our ship into some convenient harbour there ) we be drive so far to leeward , that we can fetch no part of Ireland , so as with heavy heart and sad cheer , we be constrain to return back again , and expect till it shall please God to send we a fair wind either for England or Ireland . in the mean time we be allow every man three or four spoon full of vinegar to drink at a meal : for other drink we have none , save only at two or three meal , when we have in stead hereof as much wine , which be wringe out of wine - lee that remain . with this hard fare ( for by reason of our great want of drink , we dare eat but very little ) we continue for the space of a fortnight or thereabouts : save that now and then we feast for it in the mean time : and that be when there fall any hail or rain : the hailstone we gather up and do eat they more pleasant then if they have be the sweet comfit in the world ; the rain - drop be so careful save , that so near as we can , not one be lose