want be industrious , painful , and husbandly inhabitant to till and trim the ground : for the common sort , if they can provide sufficient to serve from hand to mouth , take no further care . of money ( as it seem ) there be very small store among they , which perhaps be the cause that make they double and triple the prize of many thing we buy of they , more than they be before our come thither . good land be here to be have for four penny the acre yearly rend . there be mine of Alome , tin , brass , and iron . stone we see there as clear as crystal , natural square like diamond . that part of the country be all full of great mountains and hill , from whence come running down the pleasant stream of sweet fresh run water . the natural hardness of that nation appear in this , that their small child run usual in the midst of winter up and down the street barefoot and barelegged , with no other apparel ( many time ) save only a manteli to cover their nakedness . the chief officer of their town they call their sovereign , who have the same office and authority 28 the earl of Cumberland among they that our major have with we in England , and have his sergeant to attend upon he , and bear the mace before he as our major . we be first entertain at the sovereign house , which be one of those 4 . that withstand the earl of Desmond in his rebellion . they have the same form of common prayer word for word in latin , that we have here in England . upon the Sunday the sovereign come into the church with the sergeant before he , and the sheriff and other of the town accompany he , and there they kneel down every man by himself private to make his prayer . after this they rise and go out of the church again to drink , which be do , they return again into the church , and then the minister begin prayer . their manner of baptize differ something from we : part of the service belong thereto be repeat in latin , and part in irish . the minister take the child in his hand , and first dip it backward , and then forward , over head and ear into the cold water in the midst of winter , whereby also may appear their natural hardness , ( as before be specify . ) they have neither bell , drum , nor trumpet , to call the parishioner together , but they expect till their sovereign come , and then they that have any devotion follow he . they make their bread all in cake , and , for the ten part , the baker bake for all the town . we have of they some 10 . or 11 . ton of beer for the victory , but it prove like a present purgation to they that take it , so that we choose rather to drink water than it . the 20 . of December we loose from hence , have well provide our self of fresh water , and other thing necessary , be accompany with sir Edw . Dennie , his lady , and two young son . this day in the morning my lord go ashore to dispatch away speedy some fresh water that remain for the victory , the wind be very fair for we , 29 bring we news that there be 60 . Spanish prize take and bring to England . for two or three day we have a fair wind , but afterward it scant so , that ( as i say before ) we be fain to keep he cool Christmas with the bishop and his clerk . after this we meet with a english ship , that bring we joyful news of 91 . Spanish prize that be come to England : and sorrowful news withal , that the last and best prize we take , have suffer shipwreck at a place upon the coast of Cornwall which the cornish man call ais efferne , that be , hell - cliff , and that captain Lister and all the man in the ship be drown , save 5 . or 6 . the one half english , the other Spanish that save themselves with swim : but notwithstanding much of the good be save , and reserve for we , by sir Francis Godolphin , and the worshipful gentleman of the country there . my lord be very sorry for captain lister death , wish that he have lose his voyage to have save his life . the 29 . of December we meet with another ship , that tell we then same news , and that sir Martin Frobisher , and captain Reymond have take the admiral and vice - admirall of the fleet that we espy go to Tercera haven . but the admiral be sink with much leak , near to the idy stone , a rock that lie over against Plymouth sound , and the man be save . this ship also certify we that captain prestons ship have take a prize load with silver . my lord enter present into this ship , and go to Falmouth , and we hold on our course for Plymouth . at night we come near to the ram - head ( the next cape westwards from Plymouth sound ) but we be afraid to double it in the night , misdoubt the scantness of the wind . so we stand off to sea half the night , and towards morning have the wind more large , and make too little spare thereof , that partly for this cause , and partly through mistake of the land , we be drive so much to leeward , that we can not double that cape : therefore 3 ° we return back again , and come into Falmouth haven , where we strike on ground in 17 . foot water : but it be a low ebb , and ready again to flow , and the ground soft , so as no hurt be do . here with gladness we set foot again upon the english ground ( long desire ) and refresh our self with keep part of Christmas upon our native soil .