, find the people very friendly and tractable . and the next day after our arrival ! i go up into the land about three mile to the town of Refisca , where i be friendly use and well entertain Refisca . of the alcay , and especial of a young nobleman call Conde Amar pattay , who present i with a ox for my company , goat and some young kid , assure i that the king will be glad to hear of the arrival of a christian ship , who they call Blancos , that be , [ ii two . 190 . ] white man : especial of a english ship . and so daily the young conde come with a small company of horseman to the sea side , feast i very kind and courteous . and the five of December he with his train come aboard to see the ship ; which to they seem wonder , as people that seidome have see the like : who tell i that his messenger from the king be return ; and the king rejoice much to hear that english man be come with a ship to trade in his port ; and be the first Englishman that ever come with a ship , i be the better welcome ; promise that i or any Englishman hereafter shall be well entreat and find good deal at their hand . and further the conde on the king behalf and his own , earnest request , that before my departure off the coast i will return again to his road to confer with he for the better continuance and confirm of amity between they and Englishmen : which i agree unto . and so show he and his company the best friendship and courtesy i can , he go on shore , and shall have have the honour of our 93 ordinance but that he desire the contrary , be amaze at the sight of the ship and noise of the gun , which they do great admire . the 13 of December at night we weigh anchor , and port » dally , arrive the 14 day at the road of Porto d ’ ally , which be another kingdom : the king thereof be call Amar Meleck , and son to Meleck Zamba the other king , and dwell a day journey and a half from Porto d ’ ally . when we have anchor , the king kinsman be governor , with all the officer of that town come aboard to receive all duty for the ship and licence to traffic due to the king ; who there general seem to be very glad that no Portugal be come in our ship out of England ; say it be the king pleasure we shall bring none hereafter ; for that the king do esteem they as people of no truth ; and complain of one Francisco de Costa servant to don Antonio , how he have often and the last year also abuse and delude their king Amar Meleck in promise to bring he certain thing out of England , which he never perform , and deem that to be the cause of his stay behind this voyage , and that neither Spaniard nor Portugal can abide we , but report very bad and give out hard speech tend to the defamation and great dishonour of England : and also affirm that at the arrival of a english ship call the Comanda the command , of Richard Kelley of Dartmouth , one ^ rd ^ kd ^ ' Pedro Gonsalves a Portugal that come in the say ship the monstrous fr ° m don Antonio report unto they , that we be lie of a por - flee out of England and come away upon intent to rob tugall . and do great spoil upon this coast to the negro and Portugal , and that Thomas Dassel have murder Francisco de Acosta since our come from England , who be come to their king in our ship with great present from don Antonio , and desire that at our arrival stay may be make of our good and our self in secret manner ; which they deny , not give credit to his report , have be often abuse by such frivolous and slanderous speech by that nation ; tell i their king be sorry for the former murder and captivity of our nation , and will never yield to the like , have the Portugal and Spaniard in generail hatred ever since , and conceive much better of our country , and we , than these our enemy report of . for which i yield they hearty thank , assure they they shall find great difference between the loyalty of the one and disloyalty of the other : and so pay their duty : and for that port dally the it be the chief place of trade , i show they how be resolve to go to their king with certain present ’ which we have bring out of England ; which we determine for the more honour and credit of our country , and augment of their better affection towards we . all this while Thomas Dassel be with our great pinnace at the town of Joala , be in the kingdom of Joala . king Jocoel Lamiockeric , traffic with the Spaniard and Portugal there . and the forename Pedro Gonsalves , which come out of England , be there also with other english merchant about the business of Richard Kelley ; and as it shall seem , for that he can not obtain his mischievous pretend purpose against Thomas Dassel and other at the town of Porto d ’ ally , where i Richard Rainolds remain , he attempt with consent of other Portugal which be make privy to his intent to betray the say Thomas Dassel at this town , and have with bribe seduce the chief commander and negro to effect his wicked and most villainous practice : which as God will , be reveal to the say Thomas Dassel by Richard cape a Englishman and servant to the forename Richard Kelley ; to who this say Pedro Gonsalves have disclose his secret treachery , will he with all expedition to stand upon his guard . whereupon Thomas Dassel go aboard a small english bark call the cherubin the cherubin of lime , and there one John Payva a Portugal and at servant of don Antonio declare , that if he and one Garcia ' a Portugal of the say town will have consent with Pedro Gonsalves , the say Thomas Dassel have be betray long before . and upon this warning Thomas Dassel the next day have get three Portugal aboard , advise for our better security to send two on land , and detain one with he call Villa nova , tell they that if the next day by eight of the clock , they will bring Pedro Gonsalves aboard to he , he will release the say villa nova , which they do not . and Thomas Dassel have intelligence that certain negro and Portugal be ride post overland to Porto d ’ aily with intent to have Richard Rainolds and his company stay on land