the one lose his hand , and the other his life within two or three day after : the three be shoot into his neck with a small shot , without any great hurt . with these news our company return back again at night , whereupon preparation be make to go to they again the next day : but the day be far spend before we can come near they with our ship : neither can we find any good ground to anchor in , where we may lie to batter the town , and further we can find no land place , without great danger to loose many man : which may turn not only to the overthrow of our voyage , but also put the queen ship in great peril for want of man to bring she home . therefore my lord think it best to write to they to this effect : that he can not a little marvel at their inhumanity and cruelty which they have show towards his man , see they be send by he unto they in peaceable manner to receive their answer which they have promise to give the day before : and that be it not for don Antonio their lawful king his sake , he can not put up so great injury at their hand , without just revengement upon they : notwithstanding for don Antonio his sake , who friend he be , he be yet content to send to they once again for their answer : at night captain Lister return with this answer from they . that their gunner shoot off one of their piece , which be charge with powder only , and be stop ; which our man think it have be shoot at they , shoot again , and so begin the fight : [ ILii . 160 . ] and that the next morning they will send my lord a 12 resolute answer to his demand , for as yet they can not know their governor mind herein . the next morning there come unto we a boat from the shore with a flag of truce , wherein be three of the chief man of the island , who agree with my lord that he shall have of they sixty buttes of wine , and fresh victual to refresh himself and his company withal : but as for fresh water , they can not satisfy our need therein , have themselves little or none , save such as they save in vessel or cistern when it rain , and that they have rather give we two ton of wine then one of water : but they request that our soldier may not come on shore , for they themselves will bring all they have promise to the waterside , which request be grant , we keep one of they aboard with we until their promise be perform , and the other we send to shore with our empty cask , and some of our man to help to fill , and bring they away with such other provision as be promise : so the Margaret , captain Davis his ship , and another of Weymouth stay ride at anchor before the town , to take in our provision . this ship of Weymouth come to we the day before , and have take a rich prize ( as it be report ) worth sixteen thousand pound , which bring we news that the west - indian fleet be not yet come , but will come very short . but we with the victory put off to sea , and upon Saturday the four of October , we take a french ship of saint Malo ( a city of the unholy league ) load with fish from Newfoundland : which have be in so great a tempest , that she be constrain to cut her main mast overboard for her safety , and be now come to Graciosa , to repair her self . but so hardly it befall she , that she do not only not repair her former loss , but lose all that remain unto we . the chief of her man we take into our ship , and send some of our man , mariner , and soldier into she to bring she into England . upon the Sunday follow at night , all our pro - 13 miss provision be bring unto we from gratiosa : and we friendly dismiss the hander with a peal of ordinance . upon Monday , Tuesday , and Wednesday , we ply to and fro about those island , be very rough weather . and upon Thursday at night , be drive some three or four league from Tercera , we see fifteen sail of the west - indian fleet come into the haven at Angra in Tercera . but the wind be such , that for the space of four day after , though we lie as close by the wind as be possible , yet we can not come near they . in this time we lose our late french prize , not be able to lie so near the wind as we , and hear no more of she till we come to England where she safe arrive . upon Monday we come very near the haven mouth , be mind to have run in among they , and to have fetch out some of they if it have be possible : but in the end this enterprise be deem too daun - gero ' us , consider the strength of the place where they ride , be hale and tow in near the town , at the first sight of our approach , and lie under the protection of the castle of Brasill , on the one side ( have in it five and twenty piece of ordinance ) and a fort on the other side wherein be 13 or 14 great brass piece . beside , when we come near land the wind prove too scant for we to attempt any such enterprise . upon Tuesday the fourteenth of October we send our boat to the road to sound the depth , to see if there be any anchor place for we , where we may lie without shot of the castle and fort , and within shot of some of those ship , that we may either make they come out to we , or sink they where they lie . our boat