, there be in her 30 ton of good Madera wine , certain woollen cloth , silk , taffeta , etc the 14 of August we come to the hand of Flores , where we determine to take in some fresh water and fresh victual , such as the hand do afford . so we man our boat with some 120 man and row towards the shore ; whereto when we approach the inhabitant that be assemble at the land place , put forth a flag of truce , whereupon we also do the like . when we come to they , my lord give they to understand by his Portugal interpreter , that he be a friend to their king don Antonio , and come not any way to injury they , but that he mean only to have some fresh water and fresh victual of they , by way of exchange for some provision that he have , as oil , wine , or pepper , to which they present agree willing , and send some of their company for beef and sheep , and we in the mean season march southward about a mile to Villa de Santa Cruz , from whence all the inhabitant young and old be depart , and not any thing of value leave . we demand of they what be the cause hereof , they answer , fear ; as their usuali manner be when any ship come near their coast . we find that part of the hand to be full of great rocky barren hill and mountain , little inhabit by reason that it be molest with ship of war which may partly appear by this town of Santa Cruz ( be one of their chief town ) which be all ruinous , and ( as it be ) but the relic of the ancient town which have be burn about two year before by certain english ship of war , as the inhabitant there report . at evening as we be in row towards the victory , a huge fish pursue we for the space well nigh of two mile together , distant for the most part from the boat stern not a spear length , and sometime so near that the boat strike upon he , the tip of who fin about the ghil ( appear oft time above the water ) be by estimation 4 or 5 yard asunder , and his jaw gape a yard and a half wide , which put we in fear of overturn the pinnace , but God be thank ( row as hard as we can ) we escape . when we be about Flores a little ship call the drake , bring we word that the carack be at Tercera , of which news we be very glad , and speed we thitherward with all the speed we can : and by the way we come to Fayal ride the seven and twenty day of August , [ ii two . 157 . ] after sun set , where we espy certain ship ride at anchor , to who we send in our skiff with captain Lister and captain Monson in she to discover the roader : and lest any danger shall happen to our boat , we send in likewise the saucy Jacke and the small caravel ; but the wind be off the shore , the ship be not able to fetch it so nigh as the Spaniard ride , which nevertheless the boat do , and clap a ship aboard of two hundred and fifty ton , which carry in her fourteen cast piece , and continue fight alone with she for the space of one hour until the come up of other boat to the rescue of she , which be send from the ship , and then a fresh board she again one boat in the quarter , another in the house , we enter she on the one side , and all the Spaniard leap overboard on the other , save Juan de Palma the captain of she and two or three more , and thus we become possessor of she . this ship be more to the castle which shoot at we all this while : the only hurt which we receive of all this shot be this , that the master of our caravel have the calf of his leg shoot away . this ship be lade with sugar , ginger , and hide late come from saint Juan de Puerto Rico ; after we have tow she clear off the castle , we row in again with our boat , and fetch out five small ship more , one lade with hide , another with elephant tooth , grain , coconut , and goat skin come from guinie , another with woad , and two with dogfish , which two last we let drive in the jn escape of 8 . Englishmen from Tercera . sea make none account of they . the other four we send for England the 30 of August . at the take of these prize be consort with we some other small man of war , as master John Davis , with his ship , pinnace , and boat , captain Markesburie with his ship , who owner be sir Walter Ralegh , the bark of lime , which be also consort with we before . the last of August in the morning we come in sight of Tercera , be about some nine or ten league from shore , where we espy come towards we , a small boat under sail , which seem somewhat strange unto we , be so far from land , and no ship in sight , to which they may belong : but come near , they put we out of doubt , show they be english man ( eight in number ) that have late be prisoner in Tercera , and find opportunity to escape at that time , with that small boat commit themselves to the sea , under god providence , have no other yard for their main sail , but two pipe staff tie together by the end , and no more provision of victual , than they can bring in their pocket and bosom . have take they all into the victory , they give we certain intelligence , that the carack be depart from thence about a week before . thus be without any further hope of those carack , we