town stand betwixt two valley . upon the top of the hill lie their great ordinance ( such as they have ) wherewith they shoot leaden bullet , whereof one pierce through our prize side , and lie still in the ship without do any more harm . the next day we go again for water to the same hand , but not know before the inconvenience and disadvantage of the place where we attempt to land , we return frustrate . the same night the 25 of October we depart for saint George hand for fresh water , whither we come on Monday follow October 27 , and have espy where a spout of water come run down : the pinnace and long boat be present man and send under the conduct of captain Preston , and captain Munson , by who my lord send a letter to the hander as before , to grant we leave to water only , and we will not seven 17 b further trouble they : notwithstanding our man come on shore find some of the poor hander , which for fear of we hide themselves among the rock . and on Wednesday follow our boat return with fresh water , whereof they bring only six ton for the victory , allege they can get no more , think [ ii two . 162 . ] ( as it be suppose ) that my lord have no more provision of water and wine , but only 12 ton , will not go for the coast of Spain , but straight for the coast of England , as many of our man great desire : notwithstanding my lord be unwilling so to do , and be mind the next day to have take in more water : but through roughness of the sea and wind , and unwillingness of his man it be not do . yet his Hon . purpose not to return with so much provision unspent , and his voyage ( as he think ) not yet perform in such sort as may give some reasonable contentment or satisfaction to himself and other . therefore because no more water can now convenient be get , and be uncertain when it can be get , and the time of our stay aboard also uncertain , the matter be refer to the choice of the whole company , whither they will tarry long , till we may be more sufficient provide of fresh water , or go by the coast of Spain for England , with half so much allowance of drink as before , they willing agree that every mess shall be allow at one meal but half so much drink as they be accustom ( except they that be sick or wound ) and so to go for England , take the coast of Spain in our way , to see if we can that way make up our voyage . upon Saturday October 31 we send the Margaret ( because she leak much ) direct for England , together with the prize of Brasile which we take at saint marie , and in they some of our hurt and wound man or otherwise sick be send home as they desire , for England : but captain Monson be take out of the Meg into the victory . so we hold on our course for the coast of Spain with a fair wind and a large which before our seidome have . and upon Twesday follow be the 4 of Novemb . we espy a sail right before we , which we chase till about three a clock in the afternoon , at which time we overtake she , she strike sail , and be demand who be her owner and from whence she be , they answer , a Portugal , and from pernan - bucke in Brasile . she be a ship of some no tun burden , freight with 410 chest of sugar , and 50 kintal of brasill - wood , every kintail contain one hundred pound weight : we take she in latitude nine and twenty degree , about two hundred league from Lisbon westwards : captain Preston be present send unto she , who bring the principali of her man aboard the victory , and certain of our man , mariner and soldier be send aboard she . the Portugal of this prize tell we that they see another ship before they that day about noon . have therefore dispatch all thing about the prize aforesaid and leave our long boat with captain Davis , take his lesser boat with we , we make way after this other ship with all the sail we can bear , hold on our course due east , and give order to captain Davis his ship and the prize that they shall follow we due east , and that if they have sight of we the morning follow they shall follow we still : if not , they shall go for England . the next morning we espy not the sail which we chase , and captain Davis his ship and the prize be behind we out of sight : but the next Thursday the sixth of November ( be in latitude 38 degree 30 minute , and about sixty league from Lisbon westwards ) early in the morning captain Preston descry a sail some two or three league a head of we , after which we present hasten our chase , and overtake she about eight or nine of the clock before noon . she come late from saint Michael road , have be before at Brasill load with sugar and Brasile . Having 19 send our boat to they to bring some of the chief of their man aboard the victory , in the mean time while they be in come to we one out of the main top espy another sail a head some three or four league from we . so immediate upon the return of our boat , have send her back again with some of our man aboard the prize , we pursue speedy this new chase , with all the sail we can pack on , and about two a clock in the afternoon overtake she : she have make provision to fight with we , have hang the side of the ship so thick with hide ( wherewith especial she be load ) that musket shot can not have pierce they : but year we have discharge two