, and rebellious to his true prince , to who obedience he be bind by oath , by 50 nature , and by religion ? no , . they be only assure to be employ in all desperate enterprise , to be hold in scorn and disdain ever among those who they serve . and that ever traitor be either trust or advance i can never yet read , neither can i at this time remember any example . and no man can have less become the place of a orator for such a purpose , than this morris of Desmond . for the earl his cousin be one of the great subject in that kingdom of Ireland , have almost whole country in his possession ; so many goodly manor , castle , and lordship ; the count palatine of Kerry , five hundred gentleman of his own name and family to follow he , beside other ( all which he possess in peace for three or four hundred year ) be in less than three year after his adhere to the Spaniard and rebellion , beat from all his hold , not so many as ten gentleman of his name leave live , himself take and behead by a soldier of his own nation , and his land give by a parliament to her majesty , and possess by the english : he other cousin sir John of Desmond take by master John zouch , and his body hang over the gate of his native city to be devour by raven : the third brother sir James hang , draw , and quarter in the same place . if he have withal vaunt of his success of his own house , no doubt the argument will have move much , and wrought great effect : which because , he for that present forget , i think it good to remember in his behalf . for matter of religion it will require a particular volume , if i shall set down how irreligious they cover their greedy and ambitious pretence , with that veil of piety . but sure i be , that there be no kingdom or commonwealth in all Europe , but if they be reform , they then invade it for religion sake : if it be , as they term catholique , they pretend title ; as if the king of Castille be the natural heir of all the world : and so between both , no kingdom be unsought . where they dare not with their own force to invade , they base entertain the traitor and vagabond of all nation : seek by those and by their runagate Jesuit to win part , and have by that mean ruin many noble house and other in this land , and have extinguish both their life and family . what good , honour , or fortune ever man yet by they achieve , be yet unheard of , or unwritten . and if our english papist do but look into Portugal , against which they have no pretence of religion , how the nobility be put to death , imprison , their rich man make a prey , and all sort of people captive ; they shall find that the obedience even of the Turk be easy and a liberty , in respect of the slavery and tyrannic of Spain . what have they do in Sicill , in Naples , Milan , and in the low country ; who have there be spare for religion at all ? and it come to my remembrance of a certain Burger of Antwerp , who house be enter by a company of spanish soldier , when they first sack the city , he beseech they to spare he and his good , be a good catholic , and one of their own party and faction . the Spaniard answer , that they know he to be of a good conscience for himself , but his money , plate , jewel , and good , be all heretical ! , and therefore good prize . so they abuse and torment the foolish Fleming , who hope that a Agnus dei have be a sufficient target against all force of that holy and charitable nation . neither have they at any time as they protest invade the kingdom of the Indies and Peru , and elsewhere , but only lead . thereunto , rather to reduce the people to Christianity , then for either gold or empery . when as in one only island call Hispaniola , they have waste thirty hundred thousand of the natural people , beside many million else in other place of the Indies : a poor and harmless people create of God , and may have be win to his knowledge , as many of they be , and almost as many as ever be persuade thereunto . the story whereof be at large write by a bishop of their own nation call Bartholomew de las Casas , and trans - the last fight of the revenge ’ a . d . .... I591 ' late into english and many other language , entitle the spanish cruelty . who will therefore repose trust in such a nation of ravenous stranger , and especial in those Spaniards which more greedy thirst after english blood , then after the life of any other people of [ ii two . 175 . ] Europe , for the many overthrow and dishonour they have receive at our hand , who weakness we have discover to the world , and who force at home , abroad , in Europe , in India , by sea and land , we have even with handful of man and ship , overthrow and dishonour . let not therefore any english man , of what religion soever , have other opinion of the Spaniard , but that those who he seek to win of our nation , he esteem base and traitorous , unworthy person , or unconstant fool : and that he use his pretence of religion , for no other purpose but to bewitch we from the obedience of our natural prince , thereby hope in time to bring we to slavery and subjection , and then none shall be unto they so odious , and disdain as the traitor themselves , who have sell their country to a stranger , and forsake their faith and obedience contrary to nature and religion ; and contrary to that humane and general honour , not only of Christians , but of heathen and irreligious nation , who have always sustained what labour soever , and embrace even death it self , for their country , prince , or commonwealth . to conclude , it have ever to this day please God to prosper and defend her majesty , to break the purpose of malicious enemy , of forswear traitor , and of injust practise and invasion . she have ever be honour of the worthy king , serve by faithful subject , and shall by the favour of God , resist , repel , and confound all whatsoever attempt against her sacred person or kingdom . in the mean time let the Spaniard and traitor vaunt of their success , and we her true and obedient vassal , guide by the shine light of her virtue , shall always love she , serve she , and obey she to the end of our life .