a report of the truth of the fight about the isle of azore , the last of August 1591 . betwixt the revenge , one of her majesty ship , and a armada of the king of Spain ; pen by the honourable sir Walter Ralegh knight . ecause the rumour be diverse spread , as well in England as in the low country and elsewhere , of this late encounter between her majesty ship and the armada of Spain ; and that the Spaniard accord to their usuali manner , fill the world with their vainglorious vaunt , make great appearance of victory , when on the contrary , themselves be most common and shameful beat and dishonour ; thereby hope to possess the ignorant multitude by anticipate and forerun false report : it be agreeable with all good reason , for manifestation of the truth , to overcome falsehood and untruth ; that the beginning , continuance and success of 38 the last fight of the ‘ revenge ’ a . d . .... IS9r this late honourable encounter of sir Richard greenvil , and other her majesty captain , with the armada of Spain ; shall be true set down and publish without partiality or false imagination . and it be no marveile that the Spaniard shall seek by false and slanderous pamphlet , advise and letter , to cover their own loss , and to derogate from other their due honour , especial in this fight be perform far off : see they be not ashamed in the year 1588 . when they purpose the invasion of this land , to publish in sundry language in print , great victory in word , which they plead to have obtain against this realm ; and spread the same in a most false sort over all part of France , Italy , and elsewhere . when short after it be happy manifest in very deed to all nation , how their navy which they term invincible , consist of 140 . sail of ship , not only of their own kingdom e , but strengthen with the great argosy , Portugal carrack , Florentines , and huge hulk of other country , be by 30 . of her majesty own ship of war , and a few of our own merchant , by the wise , valiant , [ ii two . 170 . ] and advantageous conduct of the lord Charles Howard high admiral of England , beat and shuffle together ; even from the lizard in Cornwall first to Portland , where they shameful leave don Pedro de Valdes , with his mighty ship ; from Portland to Cales , where they lose Hugo de Moncado , with , the gallia of which he be captain , and from Cales , drive with squib from their anchor , be chase out of the sight of England , round about Scotland and Ireland . where for the sympathy of their barbarous religion , hope to find succour and assistance , a great part of they be crush against the rock , and those other that land , be very many in number , be notwithstanding break , slay , and take , and so send from village to village couple in halter , to be ship into England . where her majesty of her princely and invincible disposition , disdain to put they to death , and scorn either to retain or entertain they : they be all send back again to their country , to witness and recount the worthy achievement of their invincible and dreadful navy : of which the number of soldier , the fearful burden of their ship , the commander name of every squadron , with all other their magasines of provision , be put in print , as a army and navy unresistable , and disdain prevention . with all which so great and terrible a ostentation , they do not in all their sail round about England , so much as sink or take one ship , bark , pinnace , or cockbote of we : or ever burn so much as one sheepecote of this land . whenas on the contrary , sir Francis Drake , with only 800 . soldier not long before , land in their Indies , and force Sant - Iago , Santo Domingo , Cartagena , and the fort of Florida . and after that , sir John Norris march from Peniche in Portugal , with a handful of soldier , to the gate of Lisbon , be above 40 english mile . where the earl of Essex himself and other valiant gentleman brave the city of Lisbon , encamp at the very gate ; from whence , after many day abode , find neither promise party , nor provision to batter ; they make retreat by land , in despite of all their garrison , both of horse and foot . in this sort i have a little digress from my first purpose , only by the necessary comparison of they and our action : the one covetous of honour without vaunt of ostentation ; the other so greedy to purchase the opinion of their own affair , and by false rumour to resist the blast of their own dishonour , as they will not only not blush to spread all manner of untruth : but even for the least advantage , be it but for the take of one poor adventurer of the english , will celebrate the victory with bonfire in every town , always spend more in faggot , than the purchase be worth they obtain . when as we never think it worth the consumption of two billet , when we have take eight or ten of their indian ship at one time , and twenty of the Brasill fleet . such be the difference between true valour , and ostentation : and between honourable action , and frivolous vainglorious vaunt . but now to return to my purpose . the L . Thomas Howard with six of her majesty ship , six victualler of London , the bark Ralegh , and two or three other pinnace ride at anchor near unto Flores , one of the westerly hand of the azore , the last of August in the afternoon , have intelligence by one captain Middleton of the approach of the spanish armada . which Middleton be in a very good sailer have keep they company three day before , of good purpose , both to discover their force the more , as also to give advise to my lord Thomas of their approach . he have no soon deliver the news but the fleet be in sight : many of our ship company be on shore in the island ; some provide ballast for their ship ; other fill of water and refresh themselves from the land with such thing as they can either for money , or by force recover . by reason whereof our ship be all pester and rummage every thing out of order , very light for want of ballast , and that which be most to our disadvantage , the one half part of the man of every ship sick , and utter unserviceable : for in the revenge there be ninety disease : in the Bonaventure , not so many in health as can handle her main sail . for have not twenty man be take out of a bark of sir George Careys