, be doubtful what friendship soever the unconstant negro profess ( by reason they be often waver be overcome with drink wine ) how they will deal , to prevent the dangerous wile that may be effect in the road by Portugal , and for better strength , the 24 of December he come with his pinnace and Portugal to ride in the road of Porto d ’ ally , where our great ship the nightingale be : who be no soon arrive but he have news also from the shore from John Baily Anthony Dassels servant , who be there with our good detain by the Portugal mean , that above 20 Portugal and Spaniards be come from Joala by land , and Pedro Gonsalves in their company , to take order for the release of Villa nova . So have have conference two or three day with the commander , the negro , some Spaniard , and some Portugal , in the end by due examination of the matter the negro see how vile Pedro Gonsalves have deal , he be in their power , say he shall suffer death or be torture , for a example to other . but we in recompense of his cruelty pity he and show mercy , desire the negro to entreat he well though undeserving : and thereupon the commander bring he aboard the pinnace to Thomas Dassel to do with he what he will : where at his come from the shore , for lavish speech which he use of prince , he be well buffete by a Spaniard , and may have be slay , if for our sake he have not be rescue . while i go on shore with Villa nova , the say Pedro Gonsalves confess unto Thomas Dassel that he do 96 inquire of some negro and Portugal if he may not stay he and his good in the land , and that he do nothing but by commission from his king by his letter which he receive from London in Dartmouth after we be depart from London , for that we presume to come to Guinea to traffic without a servant of his : and further , that he have power or procuration from Francisco de Costa the Portugal that stay behind in England to detain the good of Anthony Dassel in Guinea . by consent of m . Francis Tucker , John browbeare , and the rest of the factor of Richard Kelley , with who this Pedro Gonsalves come , for avoid further mischief that may be practise , we agree that the say Pedro Gonsalves shall stay aboard our ship , and not go any more on land until they depart . So the nine of January he be deliver aboard to go for England in the same ship wherein he come : who be all the time of his abode in our ship both courteous and friendly use at my hand , much against the mariner will , who can not abide such a wicked creature and caitiff , that be nourish and relieve in our country , and yet by villainous mean seek the destruction of we all . the Spaniard and Portugal though they be dissembler and not to be trust , when they perceive how king Amar melick negro befriend and favour we , and that it will be prejudicial ! to their trade for diverse respect , if we shall any way be injury , renounce the say practise , detest the author , and protest to defend we in such case with all faithfulness : desire we will , as the king of Negros have command we , never bring Portugal with we more : use this phrase in disdain of such as come out of England , let your Portugal be bar of iron : for in truth in regard of the rich trade maintain by Frenchmen and by we of late , they esteem more of one bar of iron then of twenty Portugal which we shall bring out of England : who at their come thither very subtle disadvantage we , and do great hurt to every party . un 97 g [ ii two . 192 . ] San Domingo . Rio grande . note this trade . at the begin of these broil the king Amar Melick have send his chief secretary and three horse for i Richard Rainolds : but i deny to go by reason of the hurley burley , though i may have have negro of account for pledge aboard : yet we send the present unto the king ; who so soon as he understand the cause why i come not to he , be sorry and offend thereat , command present by proclamation , that no injury shall be offer we in his dominion by his own people , or suffer to be do by Spaniards or Portugal . and if the negro join to his kingdom shall confederate with the Spaniard and Portugal to molest or trouble we ; that his subject the negro shall be ready to aid , succour and defend we . in which people appear more confident love and goodwill towards we , than ever we shall find either of Spaniards or Portugal , though we shall relieve they of the great misery that can be imagine . in the river of Senega no Spaniard or Portugal use to trade : and only one Portugal call Ganigoga dwell far within the river , who be marry to a king daughter . in the town of Porto d ’ ally and Joala , be town of chief trade , and in the town of canton and Cassan in the river of Gambra be many Spaniard and Portugal resident by permission of the negro ; who have rich trade there along the coast , especial to San Domingo and Rio grande , not far distant from Gambra river ; whither they transport the iron which they buy of Frenchmen and we , and exchange it for negro ; which be carry continual to the west Indies in such ship as come from Spain . also by the governor order and renter of castle de Mina and other place , where gold be , upon the coast of Guinea , they have a place limit how far they must go to trade within the river of Gambra ; and further they may not go upon pain of confiscation of their good , and loss of life : for that the renter themselves send at certain time their own ■ 98 ' 594 - bark within the river to such place , where as they have great store of gold . and in all these place hereabout , mb tr ^ e where we use to trade , they have no fort , castle , or ™ place of strength , but only trade by the negro safe - ' conduct and permission . and the most part of the Spaniard and Portugal that be resident in these place be banish man or fugitive , for commit most heinous crime and incestuous act , their life and conversation be agreeable ; and they be of the base behaviour that we have ever see of these nation in any other country .