a brief relation concern the estate of the city and province of Tombuto and Gago write in Morocco the first of August 1594 , and send to m . Anthony Dassel merchant of London . y hearty commendation premise : your letter of late i receive , and find that you will have i discover unto you the estate and quality of the country of Tombuto and Gago . and that you may not think i to slumber in this action , wherein you will be true and perfect resolve , you shall understand , that not ten day pass here come a Cahaia of the andoluze home from Gago , and another principali Moore , who the king send thither at the first with Alcaide Hamode , and they bring with they thirty mule lade with gold . i see the same come into the Alcasava with my own eye : and these man themselves come not poor , but with such wealth , that they come away without the king commandment : and for that cause the king will pay they no wage for the time they have be there . on the other side they dare not ask the king for any wage . and when Alcaide Hamode see that the Cahaia of the andoluze will not stay in Gago with he , he think 99 good to send these thirty mule lade with gold by he , with letter of commendation , by which the king smell their riches that they bring with they : and this be the cause of the king displeasure towards they . so now there remain in Gago Alcaide Hamode , and Alcaide Jawdara , and Alcaide bucthare . and here be in a readiness to depart in the end of this next September Alcaide monsor , ben abdrahaman ally , monsor Rico with five thousand man , most of the fettilase , that be to say , of fier - mach , and musket . there be go good store of red and yellow : and this year here be want of the same commodity ; but i trust the next year will be no want . but in fine the king do prosper well in those part , and here be many pledge come hither , and namely three of the king son of Gago and the justice ; i see they come in with the treasure . now when Alcaide monsor come to Gago , the which will be in January next , then return hither Alcaide Hamode with all the treasure , and Alcaide monsor be to keep Gago until the king take further order . and thus much for Gago . thus not have any other thing to write at this present , i commend you to the merciful tuition of the almighty . from Morocco the first of August 1594 . your assure friend Laurence Madoc . another brief relation concern the late conquest and the exceed great riches of the city and province of Tombuto and Gago , write from Morocco the 30 August 1594 , to m . Anthony Dassel merchant of London aforesaid . Oving friend m . Dassel , two of your letter i have receive , one by the ship call the amity , the other by the concord : the chief matter therein be to be satisfy of the king of Morocco his proceed in Guinea . therefore these ioo be to let you understand that there go with Alcaide Hamode for those part seventeen hundred man : who pass over the sand , for want of water perish one three part of they : and at their coming to the city of Tombuto , the negro make some Tombuto resistance ; but to small purpose , for that they have no iaken ‘ defence but with their asagay or javelin poison . so they take it , and proceed to the city of Gago , Gago take . where the negro be in number infinite , and mean to stand to the uttermost for their country : but the moor slay they so fast , that they be fain to yield , and do pay tribute by the year . the rent of [ ii two . 193 . ] Tombuto be 60 quintal of gold by the year ; the goodness whereof you know . what rent Gago will yield , you shall know at the spring , for than Alcaide Hamode come home . the rent of Tombuto be come by the cafelow or carovan , which be , as above be mention , 60 quintal . the report be , that Mahomed bring with he such a infinite treasure as i never hear of : it do appear that they have more gold than any other part of the world beside . the Alcaide win all the country where he go without fight , and be go down towards the sea coast . this king of Morocco be like to be the great prince in the world for money , if he keep this country . but i make account assoon as the king of Spain have quietness in Christendom , he will thrust he out : for that the king force be not great as yet ; but he mean to be strong . there be a camp ready to go now with a viceroy : the speech be with 3000 man : but i think they will be hardly 2000 ; for by report , 3000 man be enough to conquer all the country : for they have no defence of importance against a enemy . i think Hamode will be return home in January or thereabouts : for he stay but for the coming of the viceroy . Mulley balasen the king son of Morocco be slay in Guinea by his own man , and they be present kill , because they shall tell no tale . and thus leave to trouble you , i commit you ioi to God , who prosper you in all your proceed . from Morocco the first of August 1594 . you to command for ever Laurence Madoc . of these two rich city and kingdom of Tombuto and Gago Leo Africanus write at large in the begin of his seven book of the description of Africa , which worthy work be to be annex into the end of this second volume .