and compassion of humane misery , in the end resolve free to dismiss this captain and the most part of his follower to their own country , and for the same purpose ’ bestow they in certain vessel furnish with all kind of necessary provision . this business thus dispatch , good leisure have he to take such view of the good as conveniency may afford . and have very prudent ( to cut off the unprofitable spoil and pillage whereunto he see the mind of many incline ) seize upon the whole to her majesty use , after a short and slender rummage and search of such thing as first come to hand , he perceive that you wealth will arise nothing disanswerable to expectation ; but that the variety and a brief cata - hpie of you sundry rich commodity of the Madre de Dios . grandure of all rich commodity will be more theft sufficient to content both the adventurer desire and the soldier travel . and here i can but enter into the consideration and acknowledgement of God great favour towards our nation , who by put this purchase into our hand have manifest discover those secret trade and indian riches , which hitherto lie strange hide , and cunning conceal from we ; whereof there be among some few of we some small and unperfect glimpse only , which now be turn into the broad light of full and perfect knowledge . whereby it shall seem that the will of God for our good be ( if our weakness can apprehend it ) to have we communicate with they in those east indian treasure , and by the erection of a lawful traffic to better our mean to advance true religion and his holy service . the carrack be in burden by the estimation of the wise and experience no less than 1600 ton have full 900 of those stow with the gross bulk of merchandise , the rest of the tunnage be allow , partly to the ordinance which be 32 piece of brass of all sort , partly to the passenger and the victual , which can not be any small quantity , consider the number of the person betwixt 600 and 700 , and the length of the navigation . to give you a taste ( as it be ) of the commodity , it shall suffice to deliver you a general particularity of they , accord to the catalogue take at leaden hall the 15 of September 1592 . where upon good view it be find , that the principali ware after the jewel ( which be no doubt of great value , though they never come to light ) consist of spice , drug , silk , calico , quilt , carpet and colour , etc the spice be pepper , clove , mace , nutmeg , cinamom , green ginger : the drug be benjamim , frankincense , galingale , mirabolan , aloe zocotrina , camphire : the silk , damask , taffatas , sarcenet , altobassos , that be , counterfeit cloth of gold , unwrought China silk , sleaved silk , white twist such , curl cypress . the calico be book - calico , calico - lanes , broad white calico , fine 116 the take of the ‘ Madre de Dios ’ aa 1592 - starched calico , course white calico , brown broad calico , brown course calico . there be also canopy , and course diaper - towel , quilt of course sarsenet and of calico , carpet like those of Turkey ; whereunto be to be add the pearl , musk , civet , and amber - griece . the rest of the ware be many in number , but less in value ; as elephant tooth , porcellan vessel of China , coconut , hide , eben - wood as black as jet , bedsted of the same , cloth of the rind of tree very strange for the matter , and artificiali in workmanship . all which pile of commodity be by man of approve judgement rate but in reasonable sort amount to no less than 150000 livre . sterling , which be divide among the adventurer ( whereof her majesty be the chief ) be sufficient to yield contentment to all party . the cargazon be take out , and the good freight in ten of our ship send for London , to the end that the bigness , heighth , length , breadth , and other dimension of so huge a vessel may by the exact rule of Geometricali observation be true take , both for present knowledge , and derivation also of the same unto posterity , one m . Robert Adam , a man in his faculty of excellent skill , capacity omit nothing in the description , which either his art can demonstrate , or any man judgement think worthy jytos the memory . after a exquisite survey of the whole frame he find the length from the beakhead to the stern ( whereupon be erect a lantern ) to contain 165 foot . the breadth in the second close deck whereof [ ii two . 199 . ] she have three , this be the place where there be most extension of breadth , be 46 foot and 10 inch . she draw in water 31 foot at her departure from Cochin in India , but not above 26 at her arrival in Dartmouth , be lighten in her voyage by diverse mean , some 5 foot . she carry in height 7 several story , one main orlop , three close deck , one forecastle , and a spar - deck of two floor a piece . the length of the keel be 100 foot , of the mainmast 121 foot , and the circuit about at the partner 10 foot 7 inch , the mainyard be 106 117 foot long . by which perfect commensuration of the part appear the hugeness of the whole , far beyond the mould of the big ship use among we either for war or receit . do Alonso de ba ? an have a great fleet and suffer these two carack , the Santa Cruz to be burn , and the Madre de Dios to be take , be disgrace by his prince for this negligence .