. which direction take effect accord ; for the king of Spain admiral receive intelligence that the english fleet be come on the coast , attend to defend the south part of Spain , and to keep himself as near sir Mart . Frobisher as he can , to impeach he in all thing which he may undertake ; and thereby neglect the safeconduct of the carack , with who it fare as hereafter shall appear . before the fleet sever themselves they meet with a great Biscain on the spanish coast call Santa Clara a ship of 600 ton . the noise of the artillery on both side be hear , immediate they draw to their fleet ; where after a reasonable hot fight , the ship be enter and master , which they find freight with all sort of small ironwork , as horse - shoe , nail , ploughshare , iron bar , spike , bolt , lock , gimbol , and such like , value by we at 6000 or 7000 livre . but worth to they treble the value . This Biscain be sail towards saint Lucar , there to take in some further provision for the west India . this ship be first roomage , and after send for England , our fleet coast along towards the southcape of S . Vincent , and by the way , about the rock near Lisbon , sir John Burrough in the roebuck spy a sail afar off , give her present chase ; which be a flyboat and of good sail , draw he far southwards before he can fetch she ; but at last she come under his lee and strike sail . the master of which flyboat come aboard he , confess that the king indeed have prepare a great fleet ' in saint Lucar and Cadiz , and ( as the report in Spain be currant ) for the west Indies . but in deed the spanish king have provide this fleet upon this counsel . he receive intelligence , that sir Walter Ralegh be to put the take of the ‘ Madre de Dios ’ out strong for the west India : to impeach he , and to ranconter his force he appoint this fleet ; although look for the arrival of his east indian carack , he first ordain those ship to waft they from the azore . but persuade himself , that if the fleet of sir Walter Ralegh do go for the west India , than the hand shall have none to infest they but small man of war , which the carack of themselves will be well able to match ; his order be to don Alonso de ba ? a brother to the mark of Santa Cruz , and general of his armada , to pursue sir Walters fleet , and to confront he , what course soever he hold . and that this be true , our man in short time by proof understand : for sir John Burrough , not long after the take of his last prize the flyboat , as he sail back again towards the rest of his company , discover the spanish fleet to seaward of he : which have likewise espy he betwixt they and the shore , make full account to bring he safe into spanish harbour ; and therefore spread themselves in such sort before he , that indeed his danger be very great : for both the liberty of the sea be bring into a narrow straight , and the shore be enemy can give he no comfort of relief : so that trust to god help only and his good sail , he thrust out from among they in spite of all their force , and to the notable illusion of all their cunning , which they show to the uttermost , in lay the way for his apprehension . but now sir John Burrough have happy escape their douche , find the coast guard by this fleet , and know it be but folly to expect a meeting there with sir Martin Frobisher ( who understanding of this armada aswell as himself , will be sure not to come that way ) begin to shape his course to the azore accord to sir W . ralegh direction , and come in sight of saint Michael , run so near by villa Franca , that he may easy discern the ship lie there at anchor . diverse small caravel both here and between saint George and the pike in his course towards Flores he intercept ; of which no great intelli - 109 [ ii two . 196 . ] sir John Burrough in great danger of the spanish fleet . the lie of . Michael . diverse small ship take . gence for his affair can be understand . arrive before Flores upon Thursday the 21 of June , towards evening , accompany only with captain Caufield and the master of his ship , the rest not be yet arrive , he make towards the shore with his boat , find all the Santa Cruz a people of Santa Cruz , a village of that hand , in arm , wbagemthe fear their land , and ready marshal to defend e oj oar , town from spoil . sir John contrariwise make sign of amity unto they by advance a white flag , a common token of peace , which be answer again of they with the like : whereupon ensue intercourse of good friendship ; and pledge be take on both side , the captain of the town for they , and captain Caufield for we : so that whatsoever our man want , which that place can supply either in fresh water , victual , or the like , be very willing grant by the inhabitant : and good leave have they to refresh themselves on shore as much and as oft as they will without restraint . at new of the this Santa Cruz sir John Burrough be inform , that arah ^ * ndeed there be among they no expectation of any ’ fleet to come from the west , but from the east , that no long since than three day before his arrival a carrack be pass by for Lisbon , and that there be four carack more behind ,