a true report of the honourable service at sea perform by sir John Burrough knight , lieutenant generail of the fleet prepare by the honour . sir Walter Ralegh knight , lord warden of the stannery of Cornwall and Devon . wherein chief the Santa Clara of Biscay , a ship of 600 ton be take , and the two east indian carack , the Santa Cruz ' and the Madre de Dios be force , the one burn , and the other take and bring into Dartmouth the seven of September , 1592 . ir Walter Ralegh upon commission receive from her majesty for a expedition to be make to the west Indies , slack not his uttermost diligence to make full provision of all thing necessary , as both in his choice of good ship , and sufficient man to perform the action evident appear . for his ship which be in number 14 or 15 , those two of her majesty , the garland and the foresight be the chief ; the rest either his own or his good friend or adventurer of London . for the gentleman his consort and officer , to give they their right , they be so well quality in courage , experience , and discretion , as the great prince may repute himself happy to be serve with their like . the honour of lieutenant general be impose upon sir John Burrough , a gentleman , for his manifold good and heroical part , think every way worthy of that commandment : with who after sir W . R . return be join in commission sir Martin Frobisher , who for his speciali skill and knowledge in marine cause have former carry employment of like or great place . the rest of the captain , soldier , and sailor be man of notable resolution , and for the most part such as heretofore have give to the world sufficient proof of their valour in diverse service of the like nature . with these ship thus man sir Walter Ralegh depart towards the west country , there to store himself with such further necessary as the state of his voyage do needful require : where the westerly wind blow for a long time contrary to his course , bind and constrain he to keep Rarborough so many week , that the fit season for his purpose be go , the mind of his people much alter , his victual consume ; and withal , her majesty understand how cross all this sort , begin to call the proceed of this preparation into question : insomuch that , whereas the sixth of May be first come before sir Walter can put to sea , the very next day sir Martin Frobisher in a pinnace of my lord admiral call the disdain , meet he , and bring to he from her majesty letter of revocation , with commandment to relinquish ( for his own part ) the [ ii two . 195 . ] intend attempt , and to leave the charge and conduct of all thing in the hand of sir John Burrough and sir Martin Frobisher . but sir Walter find his honour so far engage in the undertake of this voyage , as without proceed he see no remedy either to salve his reputation , or to content those his friend which have put 106 the take of the ‘ Madre de Dios ’ in adventure of great sum with he ; and make construction of the queen letter in such sort as if her commandment have be propound in indifferent term , either to advance forward or to retire , at his own discretion ; will in no case yield to leave his fleet now under sail . wherefore continue his course into the sea , he meet within a day or two , with certain sail late come from Spain : among which be a ship appertain to monsieur Gourdon governor of Caleis , and find aboard her one m . Nevel Davies a Englishman , who have endure a long and miserable captivity for the space of twelve year , partly in the inquisition in Spain , be now by good fortune escape , and upon return to his country . this man , among other thing , report for certain , that there be little hope of any good this year to be do in the west India ; consider that the king of Spain have send express order to all the port both of the hand and of terra firma , that no ship shall stir that year , nor any treasure be lay aboard for Spain . but neither this unpleasant relation nor ought else can stay his proceed , until a tempest of strange and uncouth violence arise upon Thursday the 11 of May , when he be athwart the cape Finister , have so scatter the great part of the fleet , and sink his boat and pinnace , that as the rest be drive and sever , some this way and some that , sir Walter himself be in the garland of her majesty be in danger to be swallow up of the sea whereupon sir W . Ralegh find that the season of the year be too far go to proceed with the enterprise which he have upon Panama , have be hold on the english coast from February till may , and thereby spend three month victual ; and consider withal , that to lie upon the spanish coast or at the hand to attend the return of the east or West indian fleet be rather a work of patience then ought else : he give direction to sir John Burgh and sir m . Frobisher to divide the fleet in two part ; sir m . with the garland , cap . George Gifford , 107 the santa Clara a Biscain ship oj 600 ton take . cap . Henry thin , cap . Grenvile and other to lie off the south cape , thereby to amaze the spanish fleet , and to hold they on their own coast ; while sir J . Burgh , captain . Robert cross , captain . Tomson , and other shall attend at the hand for the carack or any other spanish ship come from Mexico or other part of the west Indies