make they draw back as they do . when we have not man to enter , we ply our great ordinance much at they as high up as they may be mount , for otherwise we do they little harm , and by shoot a piece out of our forecastle be close by she , we fire a mat on her beakhead , which moor and more kindle , and run from thence to the mat on the bowsprit , and from the mat up to the wood of the bowsprit , and thence to the topsail yard , which fire make the Portugal abaft in the ship to stagger , and to make show of parley . but they that have the charge before encourage they , make show , that it may easy be put out , and that it be nothing . whereupon again they stand stiff to their defence . Anone the fire grow so strong , that i see it beyond all help , although she have be already yield to we . than we desire to be off from she , but have little hope to obtain our desire ; nevertheless we ply water very much to keep our ship well . in deed i make little other reckon for the ship , my self , and diverse hurt man , than to have end there with the carrack , but most of our people may have save themselves in boat . and when my care be most , by god providence only , by the burn asunder of our spritsail - yard with rope and sail , and the rope about the spritsail - yard of the carrack , whereby we be fast entangle , we fall apart , with burn of some of our sail which we have then on board . the exchange also be far from the fire , afterward be more easy clear , and fall off from abaft . and as soon as God have put we out of danger , the fire get into the forecastle , where , i think , be store of Benjamin , and such other like combustible matter , for 121 it flame and run over all the carrack at a instant in a manner . the Portugal be leap overboard in great number . then send i captain grant with the boat , with leave to use his own discretion in save of they . so he bring i aboard two gentleman , the one an * old man call Nuno Velio Pereira , which ( as appear by the 4 chapter in the first book of the worthy history of Huighen de Linschoten ) be governor of Mozambique and Cefala , in the year 1582 . and since that time have be likewise a governor in a place of importance in the east Indies . and the ship wherein he be come home be cast away a little to the east of the cape of Buona Speranza , and from thence he travel overland to Mozambique , and come as a passenger in this carrack . the other be call brass Carrero , and be captain of a carrack which be cast away near Mozambique , and come likewise in this ship for a passenger . also three man of the inferior sort we save in our boat , only these two we clothe and bring into England . the rest which be take up by the other ship boat , we set all on shore in the he of Flores , except some two or three negro , whereof one be bear in Mozambique , and another in the east Indies . this fight be open off the sound between faial and Pico 6 league to the southward . the people which we save tell we that the cause why they will not yield , be , because this carrack be for the king , and that she have all the good belong to the king in the country for that year in she , and that the captain of she be in favour with the king , and at his return into the Indies shall have be viceroy there . and withal this ship be nothing at all pester neither within board nor without , and be more like a ship of war then otherwise : moreover , she have the ordinance of a carrack that be cast away at Mozambique , and the company of she , together with the company of another carrack that be cast away a little to the eastwards of the cape of Buona Speranza . yet through sickness which they catch at Angola , where they water , they 122 the fire of ‘ the five wound ’ a . d . 1594 - say , they have not now above 150 white man , but negro a great many . they likewise affirm that they have [ ii two . 201 . ] three nobleman and three lady in she , but we find they to differ in most of their talk . all this day and all the night she burn , but the next morning her powder which be low be 60 barrel blow she abroad , so that most of the ship do swim in part above the water . some of they say , that she be big than the Madre de Dios , and some , that she be less : but she be much undermast , and undersail , yet she go well for a ship that be so foul . the shot which we make at she in great ordinance before we lay she aboard may be at seven bout which we have , and six or 7 shot at a bout , one with another , some 49 shot : the time we lie aboard may be two hour . the shot which we discharge aboard the carrack may be some twenty sacar . and thus much may suffice concern our dangerous conflict with that unfortunate carrack . the last of June after long traverse of the sea we have sight of another mighty carrack which diverse of our company at the first take to be the great saint Philip the admiral of Spain , but the next day be the first of July fetch she up we perceive she indeed to be a carrack , which after some few shot bestow upon she we summon to yield ; but they stand stout to their defence utter refuse the same . wherefore see no good can be do without board she i consult what course we shall take in the board . but by reason that we which be the chief captain be partly slay and partly wound in the former conflict , and because of the murmur of some disorder and cowardly companion , our valiant and resolute determination be cross : and to conclude a long discourse in few word , the carrack escape our hand . after this attend abput Corvo and Flores for some west indian purchase , and be disappoint of our expectation , and victual grow short , we return for England , where i arrive at Portesmouth the 28 of August .