matter be soon draw into this service . thus sir John with all these ship depart thence 6 or 7 league to the west of Flores , they spread themselves abroad from the north to the south , each ship two league at the least distant from another . by which order of extension they be able to discover the space of two whole degree at sea . in this sort they lie from the 29 of June to the three of August , what time cap . Thomson in the dainty have first sight of the huge carrack call the Madre de Dios , one of the great receit belong to the crown of Portugal . the dainty be off excellent sail get the start of the rest of our fleet , and begin the conflict somewhat to her cost , with the slaughter and hurt of diverse of her man . within a while after , sir John Burrough in the roebuck of sir W . ralegh , be at hand to second she , who salute she with shot of great ordinance , and continue the fight within musket shoot assist by cap . Tomson and cap . Newport till sir R . across viceadmiral of the fleet come up be to leeward , at who arrival sir J . Burgh demand of he what be best to be do , who answer , that if the carrack be not board she will recover the shore and fire herself as the other have do . whereupon sir J . Burgh conclude to entangle she ; and sir R . cross promise also to fasten himself to she together at the instant ; which be perform : but after a while sir John Burgh receive a shot with a canon pery under water , and ready to sink , desire sir R . C . to fall off , that he may also clear himself , and save his ship from sink , which with difficulty he do : for both the roebuck and the foresight be so entangle , as with much ado can they clear themselves . the same evening sir R . across find the carrack then unto 113 h sure and draw near the hand persuade his company to board she again , or else there be no hope to recover she : who after many excuse and fear , be by he encourage , and so fall athwart her foreship all alone ; and so hinder she sail that the rest have time to themadrede come up to his succour , and to recover the carrack year she Dios take . recover the land : and so towards the evening after he have fight with her alone three hour single , my lord of cumberland two ship come up , and with very little loss enter with sir R . cross , who have in that time break their courage , and make the assault easy for the rest . the general have disarm the Portugal , and stow they for better security on all side , first have present to his eye the true proportion of the vast body of this carrack , which do then and may still just provoke the admiration of all man not former acquaint with such a sight . but albeit this first appearance of the hugeness thereof yield sight enough to entertain our man eye ; yet the pitiful object of so many body slay and dismember can not but draw each man eye to see , and heart to lament , and hand to help those miserable people , who limne be so tear with the violence of shot , and pain make grievous with the multitude of wound . no man can almost step but upon a dead carcase or a bloody floor , but special about the helm , where very many of they fall sudden from stir to die . for the greatness of the stirrage require the labour of twelve or fourteen man at once , and some of our ship beat she in at the stern with their ordinance often time with one shot slay four or five labour on either side of the helm ; who room be still furnish with fresh supply , and our artillery still play upon they with continual volley , it can not be but that much blood shall be shed in that place . exceed whereupon our general move with singular commiser - shmecpto the ation their misery , send they his own chirurgeon , enemy . deny they no possible help or relief that he or any 114 the take of the ‘ Madre de Dios ’ a . d . 1592 . of his company can afford they . among the rest of [ ii two . 198 . ] those , who state this chance have make very deplorable , be don Fernando de Mendosa grand captain and commander of this carake : who indeed be descend of the house of Mendosa in Spain ; but be marry into Portugal , live there as one of that nation ; a gentleman well strike in year , well speak , of comely personage , of good stature , but of hard fortune . in his several service against the moor he be twice take prisoner , and both time ransom by the king . in a former voyage of return from the east India he be drive upon the Baxos or sand of Juda near the coast of Cephala , be then also captain of a carrack which be there lose , and himself , though escape the seadanger , yet fall into the hand of infidel on land ; who keep he under long and grievous servitude . once more the king carry a love respect to the man , and desirous to better his condition , be content to let he try his fortune in this easterly navigation , and commit unto he the conduct of this carrack , wherein he go from Lisbon general of the whole fleet , and in that degree have return , if the vice - rey of goa embark for Portugal in the bon Jesus have not , by reason of his late office , be prefer . sir John intend not to add too much affliction to the afflict , move with pity