the cast away of the Toby near cape espartel corrupt call cape Sprat without the strait of Gibraltar on the coast of Barbary . x593 - he Toby of London a ship of 250 ton man with fifty man , the owner whereof be the worshipful m . Richard staper , be bind for Livorno , Zante and Patras in Morea , be lade with merchandise to the value of 11 or 12 thousand pound sterling , set sail from Blackwall the 16 day of August 1593 , and we go thence to Portesmouth where we take in great quantity of wheat , and set sail forth of Stokes bay in the isle of wight , the 6 . day of October , the wind be fair : and the 16 of the same month we be in the heighth of cape S . Vincent , where on the next morning we descry a sail which lie in try right a head off we , to which we give chase with very much wind , the sail be a Spaniard , which we find in fine so good of sail that we be fain to leave she and give she over . two day after this we have sight of mount Chiego , which be the first highland which we descry on the spanish coast at the entrance of the strait of Gibraltar , where we have very foul weather and the wind scant two day together . here we lay off to the sea . the master , who name be George Goodlay , be a young man , and one which never take charge before for those part , be very proud of that charge which he be little able to discharge , neither will take any counsel of any of his company , but do as he think best himself , and in the end of the two day of foul weather cast about , and the wind be fair , bare in with the straight mouth . the 19 day at night he think that he be far off the land than he be , bare sail all that night , and a hour and 124 the cast away of the ‘ Toby ’ a . d . . * 593 - a half before day have run our ship upon the ground on the coast of Barbary without the straight four league to the south of cape Espartel . whereupon be all not a little astonish , the master say unto we , i pray you forgive i ; for this be my fault and no man else . the company ask he whether they shall cut off the main mast : no say the master we will hoist out our boat . but one of our man ' come speedy up , say , sir , the ship be full of water , well say the master , then cut the maine - mast over board : which thing we do with all speed . but the after part sudden split a sunder in such sort that no man be able to stand upon it , but all flee upon the foremast up into the shroud thereof ; and hang there for a time : but see nothing but present death approach ( be so sudden take that we can not make a raft which we have ■ determine ) we commit our self unto the lord and begin with doleful tune and heavy heart to sing the 12 psalm . help lord for good and godly man etc howbeit before we have finish four verse the wave of the sea have stop the breath of most of our man . for the foremast with the weight of our man and the force of the sea fall down into the water , and upon the fall thereof there be 38 drown , and only 12 by God providence partly by swim and other mean of chest goat on shore , which be about a quarter of a mile from the wrack of the ship . the [ ii two . 202 . ] master call George Goodley , and William Palmer his mate , both perish . m . Caesar also be captain and owner be likewise drown : none of the officer be save but the carpenter . we twelve which the lord have deliver from extreme danger of the sea , at our come ashore fall in a manner into as great distress . at our first come on shore we all fall down on our knee , pray the lord most humble for his merciful goodness . our prayer be do , we consult together what course I25 to take , see we be fall into a desert place , and we travel all that day until night , sometime one way and sometime another , and can find no kind of inhabitant ; only we see where wild beast have be , and place where there have be house , which after we perceive to have be burn by the Portugal . so at night fall into certain grove of olive tree , we climb up and sit in they to avoid the danger of lion and other wild beast , whereof we see many the next morning . the next day we travel until three of the clock in the afternoon without any food , but water and wild date root : then go over a mountain , we have sight of cape Espartel ; whereby we know somewhat better which way to travel , and then we go forward until we come to a hedgerow make with great long cane ; we spy and look over it , and behold a number of man aswell horseman as footman , to the number of some five thousand in skirmish together with small shot and other weapon . and after consultation what we be best to do , we conclude to yield our self unto they , be destitute of all mean of resistance . So rise up we march towards they , who espy we , forthwith some hundred of they with their javelin in their hand come run towards we as though they will have run we through : howbeit they only strike we flatling with their weapon , and say that we be Spaniard : and we tell they that we be Englishman ; which they will not believe yet . by and by the conflict be end , and night approaching , the captain of the moor , a man of some