the fire and sink of the stout and warlike carrack call Las cinque llaguas , or , the five wound , by three tall ship set forth at the charge of the right honourable the earl of Cumberland and his friend : write by the discreet and valiant captain m . Nicholas Downton . beside these 3 ship there be a pinnace call the violet , or the why not i . . n the latter end of the year i £ 93 - the right honourable earl of Cumberland , at his own charge and his friend , prepare 3 ship all at equal rate , and either of they have like quantity of victual , and like number of man , there be embark in all 3 ship 420 man of all sort . the royal exchange go as admiral , wherein m . George cave be captain . the may - flower vice - admiral under the conduct of William Anthony : and the Samson , the charge whereof it please his honour to commit unto i Nicholas Dounton . our direction be send we to Plymouth , and we be to open they at sea . the sixth of April 1594 we set sail in the sound of Plymouth , direct our course towards the coast of Spain . the 24 of the say month at the admiral direction we divide our self east and west from each other , be then in the heighth of 43 degree , with commandment at night to come together again . 118 the fire of ‘ the five wound ’ a . d . the 27 day in the morning we descry the Mayflower and the little pinnace with a prize that they have take , be of Viana in Portugal , and bind for Angola in Africa . this bark be of 28 ton , have some 17 person in the same . there be in her some 12 commodity butt of Galicia wine , whereof we take into every ship fi * fir Angola . a like part , with some Ruske in chest and barrel , with 5 butt of blue course cloth , and certain course linen - cloth for negro shirt , which good be divide among our fleet . the 4 of may we have sight of our pinnace , and the admiral shallop which have take three Portugal caravel , whereof they have send two away and keep the three . the second of June we have sight of saint Michael . the three day in the morning we send our small pinnace , which be of some 24 ton , with the small caravel which we have take at the burling to range the road of all the hand , to see if they can get any thing in the same : appoint they to meet usW . S . W . 12 league from faiall . their go from we be to no purpose . they miss come to we when we appoint , as also we miss they , when we have great cause to have use they . the 13 of June we meet with a mighty carrack of the east Indies , call las cinque Llagas , or the five wound . the may - flower be in fight with she before night . i , in the Samson , fetch she up in the evening , and as i command to give she the broad side , as we term it , while i stand very heedful pry to discover her strength : and where i may give counsel to board she in the night when the admiral come up to we , and as i remember at the very first shot she discharge at we , i be shoot in a little above the belly , whereby i be make unserviceable for a good while after , without touch any other for that night . yet by mean of a honest true - hearted man which i have with i , one captain grant , nothing be neglect : until midnight when 119 the admiral come up , the may - flower , and the Samson never leave by turn to ply she with their great ordinance ; but then captai ne cave wish we to stay till morning , at what time each one of we shall give she three bout with our great ordinance , and so shall clap she a board : but indeed it be long linger in the morning until io of the clock before we attempt to board she . the admiral lay she a board in the mid ship : the may - flower come up in the quarter , as it shall seem , to lie at the stern of the admiral on the larboard side . the captain of the say may - flower be slay at the first come up : whereby the ship fall to [ ii two . 200 . ] the stern of the out - licar of the carrack , which ( be a piece of timber ) so wound her foresail , that they say they can come no more to fight , i be sure they do not , but keep aloof from we . the Samson go aboard on the bow , but have not room enough , our quarter lie on the exchange bow , and our bow on the carrack bow . the exchange also at the first come have her captain m . cave shoot into both the leg , the one whereof he never recover , so he for that present be not able to do his office , and in his absence he have not any that will undertake to lead out his company to enter upon the enemy . my friend captain grant do lead my man on the carrack side , which be not manful back by the exchange man , his force be small , make the enemy bold than he will have be , whereby i have six man present slay and many more hurt , which make they that remain hurt to return aboard , and will never more give the assault . i say not but some of the exchange man do very well , and many more ( no doubt ) will have do the like , if there have be any principali man to have put they forward , and to have bring all the company to the fight , and not to have run into corner themselves . but 1 must needs say , that their ship be as well provide for defence , as any that i have see . and the Portugal peradventure encourage by our slack work , play 120 the man and have Barricados make , where they may stand without any danger of our shot . they ply we also very much with fire , so that most of our man be burn in some place or other : and while our man be put out of the fire , they will ever be ply they with small shot or dart . this unusual cast of fire do much dismay many of our man and