56 year old , come himself unto we , and by his interpretor which speak Italian , ask what we be , and from whence we come . one Thomas Henmer of our company which can speak Italian , declare unto he that we be merchant , and how by great misfortune our ship , merchandise , and the great part of our company be pitiful cast away upon their coast . but he void of humainity and all manhood , for all this , cause 126 the cast away of the ‘ Toby ’ a . d . i593 - his man to strip we out of our apparel even to our shirt to see what money and jewel we have about we : which when they have find to the value of some 200 pound in gold and pearl they give we some of our apparel again , and bread and water only to comfort we . the next morning they carry we down to the shore where our ship be cast away , which be some sixteen mile from that place . in which journey they use we like their slave , make we ( be extreme weak , ) to carry their stuff , and offer to beat we if we go not so fast as they . we ask they why they use we so , and they reply , that we be their captive : we say we be their friend , and that there be never Englishman captive to the king of Morocco . so we come down to the ship , and lie there with they seven day , while they have get all the good they can , and then they part it among they . after the end of these seven day the captain appoint twenty of his man well arm , to bring we up into you country : and the first night we come to the side of a river call Alarach , where we lie on the grass all that night : so the next day we go over the river in a frigate of nine oar on a side , the river be in that place above a quarter of a mile broad : and that day we go to a town of thirty house , call Totteon : there we lie four day have nothing to feed on but bread and water ; and than we go to a town call Cassuri , and there we . be deliver by those twenty soldier unto the Alcaide , which examine we what we be : and we tell he . he give we a good answer , and send we to the Jew house , where we lie seven day . in the mean while that we lay here , there be bring thither twenty Spaniard and twenty Frenchman , which Spaniards be take in a conflict on land , but the Frenchman be by foul weather cast on land within the strait about cape de gate , and so make captive . thus at the seven day end we twelve Englishmen , the twelve french , 127 and the twenty Spaniard be all conduct towards Morocco with nine hundred soldier , horseman and fotman , and in two day journey we come to the river of Fez , where we lodge all night , be provide of tent . the next day we go to a town call Salle , and lie without the town in tent . from thence we travel almost a hundred mile without find any town , but every night we come to fresh water , which be partly run water and sometime rain water . so we come at last within three mile of the city of Morocco , where we pitch our tent : and there we meet with a carrier which do travel in the country for the english merchant : and by he we send word unto they of our estate : and they return the next day unto we a moor , which bring we victual , be at that instant very feeble and hungry ; and withal send we a letter with pen , ink , and paper , will we to write unto they what ship it be that be cast away , and how many and what man there be alive . for say they we will know with speed , for to morrow be the king court : and therefore we will know , for that you shall come into the city like captive . but for all that we be carry in as captive and with rope about our neck as well English as the french and Spaniards . and so we be carry before the king : and when we come before he he do commit we all to ward , where we lie 15 day in close prison : and in the end we be clear by the english merchant to their great charge : for our deliverance cost they 700 ounce , every ounce in that country containing two shilling . and when we come out of prison we go to the alfandica , where we continue eight week with the english merchant . at the end of which time be well apparel by the bounty of our merchant we be convey down by the space of eight day journey to saint Cruz , where the english ship road : where we take ship about the 20 of march , two in the anne Francis of London , and five more of we five 128 day after in the expedition of London , and two more in a flemish flyboat , and one in the mary Edward also of London , other two of our number die in the country of the bloody - flux : the one at our first imprisonment at Morocco , who name be George Hancock , and the other at saint Cruz , who name be Robert Swancon , who death be hasten by eat of root and other unnatural thing to slake their rage hunger in our travail , and by our hard and cold lodging in the open field without tent . thus of fifty person through the rashness of a unskilful master ten only survive of we , and after a thousand misery return home poor , sick , and feeble into our country . Richard Johnson . Thomas Henmore . William William carpenter . John Silvester . John Durham . Thomas Whiting . Abraham rouse . William church . John Matthewes . John fox .