of one consort . sir John be very glad of this news , stay no long on shore , but present embark himself , have only in company a small bark of threescore ton belong to one m . Hopkins of Bristol . in the mean while that these thing thus pass at Flores , part of the rest of the english fleet , which sir John Burrough have leave upon the coast of Spain , draw also towards the azore : and whereas he quick at sea have discover one of the carack , the same evening he may descry two or three of the earl of cumberland ship ( whereof one m . Norton be captain ) which have in like sort ken the carrack , pursue she by that course which they see she to run towards the hand . but on no side be there any way make by reason of a great calm which yield iio the take of the ‘ Madre de Dios ’ a . d . 1592 - no breath to spread a sail . insomuch that fit to discover she what she be , of what burden , force , and countenance , sir John Burrough take his boat , and row the space of three mile , to make she exact : and be return , he consult with the better sort of the company then present , upon the board she in the morning . but a very mighty storm arise in the night , the extremity thereof force they all to weigh anchor , yet their care be such in wrestle with the weather not to lose the carrack , that in the morning , the tempest be qualify , and our man bear again with the shore , they may perceive the carrack very near the land , and the Portugal confuse carry on shore such thing as they can any manner of way convey out of she ; and see the haste our man make to come upon they , forsake she : but first , that nothing may be acarakcal left commodious to our man , set fire to that which they can not carry with they , intend by that mean whole to consume she ; that neither glory of victory nor benefit of ship may remain to we . and lest the approach and industry of the english shall bring mean to extinguish the flame , thereby to preserve the residue of that which the fire have not destroy ; be four hundred of they in number and well arm , they intrench themselves on land so near to the carrack , that she be by their force protect , and our man keep aloof off , the fire may continue to the consumption of the whole . This be note by sir John Burrough he soon provide a present remedy for this mischief . for land one hundred of his man , whereof many do swim a hundred and wade more than breast high to shore , and easy ° four man scatter those that present themselves to guard the ' land ' coast , he no soon draw towards their new trench , but they flee immediate , leave as much as the fire have spare to be the reward of our man pain . here be take among other one Vincent Fonseca a Portugal , purser of the carrack , with two other , one a almain and the second a low - dutchman , canonier : who refuse to make any voluntary report of those thing which be demand of they , have the torture threaten , the fear whereof at the last wrest from they this intelligence , that within fifteen day three other great carack than that late fire will arrive at the same hand : and that be five carack in the fleet at their departure from goa , to wit , the Buen Jesus admiral , the Madre de Dios , the saint Bernardo , the saint Christophero , and the saint Cruz , ( who fortune you have already hear ) they have receive speciali commandement from the king not to [ ii two . 197 . ] touch in any case at the hand of S . Helena , where the Portugal carack in their return from the east India be always till now wont to arrive to refresh themselves with water and victual . and the king reason be ; because of the english man of war , who ( as he be inform ) lie there in wait to intercept they . if therefore their necessity of water shall drive they to Angola a new seek supply any where , he appoint they Angola in foi ^ thecaraks ma * ne Africa , with order there to stay only the ’ take in of water to avoid the inconvenice of infection , whereunto that hot latitude be dangerous subject . the last rendezvous for they all be the hand of Flores , where the king assure they not to miss of his armada thither send of purpose for their waft to Lisbon . upon this information sir John draw to counsel , meet there captain Norton , captain Dounton , captain Abraham cock , captain of three ship of the earl of Cumberland , m . Tomson of Harwich cap . of the dainty of sir John haukin , one of sir W . ralegh fleet , and m . Christopher Newport cap . of the golden dragon new return from the west India , and other . Theise be assemble , he communicate with they what he have understand of the foresay examinate , and what great presumption of truth their relation do carry : wish that forasmuch as God and good fortune have bring they together in so good a season , they will show the uttermost of their endeavour to bring these Easterling under the lee of the english obedience . hereupon a i i 2 the take of the ‘ Madre de Dios ’ present accord on all side follow not to part company or leave of those sea till time shall present cause to put their consultation in execution . the next day her majesty good ship the foresight command by sir Rob . Crosse come in to the rest : and he likewise inform of the