the second voyage of master Martin Frobisher , make to the west and northwest region , in the year 1577 . with a description of the country , and people : write by master dionise settle . n Whitsunday , be the six and twenty of May , in the year of our lord God 1577 . captain Frobisher depart from black wall , with one of the queen majesty ship , call the aid , of nine score ton , or thereabouts : and two other little bark like wise , the one call the Gabriel , whereof master Fenton , a gentleman of my lord of warwikes , be captain : 211 theorcadians upon small occasion f . ee their home . and the other , the Michael , whereof master York , a gentleman of my lord admiral be captain , accompany with seven score gentleman , soldier , and sailor , well furnish with victual , and other provision necessary for one half year , on this his second voyage , for the further discover of the passage to Cathay , and other country , thereunto adjacent , by west and northwest navigation : which passage or way , be suppose to be on the north and northwest part of America : and the say America to be a island environ with the sea , where through our merchant may have course and recourse with their merchandise , from these our northernmost part of Europe , to those orientali coast of Asia , in much short time , and with great benefit than any other , to their no little commodity and profit that do or shall frequent the same . Oure say captain and general of this present voyage and company have the year before , with two little pinnace , to his great danger , and no small commendation , give a worthy attempt towards the performance thereof , be also press , when occasion shall be minister ( to the benefit of his prince , and native country ) to adventure himself further therein . as for this second voyage , it seem sufficient , that he have better explore and search the commodity of those people and country , which in his first voyage the year before he have find out . upon which consideration , the day and year before express , we depart from black wall to Harwich , where make a accomplishment of thing necessary , the last of may we hoist up sail , and with a merry wind the 7 . of June we arrive at the island call Orcades , or vulgar Orkney , be in number 30 . subject and adjacent to Scotland , where we make provision of fresh water ; in the do whereof our general license the gentleman and soldier for their recreation , to go on shore . at our land , the people flee from their poor cottage , with shriek and alarm , to warn their neighbour of enemy , but by gentle persuasion we reclaim 212 they to their house . it seem they be often fright with pirate , or some other enemy , that move they to such sudden fear . their house be very simple build with pibble stone , without any chimney , the fire be make in the midst thereof . the good man , wife , child , and other of their family eat and sleep on the one side of the house , and the cattle on the other , very beastly and rude , in respect of civility . they be destitute of wood , their fire be turf , and cowshard . no wood in they have corn , big , and oat , with which they pay their king rend , to the maintenance of his house . they take great quantity of fish , which they dry in the wind and sun . they dress their meat very filthy , and eat it without salt . their apparel be after the rude sort of Scotland . their money be all base . their church and religion be reform accord to the Scot . the fisher man of England can better declare the disposition fisher man oj of those people than i : wherefore i remit other their England have usage to their report , as yearly repair thither , in ta Orkney their course to and from island for fish . we depart herehence the 8 . of June , and follow our course between west and northwest , until the 4 . June and of July : all which time we have no night , but that easy , thoseld ^ st and without any impediment we have when we be so and north - disposed , the fruition of our book , and other pleasure - west region . to pass away the time : a thing of no small moment , to such as wander in unknown sea , and long navigation , especial , when both the wind and rage surge do pass their common and wont course . this benefit endure in those part not 6 . week , while the sun be near the Tropike of Cancer : but where the pole be raise to 70 . or 80 . degree , it continue much long . all along these sea , after we be six day sail great abun - from Orkney , we meet dote in the sea , great fir tree , dance of Fin e which as we judge , be with the fury of great flood fo ^ ngin root up , and so drive into the sea . island have ’ almost no other wood nor fuel , but such as they take up upon their coast . it seem , that these tree be 213 inquire drive from some part of the new find land , with the current that set from the west to the east . can ent . the we come within the make of fris - land . from this shore io . or 12 . league , we meet great island of ice , of half a mile , some more , some less in compass , show above the sea , 30 . or 40 . fathom , and as we suppose fast on ground , where with our lead we can scarce sound the bottom for depth . here , in place of odoriferous and fragrant smell of sweet gum , and pleasant note of musical bird , which other country in more temperate zone do yield , we tee , snow , and taste the most boisterous boreal blast mix with snow hrite ui June j hail , in the month of June and July , nothing inferior to our untemperate winter : a sudden alteration ,