as most man then do , Zonam torridam , the hot zone to be altogether dishabit for heat , though present we know many famous and worthy kingdom and city in that part of the earth , and the island of S . Thomas near ^ Ethiopia , and the wealthy island for the which chief all these voyage be take in hand , to be inhabit even under the equinoctial line . so / . 3 . to answer the three objection , beside Cabota and all other traveller navigation , the only credit of m . Frobisher may suffice , who late through all these island of ice , and mountain of snow , pass that way , even beyond the gulf that tumble down from the north , and in some place though he draw one inch thick ice , as he return in August do , yet come he home safe again . sol 4 . the four argument be altogether frivolous and vain , for neither be there any isthmo or strait of land between America and Asia , ne can these two land joint be one continent . the first part of my answer be manifest allow of by Homer , who that excellent 198 geographer Strabo follow , yield he in this Lib . Geog . faculty the price . the author of that book likewise irepi Kotlov to Alexander , attribute unto Aristotle , be of the same opinion that Homer and Strabo be of , in two or three place . Dionysius in oiKovnevw irepuiywi have this verse wr « ? anceavo irepiSeSpo / ae yatav airacrav . so do the ocean sea run round about the world : speak only of Europe , Africa and Asia , as than Asia be travel and know . with these doctor may note . you join Pomponius Mela . cap . 2 . lib . I . Plinius lib . 2 . cap . 67 . and Pius 2 . cap . 2 . in his description of Asia . all the which writer do no less confirm the whole eastern side of Asia to be compass about with the sea , than Plato do affirm in Timaeo , under the name Atlantis , the west Indies to be a island , as in a special discourse thereof R . Eden write , agreeable Richard Eden . unto the sentence of Proclus , Marsilius Ficinus , and other . out of Plato it be gather that America be a island . Homer , Strabo , Aristotle , Dionysius , Mela , Pliny , pius 2 . affirm the continent of Asia , Africa , and Europe , to be environ with the ocean . i may therefore bold say ( though late intelligence thereof have we none at all ) that Asia and the west Indies be not tie together by any Isthmos or straight of land , contrary to the opinion of some new cosmographer , by who doubtful this matter have be bring in controversy . and thus much for the first part of my answer unto the four objection . the second part , namely that America and Asia can be one continent , may thus be prove , koto Lib . 2 . me - trjv r ^ s be koikorrjta pei km twv troTa / Mov to trX ^ Ooi . the ttor ‘ ca ? ' 1 • most river take down that way their course , where the earth be most hollow and deep , write Aristotle : and the sea ( say he in the same place ) as it go further , so be it find deep . into what gulf do the Moscovian river Onega , Duina , ob , power out their stream northward out of Moscovia into the sea ? which way do that sea strike ? the south be main 199 land , the eastern coast wax more and more shallow : from the north , either natural , because that part of the earth be high Aristot . 2 Met . cap . 1 . or of necessity , for that the forcible influence of some northern star cause the earth there to shake off the sea , as some philosopher do think : or final for the great store of water engender in that frosty and cold climate , that the bank be not able to hold they . Alber , in 2 . meteor , cap . 6 . from the north , i say , continual fall down great abundance of water . so that this northeastern currant must at the length abrupt bow towards we south on the west side of Finmarke and Norway : or else strike down southwest above groan - land , or betwixt groneland and Iseland , into the northwest strait we speak of , as of congruence it do , if you mark the situation of that region , and by the report of m . Frobisher experience teach we . and m . Frobisher the further he travail in the former passage , as he tell i , the deep always he find the sea lay you now the sum hereof together . the river run where the channel be most hollow , the sea in take his course wax deep , the sea water fall continual from the north southward , the northeastern current strike down into the straight we speak of , and be there augment with whole mountain of ice and snow fall down furious out from the land under the north pole . where store of water be , there be it a thing impossible to want sea , where sea not only do not want , but wax deep , there can be discover no land . final , whence i pray you come the contrary tide , that m . Frobisher meet withal after that he have sail no small way in that passage , if there be any Isthmos or straight of land betwixt the aforesaid northwestern gulf , and mar deal Zur , to join Asia and America together ? that conclusion frequent in school quicquid praeter , etc be mean of the part of the world then know , and so be it of right to be understand . 200 the five objection require for answer wisdom and sol 5 . policy in the traveler , to win the barbarian favour by some good mean : and so to arm and strengthen himself , that when he shall have the