then by the west , who reason with my several answer ensue in the chapter follow . certain reason allege for the prove of a passage by the north - east , before the queen majesty , and certain lord of the counsel , by master Anthony Jenkinson , with my several answer then use to the same . Cap . 8 . because you may understand as well those thing allege against i , as what do serve for my purpose , i have here add the reason of master Anthony Jenkinson a worthy gentleman , and a great traveller , who conceive a better hope of the passage to Cataia from we , to be by the north - east , then by the northwest . he first say that he think not to the contrary , the north - but that there be a passage by the northwest , accord - west passage ing to my opinion : but assure he be , that there assent unt0 ' may be find a navigable passage by the north - east from England , to go to all the east part of the world , which he endeavour to prove three way . the first be that he hear a fisherman of Tartary the first say in hunt the morce , that he sail very far reas ° n . 181 visus nonnun - quam fallitur in suo objecto . the second reason or allegation . the answer or resolution . towards the southeast , find no end of the sea : whereby he hope a thorough passage to be that way . whereunto i answer , that the tartarian be a barbarous people , and utter ignorant in the art of navigation , not know the use of the sea card , compass or star , which he confess to be true : and therefore they can not ( say i ) certain know the southeast from the north - east , in a wide sea , and a place unknown from the sight of the land . or if he sail any thing near the shore , yet he ( be ignorant ) may be deceive by the double of many point and cape , and by the trending of the land , albeit he keep continual alongst the shore . and further , it may be that the poor fisherman through simplicity think that there be nothing that way but sea , because he see no land : which proof ( under correction ) give small assurance of a navigable sea by the north - east , to go round about the world . for that he judge by the eye only , see we in this our clear air do account twenty mile a ken at sea he second reason be , that there be a unicorn horn find upon the coast of Tartary , which can not come ( say he ) thither " by any other mean then with the tide , through some fret in the north - east of mare Glaciale , there be no unicorn in any part of Asia , save in India and Cataia : which reason ( in my simple judgement ) force as little . first , it be doubtful whether those barbarous tartarian do know a unicorn horn , yea , or no : and if it be one , yet it be not credible that the sea can have drive it so far , be of such nature that it will not swim . also the tide run too and fro , will have drive it as far back with the ebb , as it bring it forward with the flood . there be also a beast call asinus Indicus ( who horn most like it be ) which have but one horn like a unicorn in his forehead , whereof there be great 182 ... isib ' plenty in all the north part thereunto adjoin , as in Lappia , noruegia , Finmarke , etc as Jacobus Zieglerus write in his history of Scondia . and as Albertus say , there be a fish which have but one horn in his forehead like to a unicorn , and therefore it seem very doubtful both from whence it come , and whether it be a unicorn horn , yea , or no . he three and last reason be , that there come a con - than three and tinuall stream or current through mare Glaciale , of such swiftness ( as a colmax tell he ) that if you cast any ’ thing therein , it will present be carry out of sight towards the west . whereunto i answer , that there do the like from the answer or Maeotis Palus , by Pontus Euxinus , Sinus Bosphorus , resolution - and along the coast of Graecia , etc as it be affirm by Contarenus , and diverse other that have have experience of the same : and yet that sea lie not open to any main sea that way , but be maintain by freshet as by Tanais , Danubius , etc in like manner be this current in mare Glaciale increase and maintain by the Dwina , the river ob , etc now as i have here brief recite the reason allege , to prove a passage to Cataia by the north - east , with my several answer thereunto : so will i leave it to your judgement , to hope or despair of either at your pleasure . how that the passage by the northwest be more commodious for our traffic , than the other by the east , if there be any such . Cap . 9 first , by the north - east ( if your wind do not give you a marvelous speedy and lucky passage ) you be in danger ( be so near the pole ) to be benight almost the one half of the year , and what danger that be , to live so long comfortless , void of light , ( if the 183 cold kill you not ) each man of reason or understanding may judge . some doubt of 2 also Mangia , Quinzai , and the Moluccae be near unto we by the northwest , then by the north - east , more than two five part , which be almost by the half . 3 also we may have by the west a yearly return , it be at all time navigable , whereas you have but