the authority 169 of those , which have sail whole , through every part thereof . to prove by experience of sundry man travel , the open of some part of this northwest passage : whereby good hope remain of the rest . alcatrani be pelican . Baros lib . 9 of his first decas cap . 1 . Chap . 3 . PAulus Venetus , who dwell many year in Cataia , affirm that he sail 1500 mile upon the coast of Mangia , and Anian , towards the north - east : always find the sea open before he , not only as far as he go , but also as far as he can discern . 2 also Franciscus Vasques de Coronado pass from Mexico by Cevola , through the country of Quivira , to Siera Nevada , find there a great sea , where be certain ship lade with merchandise , carry on their prowess the picture of certain bird call Alcatrarzi , part whereof be make of gold , and part of silver , who signify by sign , that they be thirty day come thither : which likewise prove America by experience to be disjoined from Cataia , on that part by a great sea , because they can not come from any part of America , as native thereof : for that , so far as be discover , there have not be find there any one ship of that country . 3 in like manner , John Baros testify that the cosmographers of china ( where he himself have be ) affirm that the sea coast trend from thence Northeast , to 50 degree of septentrional latitude , be the further part that way which the Portugal have then knowledge of : and that the say cosmographer know no cause to the contrary , but that it may continue further . by who experience America be prove to be separate from those part of Asia , direct against the same . and not content with the judgement of these learned man only , i have search what may be further say for the confirmation hereof . 170 4 and i find that Franciscus Lopez de Gomara affirm America to be a island , and likewise Gronland : and that Gronland be distant from Lappia 40 league , and from terra de Labrador , 50 . 5 moreover , Alvarus Nunnius a Spaniard , and learned cosmographer , and Jacobus Cartier , who make two voyage into those part , and sail 900 mile upon the north - east coast of America do in part confirm the same . 6 likewise Hieronymus Fracastorius , a learned italian , and traveler in the north part of the same land . 7 also Jaques Cartier have do the like , hear say at Hochelaga in Nova Francia , how that there be a great sea at Saguinay , whereof the end be not know : which they presuppose to be the passage to Cataia . furthermore , Sebastian Cabota by his personal ex - write in the perience and travel have set forth , and describe this discourse of passage in his Charts , which be yet to be see in the 1 avl ^ a wn ' queen majesty privy gallery at Whitehall , who be send to make this discovery by king Henry the seven , and enter the same fret : affirm that he sail very far westward , with a quarter of the north , on the northside of Terra de Labrador the eleven of June , until he come to the septentrionali latitude of 67 degree and a half , and find the sea still open , say , that he may , and will have go to Cataia , if the mutiny of the master and mariner have not be . now as these man experience have prove some part of this passage : so the chapter follow shall put you in full assurance of the rest , by their experience which have pass through every part thereof . [ to prove 171 2 Auditus . 3 olfactus . 4 Gustus . 5 tactus . Singularia sensu , universalia vero mente percipiuntur . Lib . i . cap . ss . [ three . 17 . i page - s ^ o . to prove by circumstance that then northwest passage have be sail throughout . Chap . 4 . the diversity between bruit beast and man , or between the wise and the simple be , that the one judge by sense only , and gather no surety of any thing that he have not see , feel , hear , taste , or smell : and the other not so only , but also find the certainty of thing by reason , before they happen to be try . wherefore i have add proof of both sort , that the one and the other may thereby be satisfy . 1 first , as gemma Frisius recite , there go from Europe three brethren through this passage : whereof it take the name of Fretum trium fratrum . 2 also Pliny affirm out of Cornelius Nepos , ( who write 57 year before Christ ) that there be certain Indians drive by tempest , upon the coast of Germany which be present by the king of sum evia , unto quintus Metellus Celer , the proconsuli of France . 3 and Pliny upon the same say , that it be no marvel though there be sea by the north , where there be such abundance of moisture : which argue that he doubt not of a navigable passage that way , through which those Indians come . 4 and for the better proof that the same authority of Cornelius Nepos be not by i wrest , to prove my opinion of they northwest passage : you shall find the same affirm more plain in that behalf , by the excellent geographer Dominicus Marius Niger , who show how many way the indian sea stretch it self , make in that place recital of certain Indians , that be likewise drive through the north sea from India , upon the coast of Germany , by great tempest , as they be sail in trade of merchandise . 172 5 also while Frederic Barbarossa reign emperor , avouch by anno do . 1160 . there come certain other Indians upon franciscuslo - the coast of Germany . pesdeGomara r t , • i . r 0 tn his histone o .