likewise otnon in the stone of the Goth affirm , of India , lib . that in the time of the germane emperor , there be i . cap . io . also certain Indians cast by force of weather , upon the coast of the say country , which foresay Indians can not possible have come by the southeast , Southwest , nor from any part of Africa or America , nor yet by the north - east : therefore they come of necessity by this our northwest passage . to prove that these Indians aforenamed come not by the southeast , Southwest , nor from any other part of Africa , or America . Cap . 5 . first , they can not come from the southeast by the cape de bona speranda , because the roughness of the sea there be such ( occasion by the current and great wind in that part ) that the great armada the king of Portugal have , can without great difficulty pass that way , much less than a Canoa of India can live in those outrageous sea without shipwreck ( be a vessel of very small burden ) and have conduct themselves to the place aforesaid , be man unexpert in the art of navigation . 2 also , it appear plain that they be not able to come from alongst the coast of Africa aforesaid , to those part of Europe , because the wind do ( for the most part ) blow there easterly off from the shore , and the current run that way in like sort , shall have drive they westward upon some part of America : for such wind and tide can never have lead they from thence to the say place where they be find , nor yet can they have come from any of the country aforesaid , keep the sea always , without skilful mariner 173 this five reason by late experience be prove utter untrue . that the Indians can not be native either of Africa , or of America . to have conduct they such like course as be necessary to perform such a voyage . 3 presuppose also , if they have be drive to the west ( as they must have be , come that way ) than they shall have perish , want supply of victual , not have any place ( once leave the coast of Africa ) until they come to America , nor from America until they arrive upon some part of Europe , or the island adjoin to it , to have refresh themselves . 4 also , if ( notwithstanding such impossibility ) they may have recover Germany by come from India by the southeast , yet must they without all doubt have strike upon some other part of Europe before their arrival there , as the isle of the azore , Portugal , Spain , France , England , Ireland , etc which if they have do , it be not credible that they shall or will have depart undiscovered of the inhabitant : but there be never find in those day any such ship or man but only upon the coast of Germany , where they have be sundry time and in sundry age cast aland : neither be it like that they will have commit themselves again to sea , if they have so arrive , not know where they be , nor whither to have go . 5 and by the southwest it be unpossible , because the current aforesaid which come from the east , strike with such force upon the fret of Magellan , and fall with such swiftness and fury into mar deal Zur , that hardly any ship ( but not possible a Canoa , with such unskilful mariner ) can come into our western ocean through that fret , from the west sea of America , as magellans experience have partly teach we . 6 and further , to prove that these people so arrive upon the coast of Germany , be Indians , and not in - habiters of any part either of Africa or America , it be manifest , because the native both of Africa and America neither have , or have at this day ( as be report ) other kind of boat then such as do bear neither mast nor sail , ( except only upon the coast of Barbary and the 174 Turk ship ) but do carry themselves from place to place near the shore by the ore only . to prove that those Indians come not by the north - east , and that there be no thorough navigable passage that way . Cap . 6 . it be likely that there shall be no thorough passage by the north - east , whereby to go round about the world , because all sea ( as aforesaid ) be maintain by the abundance of water , wax moor shallow and shelffie towards the end , as we find it do by experience in mare glaciali , towards the east , which breed small hope of any great continuance of that sea , to be navigable towards the east , sufficient to sail thereby round about the world . 2 also , it stand scarce with reason , that the Indians dwell under torrida zona , can endure the injury of the cold air , about the septentrional latitude of 80 . degree , under which elevation the passage by the north - east can be ( as the often experience have of all the south part of it show ) see that some of the inhabitant of this cold climate ( who summer be to they a extreme winter ) have be strike to death with the cold damp of the air about 72 degree , by a accidental mishap , and yet the air in such like elevation be always cold , and too cold for such as the Indians be . 3 furthermore , the pierce cold of the gross thick air so near the pole will so stiffen and fur the sail and ship tackle , that no mariner can either hoist or strike they ( as our experience far near the south , than this passage be presuppose to be , have teach we ) without the use whereof no voyage can be perform . 4 also , the air be so darken with continual ! mist and fog so near the pole , that no man can well see