by the northwest ? who have go for trial sake at any time this way out of Europe to Cathayo ? 192 if you seek the advice herein of such as make profession in cosmography , Ptolome the father of Geographic , and his elder child , will answer by their map with a negative , conclude most of the sea within the land , and make a end of the world northward , near the 63 . degree . the same opinion , when learn chief flourish , be receive in the roman time , as by their poet write it may appear : tibi serviat ultima Thyle , say Virgil , be of opinion , that island be the extreme part of the world habitable towards the north . Joseph Moletius a italian , and Mercator a germane , for knowledge man able to be compare with the best geographer of our time , the one in his half sphere of the whole world , the other in some of his great globe , have continue the west Indies land , even to the north pole , and consequent , cut off all passage by sea that way . the same doctor , Mercator in other of his globe and map , Moletius in his sea card , nevertheless doubt of so great continuance of the former continent , have open a gulf betwixt the west Indies and the extreme northern land : but such a one , that either be not to be travel for the cause in the first objection allege , or clean shut up from we in Europe by Greenland : the south end whereof Moletius make firm land with America , the north part continent with Lappeland and Norway . third , the great favourer of this voyage can not deny , but that if any such passage be , it lie subject unto ice and snow for the most part of the year , whereas it stand in the edge of the frosty zone . before the sun have warm the air , and dissolve the ice , each one well know that there can be no sail : the ice once break through the continual abode the sun make a certain season in those part , how shall it be possible for so weak a vessel as a ship be , to hold out amid whole island , as it be of ice continual beat on each side , and at the mouth of seven 193 n A . D . £ 576 . Ob . 2 . Ob . 3 . that gulf , issue down furious from the north , and safe to pass , when whole mountain of ice and snow shall be tumble down upon she ? Ob . 4 . well , grant the west Indies not to continue continent unto the pole , grant there be a passage between these two land , let the gulf lie near we then common in card we find it set , namely , between the 61 . and 64 . degree north , as gemma Frisius in his map and globe imagine it , and so leave by our countryman Sebastian Cabot in his table which the earl of Bedford have at cheinies : let the way be void of all difficulty , yet do it not follow that we have free passage to Cathayo . for example sake : you may trend all Norway , Finmarke , and Lappeland , and then bow southward to saint Nicholas in Moscovia : you may likewise in the mediterranean sea fetch Constantinople , and the mouth of Tanais : yet be there no passage by sea through Moscovia into Pont euxine , now call mare Maggiore . again , in the aforesaid mediterranean sea , we sail to Alexandria in Egypt , the barbarian bring their pearl and spice from the molucca up the red sea or arabian gulf to sue , scarce three day journey from the aforesaid haven : yet have we no way by sea from Alexandria to the molucca , for that Isthmos or little straight of land between the two sea . in like manner although the northern passage be free at 61 degree of latitude , and the west ocean beyond America , usual call mar deal Zur , know to be open at 40 . degree elevation from the island Japan , yea three hundred league northerly above Japan : yet may there be land to hinder the thorough passage that way by sea , as in the example aforesaid it fall out , Asia and America there be join together in one continent . ne can this opinion seem altogether frivolous unto any one that diligent peruse our cosmographer do . Josephus Moletius be of that mind , not only in his plain hemisphere of the world , but also in his sea card . the french geographer in like manner be of 194 the same opinion , as by their map cut out in form of a hart you may perceive : as though the west Indies be part of Asia . which sentence well agree with that old conclusion in the school : quicquid praeter africam and Europam est , Asia est , whatsoever land do neither appertain unto Africa nor to Europe , be part of Asia . furthermore it be to small purpose to make so long , Ob . 5 . so painful , so doubtful a voyage by such a new find way , if in Cathayo you shall neither be suffer to land for silk and silver , nor able to fetch the Molucca spice and pearl for piracy in those sea . of a law deny all alien to enter into China , and forbid all the inhabiter under a great penalty to let in any stranger into those country , shall you read in the report of Galeotto Perera there imprison with other Portugal : as also in the japonish letter , how for that cause the worthy traveller Xavierus bargain with a barbarian merchant for a great sum of pepper to be bring into Canton , a port in China . the great and dangerous piracy use in those sea no man can be ignorant of , that list to read the japonish and East indian history . final , all this great labour will be lose , all these Ob . 6 . charge spend in vain , if in the end our traveller may not be able to return again