the letter patent of king Henry the seven grant unto John Cabot and his three son , Lewis , Sebastian , and Sancius for the this — coverie of new and unknown land . 141 142 the same in english . HEnry by the grace of God , king of England and France , and lord of Ireland , to all to who these present shall come , greet . be it know that we have give and grant , and by these present do give and grant for we and our heir , to our well - beloved John Cabot citizen of Venice , to Lewis , Sebastian , and Santius , son of the say John , and to the heir of they , and every of they , and their deputy , full and free authority , leave , and power to sail to all part , country , and sea of the east , of the west , and of the north , under our banner and ensign , with five ship of what burden or quantity soever they be , and as many mariner or man as they will have with they in the say ship , upon their own proper cost and charge , to seek out , discover , and find whatsoever isle , country , region or province of the heathen and infidel whatsoever they be , and in what part of the world soever they be , which before this time have be unknown to all Christians : we have grant to they , and also to every of they , the heir of they , and every of they , and their deputy , and have give they licence to set up our banner and ensign in every village , town , castle , isle , or main land of they new find . and that the aforesaid John and his son , or their heir and assign may subdue , occupy and possess all such town , city , castle and isle of they find , which they can subdue , occupy and possess , as our vassal , and lieutenant , get unto we the rule , title , and jurisdic - M3 1495 - Bristol think the meet port for western discovery . freedom from custom . cion of the same village , town , castle , and firm land so find . yet so that the aforesaid John , and his son and heir , and their deputy , be hold and bind of all the fruit , profit , gain , and commodity grow of such navigation , for every their voyage , as often as they shall arrive at our port of Bristol ( at the which port they shall be bind and hold only to arrive ) all manner of necessary cost and charge by they make , be deduct , to pay unto we in ware or money the five part of the capital ! gain so get . we give and grant unto they and to their heir and deputy , that they shall be free from all pay of custom of all and singular such merchandise as they shall bring with they from those place so new find . and moreover , we have give and grant to they , their heir and deputy , that all the firm land , isle , village , town , castle and place whatsoever they be that they shall chance to find , may not of any other of our subject be frequent or visit without the licence of the foresaid John and his son , and their deputy , under pain of forfeiture aswell of their ship as of all and singular good of all they that shall presume to sail to those place so find . willing , and most straight command all and singular our subject aswell on land as on sea , to give good assistance to the aforesaid John and his son and deputy , and that as well in arm and furnish their ship or vessel , as in provision of food , and in buy of victual for their money , and all other thing by they to be provide necessary for the say navigation , they do give they all their help and favour . in witness whereof we have cause to be make these our letter patent . witness our self at Westminster the five day of march , in the eleven year of our reign .