and especial in a place or parallel , where the pole be not elevate above 61 . degree : at which height other country moor to the north , yea unto 70 . degree , show themselves more temperate than this do . all along this coast ice lie , as a continual bulwark , and so defend the country , that those that will land there , incur great danger . our general 3 . day together attempt with the ship boat to have go on shore , which for that without great danger he can not accomplish , he defer it until a more convenient time . all along the coast lie very high mountain cover with snow , except in such place , where through the steepness of the mountain of force it must needs fall . four day coast along this land , we find no sign of habitation . little bird , which we judge to have lose Friseland sub - the shore , by reason of thick fog which that country ject tofigge . js much subject unto , come fly into our ship , which cause we to suppose , that the country be both more tolerable , and also habitable within , than the outward shore make show or signification . from hence we depart the eight of July : and the 16 . of the same , we come with the make of land , which land our general the year before have name the queen foreland , be a island as we judge , lie 214 near the suppose continent with America : and on the other side , opposite to the same , one other island call Halles isle , after the name of the master of the ship , near adjacent to the firm land , suppose continent with Asia . between the which two island there be a large entrance or strait , call Frobishers straight , after the name of our general , the first finder thereof . This strni say straight be suppose to have passage into the sea of Sur , which i leave unknown as yet . it seem that either here , or not far hence , the sea shall have more large entrance , then in other part within the freeze or untemperate zone : and that some contrary tide , either from the east or west , with main force cast out that great quantity of ice , which come float from this coast , even unto Friseland , cause that country to seem more untemperate than other , much more northerly than the same . i can judge that any temperature under the pole , the time of the sun northern declination be half a year together , and one whole day , ( consider that the sun elevation surmount not 23 . degree and 30 . minute ) can have power to dissolve such monstrous and huge ice , comparable to great mountain , except by l ^ tsds of ice . some other force , as by swift current and tide , with t0 the help of the say day of half a year . mounatnes . before we come within the make of these land we taste cold storm , in so much that it seem we have change summer with winter , if the length of the day have not remove we from that opinion . at our first come , the strait seem to be shut up with a long mure of ice , which give no little cause of discomfort unto we all : but our general , ( to who captain fn - diligence imminent danger , and difficult attempt seem ht s ^ e ' nothing , in respect of his willing mind , for the come - diligence fir moditie of his prince and country , ) with two little the benefit of pinnace prepare of purpose , pass twice through his prince and they to the east shore , and the island thereunto countrey - adjacent : and the ship , with the two bark lie off and 215 the order of the people appear on shore . fierce and bold people . one take . on something further into the sea , from the danger of the ice . while he be search the country near the shore , some of the people of the country show themselves leap and dance , with strange shriek and cry , which give no little admiration to our man . our general desirous to allure they unto he by fair mean , cause knife , and other thing to be proffer unto they , which they will not take at our hand : but be lay on the ground , and the party go away , they come and ' take up , leave some thing of they to countervail the same . at the length two of they leave their weapon , come down to our general and master , who do the like to they , command the company to stay , and go unto they : who after certain dumb sign , and mute congratulation , begin to lay hand upon they , but they deliverly escape , and run to their bow and arrow , and come fierce upon they , ( not respect the rest of our company which be ready for their defence ) but with their arrow hurt diverse of they : we take the one , and the other escape . while our general be busy in search the country , and those island adjacent on the eastshoare , the ship and bark have great care , not to put far into the sea from he , for that he have small store of victual , be force to abide in a cruel tempest , chance in the night , among and in the thick of the ice , which be so monstrous , that even the least of a thousand have be of force sufficient , to have shiver our ship and bark into small portion , if God ( who in all necessity , have care upon the infirmity of man ) have not provide for this our extremity a sufficient remedic through the light of the night , whereby we may well discern to flee from such imminent danger , which we avoid with 14 . bourd in one watch the space of 4 hour . if we have not incur this danger among these monstrous island of ice , we shall have lose our 216 general and master , and the most of our best sailor , which be on the shore destitute of victual : but by the valour of our master gunner , master Jackman , and hard Cox , Andrew Dier , the master mate , man