the three and last voyage unto Meta incognita , make by m . Martin Frobisher , in the year 1578 . write by Thomas Ellis . these be to let you know , that upon the 25 . of may , the Thomas Allen be vice - admiral who captain be m . York , m . Gibbes master , Christopher hall pilot , accompany with the rear - admiral name the hopewel , who captain be m . Henry carewe , the m . Andrew Dier , and certain other ship come to Gravesend , where we anchor and abide the come of certain of our fleet which be not yet come . the 27 . of the same month our fleet be now come together , and all thing press in a readiness , the wind favour , and tide serve , we be of sail in number eight , weigh anchor and hoist our sail towards Harwich to meet with our admiral , and the residue which then and there abide our arrival : where we safe arrive the 28 . thereof , find there our admiral , who we with the discharge of certain piece salute , accord to order and duty , and be welcome with the like courtesy : which be finish we land : where our general continue muster his soldier and miner , and set thing in order appertain to the voyage until the last of the say month of May , which day we hoist our sail , and commit our self to the conduct of almighty God , we set forward towards the west country in such lucky wise and good success , that by the five of June we pass the dursy , be the utmost part of Ireland to the westward . and here it be not much amiss nor far from our purpose , if i shall a little discourse and speak of our adventure and chance by the way , as our land at Plymouth , as also the meeting certain poor man , which be rob and spoil of all that they have by 231 master fork . Christopher hall . the hopewel . captain Carew . Andrew dier . [ three . + o . i Harwich . dursy . Ireland . Plymouth . pirate and rover : among who be a man of Briitote . Bristol , on who our general use his liberality , and send he away with letter into England . but because such thing be impertinent to the matter , i will return ( without any more mention of the same ) to that from the which i have digress and swerve , i mean our ship now sail on the surge sea , sometime pass at pleasure with a wish eastern wind , sometime hinder of our course again by the western blast , until the 20 . day of the foresay month of June , Frizeland . on which day in the morning we fall with Frizeland , which be a very hie and crag land and be almost clean cover with snow , so that we may see nought but craggy rock and the top of high and huge hill , sometime ( and for the most part ) all cover with foggy mist . there might we also perceive the great isle of ice lie on the sea , like mountain , some small , some big , of sundry kind of shape , and such a number of they , that we can not come near the shore for they . thus sail alongst the coast , at the last we see a place somewhat void of ice , where our general ( accompany with certain other ) go a shore , where they see certain tent make of beast skin , and boat much the like unto they of Meta incognita . the tent be furnish with flesh , fish , skin , and other trifle : among the which be find a box of nail : whereby we do conjecture , that they have either artificer among they , or else a traffic with some other nation . the man run away , so that we can have no conference or communication with they . our general ( because he will have they no more to flee , but rather encourage the courtesy of to stay through his courteous deal ) give commaunde - our general . mean that his man shall take nothing away with they , save only a couple of white dog , for the which he leave pin , point , knife , and other trifle thing , and depart without take or hurt any thing , and so come aboard , and hoist sail , and pass forward . 232 but be scarce out of the sight thereof , there fall such a fog and hideous mist that we can not see one another : whereupon we strike our drum , and sound our trumpet , to the end we may keep together : and so continue all that day and night till the next day that the mist break up : so that we may easy perceive all the ship thus sail together all that day , until the next day , be the 22 . of the same : on which day we see a infinite number of ice , from the which we cast about to shun the danger thereof . but one of our small bark name the Michael , who master captain be master Kinderslie , the master Bartholomew bull , lose our company , insomuch that we can not ° mew ■ obtain the sight of her many day after , of who 1 mean to speak further anon when occasion shall be minister , and opportunity serve . thus we continue in our course until ! the second of July , on which day we fall with the queen foreland , where we see so much ice , that we think it unpossible to get into the strait : yet at the last we give the adventure and enter the ice . be among it we see the Michael , of who i Michael . speak before , accompany with the Judith , who captain be Master Fenton , the master Charles Jackman , Charles bear into the foresay ice , far distant from we , who Jackman . in a storm that fall that present night , ( whereof i will at large God willing , discourse hereafter ) be sever from we , and be in , wander up and down the strait among the ice many