repulse in one coast , he may safe travail to a other , commodious take his convenient time , and discreet make choice of they with who he will thorough deal . to force a violent entry , will for we Englishman be very hard , consider the strength and valour of so great a nation , far distant from we , and the attempt thereof may be most perilous unto the doer , unless their part be very good . touch their law against stranger , you shall read nevertheless in the same relation of Galeotto Perera , that the cathaian king be wont to grant free access unto all foreigner that trade into his country for merchandise , and a place of liberty for they to remain in : as the moor have , until such time as they have bring the Loutea or lieutenant of that coast to be a circumcise Saracene : wherefore some of they be put to the sword , the rest be scatter abroad : at fuquien a great city in China , certain of they be yet this day to be see . as for the japans they be most desirous to be acquaint with stranger . the Portugal though they be strait handle there at the first , yet in the end they find great favour at the prince his hand , insomuch that the Loutea or precedent that misuse they be therefore put to death . the rude indian Canoa hall those sea , the Portugal , the saracenes , and moor travail continual up and down that reach from Japan to China , from China to Malacca , from Malacca to the molucca : and shall a Englishman , better appoint than any of they all ( that i say no more of our navy ) fear to sail in that ocean ? what sea at all do want piracy ? what navigation be there void of peril ? to the last argument . our traveller need not to Sol . 6 . seek their return by the north - east , neither shall they be constrain , except they listen , either to attempt 201 what the eastern cut rent be . magellans straight at the southwest , or to be in danger of the Portugal for the southeast : they may return by the northwest , that same way they do go forth , . as experience have show . the reason allege for proof of the contrary may be disprove after this manner . and first it may be call in controversy , whether any current continual be force by the motion of primum mobile , round about the world , or no ? for learned man do diverse handle that question . the natural course of all water be downward , wherefore of congruence they fall that way where they find the earth most low and deep : in respect whereof > it be erst say , the sea do strike from the northern land southerly . violent the sea be toss and trouble diverse way with the wind , increase and diminish by the course of the moon , hoist up and down through the sundry operation of the sun and the star : final , some be of opinion , that the sea be carry in part violent about the world , after the daily motion of the high movable heaven , in like manner as the element of air and fire , with the rest of the heavenly sphere , be from the east unto the west . and this they do call their eastern current , or levant stream . some such current may not be deny to be of great force in the hot zone , for the nearness thereof unto the centre of the sun , and bluster eastern wind violent drive the sea westward : howbeit , in the temperate clime , the sun be further off , and the wind more diverse , blow as much from the north , the west and south , as from the east , this rule do not effectual withhold we from travail eastward , neither be we keep ever back by the aforesaid Levant wind and stream . but in Magellans straight we be violent drive back westward : ergo , through the northwestern straight or Anian fret shall we not be able to return eastward ? it follow not . the first , for that the northwestern straight have more sea room at the least by one hundred english miles , than 202 1576 . Magellans fret have , the only want whereof cause all narrow passage general to be most violent . so will i say in the Anian gulf , if it be so narrow as don Diego and zalterius have paint it out , any return that way to be full of difficulty , in respect of such straightness thereof , not for the nearness of the sun , or eastern wind , violent force that way any levant streamer but in that place there be more sea room by many degree , if the card of Cabota , and gemma Frisius , and that which Tramezine imprint , be true . and hitherto reason see i none at all , but that i may as well give credit unto their do , as to any of the rest . it must be peregrinationis historia , that be , true report of skilful traveller , as Ptolome write , that in ca ? ' 2 ' such controversy of Geographic must put we out of doubt . Ortelius in his universali table , in his particular map of the west Indies , of all Asia , of the northern kingdom , of the east Indies , Mercator in some of his globe , and generail map of the world , Moletius in his universali table of the globe divide , in his sea card , and particular table of the east Indies , zalterius , and don Diego , with Ferdinando berte , and other , do so much differ from gemma Frisius and Cabota , among themselves , and in diverse place from themselves , concern the diverse situation and sundry limit of America , that one may not so rash , as true surmise , these man either to be ignorant in those point touch the aforesaid region , or that the map they have give out unto the world , be collect only by they , and never of their own draw .