expert both in easy gunnavigation , and other good quality , we be all content master jack - to incur the danger aforerehearse , before we will man . with our own safety , run into the sea , to the destrue - andrewdier . cion of our say general , and his company . the day follow , be the 19 of Julie , our captain return to the ship , with report of suppose riches , which show it self in the bowel of those barren mountain , wherewith we be all satisfy . within foufe day after we have be at the entrance of the strait , then northwest and west wind disperse the ice into the sea , and make we a large entrance into the strait , so that without any impediment , on the 19 of Julie we enter they , and the 20 . thereof , our general and master with great diligence , seek out and sound the west shore , and find out a fair harbour for the ship and bark to ride in , and name it after our master mate , jackmans sound , and bring the ship , jackmans bark , and all their company to safe anchor , except one man , which die by God visitation . at our first arrival , after the ship ride at anchor , our general , with such company as can well be spare from the ship , in march order enter the land , have speciali care by exhortation , that at our entrance thereinto , we shall all with one voice , kneel upon our knee , chief thank God for our safe arrival : second beseech he , that it will please his divine majesty , long to continue our queen , for who he , and all the rest of our company in this order take possession of the possession country : and three , that by our Christian study and taken - endevour , those barbarous people train up in paganism , and infidelity , may be reduce to the knowledge of true religion , and to the hope of salvation in Christ our redeemer . with other word very apt to signify his willing mind , and affection towards his prince and 217 country : whereby all suspicion of a undutifiill subject , may credible be judge to be utter exempt from his mind . all the rest of the gentleman and other deserve fee needful to be regard of seafaring man . stone glister with sparkle like gold . worthy herein , their due praise and commendation . these thing in this order accomplish , our general command all the company to be obedient in thing needful for our own safeguard , to master Fenton , master York , and master beast his lieutenant , while he be occupy in other necessary affair , concern our come thither . after this order we march through the country , with ensign display , so far as be think needful , and now and then heap up stone on high mountain , and other place in token of possession , as likewise to signify unto such as hereafter may chance to arrive there , that possession be take in the behalf of some other prince , by those who first find out the country . whoso make navigation to those country , have not only extreme wind , and furious sea to encounter withal , but also many monstrous and great island of ice : a thing both rare , wonderful , and great to be regard . we be force sundry time , while the ship do ride here at anchor , to have continual watch , with boat and man ready with halser to knit fast unto such ice , as with the ebb and flood be toss to and fro in the harbour , and with force of oar to hale they away , for endanger the ship . our general certain day search this suppose continent with America , and not find the commodity to answer his expectation , after he have make trial thereof he depart thence with two little bark , and man sufficient to the east shore be the suppose continent of Asia , and leave the ship with most of the gentleman , soldier , and sailor , until such time as he either think good to send or come for they . the stone of this suppose continent with America be altogether sparkle , and glister in the sun like 218 gold : so likewise do the sand in the bright water , yet they verify the old proverb : all be not gold that 4 common pro - glistereth . verb . on this west shore we find a dead fish float , which have in his nose a horn strait and torquet , of length two yard lack two inche , be break in the top , where we may perceive it hollow , into the which some of our sailor put spider they present die . i see not the trial hereof , but it be report unto i of a truth : by the virtue whereof we suppose it to be the sea unicorn . u " * - after our general have find out good harbour for corn it the ship and bark to anchor in , and also such store of suppose gold over as he think himself satisfy withal , he return to the Michael , whereof master York aforesaid be captain , accompany with our master and his mate : who coast along the west shore not far from whence the ship ride , they perceive a fair harbour , and willing to sound the same , at the entrance thereof they espy two tent of seal skin , unto which the captain , our say master , and other company resort . at the sight of our man the people flee into the people the mountain : nevertheless they go to their tent , where leave certain trifle or we , as glass , bell , i „ 0 knife , and such like thing they depart , not take any thing of they except one dog . they do in like manner leave behind they a letter , pen , ink , and paper , whereby our man who the captain lose the year before , and in that people custody , may ( if any of they be alive ) be advertise of our presence and be there . on the same day after consultation have , all the gentleman , and other likewise that can be spare from the ship , under the conduct and lead of master master Phil - Philpot , ( unto who in our general his absence , and his lieutenant