man direct his course so far towards the north pole , that even in the month of July he find monstrous heap of ice swim on the sea , and in manner continual day light , yet see he the land in that tract free from ice , which have be melt by the heat of the sun . thus see such heap of ice before he , he be enforce to turn his sail and follow the west , so coast still by the shore , that he be thereby bring so far into the south , by reason of the land bend so much southwards , that it be there almost equal in latitude , with the sea Fretum Herculeum , have the northpole elevate in manner in the same degree . he sail likewise in this tract so far towards the west , that he have the island of Cuba on his left hand , in manner in the same degree of longitude . as he travel by the coast of this great land , ( which he name baccalaos ) he say that he find the like course of the water towards the west , but the same to run more soft and gentle then the swift water which the Spaniard find in their navigation southward . wherefore it be not only more like to be true , but aught also of necessity to be conclude that between both the land hitherto unknown , there shall be certain great open place whereby the water shall thus continual pass from the east unto the west : which water i suppose to be drive about the globe of the earth by the un - cessant move and impulsion of the heaven , and not to be swallow up and cast up again by the breathe of Daemogorgon , as some have imagine , because they see the sea by increase and decrease to ebb and flow . Sebastian Cabot himself name those land baccalaos , because that in the sea thereabouts he find so great multitude of certain big fish much like unto Tunies , ( which the inhabitant call baccalaos ) that they sometime stay his ship . he find also the people of those * 5 * region cover with beast skin , yet not without the use of reason . he also say there be great plenty of bear in those region which use to eat fish : for ing themselves into you water , where they perceive a multitude of these fish to lie , they fasten their claw in their scale , and so draw they to land and eat they , so ( as he say ) the bear be thus satisfy with fish , be not noisome to man . he declare further , that in many place of these region he see great plenty of copper among the inhabitant . Cabot be my very friend , who i use familiar , and delight to have he sometime keep i company in my own house . for be call out of England by the commandment of the catholique king of Castille , after the death of king Henry the seven of that name king of England , he be make one of our council and assistant , as touch the affair of the new Indies , look for ship daily to be furnish for he to discover this hide secret of nature . the testimony of Francis Lopez de Gomara a Spaniard , in the four chapter of the second book of his general history of the west Indies concern the first discovery of a great part of the west Indies , to wit , from 58 . to 38 . degree of latitude , by Sebastian Cabota out of England . e which bring most certain news of the country and people of baccalaos , say Gomara , be Sebastian cabote a venetian , which rig up two ship at the cost of king Henry the 7 . of England , have great desire to traffic for the spice as the Portugal do . he carry with he 300 . man , and take the way towards island from beyond the cape of Labrador , until he find himself in 58 . degree and better . he make relation 153 copper find in many place by cabote . that in the month of July it be so cold , and the ice so great , that he dare not pass any further : that the day be very long , in a manner without any night , and for that short night that they have , it be very clear . Cabot feel the cold , turn towards the west , refresh himself at baccalaos : and afterward he sail along the coast unto 38 . degree , and from thence he shape his course to return into England . a note of Sebastian cabots first discovery of part of the Indies take out of the latter part of Robert fabian chronicle not hitherto print , which be in the custody of m . John stow a diligent preserver of antiquity . cabot voyage from Bristol wherein he discover it newfound land , in the northern part of that land , and from thence as far almost as Florida . n the 13 . year of king Henry the 7 . ( by mean of one John Cabot a venetian which make himself very expert and cunning in knowledge of the circuit of the world and hand of the same , as by a sea card and other demonstration reasonable he show ) the king cause to man and victuali a ship at Bristol , to search for a island , which he say he know well be rich , and replenish with great commodity : which ship thus man and victual at the king cost , diverse merchant of London venture in her small stock , be in she as chief patron the say venetian . and in the company of the say ship , sail also out of Bristol three or four small ship fraught with sleight and gross merchandizes , as course cloth , cap , lace , point and other trifle . and so depart from Bristol in the begin of May , of who in this major time return no tiding . 154 of three savage which Cabot bring home and present unto the king in the fourteenth year of his reign , mention by the foresay Robert Fabian . he year also be bring unto the king three man take in the newfound island that before i speak of , in William Purchas time be mayor : these be clothe in beast skin , and do eat raw flesh , and speak such speech that no man can understand they , and in their demeanour like to bruit beast , who the king keep a time after . of the which upon two year after , i see two apparel after the manner of Englishman in Westminster palace , which that time i can not discern from Englishman , till i be learned what they be , but as for speech , i hear none of they utter one word .