master beast , all the rest be obedient ) go master beast . a shore , determine to see , if by fair mean we can either allure they to familiarity , or otherwise take some of 219 they , and so attain to some knowledge of those man who our general lose the year before . at our come back again to the place where their tent be before , they have remove their tent further into the say bay or sound , where they may if they be drive from the land , flee with their boat into the sea . we part our self into two company , and compass a mountain come sudden upon they by land , who espy we , without any tarry flee to their boat , leave the most part of their oar behind they for haste , and row down the bay , where our two pinnace meet they and drive they to shore : but if they have have all their oar , so swift be they in row , it have be lose time to have chase they . when they be land they fierce assault our man with their bow and arrow , who wound three of they with our arrow : and perceive themselves thus hurt , they desperate leap off7 the rock into the sea , and drown themselves : which if they have not do , but have submit themselves , or if by any mean we can have take they alive ( be their enemy as they judge ) we will both have save they , and also have seek remedy to cure their wound receive at our hand . but they altogether void of humanity , and ignorant what mercy mean , in extremity look for no other then death : and perceive they shall fall into our hand , thus miserable by drown rather desire death then otherwise to be save by we : the rest perceive their fellow in this distress , flee into the high mountain . two woman not be so apt to escape as the man be , the one for her age , and the other be encumber with a young child , we take . the old wretch , who diverse of our sailor suppose to be either a devil , or a witch , have her buskin pluck off , to see if she be cleave footed , and for her ugly hue and deformity we let she go : the young woman and the child we bring away . we name the place where they be slay , bloody point : and the bay or harbour , York 220 sound , after the name of one of the captain of the two bark . have this knowledge both of their fierceness and fair mean cruelty , and perceive that fair mean as yet be not able to allure they to familiarity , we dispose our self , familiarity t0 contrary to our inclination , something to be cruel , return to their tent and make a spoil of the same : where we find a old shirt , a doublet , a girdle , and also shoe of our man , who we lose the year before : on nothing else unto they belong cold we set our eye . their riches be not gold , silver or precious drapery , but their say tent and boat , make of the skin of red ° f dear and seal skin : also dog like unto wolf , 5 s ' but for the most part black , with other trifle , more to be wonder at for their strangeness , then for any other commodity needful for our use . thus return to our ship the 3 . of August , we our departure depart from the west shore suppose firm with west America , after we have anchor there 13 . day : and so ' the 4 . thereof we come to our general on the east shore , and anchor in a fair harbour name anne warwick ' s sound , unto which be annex a island both name after the countesseof Warwick , anne Warwick sound and isle . in this isle our general think good for this - voyage , to fraught both the ship and bark , with such stone or suppose gold minerali , as he judge to countervail the charge of his first , and this his second navigation to these country . in the mean time of our abode here some of they the country country people come to show themselves unto we , sundry setoe time on the main shore , near adjacent to the say unt0 we . isle . our general desirous to have some news of his man , who he lose the year before , with some company with he repair with the ship boat to common , or sign with they for familiarity , whereunto he be persuaded to bring they . they at the first show make token , that three of his five man be alive , and desire 221 their usage in traffic or exchange . the people show themselves the three time . the people show themselves again on jirme land . pen , ink , and paper , and that within three or four day they will return , and ( as we judge ) bring those of our man which be live , with they . they also make sign or token of their king , who they call Cacough , and how he be carry on man shoulder , and a man far surmount any of our company , in bigness and stature . with these token and sign of writing , pen , ink , and paper be deliver they , which they will not take at our hand , but be lay upon the shore , and the party go away , they take up : which likewise they do when they desire any thing for change of they , lay for that which be leave so much as they think will countervail the same , and not come near together . it seem they have be use to this trade or traffic , with some other people adjoin , or not far distant from their country . after 4 . day some of they show themselves upon the firm land , but not where they be before . our general very glad thereof , suppose to hear of our man , go from the island , with the boat , and sufficient company with he . they seem very glad , and allure he about a certain point of the land : behind which they may perceive a company of the crafty villain to lie lurk , who our