without ice , 208 1576 - but present within two hour it be freeze round about the ship , a quarter of a inch thick , and that day very fair , and calm . the 17 . day we weigh , and come to Thomas Williams 17 . island . the 18 . day we sail north northwest , and anchor « 8 . again in 23 . fathom , and tough oaze , under burcher island , which be from the former island , ten league . the 19 day in the morning , be calm , and no 19 wind , the captain and i take our boat , with eight man in she , to row we a shore , to see if there be there any people , or no , and go to the top of the island , we have sight of seven boat , which come row ° ftke from the east side , towards that island : whereupon we return aboard again : at length we send our boat p with five man in she , to see whither they row , and so with a white cloth bring one of their boat with their man along the shore , row after our boat , till such time as they see our ship , and then they row a shore : then i go on shore my self , and give every of they a threadden point , and bring one of they aboard of i , where he do eat and drink , and then carry he on shore again . whereupon all the rest come aboard with their boat , be nineteen person , and they speak , but we understand they not . they ducrip - bee like to Tartar , with long black hair , broad face , °£ the and flat nose , and tawny in colour , wear seal p p ’ skin , and so do the woman , not differ in the fashion , but the woman be mark in the face with blow streeke down the cheek , and round about the eye . their boat be make all of seal skin , with a keel of wood within the skin : the proportion of they be like a spanish shallop , save only they be flat in the bottom , and sharp at both end . , the twenty day we weigh , and go to the east - 20 . side of this island , and i and the captain , with four man more go on shore , and there we see their house , and the people espy we , come row towards seven 209 oh our boat : whereupon we ply towards our boat : and we be in our boat and they ashore , they call to we , and we row to they , and one of their company come into our boat , and we carry he a board , and give he a bell , and a knife : so the captain and i c . of our man will five of our man to set he a shore at a rock , take by they and not among the company , which they come from , f ' but their wilfulness be such , that they will go to they , and so be take themselves , and our boat lose . 21 . the next day in the morning , we stand in near the shore , and shoot off a fauconet , and sound our trumpet , but we can hear nothing of our man : this sound we call the five man sound , and ply out of it , but anchor again in thirty fathom , and oaze : and ride there all night , in the morning , the snow lie a foot thick upon our hatch . 22 . the 22 . day in the morning we weigh , and go again to the place where we lose our man , and our boat . we have sight of fourteen boat , and some come near to we , but we can learn nothing of our man : among the rest , we entice one boat to our ship side , with a bell , and in give he the bell , we take he , and his boat , and so keep he , and so row down to Thomas William island , and there anchor all night . they retume . the 26 . day we weigh , to come homeward , and by 2 • 12 . of the clock at noon , we be thwart of trumpet island . 27 . the next day we come thwart of gabriels island , and at 8 . of the clock at night we have the cape Labrador as we suppose west from we , ten league . 28 . the 28 . day we go our course southeast . 29 . we sail southeast , and by east , 22 . league . September . the first day of September in the morning we have king sight of the land of Friseland , be eight league from we , but we can not come near it , for the monstrous ice that lie about it . from this day , till the six of this month , we run along island , and have the south part of it at eight of the clock , east from we ten league . 210 the seven day of this month we have a very terrible 7 « storm , by force whereof , one of our man be blow into the sea out of our waste , but he catch hold of the foresail sheate , and there hold till the captain pluck he again into the ship . the 25 . day of this month we have sight of the island of Orkney , which be then east from we . the first day of October we have sight of the shield , 2 % Sam and so sail about the coast , and anchor at Yarmouth , and the next day we come into Harwich . the language of the people of Meta incognita . argoteyt , a hand . Cangnawe , a nose . arere , a eye . Keiotot , a tooth . mutchatet , the head . Chewat , a ear . Comagaye , a leg . Atoniagay , a foot . Callagay , a pair of breech . ' attegay , a coat . Pollevetagay , a knife . Accaskay , a ship . coblone , a thumb . teckkere , the foremost finger . ketteckle , the middle finger . Mekellacane , the four finger . yacketrone , the little finger .