general will not deal withal , for that he know not what company they be , and so with few sign dismiss they and return to his company . a other time as our say general be coast the country with two little pinnace , whereby at our return he may make the better relation thereof , three of the crafty villain , with a white skin allure we to they . once again our generail , for that he hope to hear of his man , go towards they : at our come near the shore whereon they be , we may perceive a number of they lie hide behind great stone , and those 3 . in sight labour by all mean possible that some will come on land : and perceive we make no haste 222 by word nor friendly sign , which they use by clap their first of their hand , and be without weapon , and but 3 . in sight , they seek further mean to provoke we as ^ us 0 thereunto . one alone lay flesh on the shore , which their second we take up with the boat hook , as necessary victual mean . for the relieve of the man , woman , and child , who we have take : for that as yet they can not digest our meat : whereby they perceive themselves deceive of their expectation , for all their crafty allurement . yet once again to make ( as it be ) a full show of their their three crafty nature , and subtle sleight , to the intent thereby an ^ crafiest . 1 ° r allurement . to nave entrap and take some or our man , one or they counterfeit himself impotent and lame of his leg , who seem to descend to the water side , with great difficulty : and to cover his craft the more , one of his fellow come down with he , and in such place where he seem unable to pass , he take he on his shoulder , set he by the water side , and depart from he , leave he ( as it shall seem ) all alone , who play his counterfeit pageant very well , think thereby to provoke some of we to come on shore , not fear , but that one of we may make our party good with a lame man . our general have compassion of his impotency , compassion to thought good ( if it be possible ) to cure he thereof : c “ re a crafty wherefore he cause a soldier to shoot at he with ’ his caliver , which graze before his face . the counterfeit villeine deliverly flee , without any impediment at all , and get he to his bow and arrow , and the rest from their lurk hole , with their weapon , bow , arrow , sling , and dart . our general cause some caliver to be shoot off " at they , whereby some be hurt , they may hereafter stand in more fear of we . this be all the answer for this time we can have of our man , or of our general letter . their crafty deal at these three several time be thus manifest unto we , may plain show their disposition in other thing to be correspondent . we judge that they use 223 these stratagem , thereby to have catch some of we , for the deliver of the man , woman and child who we have take . they be man of a large corporature , and good proportion : their colour be not much unlike the sun burn country man , who labour daily in the sun for his live . they wear their hair something long , and cut before either with stone or knife , very disorderly . their woman wear their hair long , and knit up with two loupe , show forth on either side of their face , and the rest foltre upon a knot . also some of their woman raze their face proportional , as chin , cheek , and forehead , and the wrist of their hand , whereupon they lie a colour which continue dark azurine . they eat their meat all raw , both flesh , fish , and foul , or something per boil with blood and a little water which they drink . for lack of water they will eat ice , that be hard freeze , as pleasant as we will do sugar Candie , or other sugar . if they for necessity sake stand in need of the premise , such grass as the country yield they pluck up and eat , not dainty , or salletwise to allure their stomach to appetite : but for necessity sake without either salt , oil or wash , like brute beast devour the same . they neither use table , stool , or table cloth for comeliness : but when they be imbrue with blood knuckle deep , and their knife in like sort , they use their tongue as apt instrument to lick they clean : in do whereof they be assure to loose none of their victual . dog like they frank or keep certain dog not much unlike unto wolf . wolf , which they yoke together , as we do ox and horse , to a sled or trade : and so carry their necessary over the ice and snow from place to place : as the captive , who we have , make perfect sign . and when those dog be not apt for the same use : or when with hunger they be constrain for lack of other victual , 224 > 577 - they eat they : so that they be as needful for they they eat dtp in respect of their bigness , as our ox be for we . fresh - they apparel themselves in the skin of such beast as they kill , sew together with the sinew of they . all the foul which they kill , they skin , and make thereof one kind of garment or other , to defend they from the cold . they make their apparel with hood and tail , which hood and . tail they give when they think to gratify any friend - tatle ship show unto they : a great sign of friendship a " be ’ with they . the man have they not so side as the woman . the man and woman wear their hose close to their leg , from the waste to the knee without any open before , as well the one kind as the other . upon their leg they wear hose of leather ,