day in great peril , till at the last , ( by the providence of God ) they come safe to harbour in their wish port . in the countess countess of Warwick sound , the 20 . of July aforesaid , ten day before any of the other ship : who go on ' shore find where the people of the country have be , and have hide their provision in great heap of stone be both of flesh and fish , which they have kill ; whereof we also find great store in other place after [ three . 41 . j our arrival . they find also diverse engine , as bow , 233 narrow shift fir safety . sling , and dart . they find likewise certain piece of the pinnace which our general leave there the year before , which pinnace he have sink , mind to have it again the next year . now see i have entreat so much of the Judith and the Michael : i will return to the rest of the other ship , and will speak a little of the storm which fall , with the mishap that we have , the night that we put into the ice : whereof i make mention before . at the first enter into the ice in the mouth of the strait , our passage be very narrow , and difficult but be once get in , we have a fair open place without any ice for the most part , be a league in compass , the ice be round about we and enclose we , as it be , within the pale of a park . in which place , ( because it be almost night ) we mind to take in our sail , and lie a hull all that night . but the storm so increase , and the wave begin to mount aloft , which bring the ice so near we , and come on so fast upon we , that we be fain to bear in and out , where we may espy a open place . thus the ice come on we so fast , we be in great danger , look every hour for death . and thus pass we on in that great danger , see both our self and the rest of our ship so trouble and toss among the ice , that it will make the strong heart to relent . at the last the bark Dionyse be but a weak ship , and bruise afore among the ice , be so leak that no long she can tarry above the water , sink without save any of the good which be within she : which sight so abash the whole fleet , that we think very we shall have taste of the same sauce . but nevertheless we see they in such danger , man our boat and save all the man in such wise , that not one perish : God be thank . the storm still increase and the ice enclose we , so that we be fain to take down top and top mast : for the ice have so environ we , that we can see neither 234 i578 - land nor sea , as far as we can ken : so that we be fain to cut our cable to hang over board for fender , somewhat to ease the ship side from the great and driry stroke of the ice : some with capstan bar , some fend off with oar , some with plank of two inche thick , which be break immediate with the force of the ice , some go out upon the ice to bear it off with their shoulder from the ship . but the rigorousness of the tempest be such , and the force of the ice so great , that not only they burst and spoil the foresay provision , but likewise so raze the side of the ship , that it be pitiful to behold , and cause the heart of many to faint . thus we continue all that dismal and lamentable night plunge in this perplexity , look for instant death : but our god ( who never leave they destitute godsprwi - which faithful call upon he , although he often punish dence ' for amendment sake ) in the morning cause the wind to cease , and the fog which all that night lie on the face of the water to clear : so that we may perceive about a mile from we , a certain place clear from any ice , to the which with a easy breath of wind which our God send we , we bend our self . and furthermore , he provide better for we than we deserve or hope for : for when we be in the foresay clear place , he send we a fresh gale at west or at west Southwest , which set we clear without all the ice . and further he add more : for he send we so pleasant a day as the like we have not of a long time before , as after punishment consolation . thus we joyful wight be at liberty , take in all our sail and lay a hull , praise God for our deliverance , and stay to gather together our fleet : which once be do , we see that none of they have any great hurt , neither any of they want , save only they of who i speak before and the ship which be lose , then at the last we hoist our sail , and lay bult off and on , till such time as it will please God to take away the ice that we may get into the strait . 235 1578 . a mountain of ice appear in sundry figure . and as we thus lay off and on we come by a marvellous huge mountain of ice , which surpass all the rest that ever we see : for we judge it to be near fourscore fathom above water , and we think it to be a ground for any thing that we can perceive , be there nine score fathom deep , and of compass about half a mile . a fog of long continuance . also the five of July there fall a hideous fog and mist , that continue till the nineteenth of the same : so that one ship can not see another . therefore we be fain to bear a small sail and to observe the time :