a current to the ' northwest . but there run such a current of a tide , that it set we to the northwest of the queen foreland the backside of all the strait : where ( through the contagious fog have no sight either of sun or star ) we scarce know where we be . in this fog the ten of July we lose the company of the vice - admiral , the anne Francis , the buss of Bridgewater , and the Francis of Foy . the 16 . day one of our small bark name the the Gabriel . Gabriel be send by our general to bear in with the land to descry it , where be on land , they meet with the people offer to traffic with we . the people of the country , which seem very humane and civil , and offer to traffic with our man , proffer they fowl and skin for knife , and other trifle : who courtesy cause we to think , that they have small conversation with other of the strait . than we bear back again to go with the queen foreland : and the eighteenth day we come by two island whereon we go on shore , and find where the people have be : but we see none of they . this day we be again in the ice , and like to be in as great peril as we be at the first . for through the darkness and obscurity of the foggy mist , we be almost run on rock and island before we see they : but God ( even miraculous ) provide for we , open the fog that we may see clear , both where and in what danger we present be , and also the way to escape : or else without fade we have ruinous run upon the rock . 236 when we know perfect our instant case , we cast about to get again on seaboard , which ( God be thank ) by night we obtain and praise God . the clear continue scarce a hour , but the fog fall again as thick as ever it be . then the rearadmiral and the bear get themselves clear without danger of ice and rock , strike their sail and lay a hull , stay to have the rest of the fleet come forth : which as yet have not find the right way to clear themselves from the danger of rock and ice , until the next morning , at what time the rearadmiral discharge certain warning piece to give notice that she warn have escape , and that the rest ( by follow of she ) may set themselves free , which they do that day . charnd * then have gather our self together we proceed on our purpose voyage , bear off , and keep our self distant from the coast till the 19 day of July : at which time the fog break up and disperse , so that we may plain and clear behold the pleasant air , which so long have be take from we , by the obscurity of the foggy mist : and after that time we be not much encumber therewith until we have leave the con fine of the country . then our espy a fair sound , suppose it to go a fair sound into the strait between the queen foreland and between the jackmans sound , which prove as we imagine . for our general send forth again the Gabriel to discover it , who jackmans pass through with much difficulty : for there run such sound . a extreme current of a tide , with such a horrible gulf , that with a fresh gale of wind they be scarce able to stem it : yet at the length with great travail they pass it , and come to the strait , where they meet with the Thomas Allen , the Thomas of Ipswich , and the buss of Bridgewater : who altogether adventure to bear into the ice again , to see if they can obtain their wish port . but they be so encumber that with much difficulty they be able to get out again , yet at the last they escape , the Thomas Allen , and the Gabriel 237 the time of our set forward , etc bear in with the western shore , where they find harbour , and there moar their ship until the four of August , at which time they come to we in the countess of Warwick sound . the Thomas of Ipswich catch a great leak which cause she to cast again to Seabord and so be mend . we sail along still by the coast until we come to the queen foreland , at the point whereof we meet with part of the gulf aforesaid , which place or gulf ( as some of our master do credible report ) do flow nine hour , and ebb but three . at that point we discover certain land southward , which neither time nor opportunity will serve to search . then be come to the mouth of the strait we meet with the anne Francis , who have lie bult up and down ever since her departure alone , never find any of her company . we meet then also the Francis of Foy , with who again we intend to venture and get in : but the ice be yet so thick , that we be compel again to retire and get we on seaboard . there fall also the same day be the 26 . of July , such a horrible snow , that it lie a foot thick upon the hatch which freeze as it fall . we have also at other time diverse cruel storm both of snow and hail , which manifest declare the dis - temperature of the country : yet for all that we be so many time repulse and put back from our purpose , know that linger delay be not profitable for we , but hurtful to our voyage , we mutual consent to our valiant general once again , to give the onset . the 28 . day therefore of the same July we assay , and with little trouble ( God be praise ) we pass the danger by day light . then night fall on the face of the earth , we hull in the clear , till the cheerful light of the day have chase away the noisome darkness of the night : at which time we