: but how we shall be so far shoot up so sudden within the say straight the expert mariner begin to 333 James bear a good mariner . : Christopher hall chief pilot . marvel , think it a thing impossible that they can be so far overtake in their account , or that any current can deceive they here which they have not by former experience prove and find out . howbeit many confess that they find a swift course of flood then before time they have observe . and true it be wonderful to hear and see the rush and noise that the tide do make in this place with so violent a force that our ship lie a hull be turn sometime round about even in a moment after the manner of a whirlpool , and the noise of the stream no less to be hear afar off , than the waterfall of London bridge . but while the fleet lie thus doubtful among great store of ice in a place they know not without sight of sun , whereby to take the height , and so to know the true elevation of the pole , and without any clear of light to make perfect the coast , the general with the captain and master of his ship , begin doubtful to question of the matter , and send his pinnace aboard to hear each man opinion , and special of James bear , master of the anne Francis , who be know to be a sufficient and skilful mariner , and have be there the year before , have well observe the place , and draw out card of the coast . but the rather this matter grow the more doubtful , for that Christopher hall chief pilot of the voyage , deliver a plain and public opinion in the hear of the whole fleet , that he have never see the foresay coast before , and that he can not make it for any place of frobishers streit , as some of the fleet suppose , and yet the land do lie and trend so like , that the best mariner therein may be deceive . the ten of July , the weather still continue thick and dark , some of the ship in the fog lose sight of the admiral and the rest of the fleet , and wander to and fro , with doubtful opinion whether it be best to seek back again to seaward through great store of ice , or to follow on a doubtful course in a sea , bay , or streite they know not , or along a coast , whereof by reason of the 334 1578 . dark mist they can not discern the danger , if by chance any rock or break ground shall lie of the place , as common in these part it do . the vice - admiral captain York consider the foresaid opinion of the pilot hall , who be with he in the Thomas Allen , have lose sight of the fleet , turn back to sea again , have two other ship in company with he . also the captain of the anne Francis have likewise lose company of the fleet , and be all alone , hold it for best to turn it out to sea again , until they may have clear weather to take the sun altitude , and with incredible pain and peril get out of the doubtful place , into the open sea again , be so narrow distress by the way , by mean of continual fog and ice , that they be many time ready to leap upon a hand of ice to avoid the present danger , and so hope to prolong life awhile mean rather to die a pine death . some hope to save themselves on chest , and some hard shift to determine to tie the hatch of the ship together , and man to bind themselves with their furniture fast thereunto , wet ' and so to be tow with the ship - boat ashore , which otherwise can not receive half of the company , by which mean if happy they have arrive , they shall either have perish for lack of food to eat , or else shall themselves have be eat of those ravenous , bloody , and men - eating people . the rest of the fleet follow the course of the the coast along general which lead they the way , pass up above sixty league within the say doubtful and suppose straight , ieagU ™ have always a fair continent upon their starreboorde side , and a continuance still of a open sea before they . the general albeit with the first perchance he find mistake out the error , and that this be not the old straight , yet tf ^ ghttwhich he persuade the fleet always that they be in their n ° right course , and know straight . howbeit i suppose he rather dissemble his opinion therein then otherwise , 335 1578 . mean by that policy ( be himself lead with a honourable desire of further discovery ) to induce the fleet to follow he , to see a further proof of that place . and as some of the company report , he have since confess that if it have not be for the charge and care he have of the fleet and fraught ship , he Frobisher can have pass to Cataia . both will and can have go through to the south sea , call mar deal Sur , and dissolve the long doubt of the passage which we seek to find to the rich country of Cataya . 1 of which mistaken straight , consider the circumstance , we have great cause to confirm our opinion , to like and hope well of the passage in this place . for fair open may . reason to prove a passage here . the foresay bay or sea , the further we sail therein , the wide we find it , with great likelihood of endless continuance . and where in other place we be much trouble with ice , as in the entrance of the same , so after we have sail fifty or sixty league therein we have no let of ice , or other thing at all , as in other place we find . great indraft . 2 also this place seem to have a marvellous great indraft , and draw unto it most of the drift ice , and other thing which do fleet in the sea , either to the north or eastwards of the same