contain 40 . degree in latitude , go round about the earth , accord to longitude ) be not only habitable , but the same most fruitful and delectable , and that if any extremity of heat be , the same not to be within the space of twenty degree of the equinoctial on either side , but only under and about the two tropicke , and so proportional the near you do approach to either Tropic , the more you be subject to extremity of heat ( if any such be ) and so Marochus be situate but six or seven degree from the Tropic of Cancer , shall be more subject to heat , than any place under or near the equinoctial line . and first by the experience of sundry man , yea thousand , traveller and merchant , to the east and west Indies in many place both direct under , and hard by the equinoctial , they with one consent affirm , that it abound in the midst of torrida zona with all 253 A . D . 1578 . Marochus more hot than about the equinoctial . 1578 . manner of grain , herb , grass , fruit , wood and cattle , that we have here , and thousand other sort , far more wholesome , delectable and precious , than any we have in these northern climate , as very well shall appear to he that will read the history and navi - marvellous fruitful soil under the equinoctial . gation of such as have travel Arabia , India intra and extra gangem , the island Moluccas , America , etc which all lie about the middle of the burn zone , where it be true report , that the great herb , as be radish , lettuce , colewort , borage , and such like , do wax ripe , great , more savoury and delectable in taste than we , within sixteen day after the seed be sow . wheat be sow the first of February , be find ripe the first of May , and general , where it be less fruitful , the wheat will be ripe the four month after the seed be sow , and in some place will bring forth a ear as big as the wrist of a man ’ s arm contain 1000 grain ; bean , peace , etc be there ripe twice a year . also grass be cut down , will grow up in six day above one foot high . if our cattle be transport thither , within a small time their young one become of big stature , and more fat than great tree . ever they will have be in these country . there be find in every wood in great number , such timber tree as twelve man hold hand together be not able to fathom . and to be short , all they that have be there with one consent affirm , that there be the goodly green meadow and plain , the fair mountain commodity and pleasure under the equinoctial . cover with all sort of tree and fruit , the fair valley , the goodly pleasant fresh river , store with infinite kind of fish , the thick wood , green and bear fruit all the whole year , that be in all the world . and as for gold , silver , and all other kind of metal , all kind of spice and delectable fruit , both for delicacy and health , be there in such abundance , as hitherto they have be think to have be breed no where else but there . and in conclusion , it be now think that no where else but under the equinoctial , 254 or not far from thence , be the earthly paradise , and the only place of perfection in this world . and that these thing may seem the less strange , because it have be account of the old philosopher , that there can nothing prosper for the extreme heat of the sun continual go over their head in the zodiac , i think good here to allege such natural cause as to i seem very substantiali and sure reason . first you be to understand that the sun do work his moor or less heat in these low part by two mean , the one be by the kind of angle that the sun beam do make with the earth , as in all torrida zona iter make perpendicular right angle in some place or other at noon , and towards the two pole very oblique and uneven angle . and the other mean be the long or short continuance of the sun above the horizon . so that wheresoever these two cause do most concur , there be most excess of heat : and when the one be want , the rigor of the heat be less . for though the sun beam do beat perpendicular upon any region subject unto it , if it have no continuance or abode above the horizon , to work his operation in , there can no hot effect proceed . for nothing can be do in a moment . and this second cause mora solis supra horizontem , the time of the sun abide above the horizon , the old philosopher never remember , but regard only the manner of Angles that the sun beam make with the horizon , which if they be equal and right , the heat be the great , as in torrida zona : if they be unequal and oblique , the heat be the less , as towards both pole , which reason be very good and substantiali : for the perpendicular beam reflect and reverberate in themselves , so that the heat be double , every beam strike twice , and by unite be multiply , and continue strong in form of a column . but in our latitude of 50 . and 60 . degree , the sun beam descend oblique and slant wise , and so strike but once and depart , and therefore our 255 heat be cause by two mean that be by his manner of angle and by his continuance . note this reason . heat be the less for any effect that the angle of the sun beam make . yet because we have a long continuance of the sun presence above our horizon