for we see very much towards the northnortheast , west , and Southwest : and this day and this night we clear our self of the ice , run southsouthwest along the shore . upon Thursday be the 22 . of this month , about three of the clock in the morning , we hoist out our boat , and the captain with six sailor go towards the shore , think to find a land place , for the night before we do perceive the coast to be void of ice to our judgement , and the same night we be all persuaded that we have see a Canoa row along the shore , but afterward we fall in some doubt of it , but we have no great reason so to do . the captain row towards the shore , will the master to bear in with the land after he , and before he come near the shore by the space of a league , or about two mile , he find so much ice , that he can not get to land by any 384 mean . here our mariner put to their line to see if they can get any fish , because there be so many seal upon the coast , and the bird do beat upon the water , but all be in vain : the water about this place be very black and thick like to a filthy stand pool , we sound and have ground in 120 . fathom . while the captain be row to the shore , our man see wood upon the rock like to the rock of Newfoundland , but i can not discern they , yet it may be so very well : for we have wood float upon the coast every day , and the moonshine take up a tree at sea not far from the coast be sixty foot of length and fourteen handful about , have the root upon it : after this the captain come aboard , the weather be very calm and fair we bend our course towards the south , with intent to double the land . the 23 . we coast the land which do lie Eastnortheast and Westsouthwest . the 24 . the wind be very fair at east , we coast the land which do lie east and west , not be able to come near the shore by reason of the great quantity of ice . at this place , because the weather be somewhat cold by reason of the ice , and the better to encourage our man , their allowance be increase : the captain and the master , take order that every mess , be five person , shall have half a pound of bread and a can of beer every morning to breakfast . the weather be not very cold , but the air be moderate like to our april - weather in England : when the wind come from the land , or the ice , it be some what cold , but when it come off the sea it be very hot . the 25 of this month we depart from sight of this land at six of the clock in the morning , direct our course to the northwestward , hope in God mercy to find our desire passage , and so continue above four day . the 29 of July we discover land in 64 degree 15 minute of latitude , bear Northeast from we . the vn 385 2 b very black water . float wood . coldebyreason ofyce . they sail northwestward above four day . land in 64 degree 15 min . the sound where our ship do ride be call gilbert sound . musician . the people of the country come and confer with man . wind be contrary to go to the northwestwards , we bear in with this land to take some view of it , be utter void of the pester of ice and very temperate . come near the coast , we find many fair sound and good road for ship , and many great inlet into the land , whereby we judge this land to be a great number of island stand together . here have more our bark in good order , we go on shore upon a small island to seek for water and wood . upon this island we do perceive that there have be people : for we find a small shoe and piece of leather sow with sinew , and a piece of fur , and wool like to Bever . than we go upon another island on the other side of our ship : and the captain , the master , and i , be get up to the top of a high rock , the people of the country have espy we , make a lamentable noise , as we think , with great outcry and skreeching : our hear they , think it have be the howl of wolf . at last i hallow again , and they likewise cry . than we perceive where they stand , some on the shore , and one row in a Canoa about a small island fast by they , we make a great noise , partly to allure they to we , and partly to warn our company of they . whereupon m . Bruton and the master of his ship , with other of their company , make great haste towards we , and bring our musician with they from our ship , purpose either by force to rescue we , if need shall so require , or with courtesy to allure the people . when they come unto we , we cause our musician to play , our self dance , and make many sign of friendship . at length there come ten canoas from the other island , and two of they come so near the shore where we be , that they talk with we , the other be in their boat a pretty way off . their pronunciation be very hollow through the throat , and their speech such as we can not understand : only we allure they by friendly embrace and sign of courtesy . at length one of they point up to the sun with his hand , will present strike his breast so 386 .. I585 ' hard that we may hear the blow . this he do many time before he will any way trust we . then John Ellis the master of the moonshine be appoint to use his best policy to gain their friendship ; who strike his breast , and point to the sun after their order : which when he have diverse time do , they begin to trust he , and one of they come on shore , to who we throw our cap , stocking and glove , and such other thing as than we have about we , play with our music , and make sign of joy , and dance . So the night come , we bid they farewell , and go aboard our bark . the next morning be the 30 of July there come 37 thirty seven canoas row by our ship , call to we to come on canms - shoare : we not make any great haste unto they , one of they go up to the top of the rock , and leap and dance as they have do the day before , show we a seal skin , and another thing make like a timbrel , which he do beat upon with a stick , make a noise their music . like a small drum . whereupon