near as we can , to raise our degree to bring our self with the latitude of Sylley , we take the height the ten of September , and find our self in the latitude of degree and ten minute . the eleven of September about six a clock at night the wind come good Southwest , our vex sb eat and set our course southeast . and upon Thursday , the twelve of September , take the height , we be in the latitude of and a half , and reckon our self not past one hundred and fifty league short of Sylley , the weather fair , the wind large at Westsouth west , we keep our course southeast . the thirteenth day the height be take , we find our self to be in the latitude of degree , the wind Westsouthwest , then be in the height of Sylley , and we keep our course east , to run in with the sleeve or chanel so call , be our narrow sea , and reckon we short of Sylley twelve league . Sunday , the 15 of September about four of the clock , we begin to sound with our lead , and have ground at 61 fathom depth , white small sandy ground , and reckon we upon the back of Sylley , and set our course east and by north , Eastnortheast , and Northeast among . the sixteenth of September , about eight of the clock in the morning sound , we have 65 . fathom osey sand , and think our self thwart of saint George channel a little within the bank . And bear a small sail all night , we make many sounding , which be about forty fathom , and so shallow , that we can not well tell where we be . 317 the seventeenth of September we sound , and have forty fathom , and be not far off the land end , find brand sand with small worm and cockle shell , and be shoot between Sylley and the land end , and be within the bay , we be not able to double the point with a south and by east way , but be fain to make another board , the wind be at southwest and by west , and yet can not double the point to come clear of the land end , to bear along the channel : and the weather clear up when we be hard aboard the shore , and we make the land end perfect , and so put up along saint George chanel . and the weather be very foul at sea , we covet some harbour , because the arrival of our steerage be break , and so come to anchor in Padstow ? road in Cornwall . but ride there a very dangerous Cornwall ride , we be advise by the country , to put to sea again , and of the two evil , to choose the less , for there be nothing but present peril where we ride : whereupon we ply along the channel to get to Londy , from whence we be again drive , be but a open road , where our anchor come home , and with force of weather put to sea again , and about the three and twenty our cam of September , arrive at Milford haven in wale , which ^ haven ^ be a very good harbour , make we happy man , that ’ we have receive such long desire safety . about one month after our arrival ! here , by order from the lord of the counsel , the ship come up to the arrival Bristol , where the ore be commit to keep in the ^ qrhtow ^ 1 castle there . here we find the Gabriel one of the ’ bark , arrive in good safety , who have never a man within board very sufficient to bring home the ship , after the master be lose , by good fortune , when she come upon the coast , meet with a ship of Bristol at sea , who conduct she in safety thither . the Michael here we hear good tiding also of the arrival of the “ llorth ' art ^ other bark call the Michael , in the north part , which cr pars . as not a ttie joyful unto we , that it please God so to bring we to a safe meeting again , and we lose in 318 all the voyage only one man , beside one that die only one man at sea , which be sick before he come aboard , and be die the so desirous to follow this enterprise , that he rather choose to dye therein , than not to be one to attempt so notable a voyage . the three voyage of captain Frobisher , pre - tend for the discovery of Cataia , by Meta incognita , anno do . 1578 . he general be return from the second voyage , immediate after his arrival in England , repair with all haste to the court be then at Windsor , to advertise her majesty of his prosperous proceed , and good success in this last voyage , and of the plenty of gold over , with other matter of importance which he have in these septentrional ! part discover . he be courteous entertain , and hearty welcome of many noble man , but especial for his great adventure , commend of her majesty , at who hand he receive great thanks , and most gracious countenance , accord to his desert . her highness also great commend the rest of the gentleman in this service , for their great forwardness in this so dangerous a attempt : but especial she rejoice very much , that among they there be so good order of government , so good agreement , every man so ready in his call , to do whatsoever the general shall command , which due commendation gracious of her majesty remember , give so great encouragement to all the captain and gentleman , that they , to continue her highness so good and honourable opinion of they , have since neither spare labour , limb , nor life , to bring this matter ( so well begin ) to a happy and prosperous end