a while , until the north and northwest wind may disperse the ice , and make the place more free to pass . other some forget themselves , speak more undutiful in this behalf , say : that they have as leave be hang when they come home , as without hope of safety to seek to pass , and so to perish among the ice . the general not open his ear to the peevish passion of any private person , but chief respect the accomplishment of the cause he have undertake ( wherein the chief reputation and fame of a general and captain consist ) and call to his remembrance the short time he have in hand to provide so great number of ship their load , determine with this resolution to pass and recover his port , or else there to bury himself with his attempt . notwithstanding somewhat to appease the feeble passion of the fearefull sort , and the better to entertain time for a season , while the ice may the better be dissolve , he hale on the fleet with belief that he will put they into harbour : thereupon while the ship lie off " and on under hatton Hedland , he seek to go in with his pinnace among the island there , as though he mean to search for harborowe , where indeed he mean nothing less , but rather seek if any ore may be find in that place , as by the sequel appear . in the mean time while the fleet lie thus doubtful without any certain resolution what to do , be hard aboard the lee - shore , there arise a sudden and terrible tempest at the southsoutheast , whereby the ice begin marvellous to gather about we . whereupon every man , as in such case of extremity he think best , seek the wise way for his own safety . the most part of the fleet which be further shoot up within the straight , and so far to the leeward , as that they can not double the land , follow the 342 course of the general , who lead they the way , take in their sail , and lay it a hull among the ice , and so pass over the storm , and have no extremity at all , but for a short time in the same place . howbeit the other ship which ply out to seaward , have a extreme storm for a long season . and the nature of the place be such , that it be subject diverse to diverse wind , accord to the sundry situation of the great Alps and mountain there , every mountain cause a several blast , and pirrie , after the manner of a Levant . in this storm be the six and twenty of July , there fall so much snow , with such bitter cold air , that we can not scarce see one another for the same , nor open our eye to handle our rope and sail , the snow snow in July . be above half a foot deep upon the hatch of our ship , which do so wet through our poor mariner clothes , that he that have five or six shift of apparel have scarce one dry thread to his back , which kind of wet and coldness , together with the overlabour of the poor man amid the ice , breed no small sickness among the fleet , which somewhat discourage some of the poor man , who have not experience of the like before , every man persuade himself that the winter there must needs be extreme , where they find extreme win - so unseasonable a summer . ter ' and yet notwithstanding this cold air , the sun great heattn many time have a marvellous force of heat among m . etam 1 ™ % - , i , .... ° mta . those mountain , insomuch that when there be no breath of wind to bring the cold air from the disperse ice upon we , we shall be weary of the bloom heat and then sudden with a perry of wind which inconstant come down from the hollowness of the hill , we weather - shall have such a breath of heat bring upon our face as though we be enter within some bathstove or hothouse , and when the first of the pirry and blast be past , we shall have the wind sudden a new blow cold again . 343 the general recavere th his port . in this storm the anne Francis , the moon , and the Thomas of Ipswich , who find themselves able to hold it up with a sail , and can double about the cape of the queen foreland , ply out to the seaward , hold it for better policy and safety to seek sea room , than to hazard the continuance of the storm , the danger of the ice , and the leeshoare . and be uncertain at this time of the general private determination , the weather be so dark that they can not discern one another , nor perceive which way he wrought , betake themselves to this course for best and safe . the general , notwithstanding the great storm , follow his own former resolution , seek by all mean possible , by a short way to recover his port , and where he see the ice never so little open , he gate in at one gap and out at another , and so himself valiant lead the way through before to induce the fleet to follow after , and with incredible pain and peril at length get through the ice , and upon the one and thirty of July recover his long wish port after many attempt and sundry time be put back , and come to anchor in the countess of Warwick sound , in the entrance whereof , when he think all peril past , he encounter a great hand of ice which give the aid such a blow , have a little before weigh her anchor a cock bill , that it strike the anchor flouke through the ship bow under the water , which cause so great a leak , that with much ado they preserve the ship from sink . at their arrival here they perceive two ship at anchor within the harbour , whereat they begin much to marvel and great to rejoice , for those they know to be the Michael , wherein be the lieutenant general captain Fenton , and the small bark call the Gabriel ,