a generail and brief description of the country , and condition of the people , which be find in Meta incognita . ave now sufficient and true set forth the whole circumstance , and particular handle of every occurrent in the 3 . voyage of our worthy general , captain Frobisher , it shall not be from the purpose to speak somewhat in general of the nature of this country call Meta incognita , and the condition of the savage there inhabit . first therefore touch the Topographical description of the place , it be now find in the last voyage , that queen Elizabeth cape be situate in latitude at 61 . 367 a topographical description of Meta incognita . the people of Meta incognita like unto samoed . their native colour . degree and a half , which before be suppose to be part of the firm land of America , and also all the rest of the south side of frobishers strait , be all several island and break land , and likewise so will all the north side of the say strait fall out to be as i think . and some of our company be enter above 60 . league within the mistake strait in the three voyage mention , think certain that they have descry the firm land of America towards the south , which i think will fall out so to be . these break land and island be very many in number , do seem to make there a archipelagus , which as they all differ in greatness , form , and fashion one from another ; so be they in goodness , colour , arid soil much unlike . they all be very high land , mountains , and in most part cover with snow even all the summer long . the norther land have less store of snow , more grass , and be more plain country : the cause whereof may be , for that the Souther hand receive all the snow , that the cold wind and pierce air bring out of the north . and contrary , the north part receive more warm blast of mild air from the south , whereupon may grow the cause why the people covet to inhabit more upon the north part then the south , as far as we can yet by our experience perceive they do . Theise people i judge to be a kind of Tartar , or rather a kind of Samoed , of the same sort and condition of life that the samoed be to the northeastwards beyond Moscovy , who be call samoeds , which be as much to say in the Moscovy tongue as eater of themselves , and so the russian their borderer do name they . and by late conference with a friend of i ( with who i do sometime travel in the part of Moscovy ) who have great experience of those samoed and people of the north - east , i find that in all their manner of live , those people of the north - east , and these of they northwest be like . they be of the colour of a ripe olive , which how it may come to pass , be bear 368 description of Meta incognita a . d . in so cold a climate i refer to the judgement of other , for they be natural bear child of the same colour and complexion that all the american be , which dwell under the equinoctial line . they be man very active and nimble . they be a strong people and very warlike , for in our sight upon the top of the hill they will often muster themselves , and after the manner of a skirmish trace their ground very nimble , and manage their bow and dart with great dexterity . they go clad in coat make of theirapparel . the skin of beast , as of seal , deer , bear , fox , and hare . they have also some garment of feather , be make of the case of fowl , fine sow and compact together . of all which sort we bring home some with we into England , which we find in their tent . in summer they use to wear the hairy side of their coat outward , and sometime go naked for too much heat . and in winter ( as by sign they have declare ) they be four or five fold upon their body with the hair ( for warmth ) turn inward . hereby it appear , that the air there be not indifferent , but either it be fervent hot , or else extreme cold , and far more excessive in both quality , than the reason of the climate shall yield . for there it be cold , be under 62 . degree in latitude , than it be at Wardhouse in the voyage to saint Nicholas in Moscovie , be at above 72 . degree in latitude . the reason hereof perhaps acdden - may be , that this Meta incognita be much frequent taucauserjftlie and vex with eastern and northeastern wind , which metalncog - from the sea and ice bring often a intolerable cold nita . air , which be also the cause that this year our strait be so long shut up with so great store of ice . but there be great hope and likelihood , that further within the strait it will be more constant and temperate weather . these people be in nature very subtle and sharp witted , ready to conceive our meaning by sign , and to make answer well to be understand again . and if unto 369 2 a they have not see the thing whereof you ask they , they will wink , or cover their eye with their hand , as who will say , it have be hide from their sight . if they understand you not whereof you ask they , they will stop their ear . they will teach we the name of each thing in their language which we desire to learn , and be apt to learn any thing of we . they the savage delight in music above measure , and will keep time dehghtin anj stroke to any tune which you shall sing , both with ustc e ' their voice