article and order to be observe for the fleet , set down by captain Frobisher general , and deliver in write to every captain , as well for keep company , as for the course , the 31 of May . 1 tnprimis , to banish swear , dice , and card - playing , 1 . and filthy conmunication , and to serve God twice a day , with the ordinary service usual in church of 322 England , and to clear the glass , accord to the old order of England . 2 the admiral shall carry the light , and after his light be once put out , no man to go a head of he , but every man to fit his sail to follow as near as they may , without endanger one another . 3 that no man shall by day or by night depart further from the admiral then the distance of one english mile , and as near as they may , without danger one of another . 4 if it chance to grow thick , and the wind contrary , either by day or by night , that the admiral be force to cast about , before her cast about she shall give warning , by shoot off a piece , and to her shall answer the vice - admiral and the rearadmiral each of they with a piece , if it be by night , or in a fog ; and that the vice - admiral shall answer first , and the rearadmiral last . 5 that no man in the fleet descry any sail or sail , give upon any occasion any chase before he have speak with the admiral . 6 that every evening all the fleet come up and speak with the admiral , at seven of the clock , or between that and eight , and if the weather will not serve they all to speak with the admiral , than some shall come to the vice - admiral , and receive the order of their course of master hall chief pilot of the fleet , as he shall direct they . 7 if to any man in the fleet there happen any mischance , they shall present shoot off two piece by day , and if it be by night , two piece , and show two light . 8 if any man in the fleet come up in the night , and hale his fellow know he not , he shall give he this watchword , before the world be God . the other shall answer he ( if he be one of our fleet ) after God come Christ his son . so that if any be find among we , not of our own company , he that first describe any such sail or sail , shall give warning to the 323 admiral by himself or any other that he can speak to , that sail better than he , be near unto he . 9 that every ship in the fleet in the time of fog , which continual happen with little wind , and most part calm , shall keep a reasonable noise with trumpet , drum , or otherwise , to keep themselves clear one of another . io if it fall out so thick or misty that we lay it to hull , the admiral shall give warning with a piece , and put out three light one over another , to the end that every man may take in his sail , and at his set of sail again do the like , if it be not clear . 11 if any man discover land by night , that he give the like warning , that he do for mischance , two light , and two piece , if it be by day one piece , and put out his flag , and strike all his sail he have aboard . 12 if any ship shall happen to lose company by force of weather , than any such ship or ship shall get she into the latitude of , and so keep that latitude until they get Frisland . and after they be past the west part of Frisland , they shall get they into the latitude of , and , and not to the northward of ; and be once enter within the streite , all such ship shall every watch shoot off a good piece , and look out well for smoke and fire which those that get in first shall make every night , until all the fleet be come together . 13 that upon the sight of a ensign in the mast of the admiral ( a piece be shoot off ) the whole fleet shall repair e to the admiral , to understand such conference as the general be to have with they . 14 if we chance to meet with any enemy , that four ship shall attend upon the admiral , viz . the Francis of Foy , the moon , the bark Dennis , and the Gabriel : and four upon my lieutenant general in the Judith , viz . the hopewel , the armenal , the bear , and the Salomon : and the other four upon the vice - admiral , the 324 anne Francis , the Thomas of Ipswich , the Emmanuel , and the Michael . 15 if there happen any disorder person in the fleet , that he be take and keep in safe custody until he may convenient be bring aboard the admiral , and there to receive such punishment as he or their offence shall deserve . by i Martin Frobisher . our departure from England . have receive these article of direction we depart from Harwich the one and thirty of May . And sail along the south part of England westward , we at length come by the coast of Ireland at cape clear cape clear the six of June , and give chase there to a small bark which be suppose to be a pirate , or rover on the ’ sea , but it fall out indeed that they be poor man of Bristol , who have meet with such company of Frenchmen as have spoil and slay many of they , and leave the rest so sore wound that they be like to perish in the sea , have neither hand nor foot hole to help themselves with , nor victual to sustain their hungry body . our general , who well understand the office of a soldier and a Englishman , and know well what the necessity of the sea mean , pity