the first voyage of m . John Davis , undertake in June 1585 . for the discovery of they northwest passage , write by m . John Janes merchant , sometime servant to the worshipful master William Sanderson . ertaine honourable personage and worthy gentleman of the court and country , with diverse worshipful merchant of London and of the west country , move with desire to advance God glory and to seek the good of their native country , consult together of the likelihood of the discovery of they northwest passage , which heretofore have be attempt , but unhappy give over by accident unlooked for , which turn the enterpriser from their principali purpose , resolve after good deliberation , to put down their adventure to provide for necessary ship , and a fit man to be chief conductor of this so hard a enterprise . the set forth of this action be commit by the adventurer , especial to the care of m . William Sanderson merchant of London , who be so forward therein , that beside his travail which be not small , he become the great adventurer with his purse , and commend unto the rest of the company one m . John Davis , a man very well ground in the principle of the art of navigation , for captain and chief pilot of this exploit . thus therefore all thing be put in a readiness , we depart from Dartmouth the seven of June , towards the discovery of the aforesaid northwest passage , with two bark , the one be of 50 . ton , 381 name the sunshine of London , and the other be 35 . ton , name the moonshine of Dartmouth . in the sunshine we have 23 . person , who name be these follow , m . John Davis captain , William Eston master , Richard pope master mate , John Jane merchant , Henry Davie gunner , William across boatswain , John bag , Walter Arthur , luke Adam , Robert coxworthie , John Ellis , John Kelley , Edward Helman , musician . William Dick , Andrew Maddock , Thomas hill , Robert wat carpenter , William Russell , Christopher Gorney boy : James coal , Francis Ridley , John Russell , Robert Cornish musician . the moonshine have 19 person , William Bruton captain , John Ellis master , the rest mariner . the 7 . of June the captain and the master draw out a proportion for the continuance of our victual . the 8 . day the wind be at southwest and west southwest , we put in for Falmouth , where we remain until the 13 . the 13 . the wind blow at north , and be fair weather we depart . the 14 . with contrary wind we be force to put into Silley . the 15 . we depart thence , have the wind north and by east moderate and fair weather . the 16 . we be drive back again , and be constrain to arrive at new Grymsby in Silley : here the wind remain contrary 12 . day , and in that space the captain , the master and i go about all the hand , and the captain do plat out and describe the situation of all the hand , rock and harborough to the exact use of navigation , with line and scale thereunto convenient . they depart the 28 . in God name we depart the wind be from Silley . Easterly but calm . July . the first of July we see great store of porpoise ; the master call for a harp iron , and shoot twice or thrice : sometime he miss , and at last shoot one 382 and strike he in the side , and wound he into the ship ; when we have he aboard , the master say it be a darlie head . the 2 . we have some of the fish sodden , and it do eat as sweet as any mutton . the 3 . we have moor in sight , and the master go to shoot at they , but they be so great , that they burst our iron , and we lose both fish , iron , pastime and all : yet nevertheless the master shoot at they with a pike , and have wellnigh get one , but he be so strong that he burst off the bar of the pike and go away : than he take the boathook , and hit one with that , but all will not prevail , so at length we let they alone . the 6 . we see a very great whale , and every day we see whale continual . the 16 . 17 . and 18 . we see great store of whale . great store of the 19 of July we fall into a great whirl and us . brustle of a tide , set to the northward : and sail about half a league we come into a very calm sea , which bend to the southsouthwest . here we hear a mighty great roar of the sea , as if it have be the breach of some shore , the air be so foggy and full of thick mist , that we can not see the one ship from the other , be a very small distance asunder : so the captain and the master be in distrust how the tide may set they , cause the moonshine to hoist out her boat and to sound , but they can not find ground in 300 . fathom and better . then the captain , master , and i go towards the breach , to see what it shall be , give charge to our gunner that at every glass they shall shoot off a musketshot , to the intent we may keep our self from loose they . then come near to the breach , we meet many hand of ice dote , which have quick compass we about : than we go upon some of they , and do perceive that all the roar which we hear , be cause only by the roll of this ice together : our company see we not to return 383 the rout if the ice together make a great roar . accord to our appointment , leave off shoot musket , and begin to shoot falkonet , for they fear some mishap have befall we , but before night we come aboard again with our boat lade with ice , which make very good fresh water . than we bend our course towards the north , hope by that mean to double the land . the 20 . as we sail along the coast the fog break up , and we discover the land , which be the most deform rocky and mountainous land that ever we see : the first sight whereof do show as if it have be in form of a sugarloaf , stand to our sight above the cloud , for that it do show over the fog like a white list in the sky , the top altogether cover with snow , and the shore beset with ice a league off into the sea , make such irksome noise as that it seem to be the true pattern of desolation , and after the same our captain name it , the land of desolation . the 21 . the wind come northerly and overblew , so that we be constrain to bend our course south again , for we perceive that we be run into a very deep bay , where we be almost compass with ice ,