the three voyage northwestward , make by m . John Davis gentleman , as chief captain and pilot generail , for the discovery of a passage to the isle of the Moluccas , or the coast of China , in the year 1587 . write by m . John Janes . may . he 19 of this present month about midnight we weigh our anchor , set sail , and depart from Dartmouth with two bark and a clincher , the one name the Elizabeth of Dartmouth , the other the sunshine of London , and the clincher call the Helen of London : thus in god name we set forward with the wind at Northeast a good fresh gale . about 3 . hour after our departure , the night be somewhat thick with darkness , we have lose the pinnace : the captain imagine that the man have run away with she , will the master of the sunshine to stand to seaward , and see if we can descry they , we bear in with the shore for Plymouth . at length we descry she , bear with she , and demand what the cause be : they answer that the tiller of their helm be burst . So shape our course Westsouthwest , we go forward , hope that a hard beginning will make a good end , yet some of we be doubtful of it , fall in reckon that she be a clincher ; nevertheless we put our trust in God . the 21 . we meet with the red lion of London , which come from the coast of Spain , which be afraid that we have be man of war , but we hail they , and after a little conference , we desire the master to carry our letter for London direct to my uncle Sanderson , who promise we a safe delivery . and after we have heave they a lead and a line , whereunto we have make fast our 414 1587 - letter , before they can get they into the ship , they fall into the sea , and so all our labour and they also be lose ; notwithstanding they promise to certify our departure at London , and so we depart , and the same day we have sight of Silley . the 22 . the wind be at Northeast by east with fair weather , and so the 23 . and 24 . the like . the 25 . we lay our ship on the lee for the sunshine , who be a rummage for a leak , they have 500 stroke at the pump in a watch , the wind at northwest . the 26 . and 27 . we have fair weather , but this 27 . the pinnace foremast be blow overboard . the 28 . the Elizabeth tow the pinnace , which be so much brag off by the owner report before we come out of England , but at sea she be like a cart draw with ox . sometime we tow she because she can not sail for scant wind . the 31 . day our captai ne ask if the pinnace be staunch , peerson answer that she be as sound and staunch as a cup . This make we something glad , when we see she will brook the sea , and be not leak . June . the first 6 . day we have fair weather : after that for 5 . day we have fog and rain , the wind be south . the 12 . we have clear weather . the mariner in the sunshine and the master can not agree : the mariner will go on their voyage a fish , because the year begin to waste : the master will not depart till he have the company of the Elizabeth , whereupon the master tell our captain that he be afraid his man will shape some contrary course while he be asleep , and so he shall lose we . at length after much talk and many threaten , they be content to bring we to the land which we look for daily . the 14 . day we discover land at five of the clock land descry . in the morning , be very great and high mountain , the top of the hill be cover with snow . here the 415 wind be variable , sometime Northeast , Eastnortheast , and east by north : but we imagine ourselves to be 16 . or 17 . league off from the shore . the 16 . we come to a anchor about 4 . or 5 . of the clock after nun , the people come present to we after the old manner , with cry ilyaoute , and show we seal skin . the 17 . we begin to set up the pinnace that peerson frame at Dartmouth , with the board which he bring from London . the 18 . peerson and the carpenter of the ship begin to set on the plank . the 19 as we go about a island , be find black pumise stone , and salt kern on the rock , very white and glister . this day also the master of the sunshine take of the people a very strong lusty young fellow . the 20 . about two of the clock in the morning , the savage come to the island where our pinnace wk build ready to be launch , and tear the two upper strike , and carry they away only for the love of the iron in the board . while they be about this practice , we man the Elizabeth boat to go a shore to they : our man be either afraid or amaze , be so long before they come to shore , that our captain will they to stay , and make the gunner give fire to a saker , and lay the piece level with the boat which the savage have turn on the one side because we shall not hurt they with our arrow , and make the boat their bulwark against the arrow which we shoot at they . our gunner have make all thing ready , give fire to the piece , and fear to hurt any of the people , and regard the owner profit , think belike he will save a saker shoot , doubt we shall have occasion to fight with man of war , and so shoot off the saker without a bullet : our look still when the savage that be hurt shall run away without leg , at length we can perceive never a man hurt , but all have their leg can carry away their body : we have not soon shoot off the piece , but the master of the sun - 416 shine man his boat , and come row towards the island , the very sight of who make each of they take that he have get , and flee away as fast as they can to another island about two mile off , where they take the nail out of the timber , and leave the wood on the isle , when we come on shore , and see how they have spoil the boat , after much debate of the matter , we agree that the Elizabeth shall have she to fish withal : whereupon