great a argument either of want of courage or discretion in they , as he resolve rather to fall into any danger , then so shameful to consent to return home , protest that it shall never be speak of he , that he will ever return without do he endeavour to find the fleet , and know the certainty of the general safety . he put his company in remembrance of a pinnisse of five ton burden , which he have within his ship , which be carry in piece , and unmake up for the use of those which shall inhabit there the whole year , the which , if they can find mean to join together , he offer himself to prove before therewith , whether it be possible for any boat to pass for ice , whereby the ship may be bring in after , and may also thereby give true notice , if any of the fleet be arrive at their port or not . captain best resolution . a pinnisse for the inhabiter . but notwithstanding , for that he well perceive that the most part of his company be addict to put into harbour , he be will the rather for these cause somewhat to incline thereunto . at first , to search alongst the same coast , and the sound thereabouts , he think it to be to good purpose , for that it be likely to find some of the fleet there , which be leak , and sore bruise with the ice , be the rather think likely to be seven 353 z put into a ill harbour , be distress with foul weather in the last storm , than to hazard their uncertain safety among the ice : for about this place they lose they , and leave the fleet then doubtful question of harbour . it be likely , also , that they may find some fit harbour thereabouts , which may be behooveful for they against another time . it be not likewise impossible to find some ore or i thereabouts wherewithal ! to fraught their ship , which will be more commodious in this place , for the nearness to seaward , and for a better outlet , then far within the strait , be likely here always to load in a short time , howsoever the strait shall be pester with ice within , so that if it may come to pass that thereby they may either find the fleet , i , or convenient harbour , any of these three will serve their present turn , and give some hope and comfort unto their company , which now be altogether comfortless . but if that all fortune shall fall out so contrary , that they can neither recover their port , nor any of these aforesaid help , that yet they will not depart the coast , as long as it be possible for they to tarry there , but will lie off and on at sea athwart the place . therefore his final ! conclusion be set down thus , first , that the Thomas of Ipswich and the moon shall consort and keep company together careful with the anne Francis , as near as they can , and as true Englishman and faithful friend , shall supply one another want in all fortune and danger . in the morning follow , every ship to send off his boat with a sufficient pilot , to search out and sound the harborough for the safe bring in of their ship . And be arrive in harbour , where they may find convenient place for the purpose , they resolve forthwith to join and set together the pinnace , wherewithal ! the captain of the anne Francis might , accord to his former determination , discover up into the strait . 354 after these determination thus set down , the Thomas of Ipswich the night follow lose company of the other ship , and afterward shape a contrary course homeward , which fall out as it manifest appear , very much against their captain master tanfields mind , as by due examination before the lord of her majesty most honourable privy counsel it have since be prove , to the great discredit of the pilot Cox , who special persuade his company against the opinion of his say captain , to return home . and as the captain of the anne Francis do witness , even at their conference together , captain Tanfield tell he , that he do not a little suspect the say pilot Cox , say that he have opinion in the man neither of honest duty , manhood , nor constancy . notwithstanding the say ship departure , the captain of the anne Francis be desirous to put in execution his former resolution , go with his ship boat ( be accompany also with the moon skiff ) to prove among the hand which lie under hatton Hedland , if any convenient harbour , or any knowledge of the fleet , or any good ore be there to be find . the ship lie off and on at sea the while under sail , search through many sound , they see they all full of many danger and break ground : yet one there be , which seem a indifferent place to harbour in , and which they do very diligent sound over , and search again . here the say captain find a great black hand , whereunto he have good like , and certify the company thereof , they be somewhat comfort , and with the good hope of his word row cheerful unto the place : where when they arrive , they find such plenty of black ore of the same sort which be bring into England this last year , that if the goodness may answer the great plenty thereof , it be to be think that it may reasonable suffice all the gold - glutton of the world . this hand the captain for cause of his good 355 Bestes bless - hap , call after his own name , Bestes blessing , and with these good tiding return aboard his ship the nine of August about ten of the clock at night , he be joyful welcome of his company , who before be discomfort , and great expect some better fortune at his hand . the next day be the ten of August , the weather reasonable fair , they put into the foresay harbour , have their boat for their better security sound before their ship . but for all the care and diligence that can be take in sound