because it be too small as they think : whereupon we make a new proportion ; every mess be five to a mess shall have four pound of bread a day , twelve wine quart of beer , six Newland fish ; and the flesh day a gill of pease more : so we restrain they from their butter and cheese . the both we come to the most southerly cape of this land , which we name the cape of God mercy , as be the place of our first entrance for the discovery . the weather be very foggy we coast this north land ; at length when it break up , we perceive that we be shoot into a very fair entrance or passage , be in some place twenty league broad , and in some thirty , altogether void of any pester of ice , the weather very tolerable , and the water of the very colour , nature and quality of the main ocean , which give we the great hope of our passage . Having sail northwest sixty league in this entrance 39 ° we discover certain island stand in the midst thereof , have open passage on both side . whereupon our ship divide themselves , the one sail on the north side , the other on the south side of the say isle , where we stay five day , have the wind at southeast , very foggy and foul weather . the 14 we go on shore and find sign of people , for we find stone lay up together like a wall , and see the skull of a man or a woman . the 15 we hear dog howl on the shore , which we think have be wolf , and therefore we go on shore to kill they . when we come on land the dog come present to our boat very gentle , yet we think they come to pray upon we , and therefore we shoot at they , and kill two : and about the neck of one of they we find a leathern collar , whereupon we think they to be tame dog . there be twenty dog like mastiff with prick ear and long bush tail : we find a bone in the pizzle of their dog . than we go far , and find two slead make like we in England : the one be make of fir , spruce and oaken board sawen timber like inch board : the other be make all of whale bone , sawen -& there hang on the top of the slead three head of beast which they have kill . we see here lark , raven , foul . and partridge . the 17 we go on shore , and in a little thing make like a oven with stone i find many small trifle , as a small canoa make of wood , a piece of wood make like a image , a bird make of bone , bead have small hole a image . in one end of they to hang about their neck , and other small thing . the coast be very barren without wood or grass : the rock be very fair like marble , full of vein of diverse colour . we find a seal which be kill not long before , be flean , and hide under stone . our captain and master search still for proba - probability bility of the passage , and first find , two that this place fi ^ the passage . be all island , with great sound pass between they . 391 we never come into any bay before or after , but the water colour be alter very blackish . second , the water remain of one colour with the main ocean without alter . third , we see to the west of those isle three or four whale in a skull , which they judge to come from a westerly sea , because to the eastward we see not any whale . also as we be row into a very great sound lie southwest , from whence these whale come , upon the sudden there come a violent countercheck of a tide from the southwest against the flood which we come with , not know from whence it be maintain . five , in sail twenty league within the mouth of this entrance we have sound in 90 fathom , fair grey osie sand , and the further we run into the westwards the deep be the water ; so that hard aboard the shore among these isle we can not have ground in 330 fathom . last , it do ebb and flow six or seven fathom up and down , the flood come from diverse part , so as we can not perceive the chief maintenance thereof . the 18 and 19 our captain and master determine what be best to do , both for the safeguard of their credit , and satisfy of the adventurer , and resolve , if the weather break up , to make further search . the 20 the wind come direct against we : so they alter their purpose , and reason both for proceed and return . the 21 the wind be northwest , we depart from these island ; and as we coast the south shore we see many fair sound , whereby we be persuade that it be no firm land but island . the 23 of this month the wind come southeast , with very stormy and foul weather : so we be constrain to seek harbour upon the south coast of this entrance , where we fall into a very fair sound , and anchor in 25 fathom green osie sand . here we go on shore , where we have manifest sign of people where they have make their fire , and lay stone like a wall . in this place we 392 letter from John Davis to Walsingham , 3rd October , 1585 the material original position here be too large for reproduction in this downioarnmwsy / ^ lwon « sgm ^ to 1585 . see four very fair falcon ; and m . Bruton take Faukens . from one of they his prey , which we judge by the wing and leg to be a snite , for the head be eat off . the 24 in the afternoon , the wind come somewhat fair , we depart from this road , purpose by God grace to return for England . the 26 we depart from sight of the north land of their return . this entrance , direct our course homeward until the ten of the next month . the 10 . of September we fall with the land of desola - September . cion , think to go on shore , but we can get never IO3 ' J a good harbour . that night we put to sea again think to search it the next day : but this night arise a very great storm , and separate our ship , so that we lose the sight of the moonshine . the 13 . about noon ( have try all the night before with a goose wing ) we set sail , and within two hour after we have sight of the moonshine again : this day England in we depart from this land . 14 . day . the 27 . of this month we fall with sight of England . this night we have a marvelous storm and lose the moonshine . the 30 . of September we come into Dartmouth , where we find the moonshine be come in not two hour before .