a true discourse of the three voyage of discovery , for the find of a passage to Cathaya , by the northwest , under the conduct of Martin Frobisher general : before which , as a necessary preface be prefix a twofold e discourse , containing certain reason to prove all part of the world habitable . pen by master George best , a gentleman employ in the same voyage . what commodity and instruction may be reap by diligent read this discourse . i tturst , by example may be gather , how a dis - j ? coverer of new country be to proceed in his first attempt of any discovery . 2 item , how he shall be provide of ship , victual , munition , and choice of man . 3 how to proceed and deal with strange people , be they never so barbarous , cruel and fierce , either by lenity or otherwise . 4 how trade of merchandise may be make without money . 5 how a pilot may deal , bq environ with mountains of ice in the freeze sea 25 ° 6 how length of day , change of season , summer and winter do differ in ' sundry region . 7 how dangerous it be to attempt new discovery , either for the length of the voyage , or the ignorance of the language , the want of interpreter , new and unaccustomed element and air , strange and unsavoury meat , danger of thief and robber , fierceness of wild beast and fish , hugeness of wood , dangerousness of sea , dread of tempest , fear of hide rock , steepness of mountain , darkness of sudden fall fog , continual pain take without any rest , and infinite other . 8 how pleasant and profitable it be to attempt new discovery , either for the sundry sight and shape of strange beast and fish , the wonderful work of nature , the different manner and fashion of diverse nation , the sundry sort of government , the sight of strange tree , fruit , fowl , and beast , the infinite treasure of pearl , gold and silver , the news of new find land , the sundry position of the sphere , and many other . 9 how valiant captain use to deal upon extremity , and otherwise . 10 how trusty soldier dutiful use to serve . 11 also here may be see a good example to be observe of any private person , in take note , and make observation of all such thing as be requisite for a discoverer of new country . 12 last , the reader here may see a good pattern of [ in . 4 . 8 . i a well govern service , sundry instruction of matter of cosmography , Geographic , and navigation , as in read more at large may be see . [ experience 251 experience and reason of the sphere , to prove all part of the world habitable , and thereby to confute the position of the five zone . experience to prove thattor - rida zona be habitable . irst , it may be gather by experience of our Englishman in anno 1553 . for captain Windam make a voyage with merchandise to Guinea , and enter so far within the torrida zona , that he be within three or four degree of the equinoctial , and his company abide there certain month , return , with gain . also the Englishman make another voyage very prosperous and gainful , An . 1554 . to the coast of Guinea , within 3 . degree of the equinoctial . and yet it be report of a truth , that all the tract from cape de las Palmas trending by C . de tres puntas alongst by Benin , unto the he of saint Thomas ( which be perpendicular under the equinoctial ) all that whole bay be more subject to many bloom and smother heat , with infectious and contagious air , than any other place in all torrida zona : and the cause thereof be some accident in the land . for it be most certain , that mountain , sea , wood and lake etc may cause through their sundry kind of situation , sundry strange and extraordinary effect , which the reason of the climb otherwise will not give . i mention these voyage of our Englishman , not so much to prove that torrida zona may be , and be inhabit , as to show their readiness in attempt long and dangerous navigation . we also among we in England have black moor , . / ethiopian , out of all part of torrida zona , which after a small continuance , can well endure the cold of our country , and why shall not we as well abide the heat of their country ? but what shall i name any more experience , see that all the coast of Guinea and Benin be inhabit of Portugal , span - 252 yard , french , and some Englishman , who there have build castle and town . only this i will say to the merchant of London , that trade yearly to Marochus , it be very certain , that the great part of the burn zone be far more temperate and cool in June , than the country of Marochus , as shall appear by these reason and experience follow . for let we first consider the breadth and bigness of this burn zone ( which as every man know , be 47 . degree ) each Tropic , which be the bounder thereof , be 23 . degree and a half distant from the equinoctial . imagine again two other parallel , on each side the equinoctial one , either of they distant from the equinoctial about 20 . degree , which parallel may be describe either of they twice a year by the sun , be in the first degree of gemini the 11 . of may , and in Leo the 13 . of July , have north latitude . and again , the sun be in the first degree of sagittarius , the 12 . of November , and in Aquarius the 9 of January , have south latitude , i be to prove by experience and reason , that all that distance include between these two parallel last name (