than they have under the equinoctial ; by this continuance the heat be increase , for it shine to we 16 . or 18 . hour sometime , when it continue with they but twelve hour always . and again , our night be very short wherein cold vapour use to abound , be but six or eight hour long , whereas they be always twelve hour long , by which two advantage of long day and short night , though we want the equality of angle , it come to - passe that in summer our heat here be as great as they be there , as have be prove by experience , and be nothing dissonant from good reason . therefore whosoever will right weigh the force of cold and heat in any region , must not only consider the angle that the sun beam make , but also the continuance of the same above the horizon . as first to they under the equinoctial the sun be twice a year at noon in their zenith perpendicular over their head , and therefore during the two hour of those two day the heat be very urgent , and so perhaps it will be in four or five day more an hour every day , until the sun in his proper motion have cross the equinoctial ; so that this extreme heat cause by the perpendicular angle of the sun beam , endure but two hour of two day in a year . but if any man say the sun may scalde a good while before and after it come to the meridian , so far forth as reason lead , i be content to allow it , and therefore i will measure and proportion the sun heat , by compare the Angles there , with the Angles make here in England , because this temperature be best know unto we . as for example , the two . day of march , when under the equinoctial it be half hour past eight of the clock in the morning , the sun will be in the east about 38 . degree above the horizon , because there it rise always at six 256 of the clock , and move every hour 15 . degree , and so high very near will it be with we at London the say eleven day of march at noon . and therefore look what force the sun have with we at noon , the eleven of march , the same force it seem to have under the equinoctial at half a hour past eight in the morning , or rather less force under the equinoctial . for with we the sun have be already six hour above the horizon , and so have purify and cleanse all the vapour , and thereby his force increase at noon ; but under the equinoctial , the sun have be up but two hour and a half , have sufficient to do , to purge and consume the cold and moist vapour of the long night past , and as yet have wrought no effect of heat . and therefore i may bold pronounce , that there be much less heat at half a hour past eight under the equinoctial , then be with we at noon : i fortiori . but in march we be not only content to have the sun shine , but we great desire the same . likewise the 11 of June , the sun in our meridian be 62 degree high at London : and under the equinoctial it be so high after 10 of the clock , and see then it be beneficial with we ; a fortiori it be beneficial to they after 10 of the clock . and thus have we measure the force of the sun great heat , the hot day in the year , under the equinoctial , that be in march and September , from six till after ten of the clock in the morning , and from two until sun set . and this be conclude , by respect only the first . cause of heat , which be the consideration of the angle of the sun beam , by a certain similitude , that whereas the sun shine never above twelve hour , more than eight of they will be cool and pleasant even to we , much more to they that be acquaint always with such warm place . so there remain less than four hour of any excessive heat , and that only in the two summer day of the year , that be the eleven day of march , and the foure - vii 257 r teenth of September : for under the equinoctial they have two summer , the one in march , and the other in September , which be our spring and autumn : and likewise two winter , in June and December , which be our summer and winter , as may well appear to he that have only taste the principle of the sphere . but if the sun be in either Tropic , or approach near thereunto , then may we more easy measure the force of his meridian altitude , that it strike upon the equinoctial . as for example , the twelve of June the sun will be in the first degree of Cancer . then look what force the heat of the sun have under the equinoctial , the same force and great it have in all that parallel , where the pole be elevate between fourty and seven , Paris in . and fourty and eight degree . and therefore Paris in France ss as prance the twelve day of June sustain more heat of the Equinoc - the sun , than saint Thomas hand lie near the tiall in June , same meridian do likewise at noon , or the hand Taprobana , Moluccae , or the firm land of Peru in America , which all lie underneath the equinoctial . for upon the twelve day of June aforesaid , the sun beam at noon do make a isoscheles triangle , who vertex be the centre of the sun , the basis a line extend from saint Thomas hand under the equinoctial , unto Paris in France near the same meridian : therefore the two angle of the base must needs be equal per 5 . primi , ergo the force of the heat