counterfeit we have draw , with boat and other furni - picture . ture , both as he be in his own , and also in english apparel ) he be upon the sudden much amaze thereat , and behold advise the same with silence a good while , as though he will strain courtesy whether shall begin the speech ( for he think he no doubt a lively creature ) at length begin to question with he , as with his companion , and find he dumb and mute , seem to suspect he , as one disdeinfull , and will with a little help have grow into choler at the matter , until at last by feel and handle , he find he but a deceive picture . and then with great noise and cry , cease not wonder , think that we can make man live or die at our pleasure . and thereupon call the matter to his remembrance , 301 another show of twenty person of that country in one boat . he give we plain to understand by sign , that he have knowledge of the take of our five man the last year , and confess the manner of each thing , numbered the five man upon his five finger , and point unto a boat in our ship , which be like unto that wherein our man be betray : and when we make he sign , that they be slay and eat , he earnest deny , and make sign to the contrary . the last of July the Michael return with the aid to we from the Southerland , and come to anchor by we in the countess of Warwick sound , and report that since we depart from jackmans sound there happen nothing among they there great worth the remembrance , until the thirty of July , when certain of our company be a shore upon a small island within the say jackmans sound , near the place where the aid ride , do espy a long boat with diverse of the country people therein , to the number of eighteen or twenty person , who so soon as our man perceive , they return speedy aboard , to give notice thereof unto our company . they may perceive these people climb up to the top of a hill , where with a flag , they waft unto our ship , and make great outcry and noise , like so many Buis . hereupon our man do present man forth a small skiff , have not above six or seven person therein , which row near the place where those people be , to prove if they can have any conference with they . but after this small boat be send a great , be well appoint for their rescue , if need require . as soon as they espy our company come near they , they take their boat and haste away , either for fear , or else for policy , to draw our man from rescue further within their danger : wherefore our man construe that their come thither be but to seek advantage , follow speedy after they , but they row so swift away , that our man can come nothing near they . howbeit they fail not of their best endeavour in 302 row , and have chase they above two mile into the sea , return into their ship again . the morning follow be the first of August , captain York with the Michael come into jackmans sound , and declare unto the company there , that the last night pass he come to anchor in a certain bay ( which since be name York sound ) about four league distant from jackmans sound , be put to leeward of that place for lack of wind , where he discover certain tent of the country people , where go with his company ashore , he enter into they , but find the people depart , as it shall seem , for fear of their come . but among sundry strange thing which in these tent they find , there be raw and new kill flesh of unknown sort , with dead carcase and bone York sound . the apparel of dog , and i know not what . they also behold ( to their great marveile ) a doublet of canvas make after f0 ™ * 1 a ^ n ^ . , the english fashion , a shirt , a girdle , three shoe for jman which the contrary foot , and of unequal bigness , which they well year before conjecture to be the apparel of our five poor country - be take man , which be intercept the last year by these captwe - countrey people , about fifty league from this place , further within the strait . whereupon our man be in good hope , that some of they may be here , and yet live : the captain devise for the best leave his mind behind he in write , with pen , ink , and paper also , whereby our poor captive countryman , if it may come to their hand , may know their friend mind , and of their arrival , and likewise return their answer . and so without take any thing away in their tent , leave there also look glass , point , and other of our toy ( the better to allure they by such friendly mean ) depart aboard his bark , with intent to make haste to the aid , to give notice unto the company of all such thing as he have there discover : and so mean to return to these tent again , hope that he may by force or policy entrap or entice the people to some friendly conference . which thing when he have deliver a good devise of captain York . 3 ° 3 to the whole company there , they determine forthwith to go in hand with the matter . hereupon captain York with the master of the aid and his mate ( who the night before have be at the tent , and come over from the other side in the Michael with he ) be accompany with the gentleman and soldier to the number of thirty or forty person in two small row pinnace make towards the place , where the night before