incognita , which be subject most to Meta incogeast and northeastern wind , which the last year choke habit . up the passage so with ice that the fleet can hardly recover their port . yet notwithstanding all the objection that may be , the country be habitable ; for there be man , woman , child , and sundry kind of beast in great plenty , as bear , dear , hare , fox and dog : all kind of fly fowl , as duck , seamewe , wilmot , partridge , lark , crow , hawk , and such like , as in the three book you shall understand more at large . than it appear that not only the middle zone but also the zone about the pole be habitable . which thing be well consider , and familiar captain know to our general captain Frobisher , aswell for f ^ uhers that he be thorough furnish of the knowledge of the 5 sphere and all other skill appertain to the art of navigation , as also for the confirmation he have of the same by many year experience both by sea and land , and be persuade of a new and near passage to Cataya then by Capo de buona speranda , which the Portugal yearly use : he begin first with himself to devise , and then with his friend to confer , and lay a plain plat unto they that that voyage be not only possible by the northwest , but also he can prove easy to be perform . and further , he determine and resolve with himself to go make full proof thereof , and to accomplish or bring true certificate of the truth , or else never to return again , know this to be the only thing of 277 the world that be leave yet undo , whereby a notable mind may be make famous and fortunate . but although his will be great to perform this notable voyage , whereof he have conceive in his mind a great hope by sundry sure reason and secret intelligence , which here for sundry cause i leave untouched , yet he want altogether mean and ability to set forward , and perform the same . long time he confer with his private friend of these secret , and make also many offer for the perform of the same in effect unto sundry merchant of our country above 15 year before he attempt the same , as by good witness shall well appear ( albeit some evil willer which challenge to themselves the fruit of other man labour have great injure he in the report of the same , say that they have be the first author of that action , and that they have learn he the way , which themselves as yet have never go ) but perceive that hardly he be hearken unto of the merchant , which never regard virtue without sure , certain , and present gain , he repair to the court ( from whence , as from the fountain of our common wealth , all good cause have their chief increase and maintenance ) and there lay open to many great estate and learned man the plot and sum of his device . and among many honourable mind which favour his honest and commendable enterprise , he be special bind and behold to the right honourable Ambrose Dudley earl of Warwick , who favourable mind and good disposition have always be ready to countenance and advance all honest action with the author and executer of the same : and so by mean of my lord his honourable countenance he receive some comfort of his cause , and by little and little , with no small expense and pain bring his cause to some perfection , and have draw together so many adventurer and such sum of money as may well defray a reasonable charge to furnish himself to sea withal . he prepare two small bark of twenty and five and 278 1578 . twenty ton a piece , wherein he intend to accomplish his pretend voyage . wherefore , be furnish with the foresay two bark , and one small pinnace of ten tun burden , have therein victual and other necessary for twelve month provision , he depart upon the say voyage from black - wall the 15 or June anno domini 1576 . one of the bark wherein he go be name the Gabriel , and the other the Michael ; and sail northwest from England upon the 11 of July he have sight of a high and ragged land , which he judge to be Frisland ( whereof some author have make mention ) but dare not approach the same by reason of the great store of ice that lie alongst the coast , and the great mist that trouble they not a little . not far from thence he lose company of his small pinnace , which by mean of the great storm he suppose to be swallow up of the sea , wherein he lose only four man . also the other bark name the Michael mistrust 7 ^ Michael the matter , convey themselves privy away from he , return and return home , with great report that he be cast me - away . the worthy captain notwithstanding these discomfort , although his mast be spring , and his top mast blow overboard with extreme foul weather , continue his course towards the northwest , know that the sea at length must needs have a end , and that some land shall have a beginning that way ; and determine therefore at the least to bring true proof what land and sea the same may be so far to the northwestwards , beyond any man that have heretofore discover . and the twenty of July he have sight of a high land , which he call queen Elizabeth foreland , after her majesty name . And sail more northerly alongst that coast , he descry another foreland with a great gut , bay , or passage , divide as it be two main land or continent asunder . there he meet with store of exceed great ice all this coast along , and covet still to continue his 279 " frobishers first entrance within you strait . frobishers straight . course to the northward , be always by contrary wind detain overthwart these straight ,