, head , hand and foot , and will sing the same tune apt after you . they will row with our oar in our boat , and keep a true stroke with our mariner , and seem to take great delight therein . hard kind of they live in cave of the earth , and hunt for their live . dinner or prey , even as the bear or other wild beast do . they eat raw flesh and fish , and refuse no meat howsoever it be stink . they be desperate in their fight , sullen of nature , and ravenous in their manner of feed . their sullen and desperate nature do herein manifest appear , that a company of they be environ by our man on the top of a high cliff , so that they can by no mean escape our hand , find themselves in this case distress , choose rather to cast themselves headlong down the rock into the sea , and so be bruise and drown , rather than to yield themselves to our man mercy . their wea - for their weapon to offend their enemy or kill it " ™ - their prey withal , they have dart , sling , bow , and arrow head with sharp stone , bone , and some with iron . they be exceed friendly and kind heart one to the other , and mourn great at the loss or harm of their fellow , and express their grief of mind , when they part one from another with a their chastity , mournful song , and dirge . they be very shamefast in betray the secret of nature , and very chaste in the manner of their live : for when the man , which we bring from thence into England the last voyage , 370 description of Meta incognita a . d . ... T578 - shall put off his coat or discover his whole body for change , he will not suffer the woman to be present , but put she forth of his cabin . and in all the space of two or three month , while the man live in company of the woman , there be never any thing see or perceive between they , more than may have pass between brother and sister : but the woman be in all thing very serviceable for the man , attend he careful when he be sick , and he likewise in all the meat which they do eat together , will carve unto she of the sweet , fat , and best morsel they have . they wonder much at all our thing , and be afraid of our horse and other beast out of measure . they begin to grow more civil , familiar , pleasant , and docible among we in very short time . they have boat make of leather , and cover clean their boat . over save one place in the middle to sit in , plank within with timber , and they use to row therein with one ore , more swift a great deal , than we in our boat can do with twenty . they have one sort of great boat wherein they can carry above twenty person , and have a mast with a sail thereon , which sail be make of thin skin or bladder , sow together with the sinew of fish . they be good fisherman , and in their small boat be disguise with their coat of seal skin , they deceive the fish , who take they rather for their fellow seal , then for deceive man . they be good marksman . with their dart or arrow they will common kill a duck , or any other foul in the head , and common in the eye . when they shoot at a great fish with any of their dart , they use to tie a bladder thereunto , whereby they may the better find they again , and the fish not able to carry it so easy away ( for that the bladder do boy the dart ) will at length be weary , and dye therewith . they use to traffic and exchange their commodity Sna ^ with some other people , of who they have such thing know . 371 how they make fire . their kettle and pan . the people eat grass and shrub . as their miserable country , and ignorance of art to make , deny they to have , as bar of iron , head of iron for their dart , needle make four square , certain button of copper , which they use to wear upon their forehad for ornament , as our lady in the court of England do use great pearl . also they have make sign unto we , that they have see gold , and such bright plate of metal , which be use for ornament among some people with who they have conference . we find also in their tent a guiny bean of red colour , the which do usual grow in they hight country : whereby it appear they trade with other nation which dwell far off , or else themselves be great traveller . they have nothing in use among they to make fire withal , save a kind of heath and moss which grow there . and they kindle their fire with continual rub and fret one stick against another , as we do with flint . they draw with dog in slead upon the ice , and remove their tent therewithal ! wherein they dwell in summer , when they go a hunt for their prey and provision against winter . they do sometime parboil their meat a little and see the same in kettle make of beast skin : they have also pan cut and make of stone very artificial ; they use pretty begin wherewith they take foul . the woman carry their suck child at their back , and do feed they with raw flesh , which first they do a little chaw in their own mouth . the woman have their face mark or paint over with small blow spot : they have black and long hair on their head , and trim the same in a decent order . the man have but little hair on their face ,