, as by good experience we have find . 3 for here also we meet with board , lathe , and diverse other thing drive in the sea , which be of the wrack of the ship call the bark Dennis , which a current to the west . perish among the ice as beforesaid , be lose at the first attempt of the entrance overthwart the queen foreland in the mouth of frobishers straight , which can by no mean have be so bring thither , neither by wind nor tide , be lose so many league off , if by force of the say current the same have not be violent bring . for if the same have be bring thither by tide of flood , look how far the say flood have carry it , the ebb will have recarry it as far back again , and by the wind it can not so come to 336 the material original position here be too large for reproduction in this reissue . a pdf can be download from the web address give on page iv of this book , by click on it resource available it . .. 15781 pass , because it be then sometime calm , and most time contrary . and some mariner do affirm that they have diligent observe , that there run in this place nine nine hour hour flood to three ebb , which may thus come to t0 pass by force of the say current : for whereas the sea in most place of the world , do moor or less ordinary ebb and flow once every twelve hour with six hour ebb , and six hour flood , so also will it do there , be it not for the violence of this hasten current , which force the flood to make appearance to begin before his ordinary time one hour and a half , and also to continue long than his natural course by a other hour and a half , until the force of the ebb be so great that it will no long be resist : accord to the say , naturam expellas furca licet , usque recurrit . although nature and natural course be force and resist never so much , yet at last they will have their own sway again . moreover it be not possible that so great course of flood and current , so high swell tide with continuance of so deep water , can be digest here without unburden themselves into some open sea beyond this place , which argue the more likelihood of the passage to be hereabout . also we suppose these great indraft do grow and be make by the reverberation and reflection of that same current , which at our come by Ireland , meet and cross we , of which in the first part of this discourse i speak , which come from the bay of Mexico , pass by and wash the southwest part of Ireland , rebound over to the north - east part of the world , as Norway , island , etc where not find any passage to a open sea , but rather be there increase by a new access , and another current meet with it from the scythian sea , pass the bay of saint Nicholas westward , it do once again rebound back , by the coast of Greenland , and from thence upon frobishers straight be to the southwestwardes of the same . seven 337 y the sea move from east to west continual . authority . hard but yet possible turn back again . tsaffique . 5 and if that principle of philosophy be true , that inferiora corpora reguntur a superioribus , that be , if inferior body be govern , rule , and carry after the manner and course of the superior , than the water be a inferior element , must needs be govern after the superior heaven , and so follow the course of primum mobile from east to west . 6 but every man that have write or consider any thing of this passage , have more doubt the return by the same way by reason of a great downfall of water , which they imagine to be thereabouts ( which we also by experience partly find ) than any mistrust they have of the same passage at all . for we find ( as it be ) a great downfall in this place , but yet not such but that we may return , although with much ado . for we be easily carry in one hour than we can get forth again in three . also by another experience at another time , we find this current to deceive we in this sort : that whereas we suppose it to be 15 league off , and lie a hull , we be bring within two league of the shore contrary to all expectation . our man that sail further in the same mistake straight ( have the main land upon their starboard side ) affirm that they meet with the outlet or passage of water which come through frobishers straight , and follow as all one into this passage . some of our company also affirm that they have sight of a continent upon their larboard - side be 60 league within the suppose straight : howbeit except certain hand in the entrance hereof we can make no part perfect thereof . all the foresay tract of land seem to be more fruitful and better store of grass , deer , wild foul , as partridge , lark , seamewe , gull , wilmot , falcon and tassel gen till , raven , bear , hare , fox , and other thing , than any other part we have yet discover , and be more populous . and here luke ward , a gentleman of the company , trade merchandise , and do exchange knife , bell , look glass , etc with 338 those country people , who bring he foul , fish , bear skin , and such like , as their country yield for the same . here also they see of those great boat of the country , with twenty person in a piece . now after the general have bestow these many day here , not without many danger , he return back again . and by the way sail alongst this coast ( be the backside of the suppose continent of America ) and the queen foreland , he perceive a great sound to go through into frobishers straight . whereupon he send the Gabriel the one and twenty of July