much the misery charitable of the poor man , relieve they with surgery and salve to heal their hurt , and with meat and drink to comfort their pine heart ; some of they have neither eat nor drink more than olive and stink water in many day before , as they report . and after this good deed do , have a large wind , we keep our course upon our say voyage without stay for the take in of fresh water , or any other provision , whereof many of the fleet be not thorough furnish : and sail towards the northwest part from Ireland , we meet with a great current from out of the southwest , mark this which carry we ( by our reckon ) one point to the currentnortheastwards of our say course , which current seem 325 to we to continue it self towards Norway , and other the north - east part of the world , whereby we may be induce to believe , that this be the same which the Portugal meet at Capo de buona Speranza , where strike over from thence to the stfeite of Magellan , and find no passage there for the narrowness of the say streite , run along into the great bay of Mexico , where also have a let of land , it be force to strike back again towards the north - east , as we not only here , but in another place also , further to the northward , by good experience this year have find , as shall hereafter in his place more at large declare . now have we sail about fourteen day , without sight of any land , or any other live thing , except certain fowl , as wilmot , nody , guile , etc which there seem only to live by sea . the twenty of June , at two of the clock in the morning , the general descry land , and find it to be west Frisland , now name west England . here the general , and other gentleman go ashore , be the first know Christians that we have true notice of , that ever set foot upon that ground : and therefore the general take possession thereof to the use of our sovereign lady the queen majesty , and discover here a goodly harbour for the ship , where be also certain little boat of that country . And be there land , they espy certain tent and people of that country , which be ( as they judge ) in all sort , very like those of Meta incognita , as by their apparel , and other thing which we find in their tent , appear . the savage and simple people so soon as they perceive our man come towards they ( suppose there have be no other world but they ) flee fearful away , as man much amaze at so strange a sight , and creature of humane shape , so far in apparel , complexion , and other thing different from themselves . they leave in their tent all their furniture for haste behind they , where among other thing be find a box of small 326 i578 - naile , and certain e red herring , board of fir tree well cut , with diverse other thing artificial wrought : whereby it appear , that they have trade with some civil people , or else be indeed themselves artificiali workman . our man bring away with they only two of their dog , leave in recompense belles , looking - glass , and diverse of our country toy behind they . this country , no doubt , promise good hope of great commodity and riches , if it may be well discover . the description whereof you shall find more at large in the second voyage . some be of opinion , that this west England be firm Frlsland supland with the north - east part of Meta incognita , or else with Greenland . and their reason be , because the people , Qroenian ^ apparel , boat , and other thing be so like to they : and another reason be , the multitude of island of ice , which lie between it and Meta incognita , do argue , that on the north side there be a bay , which can be but by conjoin of the two land together . and have a fair and large wind we depart from thence towards frobishers streite , the three and twenty 2 3 ° f of June . but first we give name to a high cliff in June ' West England , the last that be in our sight , and for a certain similitude we call it Charing cross . then Charing we bear southerly towards the sea , because to the cnue ' northwards of this coast we meet with much drive ice , which by reason of the thick mist and weather may have be some trouble unto we . on Monday the last of June , we meet with many great whale , as they have be porpoise . this same day the salamander be under both her whale corpse and bonnet , happen to strike a great whale with stn , > ke a shilling ! 1 ^- her full stem , with such a blow that the ship stand still , and stir neither forward nor backward . the whale thereat make a great and ugly noise , and cast up his body and tail , and so go under water , and within two day after , there be find a great whale dead 327 swim above water , which we suppose be that which the salamander strike . the second day of July early in the morning we have sight of the queen foreland , and bear in with the land all the day , and pass through great quantity of ice , by night be enter somewhat within the streite , perceive no way to pass further in , the whole place be freeze over from the one side to the other , and as it frobisher be with many wall , mountain , and bulwark of ice , streite mud choke up the passage , and deny we entrance . and up w ice . joe j not nthat passage or sea hereabout be freeze over at any time of the year : albeit it seem so unto we by the abundance of ice gather together , which occupy the whole place . but i do rather suppose these ice to be breed in the hollow sound and