his come , where he find his 361 none of the people will be take . m . wolfall a godly preacher . ship ready rig and load . wherefore he depart from thence again the next morning towards the countess sound , where he arrive the 28 . of the same . by the way he set his miner ashore at bear sound , for the better dispatch and gather the ore together : for that some of the ship be behind hand with their fraught , the time of the year pass sudden away . the thirtith of August the anne Francis be bring aground , and have 8 . great leak mend which she have receive by mean of the rock and ice . this day the mason finish a house which captain Fenton cause to be make of lime and stone upon the countess of Warwick island , to the end we may prove against the next year , whither the snow can overwhelm it , the frost break it up , or the people dismember the same . and the better to allure those brutish and uncivil people to courtesy against other time of our come , we leave therein diverse of our country toy , as bell , and knife , wherein they special delight , one for the necessary use , and the other for the great pleasure thereof . also picture of man and woman in lead , man on horseback , look glass , whistle , and pipe . also in the house be make a oven , and bread leave bake therein for they to see and taste . we bury the timber of our pretend fort . also here we sow pease , corn , and other grain , to prove the fruitfulness of the soil against the next year . master wolfall on winter furnace preach a godly sermon , which be end , he celebrate also a communion upon the land , at the partake whereof be the captain of the anne Francis , and many other gentleman and soldier , mariner , and miner with he . the celebration of - the divine mystery be the first sign , seal , and confirmation of Christ name , death , and passion ever know in these quarter . the say m . Wolfall make sermon , and celebrate the communion at sundry other time , in several and sundry ship , because the whole company can never meet together at any one 362 place . the fleet now be in some good readiness for their lade , the general call together the gentleman and captain to consult , tell they that he be very desirous that some further discovery shall be attempt , and that he will not only by God help bring home his ship lade with ore , but also mean to bring some certificate of a further discovery of the country , which thing to bring to pass ( have sometime therein consult ) they find very hard , and almost invincible . and consider that already they have spend sometime in consultation search out the trending and fashion of the mistake afurtly strait , therefore it can not be say , but that by this voyage they have notice of a further discovery , and that the hope of the passage thereby be much further and increase , as appear before in the discourse thereof . yet notwithstanding if any mean may be further devise , the captain be content and willing , as the general shall appoint and command , to take any enterprise in hand . which after long debate be find a thing very impossible , and that rather consultation be to be have of return homeward , especial for these cause follow . First the dark foggy mist , the continual fall snow and stormy weather which they common be vex with , and now daily ever moor and more increase , have no small argument of the winter draw near . and also the frost every night be so hard congeal within the sound , that if by evil hap they shall be long keep in with contrary wind , it be great to be fear , that they shall be shut up there fast the whole year , which be utter unprovide , will be their utter destruction . again , drink be so scant throughout all the fleet by mean of the great leakage , that not only the provision which be lay in for the habitation be want and waste , but also each ship several provision spend and lose , which many of our company to their great grief find in their return since , for all the way homeward they drink nothing but water . and the great cause of this leakage 3 ^ 3 and waste be , for that the great timber and seacole , which lie so weighty upon the barrel , break , bruise , and rot the hoop insunder . yet notwithstanding these reason allege the general himself ( will the rest of the gentleman and captain every man to look to his several charge and lade , that against a day appoint , they shall be all in a readiness to set homeward ) go in a pinnace and discover further northward in the straight , and find that by bear sound and hall island , the land be not firm , as it be break Hands first suppose , but all break island in manner of a mma ” er ° fan Archipelagus , and so with other secret intelligence to rc tpe agus . returnec [ to the fleet . where present upon his arrival at the countess sound , he begin to take order for their return homeward , and first cause certain article to be proclaim , for the better keep of order and course in their return , which article be deliver to every captain . the fleet return homeward . have now receive article and direction for our return homeward , all other thing be in forwardness and in good order , the last day of August the whole fleet depart from the countess sound , except the Judith , and the anne Francis , who stay for the take in of fresh water , and come the next day and meet the fleet lie off and on , athwart bear sound , who stay for the general , which then be go return home - ashore to dispatch the two bark and the buss of ward - Bridgewater , for their load , whereby to get the company and other thing aboard . the captain of the