off the force , and break the sway of the ice with such incredible pain and peril , that it be wonderful to behold , which otherwise no doubt have strike quite through and through the side of their ship , notwithstanding our former provision : for plank of timber of more than three inch thick , and other thing of great force and bigness , by the surge of the sea and billow , with the ice be shiver and cut in sunder , at the side of our ship , so that it will seem more than credible to be report of . and yet ( that which be more ) it be faithful and plain to , be prove , and that by many substantiali witness , that our ship , even those of great burden , with the meeting of contrary wave of the sea , be heave up between island of ice , a foot wellnear out of the sea above their watermark , have their knee and timber within board [ he . 79 . i both bow and break therewith . and amid these extreme , while some labour for defence of the ship , and seek to save their body , other some of more mild spirit seek to save the soul by devout prayer and meditation to the almighty , think indeed by no other mean possible then by a divine miracle to have their deliverance : so that there be none that be either idle , or not well occupy , and he that hold himself in best security have ( god know ) but only bare hope remain for his best safety . thus all the gallant fleet and miserable man without hope of ever get forth again , distress with these extremity remain here all the whole night and part of the next day , except four ship , that be , the anne Francis , the moon , the Francis of Foy , and the Gabrieli , which be somewhat a seaboord of the fleet , and 331 be fist ship by a wind , have a moor scope of clear , try it out all the time of the storm under sail , be hardly able to bear a coast of each . and albeit , by reason of the fleet ice , which be disperse here almost the whole sea over , they be bring many time to the extreme point of peril , mountain of ice ten thousand time escape they scarce one inch , which to have strike have be their present destruction , consider the swift course and way of the ship , and the unwieldiness of they to stay and turn as a man will wish : yet they esteem it their better safety , with such peril to seek sea - room , than without hope of ever get liberty to lie strive against the stream , and beat among the icy mountain , who hugeness and monstrous greatness be such , that no man will credit , but such as to their pain see and feel it . and these four ship by the next day at noon get out to sea , and be first clear of the ice , who now enjoy their own liberty , begin a new to sorrow and fear for their fellow safety . and devout kneel about their main mast , they give unto God humble thanks , not only for themselves , but beseech he likewise high for their friend deliverance . and even now white amid these extremity this gallant fleet and valiant man be altogether overlabour and forewatch , with the long and fearful continuance of the foresay danger , it please God with his eye of mercy to look down from heaven to send they help in good time , give they the next day a more favourable wind at the west northwest , which do not only disperse and drive forth the ice before they , but also give they liberty of more scope and sea - room , and they be by night of the same day follow perceive of the other four ship , where ( to their great comfort ) they enjoy again the fellowship one of another . some in mend the side of their ship , some in set up their top mast , and mend their sail and tackle ; again , 332 some complain of their false stem bear away , some in stop their leak , some in recount their danger past , spend no small time and labour . so that i dare well avouch , there be never man more dangerous distress , nor more merciful by God providence deliver . and hereof both the tear ship , and the forweary body of the man arrive do bear most evident mark and witness . and now the whole fleet ply off to seaward , resolve there to abide until the sun may consume , or the force of wind disperse these ice from the place of their passage : and be a good birth off the shore , they take in their sail , and lie adrift . the seven of July as man nothing yet dismay , we another as - cast about towards the inward , and have sight of land , salt ' which rise in form like the Northerland of the straight , which some of the fleet , and those not the worst mariner , judge to be the north foreland : howbeit other sum be of contrary opinion . but the matter be not well to be discern by reason of the thick fog which a long time hang upon the coast , and the fog , snow , new fall snow which yearly alter the shape of the land , and take away oftentimes the mariner iners mark . mark . and by reason of the dark mist which continue by the space of twenty day together , this doubt grow the great and the long perilous . for whereas indeed we think our self to be upon the north - east side of frobishers straight , we be now carry to the south westwards of the queen foreland , and be deceive by a swift current come from the north - east , a swift eur - were bring to the southwestwards of our say course many mile more than we do think possible can come ’ to pass . the cause whereof we have since find , and it shall be at large hereafter declare . here we make a point of land which some mistake for a place in the straight call mount Warwick