freshet thereabouts : which by the heat of the summer sun , be loose , do empty themselves with the ebb into the sea , and so gather in great abundance there together . and to speak somewhat here of the ancient opinion of the freeze sea in these part : i do think it to be rather a bare conjecture of man , then that ever any man have make experience of any such sea . and that which they speak of mare glacial , may be true think to be speak of these part : for this may well be call indeed the icy sea , but not the freeze sea , for no sea consist of salt water can be freeze , as i have more at large herein show my opinion in my second voyage , for saltwatercan - it seem impossible for any sea to be freeze , which not freeze . have his course of ebb and flow , especial in those place where the tide do ebb and flow above ten fathom . and also all these aforesaid ice , which we sometime meet a hundred mile from land , be gather out of the salt sea , be in taste fresh , and be dissolve , become sweet and wholesome water . and the cause why this year we have be more cumber with ice then at other time before , may be by reason of the easterly and southerly wind , which 328 bring we moor timely thither now then we look for . which blow from the sea direct upon the place of our streite , have keep in the ice , and not suffer they to be carry out by the ebb to the main sea , where they will in more short time have be dissolve . and all these fleet ice be not only so dangerous in that they wind and gather so near together , that a man may pass sometime ten or twelve mile as it be upon one firm island of ice : but also for that they open and shut together again in such sort with the tide and sea - gate , that while one ship follow the other with full sail , the ice which be open unto the foremost will join and close together before the latter can come to follow the first , whereby many time our ship be bring into great danger , as be not able so sudden to take in our sail , or stay the swift way of our ship . we be force many time to stem and strike great rock of ice , and so as it be make way through mighty mountain . by which mean some of the fleet , where they find the ice to open , enter in , and pass so far within the danger thereof , with continual desire to recover their port , that it be the great wonder of the world that they ever escape safe , or be ever hear of again . for even at this present we miss two of the fleet , that be , the Judith , wherein be the lieutenant general captain Fenton ; and the Michael , who both we suppose have be utter lose , have not hear any tiding of they in more than 20 day before . and one of our fleet name the bark Dennis , be b ^ ke Dennis of a hundred ton burden , seek way in among these ice , receive such a blow with a rock of ice that she sink down therewith in the sight of the whole fleet . howbeit have signify her danger by shoot off a piece of great ordinance , new succour of other ship come so ready unto they , that the man be all save with boat . 329 A . D . 1578 . part of the house lose . within this ship that be drown there be parcel of our house which be to be erect for they that shall stay all the winter in Meta incognita . this be a more fearful spectacle for the fleet to behold , for that the outrageous storm which present follow , threaten they the like fortune and danger . for the fleet be thus compass ( as aforesaid ) on every side with ice , have leave much behind they , through which they pass , and find more before they , through which it be not possible to pass , there arise a sudden terrible tempest at the southeast , which blow from the main sea , direct upon the place of the streite , bring together all the ice a seaboard of we upon our back , and thereby debar we of turn back to recover sea - room again : so that be thus compass with danger on every side , sundry man with sundry devise seek the best way to save themselves . some of the ship , where they can find a place more clear of ice , and get a little birth of sea room , do take in their sail , and there lay a drift . other some fasten and more anchor upon a great island of ice , and ride under the lee thereof , suppose to be better guard thereby from the outrageous wind , and the danger of the lesser fleet ice . and again some where so fast shut up , and compass in among a infinite number of great country and island of ice , that they be fain to submit themselves and their ship to the mercy of the unmerciful ice , and strengthen the side of their ship with juncke of cable , bed , mast , plank and such like , which be hang over board on the side of their ship , may the better defend they from the outrageous sway and stroke of the say ice . but as in great distress , man of best valour be best to be discern , so it be great worthy commendation and note with what invincible mind every captain encourage his company , and with what incredible labour the painful mariner and poor miner ( unacquainted with such extremity ) to the ever - 330 • .. I578 , last renown of our nation , do overcome the brunt of these so great and extreme danger : for some , even without board upon the ice , and some within board upon the side of their ship , have pole , pike , piece of timber , and Ores in their hand , stand almost day and night without any rest , bear