we man our boat and come to they , they all stay in their canoas : we come to the water side be they be : and after we have swear by the sun after their fashion , they do trust we . so i shake hand with one of they , and he kiss my hand , and we be very familiar with they . we be in so great credit with they upon this single great famill - acquaintance , that we can have any thing they have . with the we buy five canoas of they : we buy their clothes from their back , which be all make of seal skin and bird skin ; their buskin , their hose , their glove , all be common sow and well dress : so that we be full persuade that they have diverse artificer among they . we have a pair of buskin of they full of fine wool like beaver . their apparel for heat be make of bird skin with their feather on they . we see among they leather dress like glover leather , and thick thong like white leather of a good length . we have of their dart and oar , and find in they that 387 they may • make much train , if they have mean how to use it . Moscovie glass . a fruit like corinth . they will by no mean displease we , but will give we whatsoever we ask of they , and will be satisfy with whatsoever we give they . they take great care one of another : for when we have buy their boat , than two other will come and carry he away between they that have sell we his . they be very tractable people , void of craft or double deal , and easy to be bring to any civility or good order : but we judge they to be idolater and to worship the sun . during the time of our abode among these island we find reasonable quantity of wood , both fir , spruce and juniper ; which whether it come float any great distance to these place where we find it , or whether it grow in some great island near the same place by we not yet discover , we know not ; but we judge that it grow there further into the land than we be , because the people have great store of dart and oar which they make none account of , but give they to we for small trifle , as point and piece of paper . we see about this coast marvelous great abundance of seal skull together like skull of small fish . we find no fresh water among these island , but only snow water , whereof we find great pool . the cliflfe be all of such oar as m . Frobisher bring from Meta incognita . we have diverse show of study or Muscovy glass shine not altogether unlike to crystal . we find a herb grow upon the rock , who fruit be sweet , full of red juice , and the ripe one be like corinth . we find also birch and willow grow like shrub low to the ground . Theise people have great store of fur as we judge . they make show unto we the 30 of this present , which be the second time of our be with they , after they perceive we will have skin and fur , that they will go into the country and come again the next day with such thing as they have : but this night the wind come fair , the captain and the master will by no mean detract the purpose of our discovery . and so the last of this month about four 388 of the clock in the morning in God name we set sail , and be all that day becalm upon the coast . the first of August we have a fair wind , and so pro - August . ceed towards the northwest for our discovery . the sixth of August we discover land in 66 degree land in 66 40 minute of latitude , altogether void from the pester of degree +° ice : we anchor in a very fair road under a brave ' mount , the cliflfe whereof be as orient as gold . this mount be name mount Raleigh . the road where our ship lay at anchor be call Totnes ride . the sound which do compass the mount be name Exeter sound . the foreland towards the north be call dyer cape . the foreland towards the south be name cape Walsingham . so soon as we be come to a anchor in Totnes ride under mount Raleigh , we espy four white four white bear at the foot of the mount : we suppose they to eares - be goat or wolf , man our boat and go towards they : but when we come near the shore , we find they to be white bear of a monstrous bigness : we be desirous of fresh victuali and the sport , begin to assault they , and i be on land , one of they come down the hill right against i : my piece be charge with hailshot and a bullet : i discharge my piece and shoot he in the neck ; he roar a little , and take the water straight , make small account of his hurt . than we follow he with our boat , and kill he with boar - spear , and two more that night . we find nothing in their maw ; but we judge by their dung that they feed upon grass , because it appear in all respect like the dung of a horse , wherein we may very plain see the very straw . the 7 we go on shore to another bear which lie all night upon the top of a island under mount Raleigh , and when we come up to he he lie fast asleep . i level at his head , and the stone of my piece give no fire : with that he look up , and lay down his head huge white again : then i shoot be charge with two bullet , and strike he in the head : he be but amaze fall 389 backward : whereupon we run all upon he with boar - spear , and thrust he in the body : yet for all that he grip away our boar - spear , and go towards the water ; and as he be go down , he come back again . than our master shoot his boar - spear , and strike he in the head , and make he to take the water , and swim into a cove fast by , where we kill he , and bring he aboard . the breadth of his forefoot from one side to the other be fourteen inch over . they be very fat , so as we be constrain to cast the fat away . we see a raven upon mount Raleigh . we find withy also grow like low shrub and flower like primrose in the say place . the coast be very mountainous , altogether without wood , grass , or earth , and be only huge mountain of stone ; but the brave stone that ever we see . the air be very moderate in this country . the 8 we depart from mount Raleigh , coast along the shore , which lie Southsouthwest , and eastnortheast . the 9 our man fall in dislike of their allowance ,