anne Francis have most part of his company ashore , the first of September go also to bear sound in his pinnace to fetch his man aboard , but the wind grow so great immediate upon their land , that the ship at sea be in great danger , and some of they forcible put from their anchor , and great fear to be utter lose , as the Hopewell , wherein be captain Carew and 364 other , who can not tell on which side their danger be most : for have mighty rock threaten on the one side , and drive island of cut ice on the other side , they great fear to make shipwreck , the ice drive so near they that it touch their bolt - sprit . and by mean of the sea that be grow so high , they be not able to put to sea with their small pinnace to recover their ship . and again , the ship be not able to tarry or lie athwart for they , by mean of the outrageous wind and swell sea . the general will the captain of the anne Francis with his company , for that night to lodge aboard the buss of Bridgewater , and go himself with the rest of his man aboard the bark . but their number be so great , and the provision of the bark so scant , that they pester one another exceed . they have great hope that the next morning the weather will be fair , whereby they may recover their ship . but in the morning follow it be much worse , for the storm continue great , the sea be more swell , and the fleet go quite out of sight . so that now their doubt begin to grow great : for the ship of Bridgewater which be of great receit , and whereof they have best hope and make most account , ride so far to leeward of the harborowe mouth , that they be not able for the rock ( that lie between the wind and they ) to lead it out to sea with a sail . and the bark be already so pester with man , and so slender furnish with provision , that they have scarce meat for six day for such number . the general in the morning depart to sea in the Gabriel to seek the fleet , leave the buss of Bridgewater , and the Michael behind in bear sound . the buss set sail , and think by turn in the narrow channel within the harbour to get to windward : but be put to leeward more , by that mean be fain to come to anchor for her better safety , among a number of rock , and there leave in great danger of ever get 365 forth again . the Michael set sail to follow the general , and can give the buss no relief , although they earnest desire the same . and the captain of the anne Francis be leave in hard election of two evil : either to abide his fortune with the buss of Bridgewater , which be doubtful of ever get forth , or else to be tow in his small pinnace at the stern of the Michael through the rage sea , for that the bark be not able to receive or relieve half his company , wherein his danger be not a little perilous . so after he resolve to commit himself with all his company unto that fortune of God and sea , and be dangerous tow at the stern of the bark for many mile , until at length they espy the anne Francis under sail , hard under their lee , which be no small comfort unto they . for no doubt , both those and a great number more have perish for lack of victual , and convenient room in the bark without the help of the say Ship . but the honest care that the master of the anne Francis have of his captain , and the good regard of duty towards his general , suffer he not to depart , but honesdy abode to hazard a dangerous road all the night long , notwithstanding all the stormy weather , when all the fleet beside depart . and the pinnace come no soon aboard the ship , and the man enter , but she present shiver and fall in piece and sink at the ship stern , with all the poor man furniture : so weak be the boat with tow , and so forcible be the sea to bruise she in piece . but ( as God will ) the man be all save . at this present in this storm many of the fleet be dangerous distress , and be sever almost all asunder . yet , thank be to God , all the fleet arrive safe in England about the first of October , some in one place and some in another . but among other , it be most marvelous how the buss of Bridgewater get away , who be leave behind the fleet in great danger of never get forth , be force to seek a way north - 366 ward through a unknown channel full of rock , upon the back side of bear sound , and there by good hap find out a way into the north sea , a very dangerous attempt : save that necessity , which have no law , force they to try mastery . this aforesaid north sea be the same which lie upon the back side of frobishers strait , where first the general himself in his pinnace , A . D . 1578 . a unknow channel into the north - east , discover by the buss of Bridgewater . and after some other of our company have discover ( as they affirm ) a great foreland , where they will have also a great likelihood of the great passage towards the south sea , or mar deal Sur . the buss of Bridgewater , as she come homeward , to a fruitful the southeastward of Friseland , discover a great island in the latitude of 57 degree and a half , which be ‘ never yet find before , and sail three day alongst the coast , the land seem to be fruitful , full of wood , and a champion country . there die in the whole fleet in all this voyage not above forty person , which number be not great , consider how many ship be in the fleet , and how strange fortune we pass .