she be present carry aboard , and stow . now after this trouble , be resolve to depart with the first wind , there fall out another matter worse than all the rest , and that be in this manner . John churchyard one who our captain have appoint as pilot in the pinnace , come to our captain , and master Bruton , and tell they that the good ship which we must all hazard our life in , have three hundred stroke at one time as she ride in the harbour : this disquiet we all great , and many doubt to go in she . at length our captain by who we be all to be govern , determine rather ' to end his life with credit , than to return with infamy and disgrace , and so be all agree , we purpose to live and die together , and commit our self to the ship . now the 21 . have bring all our thing aboard , about 11 . or 12 . of the clock at night , we set sail and depart from those isle , which lie in 64 . degree of latitude , our ship be all now at sea , and we shape our course to go , coast the land to the northward upon the eastern shore , which we call the shore of our merchant , because there we meet with people which traffic with we , but here we be not without doubt of our ship . the 24 . be in 67 . degree , and 40 . minute , we have great store of whale , and a kind of sea bird which the mariner call cortinous . this day about six of the clock at night , we espy two of the country people at sea , think at the first they have be two great seal , until we see their oar seven 417 2d A . D . I587 . isle in 64 . degree . store of whale in 67 degree . the great variation of the compass . London coast . between Gronland in the north . of americaabovt 40 . league . glister with the sun : they come row towards we , as fast as they can , and when they come within hear , they hold up their oar , and cry ilyaoute , make many sign : and at last they come to we , give we bird for bracelet , and of they i have a dart with a bone in it , or a piece of unicorn horn , as i do judge . this dart he make store of , but when he see a knife , he let it go , be more desirous of the knife then of his dart : these people continue row after our ship the space of 3 . hour . the 25 . in the morning at 7 . of the clock we descry 30 . Savages row after we , be by judgement 10 , league off from the shore : they bring we salmon peal , bird , and caplin , and we give they pin , needle , bracelet , nail , knife , bell , look glass , and other small trifle , and for a knife , a nail or a bracelet , which they call Ponigmah , they will sell their boat , coat , or any thing they have , although they be far from the shore . we have but few skin of they , about 20 . but they make sign to we that if we will go to the shore , we shall have more store of chichsanege : they stay with we till 11 . of the clock , at which time we go to prayer , and they depart from we . ' the 28 . and 29 . be foggy with cloud , the 30 . day we take the heighth , and find our self in 72 . degree and 12 minute of latitude both at noon and at night , the sun be 5 . degree above the horizon . at midnight the compass set to the variation of 28 . degree to the westward . now have coast the land , which we call London coast , from the 21 . of this present , till the 30 . the sea open all to the westwards and northwards , the land on starboard side east from we , the wind shift to the north , whereupon we leave that shore , name the same hope Sanderson , and shape our course west , and run 40 . league and better without the sight of any land . 418 the second of July we fall with a mighty bank of a mighty ice west from we , lie north and south , which bank we will glad have double out to the north - an southt ward , but the wind will not suffer we , so that we be fain to coast it to the southward , hope to double it out , that we may have run so far west till we have find land , or else to have be thorough resolve of our pretend purpose . the 3 . we fell with the ice again , and put off from it , we seek to the northward , but the wind cross we . the 4 . be foggy : so be the 5 . also with much wind at the north . the 6 . be very clear , we put our bark with oar through a gap in the ice , see the sea free on the west side , as we think , which fall out otherwise , cause we to return after we have stay there between the ice . the 7 . and the 8 . about midnight , by god help we recover the open sea , the weather be fair and calm , and so be the 9 the 10 . we coast the ice . the 11 . be foggy , but calm . the 12 . we coast again the ice , have the wind at northnorthwest . the 13 . bear off from the ice , we determine to go with the shore and come to a anchor , and to stay 5 . or 6 . day for the dissolve of the ice , hope that the sea continual beat it , and the sun with the extreme force of heat which it have always shin - extreme heat king upon it , will make a quick dispatch , that we may sun . have a further search upon the western shore . now when we be come to the eastern coast , the water something deep , and some of our company fearful withal , we dare not come to a anchor , but bear off into the sea again . the poor people see we go away again , come row after we into the sea , the wave be somewhat lofty . we truck with they for a few skin and dart , and give they bead , nail , pin , 419 they be drive west six point out of their course in 67 . degree , 45 . minute . mount Raleigh . the earl of cumberland isle . the variation of the compass you . deg .