, to prove whether they may go through and meet again with he in the straight , which they do : and as we imagine before , so the queen foreland prove a hand , as i think most of these suppose continent will . and so he depart towards the straight , think it be high time now to recover his port , and to provide the fleet of their lade , whereof he be not a little careful , as shall by the process and his resolute attempt appear . and in his return with the rest of the fleet he be so entangle by reason of the dark fog among a number of hand and break ground that lie off this coast , that many of the ship come over the top of rock , which present after they may perceive to lie dry , have not half a foot water more than some of their ship do draw . and by reason they can not with a small gale of wind stem the force of the flood , whereby to go clear off the rock , they be fain to let a anchor fall with two bent of cable together , at a hundred and odd fathom depth , where otherwise they have be by the force of the tide carry upon the rock again , and perish : so that if God in these fortune ( as a merciful guide , beyond the expectation of man ) have not carry we through , we have sure perish amid these danger . for be many time drive hard aboard the shore without any sight of land , until we be ready to make shipwreck thereon , be force common with our boat to sound before our ship , lest we may light return out of the mistake straight . great danger . 339 anae Francis meet with some of the fleet . thereon before we can discern the same ; it please God to give we a clear of sun and light for a short time to see and avoid thereby the danger , have be continual dark before , and present after . many time also by mean of fog and current be drive near upon the coast , God lend we even at the very pinch one prosperous breath of wind or other , whereby to double the land , and avoid the peril , and when that we be all without hope of help , every man recommend himself to death , and cry out , lord now help or never , now lord look down from heaven and save we sinner , or else our safety come too late : even than the mighty maker of heaven , and our merciful God do deliver we : so that they who have be partaker of these danger do even in their soul confess , that God even by miracle have seek to save they , who name be praise evermore . long time now the anne Francis have lie beat off and on all alone before the queen foreland , not be able to recover their port for ice , albeit many time they dangerous attempt it , for yet the ice choke up the passage , and will not suffer they to enter . and have never see any of the fleet since twenty day past , when by reason of the thick mist they be sever in the mistake straight , they do now this present 23 of July overthwart a place in the straight call hatton Hedland , where they meet with seven ship of you fleet again , which good hap do not only rejoice they for themselves , in respect of the comfort which they receive by such good company , but especial that by this mean they be put out of doubt of their dear friend , who safety long time they do not a little suspect and fear . at their meeting they hale the admiral after the manner of the sea , and with great joy welcome one another with a thunder volley of shot . and now every man declare at large the fortune and danger which they have pass . 34 ° the four and twenty of July we meet with the Francis of Foy , who with much ado seek way back FrandsefF ^ . again , through the ice from out of the mistake straight , where ( to their great peril ) they prove to recover their port . they bring the first news of the vice - admiral captain York , who many day with themselves , and the buss of Bridgewater be miss . Bridgwater they report that they leave the viceadmiral reasonable s ^ ' clear of the ice , but the other ship they great fear , who they can not come to help , be themselves so hardly distress as never man more . also they tell we of the Gabriel , who have get thorough from the backside , and western point of the queen foreland , into frobishers straight , fall into their company about the cape of good hope . and upon the seven and twenty of July , the ship of Bridgewater get out of the ice and meet with the fleet which lie off and on under hatton Hedland . they report of their marvellous accident and danger , declare their ship to be so leak that they must of necessity seek harbour , have their stem so beat within their hudding , that they have much ado to keep themselves above water . they have ( as they say ) five hundred stroke at the pump in less than half a watch , be scarce two hour ; their man be so overweary therewith , and with the former danger that they desire help of man from the other ship . Moreover they declare that there be nothing but ice and danger where they have be , and that the straight within be freeze up , and that it be the most impossible thing of the streit the world , to pass up unto the countess of Warwick over sound , which be the place of our port . the report of these danger by these ship thus publish among the fleet , with the remembrance of the peril past , and those present before their face , bring no small fear and terror into the heart of many considerate man . so that some begin privy to murmur against the general for this wilful manner of 341 proceed . some desire to discover some harbour thereabouts to refresh themselves and reform their break vessel for