. And find that the matter of the gold over have appearance and make show of great riches and profit , and the hope of the passage to Cataya , by this last voyage great 3X9 m . Frobisher commend of her majesty . the gentleman commend . 1578 - commissioner appoint to examine the goodness of the ore . a name give tope place new discover . the hope of the passage to Cataya . a forte to be build in Meta incognita . increase , her majesty appoint speciali Commissioners choose for this purpose , gentleman of great judgement , art , and skill , to look thorough into the cause , for the true trial and due examination thereof , and for the full handle of all matter thereunto appertain . and because that place and country have never heretofore be discover , and therefore have no speciali name , by which it may be call and know , her majesty name it very proper Meta incognita , as a mark and bind utter hitherto unknown . the commissioner after sufficient trial and proof make of the ore , and have understand by sundry reason , and substantiali ground , the possibility and likelihood of the passage , advertise her highness , that the cause be of importance , and the voyage great worthy to be advance again . whereupon preparation be make of ship and all other thing necessary , with such expedition , as the time of the year then require . and because it be assure make account of , that the commodity of mine , there already discover , will at the least countervail in all respect the adventurer charge , and give further hope and likelihood of great matter to follow : it be think needful , both for the better guard of those part already find , and for further discovery of the inland and secret of those country , and also for further search of the passage to Cataya ( whereof the hope continual more and more increase ) that certain number of choose soldier and discreet man for those purpose shall be assign to inhabit there . whereupon there be a strong fort or house of timber , artificial frame , and cunning devise by a notable learned man here at home , in ship to be carry thither , whereby those man that be appoint to winter and stay there the whole year , may aswell be defend from the danger of the snow and cold air , as also fortify from the force or offence of those country people , which perhaps otherwise with too great multitude may oppress they . and to this great adventure and notable exploit many 320 well mind and forward young gentleman of our country willing have offer themselves . and first captain Fenton lieutenant generail for captain Frobisher , and in charge of the company with he there , captain best , and captain Filpot , unto who good discretion the government of that service be chief commend , who , as man not regard peril in respect of the profit and common wealth of their country , be willing to abide the first brunt and adventure of those danger among a savage and brutish kind of people , in a place hitherto ever think for extreme can not habitable . the whole number of man which have offer , and be appoint to inhabit Meta incognita all the year , be one hundred person , whereof 40 shall be mariner for the use of ship , 30 miner for gather the gold over together for the next year , and 30 soldier for the better guard of the rest , within which last number be include the gentleman , goldfiner , baker , carpenter , and all necessary person . to each of the captain be assign one ship , aswell for the further search of the coast and country there , as for to return and bring back their company again , if the necessity of the place so urge , or by miscarry of the fleet the next year , they may be disappoint of their further provision . be therefore thus furnish with all necessary , there be ready to depart upon the say voyage 15 sail of good ship , whereof the whole number be to return again with their load of gold over in the end of the summer , except those 3 ship , which shall be leave for the use of those captain which shall inhabit there the whole year . And be in so good readiness , the general with all the captain come to the court , then lie at Greenwich , to take their leave of her majesty , at who hand they all receive great encouragement , and gracious countenance . her highness beside other good gift , and great promise , bestow on the general a fair chain of gold , and the rest of the captain kiss her hand , take unto 321 ten a hundred man appoint to inhabit there . fifteen sail . [ he . 75 - 1 a chain of gold give to m . Frobisher . their leave , and depart every man towards their charge . the name of the ship with their several captain . i in the aid be Amirali , be the general captain Frobisher . 2 in the Thomas Allen vice - admiral York . 3 in the Judith lieutenant generail Fenton . 4 in the anne Francis Best . 5 in the Hopewell Carew . 6 in the bear Filpot . 7 in the Thomas of Ipswich Tanfield . 8 in the Emmanuel of Exeter Courtney . 9 in the Francis of Foy moil . 10 in the moon Upcot . 11 in the Emmanuel of Bridgewater Newton . 12 in the Salomon of Weymouth Randal . 13 in the bark Dennis Kendal . 14 in the Gabriel Harvey . 15 in the Michael , Kinnersley . the say fifteen sail of ship arrive and meet together at Harwich , the seven and twenty day of May anno 1578 , where the general and the other captain make view , and muster their company . and every several captain receive from the general certain article of direction , for the better keep of order and company together in the way , which article be as follow .