above all thing famous in sea cause . and have the year before give the overthrow to the king of Norway , who be lord of the island , be desirous to win fame by feat of arm , he be come on land with his man to give the attempt for the win of Frisland , which be a island much big than Ireland . wherefore see that m . Nicolo be a man of judgement and discretion , and very expert both in sea matter and martial affair , he give he commission to go aboard his navy with all his man , charge the captain to honour he and in all thing to use his counsel . this navy of Zichmni be of thirteen vessel , whereof two only be row with oar , the rest small bark and one ship , with the which they sail to the westwards and with little pain win ledovo and ilofe and diverse other small island : and turn into a bay call sudero , in the haven of the town name Sanestol , they take certain small bark lade with fish . and here they find zichmni , who come by land with his army conquer all the country as he go : they stay here but a while , and lead on their course to the westwards till they come to the other cape of the gulf or bay , then turn again , 448 they find certain island and break land which they reduce all unto the signory and possession of Zichmni . Theise sea , forasmuch as they sail , be in manner nothing but shold and rock , in so much that if m . Nicolo and the venetian mariner have not be their pilot , the whole fleet in judgement of all that be in it , have be cast away , so small be the skill of zichmnis man , in respect of we , who have be train up in the art and practice of navigation all the day of their life . now the fleet have do such thing as be declare , the captain , by the counsel of m . Nicolo , determine to go a land , at a town call Bondendon , to understand what success Zichmni have in his war : where they hear to their great content , that he have fight a great battle and put to flight the army of his enemy : by reason of which victory , they send ambassador from all part of the island to yield the country up into his hand , take down their ensign in every town and castle : they think good to stay in that place for his come , it be report for certain that flee will be there very short . at his come there be great congratulation and many sign of gladness show , as well for the victory by land , as for that by sea : for the which the venetian be honour and extol of all man , in such sort that there be no talk but of they , and of the great valour of m . Nicolo . wherefore the prince , who be a great favourer of valiant man and especial of those that can behave themselves well at sea , cause m . Nicolo to be bring before he , and after have commend he with many honourable speech , and praise his great industry and dexterity of wit , by the which two thing he acknowledge himself to have receive a inestimable benefit , as the save of his fleet and the win of many place without any great trouble , he make he knight , and reward his man N . leno , with many rich and bountiful gift . then depart from make knight thence they go in triumph manner towards Frisland , ^ tchmni . un 449 2 f the chief city of that island , situate on the southeast side of the isle , within a gulf , as there be many in that s ^ fs lade island . in this gulf or bay there be such great abundance risknd “ for ta ^ en > at many ship be lade therewith to serve Flanders , Flanders , Britain , England , Scotland , Norway , and den - britam , Eng - mark , and by this trade they gather great wealth . land , Scotland , and thus much be take out of a letter , that m . Nicolo Norway and send to m Antonio his brother , request that he will but not to be seek some mean to come to he . wherefore he who prove that have as great desire to travail as his brother , buy a ever any come ship , and direct his course that way : and after he have lettersentb sa ^ ed a great while and escape many danger , he arrive m . N . Zeno ^ at length in safety with m . Nicolo , who receive he very from Frisland joyful , for that he be his brother not only in flesh and to his brother blood , but also in valour and good quality . m . Antonio remain in Frisland and dwell there for the space of the end of year , 4 year with m . Nicolo , and 10 year alone . the first where they come in such grace and favour with the letter . prince , that he make m . Nicolo captain of his navy , and with great preparation of war they be send forth for the enterprise of Estland , which lie upon the coast between Frisland and Norway , where they do many damage : but hear that the king of Norway be come towards they with a great fleet , they depart with such a terrible flaw of wind , that they be drive upon certain shold : be a great part of their ship be cast away , the rest be save upon Grisland , a great island but dishabit . the king of Norway his fleet be take with the same storm , do utter perish in those sea : whereof Zichmni have notice , by a ship of his enemy that be cast by chance upon Grisland , have repair his fleet , and perceive himself northerly near unto the island , determine to set upon island , which together with the rest , be subject to the king of Norway : but he find the country so well fortify and defend , that his fleet be so small , and very ill appoint both of weapon and man , he be glad to retire . and so he leave that enterprise without perform 45 ° Nicholas and Antonio Zeno a . d . c . 1380 - 90 . any thing at all : and in the same channel he assault the other isle call island , which be seven , Talas , Broas , iscant , Trans , Mimant ,