great estimation , insomuch that the king send they with twelve bark to the southward to a country which they call Drogio : but in their voyage they have such contrary weather , that they think to have perish in the sea : but escape that cruel death , they fall into another more cruel : for they be take in the country and the most part of they eat by the savage people , which feed upon man flesh , as the sweet meat in their judgement that be . but that fisher with his fellow show they the manner of take fish with net , save their life : and will go every day a fish to the sea and in fresh river , and take great abundance of fish and give it to the chief man of the country , whereby he gate himself so great favour , that he be very well belove and honour of every one . the fame of this man be spread abroad in the country , there be a lord there by , that be very desirous to have he with he , and to see how he use his miraculous art of catch fish , in so much that he make war with the other lord with who he be before , and in the end prevail , for that he be more mighty and a better warrior , the fisherman be send unto he with the rest of his company . and for the 456 space of thirteen year that he dwell in those part , he say , that he be send in this order to more than 25 lord , for they have continual war among themselves , this lord with that lord , and he with another , only to have he to dwell with they : so that wander up and down the country without any certain abode in one place , he know almost all those part . he say , that it be a very great country and as it be a new world : the people be very rude and void of all goodness , they go all naked so that they be miserable vex with cold , neither have they the wit to cover their body with beast skin which they take in hunt , they have no kind of metal , they live by hunt , they carry certain lance of wood make sharp at the point , they have bow , you string whereof be make of beast skin : they be very fierce people , they make cruel war one with another , and eat one another , they have governor and certain law very diverse among themselves . but the far to the southwestwards , the more civility there be , the air be somewhat temperate , so that there they have city and temple to idol , wherein they sacrifice man and afterward eat they , they have there some knowledge and use of gold and silver . now this fisherman have dwell so many year in those country purpose , if it be possible , to return home into his country , but his companion despair ever to see it again , let he go in god name , and they keep themselves where they be . wherefore he bid they farewell , flee through the wood towards Drogio , and be very well receive of the lord that dwell next to that place ; who know he and be a great enemy of the other lord ; and so run from one lord to another , be those by who he have pass before , after long time and many travel he come at length to Drogio , where he dwell three year . when as by good fortune he hear by the inhabitant , that there be certain boat arrive upon the coast : wherefore enter into good hope to accomplish his intent , he go 457 A . D . c . 1380 - 90 . in the space of 13 year he serve 15 lord of Drogio . he return from Estotiland to Frisland . zichmni mind to send m . Antonio Zeno with a fleet towards those part of Estotiland . the 4 . letter . the fisherman die that shall have be interpreter . certain mariner take in his steed , which come with he from Estotiland . isle llofe . to the sea side , and ask they of what country they be ; they answer of Estotiland , whereat he be exceed glad , , and request that they will take he in to they , which they do very willing , and for that he have the language of the country , and there be none that can speak it , they use he for their interpreter . and afterward he frequent that trade with they in such sort , that he become very rich , and so furnish out a bark of his own , he return into Frislande , where he make report unto this lord of that wealthy country . and he be thorough credit because of the mariner , who approve many strange thing , that he report to be true . wherefore this lord be resolve to send i forth with a fleet towards those part , and there be so many that desire to go in the voyage , for the novelty and strangeness of the thing , that i think we shall be very strong appoint , without any public expense at all . and this be the tenor of the letter before mention , which i have here set down to give intelligence of another voyage that m . Antonio make , be set out with many bark , and man , notwithstanding he be not captain , as he have think at the first he shall : for Zichmni go in his own person : and concern that matter i have a letter in form follow . one great preparation for the voyage of Estotiland be begin in a unlucky hour : for three day before our departure the fisherman die that shall have be our guide : notwithstanding this lord will not give over the enterprise , but instead of the fisherman take certain mariner that return out of the island with he : and so make our navigation to the westwards , we discover certain island subject to Frisland , and have pass certain shelf we stay at Ledovo for the space of 7 day to refresh our self , and to furnish the fleet with necessary provision . depart from thence we arrive the first of July at the isle of llofe : and for that the wind make for we , we stay not there , but pass 458 forth , and be upon the main sea , there arise immediate a cruel tempest , wherewith for eight day space we be miserable vex , not know where we be : and a great part of the bark be cast away , afterward the weather wax