his grief ) of a valiant gentleman Miles Morgan . have bury only in a preparation a great mass of substance , whereby his estate be impair , his mind yet not dismay , he continue his former designment and purpose to revive this enterprise , good occasion serve . upon which determination stand long , without mean to satisfy his desire ; at last he grant certain assignment out of his commission to sundry person of mean ability , desire the privilege of his grant , to plant and fortify in the north part of America about the river of Canada , to who if God give good success in the north part ( where then no matter of moment be expect ) the same ( he think ) will great advance the hope of the south , and be a furtherance unto his determination that way . and the worst that may happen in that course may be excuse without prejudice unto he by the former supposition , that those north region be of no regard : but chief a possession take in any parcel of those heathen country , by virtue of his grant , do ..... I ^ 8 ^ ' invest he of territory extend every way two hundred league : which induce sir Humphrey Gilbert to make those assignment , desire great their expedition , because his commission do expire after six year , if in that space he have not get actuali possession . time go away without any thing do by his mond pre - assign : insomuch that at last he must resolve he - Pf ™ * ™ 1 if ™ self to take a voyage in person , for more assurance to keep his patent in force , which then almost be expire , or within two year . in furtherance of his determination , among other , sir George Peckam knight show himself very zealous to the action , great aid he both by his advice and in the charge . other gentleman to their ability join unto he , resolve to adventure their substance and life in the same cause . who begin their preparation from that time , both of ship , munition , victual , man , and thing requisite , some of they continue the charge two year complete without intermission . such be the difficulty and cross accident oppose these proceed , which take not end in less than two year : many of which circumstance i will omit . the last place of our assembly , before we leave the coast of England , be in causet bay near unto plymouth : then resolve to put unto the sea with ship and provision , such as we have , before our store yet remain , but chief the time and season of the year , be too far spend . nevertheless it seem first very doubtful by what way to shape our course , and to begin our intend discovery , either from the south northward , or from the north southward . the first , that be , begin south , without all con - consultation troversie be the likely , wherein we be assure to ° ur have commodity of the current , which from the cape course ’ of Florida set northward , and will have further great our navigation , discover from the foresay cape along towards cape Briton , and all those land lie to the north . 1583 . commodity inn discover from south northward . cause why we begin our discovery from the north . incommodity in begin north . also the year be far spend , and arrive to the month of June , we be not to spend time in northerly course , where we shall be surprise with timely winter , but to covet the south , which we have space enough then to have attain ; and there may with less detriment have winter that season , be more mild and short in the south then in the north where winter be both long and rigorous . these and other like reason allege in favour of the southern course first to be take , to the contrary be infer : that forasmuch as both our victual , and many other needful provision be diminish and leave insufficient for so long a voyage , and for the winter of so many man , we ought to shape a course most likely to minister supply ; and that be to take the Newfoundland in our way , which be but seven hundred league from our english coast . where be usual at that time of the year , and until the fine of August , a multitude of ship repair thither for fish , we shall be relieve abundant with many necessary , which after the fish end , they may well spare , and free impart unto we . not stay long upon that Newland coast , we may proceed southward , and follow still the sun , until we arrive at place more temperate to our content . by which reason we be the rather induce to follow this northerly course , obey unto necessity , which must be supply . otherwise , we doubt that sudden approach of winter , bring with it continual fog , and thick . mist , tempest and rage of weather ; also contrariety of current descend from the cape of Florida unto cape Briton and cape raze , will fall out to be great and irresistible impediment unto our further proceed for that year , and compel we to winter in those north and cold region . wherefore suppress all objection to the contrary , we resolve to begin our course northward , and to follow direct as we may , the trade way unto Newfoundland : 42 from whence after our refresh and reparation of want , we intend without delay ( by God permission ) to proceed into the south , not omit any river or bay which in all that large tract of land appear to our view worthy of search . immediate we agree upon the manner of our course and order to be observe in our voyage ; which be deliver in write unto the captain and master of every ship a copy in manner follow . every ship have deliver two bullet or scroll , the one seal up in wax , the other leave open : in both which be include several watchword . that open , serve upon our own coast or the coast of Ireland : the other seal , be promise on all hand not to be break up until we shall be clear of the irish coast ; which from thenceforth do serve until we arrive and meet altogether in such harbour of the Newfoundland as be agree for our Rendez vouz . the say watchword be requisite to know our consort whensoever by night , either by fortune of weather , our fleet disperse shall come together again ; or one shall hale another ; or if by ill watch and steerage one ship shall chance to fall aboard of another in the dark . the reason of the bullet seal be to keep secret that watchword while we be upon our own coast , lest any of the company steal from the fleet may bewray the same : which know to a enemy , he may board we by night without mistrust , have our own watchword .