say no more than thus : go fetch i this rebellious fish that obey not this gentle - man that come from Kent and Christendom , bring they to the high water mark , and when he doubt that any of those great cod by reason of shelve ground be like to tumble into the sea again , he will wary take heed and carry he up back to the heap of his fellow . this do cause my friend to wonder , and at the first hear to judge they notorious lie , but they laugh and be merry when they hear the mean how each tale be true . i tell you once i do remember how in my travail into Africa and America , i find tree that bear oyster , which be strange to you , till i tell you that their bough hang in the water , on which both oyster and muscle do stick fast , as their property be , to stake and timber . now to let these merry tale pass , and to come to earnest matter again , you shall understand , that Newfoundland be in a temperate climate , and not so cold as foolish mariner do say , who find it cold sometime when plenty of isle of ice lie near the shore : but up in the land they shall find it hot than in England in many part of the country towards the south . this cold come by a accidentali mean , as by the ice that come fleet from the north part of the world , and not by the situation of the country , or nature of the climate . the country be full of little small river all the year long proceed from the mountain , engender both of snow and rain : few spring that ever i can find or hear of , except it be towards the south : in some place or rather in most place great lake with plenty of fish , the country most cover with wood of fir , yet in many place indifferent good grass , and plenty of bear every where , so that you may kill of they as oft as you listen : their flesh be as good as young beef , and hardly you may know the one from the other if it be powder but two day . of otter we may take like store . there be sea gull , murre , duck , wild goose , and many other kind of bird store , too long to write , especial at one island name Penguin , where we may drive they on a plank into our ship as many as shall lade she . Theise bird be also call penguin , and can fly , there be more meat in one of these then in a goose : the Frenchman that fish near the grand bay , do bring small store of flesh with they , but victuali themselves always with these bird . now again , for venison plenty , especial to the north about the grand bay , and in the south near cape race , and pleasance : there be many other kind of beast , as luzarne and other mighty beast like to camel in greatness , and their foot cleave , i do see they far off not able to discern they perfect , but their step show that their foot be cleave , and big than the foot of camel , i suppose they to be a kind of buff which i read to be in the country adjacent , and very many in the firm land . there be also to the northward , hare and fox in all part so plentiful , that at noon day they take away our flesh before our face within less than half a pair of butt length , where four and twenty person be turn of dry fish , and two dog in sight , yet stand they not in fear till we give shot and set the dog upon they : the bear also be as bold , which will not spare at midday to take your fish before your face , and i believe assure will not hurt any body unless they be force . now to show you my fancy what place i suppose meet to inhabit in those part discover of late by our nation : there be near about the mouth of the grand bay , a excellent harbour call of the Frenchman chas - teaux , and one island in the very entry of the straight call bell isle , which place if they be people and well fortify ( as there be stone and thing meet for it throughout all newfound land ) we shall be lord of the whole fish in small time , if it do so please the queen majesty , and from thence send wood and coal with all necessary to Labrador late discover : but i be of opinion , and do most steadfast believe that we shall find as rich mine in more temperate place and climate , and more profitable for fish then any yet we have use , where we shall have not far from thence plenty of salt make by fire undoubted , and very likely by the heat of the sun , by reason i find salt kern on the rock in nine and forty and better : these place may be find for salt in three and forty . i know more touch these two commodity last remember then any man of our nation do ; for that i have some knowledge in such matter , and have most desire the find of they by painful travail , and most diligent inquiry . now to be short , for i have be over long by master Butlers mean , who cry on i to write at large , and of as many thing as i call to mind worthy of remembrance : wherefore this one thing more . i can wish the island in the mouth of the river of Canada shall be inhabit , and the river search , for that there be many thing which may rise thereof , as i will show you hereafter . i can find in my heart to make proof whether it be true or not that i have read and hear of Frenchmen and Portugal to be in that river , and about cape Briton . i have almost forget to speak of the plenty of wolf , and to show you that there be fox , black , white and grey : other beast i know none save those before remember . i find also certain mine of iron and copper in saint Johns , and in the island of iron , which thing may turn to our great benefit , if our man have desire to plant thereabouts , for proof whereof i have bring home some of the oar of both sort . and thus i end , assure you on my faith , that if i have not be deceive by the vile Portugal descend of the Jew and Judas kind , i have not fail to have search this river , and all the coast of Cape briton , what may have be find to have benefit our country : but they break their band , and falsify their faith and promise , disappoint i of the salt they shall have bring i in part of recompense of my good service in defend they two year against french rover , that have spoil they , if i have not defend they . by mean whereof they make i lose not only the search of the country , but also force i to come home with great loss above 600 . livre . for recompense whereof i have send my man into Portugal to demand justice at the king hand , if not , i must put up my supplication to the queen majesty and her honourable council , to grant i leave to stay here so much of their good as they have damnify i , or else that i may take of they in newfound land , as much fish as shall be worth 600 . livre . or as much as the salt may have make . i pray you advertise i what way i be best to take , and what hope there will be of a recompense if i follow the suit : many there be that do comfort i , and do bid i proceed , for that her majesty and the council do tender poor fisher man , who with i have sustain three hundred pound loss in that voyage . and to conclude , if you and your friend shall think i a man sufficient and of credit , to seek the isle of S . John , or the river of Canada , with any part of the firm land of Cape briton , i shall give my diligence for the true and perfect discovery , and leave some part of my own business to further the same : and thus i end , commit you to God . from Bristol the 13 . of November , 1578 . you to use and command Anthony Parckhurst .