satisfy speedy his so reasonable request . the merchant with their master depart , they cause forthwith to be discharge all the great ordinance of their fleet in token of our welcome . it be further determine that every ship of our fleet shall deliver unto the merchant and master of that harbour a note of all their want : which do , the ship aswell English as stranger , be tax at a easy rate to make supply . and beside , commissioner be appoint , part of our own company and part of they , to go into other harbour adjoin ( for our english merchant command all there ) to leavy our provision : whereunto the Portugal ( above other nation ) do most willing and liberal contribute . insomuch as we be present ( above our allowance ) with wine , marmalad , most fine rusk or biscuit , sweet oil and sundry delicacy . also we want not of fresh salmon , trout , lobster and other fresh fish bring daily unto we . Moreover as the manner be in their fish , every week to choose their admiral a new , or rather they succeed in orderly course , and have weekly their admiral feast solemnize : even so the general , captain and master of our fleet be continual invite and feast . to grow short , in our abundance at home , the entertainment goadenter - had be delightful , but after our want and tedious passage through the ocean , it seem more acceptable ianJt and of great contentation , by how much the same be Savages in the unexpected in that desolate corner of the world : where at south part of other time of the year , wild beast and bird have only the fruition of all those country , which now seem a ’ place very populous and much frequent . the next morning be Sunday and the 4 of August , August 4 . the general and his company be bring on land by english merchant , who show unto we their accustom walk unto a place they call the garden . but nothing appear more than nature it self without art : who confuse have bring forth rose abundant , wild , but odoriferous , and to sense very comfortable . also the like plenty of raspis berry , which do grow in every place . Monday follow , the general have his tent set up , August 5 . who be accompany with his own follower , summoned the merchant and master , both english and stranger to be present at his take possession of those possession country . before who open be read and interpret taken ‘ unto the stranger his commission : by virtue whereof he take possession in the same harbour of saint John , and 200 league every way , invest the queen majesty with the title and dignity thereof , have deliver unto he ( after the custom of England ) a rod and a turfle of actuallposses - sion maintain in Newfoundland . the same soil , enter possession also for he , his heir and assign for ever : and signify unto all man , that from that time forward , they shall take the same land as a territory appertain to the queen of England , and himself authorise under her majesty to possess and enjoy it . and to ordain law for the government thereof , agreeable ( so near as convenient may be ) unto the law of England : under which all people come thither hereafter , either to inhabit , or by way of traffic , shall be subject and govern . and especial at the same time for a beginning , he propose and deliver three law to be in force immediate . that be to say : the first for religion , which in public exercise shall be accord to the church of England . the 2 . for maintenance of her majesty right and possession of those territory , against which if any thing be attempt prejudicial ! , the party or party offend shall be adjudge and execute as in case of high treason , accord to the law of England . the 3 . if any person shall utter word sound to the dishonour of her majesty , he shall loose his ear , and have his ship and good confiscate . these content publish , obedience be promise by generail voice and consent of the multitude aswell of Englishman as stranger , pray for continuance of this possession and government begin . after this , the assembly be dismiss . and afterward be erect not far from that place the arm of England engrave in lead , and infix upon a pillar of wood . yet further and actual to establish this possession take in the right of her majesty , and to the behoof of sir Humphrey Gilbert knight , his heir and assign for ever : the general grant in fee farm diverse parcel of land lie by the water side , both in this harbour of saint John , and elsewhere , which be to the owner a great commodity , be thereby assure ( by their proper inheritance ) of ground convenient to dress and to dry their fish , whereof many time before they do fade , be prevent 54 sir Humphrey Gilbert by they that come first into the harbour . for which ground they do covenant to pay a certain rent and service unto sir Humphrey Gilbert , his heir or assign for ever , and yearly to maintain possession of the same , by themselves or their assign . now remain only to take in provision grant , accord as every ship be tax , which do fish upon the coast adjoin . in the mean while , the general appoint man unto their charge : some to repair and trim the ship , other to attend in gather together our supply and provision : other to search the commodity and singularity of the country , to be find by sea or land , and to make relation unto the general what either themselves can know by their own travail and experience , or by good intelligence of english man or stranger , who have long frequent they same coast . also some observe the elevation of the pole , and draw plait of the country exact grade . and by that i can gather by each man several relation , i have draw a brief description of the newfound land , with the commodity by sea or land already make , and such also as be in possibility and great likelihood to be make : nevertheless the card and plait that be draw , with the due gradation of the harbour , bay , and cape , do perish with the admiral : wherefore in the description follow , i must omit the particular of such thing .