by the english nation , usurp upon our right , and impose name upon country , river , bay , cape , or headland , as if they have be the first finder of those coast ; which injury we offer not unto the Spaniard , but leave off to discover when we approach the spanish limit : even so God have the french not hitherto permit they to establish a possession als ° i ” firtu - r , . , • , 1 . j • . 1 • nate tn those permanent upon another right , notwithstanding their orth part of manifold attempt , in which the issue have be no America . less tragical than that of the Spaniard , as by their own report be extant . then see the english nation only have right unto a good in - these country of America from the cape of Florida couraggnunt northward by the privilege of first discovery , unto which p ^ . Cabot be authorise by regal authority , and set forth ceeg in the by the expense of our late famous king Henry the conquest of seven : which right also seem strong defend on north our behalf by the powerful hand of almighty God , withstand the enterprise of other nation : it may great encourage we upon so just ground , as be our right , and upon so sacred a intent , as to plant religion ( our right and intent be meet foundation for the same ) to prosecute effectual the full possession of those so ample and pleasant country appertain unto the crown of England : the same ( as be to be conjecture by infallible argument of the world end approach ) be now arrive unto the time by God prescribe of their vocation , the due time if ever their call unto the knowledge of God may be expect . which also be very probable by the revolution “ of ulrngthese and course of God word and religion , which from the heathen unto beginning have move from the east , towards , and at last Christianity , unto the west , where it be like to end , unless the same d ^ moveth begin again where it do in the east , which be to circular . expect a like world again . but we be assure of the contrary by the prophesy of Christ , whereby we gather , that after his word preach throughout the world shall | be the end . and as the gospel when it descend westward begin in the south , and afterward spread into the north of Europe : even so , as the same have begin in the south country of America , no less hope may be gather that it will also spread into the north . these consideration may help to suppress all dread rise of hard event in attempt make this way by other nation , as also of the heavy success and issue in the late enterprise make by a worthy gentleman our countryman sir Humphrey Gilbert knight , who be the first of our nation that carry people to erect a habitation and government in those northerly country of America . about which , albeit he have consume much substance , and lose his life at last , his people also perish for the most part : yet the mystery thereof we must leave unto God , and judge charitable both of the cause ( which be just in all pretence ) and of the person , who be very zealous in prosecute the same , deserve honourable remembrance for his good mind , and expense of life in so virtuous a enterprise . whereby nevertheless , lest any man shall be dismay by example of other folk calamity , and misdeem that God do resist all attempt intend that way : i think good , so far as my self 38 be a eye witness , to deliver the circumstance and manner of our proceed in that action : in which the gentleman be so infortunate encumber with want , and worse match with many ill dispose people , that his rare judgement and regiment premeditate for those affair , be subject to tolerate abuse , and in sundry extremity to hold on a course , more to uphold credit , then likely in his own conceit happy to succeed . the issue of such action , be always miserable , not guide by God , who abhor confusion and disorder , have leave this for admonition ( be the first attempt by our nation to plant ) unto such as shall take the same cause in hand hereafter not to be discourage from it : but to make man well advise how they handle his so the plant high and excellent matter , as the carriage be of his word into those very mighty and vast country . a action doubtless not to be intermeddle with base purpose ; as reverence . many have make the same but a colour to shadow action ill action otherwise scarce justifiable : which do excite God heavy colour by judgement in the end , to the terrify of weak mind Prete ” ce ° f from the cause , without ponder his just proceed : and do also incense foreign prince against our attempt how just soever , who can not but deem the sequel very dangerous unto their state ( if in those part we shall grow to strength ) see the very beginning be enter with spoil . and with this admonition denounce upon zeal towards God cause , also towards those in who appears disposition honourable unto this action of plant Christian people and religion in those remote and barbarous nation of America ( unto who i wish all happiness ) i will now proceed to make relation brief , yet particular , of our voyage undertake with sir Humphrey Gilbert , begin , continue , and end adverse . when first sir Humphrey Gilbert undertake they the first and western discovery of America , and have procure from eat ^ epara - her majesty a very large commission to inhabit and possess Humphrey gil - at his choice all remote and heathen land not in the actuali bert . a constant resolution of sir Humphrey Gilbert . possession of any christian prince , the same commission exemplify with many privilege , such as in his discretion he may demand , very many gentleman of good estimation draw unto he , to associate he in so commendable a enterprise , so that the preparation be expect to grow unto a puissant fleet , able to encounter a king power by sea : nevertheless , among a multitude of voluntary man , their disposition be diverse , which breed a jar , and make a division in the end , to the confusion of that attempt even before the same be begin . and when the ship be in a manner prepare , and man ready upon the coast to go aboard : at that time some break consort , and follow course degenerate from the voyage before pretend : other fail of their promise contract , and the great number be disperse , leave the general with few of his assure friend , with who he adventure to sea : where have taste of no less misfortune , he be short drive to retire home with the loss of a tall ship , and ( more to