order agree upon by the captain and master to be observe by the fleet of sir Humphrey Gilbert . irst the admiral to carry his flag by day , and his light by night . 2 item , if the admiral shall shorten his sail by night , than to show two light until he be answer again by every ship show one light for a short time . 3 item , if the admiral after his shorten of sail , as aforesaid , shall make more sail again : than he to show three light one above another . 4 item , if the admiral shall happen to hull in the night , than to make a waver light over his other light , waver the light upon a pole . 5 item , if the fleet shall happen to be scatter weather , or other mishap , then so soon as one shall descry another , to hoist both top sail twice , if the weather will serve , and to strike they twice again ; but if the weather serve not , than to hoist the main top sail twice , and forthwith to strike it twice again . 6 item , if it shall happen a great fog to fall , then present every ship to bear up with the admiral , if there be wind : but if it be a calm , than every ship to hull , and so to lie at hull till it be clear . and if the fog do continue long , than the admiral to shoot off two piece every evening , and every ship to answer it with one shot : and every man bear to the ship , that be to leeward so near as he may . 7 item , every master to give charge unto the watch to look out well , for lay aboard one of another in the night , and in fog . 8 item , every evening every ship to hail the admiral , and so to fall astern he , sail through the ocean : and be on the coast , every ship to hail he both morning and evening . 9 item , if any ship be in danger any way , by leak or otherwise , than she to shoot off a piece , and present to hang out one light , whereupon every man to bear towards she , answer she with one light for a short time , and so to put it out again ; thereby to give knowledge that they have see her token . 10 item , whensoever the admiral shall hang out her ensign in the main shrowd , than every man to come aboard she , as a token of counsel . 11 item , if there happen any storm or contrary wind to the fleet after the discovery , whereby they be separate : 1583 . than every ship to repair unto their last good port , there to meet again . our course agree upon . he course first to be take for the discovery be to bear direct to cape raze , the most southerly cape of newfound land ; and there to harbour our self either in Rogneux or Fermous , be the first place appoint for our Rendez vous , and the next harbour unto the northward of cape raze : and therefore every ship separate from the fleet to repair to that place so fast as God shall permit , whether you shall fall to the southward or to the northward of it , and there to stay for the meeting of the whole fleet the space of ten day : and when you shall depart , to leave mark . a direction of our course unto the newfound land . begin our course from Silley , the near be by westsouthwest ( if the wind serve ) until such time as we have bring our self in the latitude of 43 or 44 degree , because the ocean be subject much to southerly wind in June and July . than to take traverse from 45 to 47 degree of latitude , if we be enforce by contrary wind : and not to go to the northward of the height of 47 degree of septentrionali latitude by no mean : if God shall not enforce the contrary ; but to do your endeavour to keep in the height of 46 degree , so near as you can possible , because cape raze lie about that height . note . if by contrary wind we be drive back upon the coast of England , than to repair unto Silley for a place of our assembly or meeting . if we be drive back by contrary wind that we can not pass the coast of Ireland , than the place of our assembly to be at bear haven or Baltimore haven . if we shall not happen to meet at cape raze , than the place of Rendez vous to be at cape Briton , or the near harbour unto the westward of cape Briton . if by mean of other ship we may not safe stay there , then to rest at the very next safe port to the westward ; every ship leave their mark behind they for the more certainty of the after comer to know where to find they . the mark that every man ought to leave in such a case , be of the general private device write by himself , seal also in close wax , and deliver unto every ship one scroll , which be not to be open until occasion require , whereby every man be certify what to leave for instruction of after comer : that every of we come into any harbour or river may know who have be there , or whether any be still there up high into the river , or depart , and which way . order thus determine , and promise mutual give to be observe , every man withdraw himself unto his charge , the anchor be already weigh , and our ship under sail , have a soft gale of wind , we begin our voyage upon Tuesday the eleven day of June , in the year of our lord 1583 , have in our fleet ( at our departure from causet bay ) these ship , who name and burden , with the name of the captain and master of they , i have also insert , as follow : 1 the delight ali & s the George , of burden 120 ton , be admiral : in which go the general , and William winter captain in she and part owner , and Richard clerk master . 2 the bark Raleigh set forth by m . Walter Raleigh , of the burden of 200 ton , be then viceadmiral : in which go m . butler captain , and Robert Davis , of Bristol master . 3