golden hind , sudden her light be out , whereof as it be in a moment , we lose the sight , and withal our watch cry , the general be cast away , which be too true . for in that moment , the frigate be devour and swallow up of the sea yet still we look out all that night , and ever after , until we arrive upon the coast of England : omit no small sail at sea , unto which we give not the token between we , agree upon , to have perfect knowledge of each other , if we shall at any time be separate . in great torment of weather , and peril of drown , it please God to send safe home the golden hind , which arrive in Falmouth , the 22 day of September , be Sunday , not without as great danger escape in a flaw , come from the southeast , with such thick mist , that we can not discern land , to put in right with the haven . from Falmouth we go to Dartmouth , and lie there at anchor before the range , while the captain go aland , to inquire if there have be any news of the frigate , which sail well , may happy have be before we . also to certify sir John Gilbert , brother unto the general of our hard success , who the captain desire ( while his man be yet aboard he , and be witness of all occurrent in that voyage , ) it may please he to take the examination of every person particular , in fi - ey Gilbert . discharge of he and their faithful endeavour . sir John a fit motion of the captain unto sir hum - Gilbert refuse so to do , hold himself satisfy with report make by the captain : and not altogether despairing of his brother safety , offer friendship and courtesy to the captain and his company , require to have his bark bring into the harbour : in furtherance whereof , a boat be send to help to tow she in . nevertheless , when the captain return aboard his ship , he find his man bend to depart , every man to his home : and then the wind serve to proceed high upon the coast : they demand money to carry they home , some to London , other to Harwich , and elsewhere , ( if the bark shall be carry into Dartmouth , and they discharge , so far from home ) or else to take benefit of the wind , then serve to draw near home , which shall be a less charge unto the captain , and great ease unto the man , have else far to go . reason accompany with necessity persuade the captain , who send his lawful excuse and cause of his sudden departure unto sir John Gilbert , by the boat of Dartmouth , and from thence the golden hind depart , and take harbour at Waimouth . all the man tire with the tediousness of so unprofitable a voyage to their seem : in which their long expense of time , much toil and anillrecom - labour , hard diet and continual hazard of life be un - pense - recompensed : their captain nevertheless by his great charge , impair great thereby , yet comfort in the goodness of God , and his undoubted providence follow he in all that voyage , as it do always those at other time , whosoever have confidence in he alone . yet have we more near feel and perseverance of his powerful hand and protection , when God do bring we together with other into one same peril / in which he leave they , and deliver we , make we thereby the beholder , but not partaker of their ruin . even so , among very many difficulty , discontentment , mutiny , conspiracy , sickness , mortality , spoiling , and wrack by sea , which be affliction , more than in so small a fleet , or so short a time may be suppose , albeit true in every particularity , as partly by the former relation may be collect , and some i suppress with silence for their sake live , it please God to support this company , ( of which only one man die of a malady inveterate , and long infest ) : the rest keep together in reasonable contentment and concord , beginning , continue , and end the voyage , which none else do accomplish , either not please with the action , or impatient of want , or prevent by death . thus have i deliver the content of the enterprise and last action of sir Humphrey Gilbert knight , faithful , for so much as i think meet to be publish : wherein may always appear , ( though he be extinguish ) some spark of his virtue , he remain firm and resolute in a purpose by all pretence honest and godly , as be this , to discover , possess , and to reduce unto the service of God , and christian piety , those remote and heathen country of America , not actual possess by Christians , and most right appertain unto the crown of England : unto the which , as his zeal deserve high commendation : even so , he may just be tax of temerity and presumption ( rather ) in two respect . first , when yet there be only probability , not a certain and determinate place of habitation select , neither any demonstration of commodity there in esse , to induce his follower : nevertheless , he both be too prodigal of 76 his own patrimony , and too careless of other man expense , to employ both he and their substance upon a ground imagine good . the which fall , very like his associate be promise , and make it their best reckon to be salve some other way , which please not God to prosper in his first and great preparation . second , when by his former preparation he be enfeeble of ability and credit , to perform his designments , as it be impatient to abide in expectation better opportunity and mean , which God may raise , he thrust himself again into the action , for which he be not fit , presume the cause pretend on God behalf , will carry he to the desire end . into which , have thus make reentry , he can not yield again to withdraw , though he see no encouragement to proceed , lest his credit foil in his first attempt , in a second shall utter be disgrace . between extremity , he make a right adventure , put all to God and good fortune , and which be worst , refuse not to entertain every person and mean whatsoever , to furnish out this expedition , the success whereof have be declare . but such be the infinite bounty of God , who from ■ Affllctimis every evil derive good . for beside that fruit may grow in time of our travel into those . northwest land , the cross , turmoil , and affliction , both in the preparation and execution of this voyage , do correct the intemperate humour , which before we note to be in this gentleman , and make unsavoury , and less delightful his other manifold virtue . then as he be refine , and make near draw unto the image of God : so it please the divine will to resume he unto himself , whither both he , and every other high and noble mind , have always aspire .