continue there from morning until night . during which time there pass sundry discourse , touch affair past , and to come , lament great the loss of his great ship , more of the man , but most of all of his book and note , and what else i know not , for which he be out of measure grieve , the same doubtless being some matter of more importance than his book , which i can not draw from he : yet by circumstance i gather , the same to be the ore which Daniel the saxon have bring unto he in the new find land . whatsoever it be , the remembrance touch he so deep , as not able to contain himself , he beat his boy in great rage , even at the same time , so long after the miscarry of the great ship , because upon a fair day , when we be becalm upon the coast of the new find land , near unto cape race , he send his boy aboard the admiral , to fetch certain thing : among which , this be chief , be yet forget and leave behind . after which time he can never convenient send again 7i circumstance to be well observe in our general , import the ore to be of a silver i . aboard the great ship , much less he doubt her ruin so near at hand . herein my opinion be better confirm diverse , and by sundry conjecture , which make i have the great hope of this rich i . for where as the general have never before good conceit of these north part of the world : now his mind be whole fix upon the new find land . and as before he refuse not to grant assignment liberal to they that require the same into these north part , now he become contrary affect , refuse to make any so large grant , especial of saint Johns , which certain english merchant make suit for , offer to employ their money and travel upon the same : yet neither by their own suit , nor of other of his own company , who he seem willing to pleasure , it can be obtain . also lay down his determination in the spring follow , for dispose of his voyage then to be reattempt : he assign the captain and master of the golden hind , unto the south discovery , and reserve unto himself the north , affirm that this voyage have win his heart from the south , and that he be now become a northern man altogether . last , be demand what mean he have at his arrival in England , to compass the charge of so great preparation as he intend to make the next spring : have determine upon two fleet , one for the south , another for the north : leave that to i ( he reply ) i will ask a penny of no man . i will bring good tiding unto her majesty , who will be so gracious , to lend i 10000 pound , will we therefore to be of good cheer : for he do thank God ( he say ) with all his heart , for that he have see , the same be enough for we all , and that we need not to seek any further . and these last word he will often repeat , with demonstration of great fervency of mind , be himself very confident , and settle in belief of inestimable good by this voyage : which the great number of his follower nevertheless mistrust altogether , not be make partaker of those secret , which the general keep unto himself . yet all of they that be live , may be witness of his word and protestation , which spare i have deliver . leave the issue of this good hope unto God , who know the truth only , 8c can at his good pleasure bring the same to light : i will hasten to the end of this wilfalnes in tragedy , which must be knit up in the person of our then generau - general . and as it be God ordinance upon he , even so the vehement persuasion and intreaty of his friend can nothing avail , to divert he from a wilful resolution of go through in his frigate , which be overcharge upon their deck , with fight , netting , and small artillery , too cumbersome for so small a boat , that be to pass through the ocean sea at that season of the year , when by course we may expect much storm of foul weather , whereof indeed we have enough . but when he be entreat by the captain , master , a ° fa and other his well willer of the hind , not to venture in the frigate , this be his answer : i will not forsake my little company go homeward , with who i have pass so many storm and peril . and in very truth , he be urge to be so over hard , by hard report give of he , that he be afraid of the sea , albeit this be rather rashness , then advise resolution , to prefer the wind of a vain report to the weight of his own life . see he will not bend to reason , he have provision out of the hind , such as be want aboard his frigate . and so we commit he to god protection , 8c set he aboard his pinnace , we be more than 300 league onward of our way home . by that time we have bring the island of Azores south of we , yet we then keep much to the north , until we have get into the height and elevation of England : we meet with very foul weather , and terrible sea , break short and high pyramid wise . the reason whereof seem to proceed either of hilly ground high a resolute and christian - like say in a distress sir Humphrey Gilbert drown . arrival in England of the golden hind . and low within the sea , ( as we see hill and dale upon the land ) upon which the sea do mount and fall : or else the cause proceed of diversity of wind , shift often in sundry point : all which have power to move the great ocean , which again be not present settle , so many sea do encounter together , as there have be diversity of wind . howsoever it come to pass , man which all their life time have occupy the sea , never see more outrageous sea . we have also upon our main yard , a apparition of a litde fire by night , which seaman do call Castor and Pollux . but we have only one , which they take a evil sign of more tempest : the same be usual in storm . Monday the nine of September , in the afternoon , the frigate be near cast away , oppress by wave , yet at that time recover : and give forth sign of joy , the general sit abaft with a book in his hand , cry out unto we in the hind ( so oft as we do approach within hear ) we be as near to heaven by sea as by land . reiterate the same speech , well beseem a soldier , resolute in Jesus Christ , as i can testify he be . the same Monday night , about twelve of the clock , or not long after , the frigate be ahead of we in the