unseemly custom to honest manner , from disorder riotous rout and company to a well govern common wealth , and withal , shall teach mechanical occupation , art , and liberali science : and which stand they most upon , they shall | be defend from the cruelty of their tyrannical ! and blood suck neighbour the cannibal , whereby infinite number of their life shall | be preserve . and last , by this mean many of their poor innocent child shall be preserve from the bloody knife of the sacrificer , a most horrible and detestable custom in the sight of God and man , now and ever heretofore use among they . many other thing can i here allege to this purpose , be it not that i do fear lest i have already more than half tire the reader . the seven chapter show that the plant there , be not a matter of such charge or difficulty , as many will make it seem to be . now therefore for proof , that the plant in these part be a thing that may be do without the aid of the prince power and purse , contrary to the allega - 120 cion of many malicious person , who will neither be actor in any good action themselves , nor so much as afford a good word to the set forward thereof : and that worse be , they will take upon they to make molehill seem mountain , and fly elephant , to the end they may discourage other , that be very well or indifferent affect to the matter , be like unto Esop dog , which neither will eat hay himself , nor suffer the poor hungry ass to feed thereon : i say and affirm that God have provide such mean for the furtherance of this enterprise , as do stand we in stead of great treasure : for first by reason that it have please God of his great goodness , of long time to hold his merciful hand over this realm , in preserve the people of the same , both from slaughter by the sword , and great death by plague , pestilence , or otherwise , there be at this day great number ( god he know ) which live in such penury and want , as they can be content to hazard their life , and to serve one year for meat , drink and apparel only , without wage , in hope thereby to amend their estate : which be a matter in such like journey , of no small charge to the prince . Moreover , thing in the like journey of great price and cost as victuali ( whereof there be great plenty to be have in that country without money ) and powder , great artillery , or corselet be not needful in so plentiful and chargeable manner , as the show of such a journey may present : for a small quantity of all these , to furnish the fort only , will suffice until such time as diverse commodity may be find out in those part , which may be think well worthy a great charge . also the peculiar benefit of archer which God have bless this land withal before all other nation , will stand we in great stead among those naked people . another help we have also , which in such like case be a matter of marvellous cost , and will be in this journey procure very easy ( that be to say ) to transport yearly 121 [ three . i78 . i aswell our people , as all other necessary needful for they into those part by the fleet of merchant , that yearly venture for fish in newfoundland , be not far distant from the country mean to be inhabit , who common go with empty vessel in effect , save some little fraught with salt . and thus it appear that the soldier wage , and the transportation may be defray for far less sum of money than the detractor of this enterprise have give out . again , this intend voyage for conquest , have in like manner many other singular privilege wherewith God have , as it be , with his holy hand bless the same before all other . for after once we be depart the coast of England , we may pass straightway thither , without danger of be drive into any the country of our enemy , or doubtful friend : for common one wind serve to bring we thither , which seidome fail from the middle of Januarie to the middle of may , a benefit which the mariner make great account of , for it be a pleasure that they have in a few or none of other journey . also the passage be short , for we may go thither in thirty or forty day at the most , have but a indifferent wind , and return continual in twenty or four and twenty day at the most . and in the same our journey , by reason it be in the ocean , and quite out of the way from the intercourse of other countries , we may safe trade and traffic without peril of piracy : neither shall our ship , people , or good there , be subject to arrest or molestation of any pagan potentate , turkish tyrant , yea , or christian prince , which heretofore sometime upon slender occasion in other part have stay our ship and merchandize , whereby great number of our countryman have be utter undo , diverse put to ransom , yea , and some lose their life : a thing so fresh in memory as it need no proof , and be well worthy of consideration . beside , in this voyage we do not cross the burn line , whereby common both beverage and victuali be 122 corrupt , and man health very much impair , neither do we pass the freeze sea , which yield sundry extreme danger : but have a temperate climate at all time of the year , to serve our turn . and last , there need no delay by the way for take in of fresh water and fuel , ( a thing usual do in long journey ) because , as i say above , the voyage be not long , and the fresh water take in there , our man here in England at their return home have find so wholesome and sweet , that they have make choice to drink it before our beer and ale . behold here