with a puissant army of lib . cap . 39 Frumentius in great favour with you queen of the Indians . a other great work of God begin by a man ofmeane birth . Ruffinus the author of this story . Euseb . in his ecclesiastical precise term , and in diverse place make mention how Constantine the great not only enlarge his empire bv the subdue of his next neighbour , but also en - 105 valiant soldier who he have before persuade to christian religion , in proper person himself come even unto this our country of England , then call the island of Britain , bend from he full west , which he whole conquer , make tributary , and settle therein Christian faith , and leave behind he such ruler thereof , as to his wisdom seem best . from thence he turn his force towards the north coast of the world , and there utter subdue the rude and cruel nation of the scythian , whereof part by friendly persuasion , part by main strength , he reduce the whole to Christian faith . afterwards he determine with himself to search out what strange people inhabit in the uttermost part of the south . and with great hazard and labour , make his journey thither , at last become victor over they all , even to the country of the blemmyans , and the remote . / ethiopian , that now be the people of presbyter John , who yet till this day continue and bear the name of Christians . in the east likewise , what nation soever at that time he can have notice of , he easy win and bring in subjection to the empire . so that to conclude , there be no region in any part of the world , the inhabitant whereof be Gentiles , though unknown unto he , but in time he overcome and vanquish . this worthy beginning of Constantine , both his son succeed his room , and also diverse other emperors afterward to their uttermost endeavour follow and continue , which all the book of Eusebius moor Theodoret in at large set forth . Theodoretus likewise in his eccle - eccle . lib . 5 . siasticall history make mention how Theodosius the caf . 20 . virtuous emperor employ earnest all his time , as well in conquer the gentile to the knowledge of the holy gospel , utter subvert their profane temple and abominable idolatry , as also in extinguish of such Theodoretus usurp ^ ns tyrant as with paganism withstand the plant - cap °^ e . eodern king of christian religion . after ’ who decease his lib . son Honorius and Arcadius be create emperor , 106 1583 . the one of the east , the other of the west , who with all stout godliness most careful imitate the forestep of their father , either in enlarge their territory , or increase the christian flock . moreover , it be report by the say author , that Theodosius junior the emperor , no whit inferior in virtuous life to any of the above name prince , with great study and zeal pursue and prosecute the gentile , subdue their tyrant and country , and utter destroy all their idolatry , convert their soul to acknowledge their only Messiah and creator , and their country to the enlargement of the empire . to be brief , who so list to read Eusebius Pamphilus , Socrates Scholasticus , Theodoritus , Hermia , sozoman , and Euagrius Scholasticus , which all be most sage ecclesiastical ! writer , shall find great store of example of the worthy life of sundry emperor , tend all to the confirmation of my former speech . and for like example of late time , ( yea even in the memory of man ) i shall not need to recite any other than the conquest make of the west and east Indies by the king of Spain and Portugal ! , whereof there be particular mention make in the last chapter of this book . herein have i use more copy of example then otherwise i will have do , save that i have be in pl ^ ce , where this manner of plant the christian faith have be think of some to be scarce lawful , yea , such as do take upon they to be more than mean learn . to these example can encage join many more , but whosoever be not satisfy with these few , may satisfy himself in read at large the author last above recite . thus have i ( as i trust ) prove that we may just trade and traffic with the savage , and lawful plant and inhabit their country . [ the three 107 the three chapter do show the lawful title which the queen most excellent majesty have unto those country , which through the aid of almighty God be mean to be inhabit . 1170 . Owen Gwyneth be then prince of North - wales , nullum tempus occurrit regi . this island be discover by sir Humphrey and his company , in this his last journey . Mutezuma his oration to his subject in presence of Hernando Cortes , which oration be make about the year 1520 . a nd it be very evident that the plant there shall in time right ample enlarge her majesty territory and dominion , or ( i may rather say ) restore to her highness ancient right and interest in those country , into the which a noble and worthy personage , lineal descend from the blood royal , bear in wale , name Madock ap Owen Gwyneth , depart from the coast of England , about the year of our lord God 1170 . arrive and there plant himself and his colony , and afterward return himself into England , leave certain of his people there , as appear in a ancient welsh chronicle , where he then give to certain hand , beast , and fowl sundry Welsh ' name , as the hand of Pengwin , which yet to this day bear the same . there be likewise a foul in the say country call by the same name at this day , and be as much to say in english , as Whitehead , and in truth the say fowl have white head . there be also in those country a fruit call gwynethe which be likewise a welsh word . Moreover , there be diverse other welsh word at this day in use , as David Ingram aforesaid report in his relation . all which most