, good countryman , the manifold benefit , commodity and pleasure heretofore unknown , by God especial blessing not only reveal unto we , but also as it be infuse into our bosom , who though hitherto like dormouse have slumber in ignorance thereof , be like the cat that be loath for their prey to wet their foot : yet if now therefore at the last we will awake , and with willing mind ( set frivolous imagination aside ) become industrious instrument to our self , questio nlesse we shall not only hereby set forth the glory of our heavenly father , but also easy attain to the end of all good purpose that may be wish or desire . and may it not much encourage we to hope for good success in the country of these savage , be a naked kind of people , void of the knowledge of the discipline of war , see that a noble man , be but a subject in this realm ( in the time of our king Henry the second ) by name Strangbow , than earl of Chepstow in south wale , by himself and his ally and assistant , at their own proper charge pass over into Ireland , and there make conquest of the now country , and then kingdom of Lynester , at which time it be very populous and strong , which history our own chronicle do witness ? and why shall we be dismay more than be the Spaniard , who have be able within these few year to conquer , possess and enjoy so large a 123 2 . Decad . lib . ^ . fol . 77 . of the west Indies , in english . canon a be a kind of boat . 3 . Decad . lib . 1 . folio 97 . about the year of our lord 1511 . conquest of the west Indies , folio 43 . and 45 . English . tract of the earth , in the west Indies , as be between the two tropics of cancer and Capricorn , not only in the main firm land of America , which be 47 . degree in latitude from south to north , and do contain 2820 . English mile at the least , that the king of Spain have there in actuali possession , beside many goodly and rich island , as Hispaniola , now call saint Domingo , Cuba , Jamaica , and diverse other , which be both beautiful and full of treasure , not speak any whit at all , how large the say land be from east to west , which in some place be account to be 1500 . English mile at the least from east to west , between the one sea and the other . or why shall our noble nation be dismay , more than be Vasques nun de Valboa , a private gentleman of Spain , who with the number of 70 . Spaniards at Tichiri , give a overthrow unto that mighty king Chemaccus , have a army of a hundred canoas and 5000 . man , and the say Vasques nun not long after , with his small number , do put to flight king chiape his whole army . likewise Hernando Cortes , be also but a private gentleman of Spain , after his departure from the island of Cuba and Acuzamil , and enter into the firm of America , have many most victorious and triumphant conquest , as that at Cyntla , where be accompany with less than 500 Spanish footman , thirteen horseman and six piece of ordinance only , he overthrow 40000 . Indians . the same Cortes with his say number of Spaniard , take prisoner that mighty emperor Mutezuma in his most chief and famous city of Mexico , which at that instant have in it above the number of 50000 . Indians at the least , and in short time after obtain not only the quiet possession of the say city , but also of his whole empire . and in like manner in the country of Peru , which the king of Spain have now in actuali possession , Francisco Pysarro , with the only aid of Diego de Almagro , 124 and Hernando Luche , be all three but private gentleman , be the principali person that first attempt discovery and conquest of the large and rich country of Peru , which through the aid of the almighty , he bring to pass and achieve in the tambo of caxa - malca , ( which be a large place of ground , enclose with wall ) in which place he take the great and mighty prince Atabalipa prisoner , amid the number of 60000 . Indians his subject , which be ever before that day account to be a warlike kind of people , which his great victory it please God to grant unto he in the marvellous year of our lord God 1533 . he not have in his victorie - company above the number of 210 . Spaniard , whereof there be not pass threescore horseman in all : after the take of which prince Atabalipa , he offer unto Pyzarro for his ransom , to fill a great large hall full of gold and silver , and such gold and silver vessel as they then use , even as high as a man may reach with his arm . and the say prince cause the same hall to be mark round about at the say height , which ransom Pyzarro grant to accept . and after , when as this mighty prince have send to his vassal and subject to bring in gold and silver for the fill of the hall , as aforesaid , as namely to the city or town of Quito , Paciacama and Cusco , as also to the Calao of Lima , in which town , as their own writer do affirm , they find a large and fair house , all slate and cover with gold : and when as the say hall be not yet a quarter full , a mutiny arise among the Spaniard , in which it be common give out , that the say prince have politic offer this great ransom under pretence to raise a much more mighty power , whereby the Spaniard shall be take , slay and overthrow : whereupon they grow to this resolution , to put the say prince to death , and to make partition of the gold and silver already bring in , which they present put in execution . And come to make perfect inventory of the