upon who the lot fall , thereby to lighten the boat , which otherways seem impossible to live , offer himself with the first , content to take his adventure glad : which nevertheless Richard clarke , that be master of the admiral , and one of this number , refuse , advise to abide God pleasure , who be able to save all , as well as a few . the boat be carry before the wind , continue six day and night in the ocean , and arrive at last with the man ( alive , but weak ) upon the new find land , save that the foresay Headly , ( who have be late sick ) and another call of we Brasile , of his travel into those country , die by the way , famish , and less able to hold out , than those of better health . for such be these poor man extremity , in cold and wet , to have no better sustenance than their own urine , for six day together . thus who God deliver from drown , he appoint to be famish , who do give limit to man time , and ordain the manner and circumstance of die : who again he will preserve , neither sea , nor famine can confound . for those that arrive upon the new find land , be bring into France by certain french man , then be upon that coast . after this heavy chance , we continue in beat the sea up and down , expect when the weather will clear up , that we may yet bear in with the land , which we judge not far off , either the continent or some 68 island . for we many time , and in sundry place find ground at 50 , 45 , 40 fathom , and less . the ground come upon our lead , be sometime oazy sand , and otherwhile a broad shell , with a little sand about it . our people lose courage daily after this ill success , the weather continue thick and bluster , with increase of cold , winter draw on , which take from they all hope of amendment , sell a assurance of worse weather to grow upon we every day . the leeside of we lay full of flat and danger inevitable , if the wind blow hard at south . some again doubt we be ingulf in the bay of S . Laurence , the coast full of danger , and unto we unknown . but above all , provision wax scant , and hope of supply be go , with loss of our admiral . caute enforce we to return home again . those in the frigate be already pinch with spare allowance , and want of clothes chief : whereupon they beseech the general to return for England , before they all perish . and to they of the golden hind , they make sign of their distress , point to their mouth , and to their clothes thin and ragged : then immediate they also of the golden hind , grow to be of the same opinion and desire to return home . the former reason have also move the general to have compassion of his poor man , in who he see no want of good will , but of mean fit to perform the action they come for , resolve upon retire : and call the captain and master of the hind , he yield they many reason , enforce this unexpected return , withal protest himself , great satisfy with that he have see , and know already . reiterate these word , be content , we have see enough , and take no care of expense past : i will set you forth royal the next spring , if God send we safe home . therefore i pray you let we no long strive here , where we fight against the element . omit circumstance , how unwilling the captain and master of the hind condescend to this motion , his a monster of the sea . September 2 . own company can testify : yet comfort with the general promise of a speedy return at spring , and induce by other apparent reason , prove a impossibility , to accomplish the action at that time , it be conclude on all hand to retire . so upon Saturday in the afternoon the 31 of August , we change our course , and return back for England , at which very instant , even in wind about , there pass along between we and towards the land which we now forsake a very lion to our seem , in shape , hair and colour , not swim after the manner of a beast by move of his foot , but rather slide upon the water with his whole body ( except the leg ) in sight , neither yet dive under , and again rise above the water , as the manner be , of whale , dolphin , tunise , porpoise , and all other fish : but confident show himself above water without hide : notwithstanding , we present our self in open view and gesture to amaze he , as all creature will be common at a sudden gaze and sight of man . thus he pass along turn his head to and fro , yawn and gape wide , with ugly demonstration of long tooth , and glare eye , and to bid we a farewell ( come right against the hind ) he send forth a horrible voice , roar or bellow as do a lion , which spectacle we all behold so far as we be able to discern the same , as man prone to wonder at every strange thing , as this doubtless be , to see a lion in the ocean sea , or fish in shape of a lion . what opinion other have thereof , and chief the general himself , i forbear to deliver : but he take it for bonum omen , rejoice that he be to war against such a enemy , if it be the devil . the wind be large for England at our return , but very high , and the sea rough , insomuch as the frigate wherein the general go be almost swallow up . Monday in the afternoon we pass in the sight of cape race , have make as much way in little more than two day and night back again , as before we have do in eight day from cape race , unto the place where our ship perish . which hindrance thitherward , and speed back again , be to be impute unto the swift current , as well as to the wind , which we have more large in our return . this Monday the general come aboard the hind to have the surgeon of the hind to dress his foot , which he hurt by tread upon a nail : at what time we comfort each other with hope of hard success to be all past , and of the good to come . So agree to carry out light always by night , that we may keep together , he depart into his frigate , be by no mean to be entreat to tarry in the hind , which have be more for his security . immediate after follow a sharp storm , which we overpass for that time . praise be God . the weather fair , the general come aboard the hind our last con - again , to make merry together with the captain , ference mth master , and company , which be the last meeting , and on Generatt ‘