, they make their course again direct towards the south , and begin to discover , people , and plant upon the west side of the hither India at goa , mangalor , Cananor , Calecut and Cochin , and the island of Zeilarn . and here i think good to remember to you , that after their plant upon this coast , their force grow so great that they be able to compel all the moor , the subject of the mighty emperor of the Turk to pay tribute unto they , ever as they pass the gulf of Arabia , from the port of Mecca in Arabia fcelix , where Mahomet lie bury , or any of the other port of the say land , ever as they pass to and from the haven of Cochin , Calecut and Cananor , and by their martial manner of discipline practise in those part , the great 128 and mighty prince the sophy emperor of the persian , and profess enemy to the Turk , come to the knowledge and use of the caliver shoot , and to interlace and join footman with his horseman , si thence which time the persian have grow to that strength and force , that they have give many mighty and great overthrow to the Turk , to the great quiet of all Christendom . and from the island of Zeilarn aforesaid , they also discover more east in pass the gulf of Bengala , and so pass the notable and famous river of Ganges , where he have his fall into the main ocean , under the tropic of cancer , and to the cape of Malaca , and unto the great and large island of Sumatra , Java major , Java minor , Mindanao , Palobane , celebe , Gilolo , Tidore , Mathin , Borneo , Machian , terenate , and all other the island of Molucques and spicery , and so east alongst the coast of Cathaia , to the port of China , these be the Zaiton and Quinsay , and to the island of Zipango and Japan , situate in the east , in 37 . degree of septentrionali from England . latitude and in 195 . of longitude . these be their at these noble and worthy discovery . here also be not to be island have forget , that in the year of our lord , 1501 . that famous and worthy gentleman Americus Vespucius do the ’ discover , people , and plant to their use the hold and fame of the fort which they have in Brasill , of who ( he be queen most but a private gentleman ) the whole country or firm efce ^ ent Maland of the west Indies , be common call and know ™ by the name of America . i do great doubt lest i seem over tedious in the recital of the particular discovery and conquest of the east and west Indies , wherein i be the more bold to urge the patience of the reader , to the end it may most manifest and at large appear , to all such as be not acquaint with the history , how the king of Portugal , who country for popularity and number of people , be scarce comparable to some three shire of England , and the king of Spain likewise , who natural country do not great abound with people , both vin 129 i which prince by mean of their discovery within less than 90 . year past , have as it appear both mighty and marvellous enlarge their territory and dominion through their own industry by the assistance of the omnipotent , who aid we shall not need to doubt , see the cause and quarrel which we take in hand tend to his honour and glory , by the enlargement of the christian faith . to conclude , since by christian duty we stand bind chief to further all such act as do tend to the increase the true flock of Christ by reduce into the right way those lose sheep which be yet astray : and that we shall therein follow the example of our right virtuous predecessor of renown memory , and leave unto our posterity a divine memoriali of so godly a enterprise : let we i say for the consideration allege , enter into judgement with our self , whether this action may belong to we or not , the rather for that this voyage through the mighty assistance of the omnipotent God , shall take our desire effect ( whereof there be no just cause of doubt . ) then shall her majesty dominion be enlarge , her highness ancient title just confirm , all odious idleness from this our realm utter banish , diverse decay town repair , and many poor and needy person relieve , and estate of such as now live in want shall be embetter , the ignorant and barbarous idolater teach to know Christ , the innocent defend from their bloody tyrannical neighbour , the diabolical custom of sacrifice humane creature abolish . all which ( no man doubt ) be thing grateful in the sight of our saviour Christ , and tend to the honour and glory of the Trinity . bee of good cheer therefore , for he that can err have say : that before the end of the world , his word shall be preach to all nation , which good work i trust be reserve for our nation to accomplish in these part : wherefore my dear countryman , be not dismay : 13 ° for the power of God be nothing diminish , nor the love that he have to the preach and plant of the gospel any whit abate . shall we then doubt he will be less ready most mighty and miraculous to assist our nation in this quarrel , which be chief and principal undertake for the enlargement of the christian faith abroad , and the banishment of idleness at home , than he be to Columbus , Vasques , nun , Hernando Cortes , and Francis Pizarro in the west : and Vasques de Gama , Peter Alvares , and Alonso de Albuquerque in the east ? let we therefore with cheerful mind and courageous heart , give the attempt , and leave the sequel to almighty God : for if he be on our part , what force it who bee against we ? thus leave the correction and reformation unto the gentle reader , whatsoever be in this treatise too much or too little , otherwise unperfect , i take leave , and so end .