a true report of the late discovery , and possession take in the right of the crown of England of the newfound land , by that valiant and worthy gentleman , sir Humphrey Gilbert knight . wherein be also brief set down , her highness lawful title thereunto , and the great and manifold commodity , that be likely to grow thereby , to the whole realm in general , and to the adventurer in particular : together with the easiness and shortness of the voyage . write by sir George Peckham knight , the chief adventurer , and furtherer of sir Humphrey gilbert voyage to newfound land the first chapter , wherein the argument of the book be contain . t be my fortune ( good reader ) not master ed - many day pass , to meet with a right ward honest and discreet gentleman , who accompany that valiant and worthy knight sir Humphrey Gilbert , in this last journey for the western discovery , and be owner and captain of the only vessel which be as yet return from thence . by he i understand that sir Humphrey depart the coast of England the eleven of June last pass , with five sail of ship , from caushen bay near plymouth , whereof one of the best forsake his company , the thirteenth day of the same month , and return into England . the other four ( through the assistance of almighty God ) do arrive at saint Johns haven , in newfound 89 sir Humphrey land , the 3 . of August last . upon who arrival all Gilbert do Masters and chief mariner of the english fleet , saint Johns w ^ ich be in the say haven before , endeavour to haven in fraught themselves with fish , repair unto sir Humphrey , newfound who he make acquaint with the effect of his com - land , the 3 . of mission : which be do , he promise to entreat they ^ » 1583 and eir good well and honourable as do become she ' majesty lieutenant . they do all welcome he in the best sort that they can , and show he and his all such courtesy as the place can afford or yield . then he go to view the country , be well accompany with most of his captain and soldier . they find the same very temperate , but somewhat warm than England at that season of the year , replenish with among these beast and great store of foul of diverse kind : and there be of sunjry sort , both in the salt water , and in the of a beast of rresh , in so great plenty as may suffice to victuali and 7 inche and army , and they be very easy take . what sundry ahalfeover . other commodity for this realm right necessary , the same do yield , you shall understand in this treatise hereafter , in place more convenient . on Monday be the five of August , the general cause his tent to be set upon the side of a hill , in the view of all the fleet of english man and stranger , which be in number between thirty and fourty sail : then be accompany with all his captain , master , gentleman and other soldier , he cause all the master , and principali officer of the ship , aswell Englishmen as Spaniard , Portugal , and of other nation , to repair unto his tent : and then and there , in the presence of they all , he do cause his commission under the great seal of England to be open and solemn read unto they , sir Humphrey whereby be grant unto he , his heir , and assign , tookepossession by the queen most excellent majesty , many great and of the new - [ arge royalty , liberty , and privilege . the effect whereof be signify unto the stranger by a inter - crowne of preter , he take possession of the say land in the right England . of the crown of England by dig of a turf and receive the same with a Hasell wand , deliver unto he , after the manner of the law and custom of England . then he signify unto the company both stranger and other , that from thenceforth , they be to live in that land , as the territory appertain to the crown of England , and to be govern by such law as by good advice shall be set down , which in all point ( so near as may be ) shall be agreeable to the law of England : and for to put the same in execution , present he ordain and establish three law . first , that religion public exercise , shall be such , and none other , then be use in the church of England . the second , that if any person shall be lawful convict of any practice against her majesty , her crown and dignity , to be adjudge as traitor accord to the law of England . the three , if any shall speak dishonourable of her majesty , the party so offend , to loose his ear , his ship and good , to be confiscate to the use of the general . all man do very willing submit themselves to these law . than he cause the queen majesty arm to be engrave , set up , and erect with great solemnity . after this , diverse Englishman make suit unto sir humh three law establish there by sir Humphrey . sundry person become tenant to sir Humphrey , and do maintain frey to have of he by inheritance , their accustom possession for stage , stand and dry place , in sundry place of in iver that land for their fish , as a thing that they do make ? * ete ‘ great account of , which he grant unto they in fee farm . and by this mean he have possession maintain for he , in many part of that country . to be brief , he do let , set , give and dispose of many thing , as absolute governor there , by virtue of her majesty letter patent . and after their ship be repair , whereof one he be drive to leave behind , both for want of man sufficient to furnish she , as also to carry home such sick person as be not able to proceed any further : he depart from thence the 20 . of August , with the other