colour : their boat be make of the bark of birch tree , with the which they fish and take great store of seal , and as far as we can understand since our come thither , that be not their habitation , but they come from the main land out of hot country , to catch the say seal and other necessary for their live . of certain cape , that be to say , the double cape , the point cape , cape royal , and the cape of milk : of the mountain of grange : of the hand of dove house : and of the great fish of cod . upon the 13 . of that month we come to our ship again with our boat on purpose to sail forward because the weather be fair , and upon Sunday we cause service to be say : then on Monday be the 15 . of the month we depart from breast , and sail towards the south to take a view of the land that there we have see , that seem unto we to be two hand : but when we be amid the bay , we know it to be firm land , where be a great double cape one above the other , and therefore we name it the double cape . in the entrance of the bay we sound , and find it to be a hundred fathom round about we . from breast to the double cape there be about 20 . league , and about five or six league beyond we sound again and find 40 fathom water . the say land lie north - east and Southwest . the next day be the 16 of the month we sail along the say coast towards the southwest , and by south about 35 league from the double cape , where we find very steep and wild hill , among the which be see certain small cabban , which we in the country call grange , and therefore we name they the hill of the grange . 189 A . D . 1534 - boat make of the bark of birch tree . the other land and mountain be all craggy , cleave and cut , and betwixt they and the sea , there be other hand , but low . the day before through the dark mist and fog of the weather , we can not have sight of any land , but in the evening we spy a entrance into the land , by a river among the say hill of grange , and a cape lie towards the southwest about 3 league from we . the say cape be on the top of it blunt - pointed , and also towards the sea it end in a point , wherefore we name it the point cape , on the north side of which there be a plain hand . and because we will have notice of the say entrance , to see if there be any good haven , we strike sail for that night . the next day be the 17 of the month we have stormy weather from Northeast , wherefore we take our way towards the southwest until Thursday morning , and we go about 37 league , till we come athwart a bay full of round hand like dove house , and therefore we name they the dove house . and from the bay of S . Julian , from the which to . a cape that lie south and by west , which we call cape royal , there be 7 . league , and towards the west southwest side of the say cape , there be another that beneath be all craggy , and above round . on the north side of which about half a league there lie a low hand : that cape we name the cape of milk . between these two cape there be certain low hand , above which there be also certain other that show that there be some river . about two league from cape royal we sound and find 20 fathom water , and there be the great fish of cod that possible may be : for stay for our company , in less than a hour we take above a hundred of they . 190 of certain hand that lie between cape royal , and the cape of milk . the next day be the 18 of the month , the wind with such rage turn against we , that we be constrain to go back towards cape royal , think there to find some harbour , and with our boat go to discover between the cape royal , and the cape of milk , and find that above the low hand there be a great and very deep gulf , within which be certain hand . the say gulf on the southside be shut up . the foresay low ground be on one of the side of the entrance , and cape royal be on the other . the say low ground do stretch themselves more than half a league within the sea it be a plain country , but a ill soil : and in the midst of the entrance thereof , there be a hand . the say gulf in latitude be fourty eight degree and a half , and in longitude * . that night we find no harbour , and therefore we launch out into the sea , leave the cape towards the west . of the hand call S . John . from the say day until the 24 of the month be saint John day we have both stormy weather and wind against we , with such darkness and mist , that until saint Johns day , we can have no sight of any land , and then have we sigh of a cape of land , that from cape royal lie Southwest about 35 league , but that day be so foggy and misty , that we can not come near land , and because it be S . Johns day , we name it cape S . John . of certain hand call the hand of Margaulx , and of the kind of beast and bird that there be find . of the hand of Brion , and cape dolphin . the next day be the 25 . of the month , the weather be also stormy , dark , and windy , but yet we sail a part of the day towards west north west , 191 and in the evening we put our self athwart until the second quarter ; when as we depart , then do we by our compass know that we be northwest and by west about seven league and a half from the cape of S . John , and as we be about to hoist sail , the wind turn into the northwest , wherefore we go three hand , southeast , about 15 . league ,