and all be fish that come to net . fl how our man set up a great cross upon the point of the say porte , and the captain of those wild man , after a long oration , be by our captain appease , and content that two of his child shall go with he . upon the 24 of the month , we cause a fair high cross to be make of the height of thirty foot , which be make in the presence of many of they , upon the point of the entrance of the say haven , in the midst whereof we hang up a shield with three flower de Luce inn it , and in the top be carve in the wood with antic letter this posy , vive le kaven roy de France . then before they all we set it upon t0 be the say point . they with great heed behold both they ? y ’ make and set of it up . so soon as it be up , we altogether kneel down before they , with our hand towards heaven , yield God thank : and we make sign unto they , show they the heaven , and that all our salvation depend only on he which in they dwell : whereat they show a great admiration , look first one at another , and then upon 203 the cross . and after we be return to our ship , their captain clad with a old bear skin , with three of his son , and a brother of he with he , come unto we in one of their boat , but they come not so near we as they be wont to do : there he make a long oration unto we , show we the cross we have set up , and make a cross with two finger , then do he show we all the country about we , as if he will say that all be he , and that we shall not set up any cross without his leave . his talk be end , we show he a axe , feign that we will give it he for his skin , to which he listen , for by little and little he come near our ship . one of our fellow that be in our boat , take hold on they , and sudden leap into it , with two or three more , who enforce they to enter into our ship , whereat they be great astonish . but our captain do straightway assure they , that they shall have no harm , nor any injury offer they at all , and entertain they very friendly , make they eat and drink . then do we show they with sign , that the cross be but only set up to be as a light and leader which way to enter into the port , and that we will short come again , and bring good store of iron ware and other thing , but that we will take two of his child with we , and afterward bring they to the say port again : and so we clothe two of they in shirt , and colour coat , with red cap , and put about every one neck a copper chain , whereat they be great content : then give they their old clothes to their fellow that go back again , and we give to each one of those three that go back , a hatchet , and some knife , which make they very glad . after these be go , and have tell the news unto their fellow , in the after noon there come to our ship six boat of they , with five or six man in every one , to take their farewell of those two we have detain to take with we , and bring they some fish , utter many word which we do not understand , 204 i53 +- making sign that they will not remove the cross we have set up . ^ [ how after we be depart from the say port , follow our voyage along the say coast , we go to discover the land lie southeast , and northwest . the next day , be the 25 of the month , we have fair weather , and go from the say port : and be out of the river , we sail Eastnortheast , for after the entrance into the say river , the land be environ about , and make a bay in manner of half a circle , where be in our ship , we may see all the coast sail behind , which we come to seek , the land lie southeast and northwest , the course of which be distant from the river about twenty league . of the cape S . alvise , and cape Memorancie , and certain other land , and how one of our boat touch a rock and sudden go over it . on Monday be the 27 of the month , about sunset we go along the say land , as we have say , lie southeast and northwest , till Wednesday that we see another cape where the land begin to bend towards the east : we go along about 15 league , then do the land begin to turn northward . about three league from the say cape we sound , and find 24 fathom water . the say land be plain , and the fair and most without wood that we have see , with goodly green field and meadow : we name the say cape S . alvise cape , because that be his day : it be 49 degree and a half in latitude , and in longitude * . on Wednesday morning we be on the east side of the cape , and be almost night we go northwestward for to approach near to the say land , which trend north and south . from saint alvise cape to another call cape Memorancie , about fifteen league , the land begin to bend northwest . about three league from the say cape we will needs sound , 205 but we can find no ground at 150 fathom , yet go we along the say land , about ten league , to the latitude of 50 degree . the Saturday follow , degree be the first of August , by sun rise , we have of latitude , certain other land , lie north and Northeast , that be very high and craggy , and seem to be mountains : between which be other low land with wood and river : we go about the say land , as well on the one side as on the other , still bend northwest , to see if it be either a gulf , or a passage , until the five of the month . the distance from one land to the