, strawberry , blackbery , white and red rose , with many other flower of very sweet and pleasant smell . there be also many goodly meadow full of grass , and lake wherein great plenty of salmon be . they call a hatchet in their tongue Cochi , and a knife bacon : we name it ray du cha - the bay of heat . leur , or the bay of heat . of another nation of wild man : of their manner , live and clothe . be certify that there be no passage through the say bay , we hoist sail , and go from saint Martin creek upon Sunday be the 12 . of July , to go and dis - 200 cover further beyond the say bay , and go along the sea coast eastward about eighteen league , till we come to the cape of Prato , where we find the tide very great , but shallow ground , and the sea stormy , so that we be constrain to draw towards shore , between the say cape and a hand lie eastward , about a league from the say cape , where we cast anchor for that night . the next morning we hoist sail to trend the say coast about , which lie north Northeast . but there rise such a stormy and rage wind against we , that we be constrain to come to the place again , from whence we be come : there do we stay all that day till the next that we hoist up sail , and come to the midst of a river five or six league from the cape of Prato northward , and be overthwart the say river , there arise again a contrary wind , with great fog and storm . so that we be constrain upon Tuesday be the fourteenth of the month to enter into the river , and there do we stay till the sixteenth of the month look for fair weather to come out of it : on which day be Thursday , the wind become so rage that one of our ship lose a anchor , and we be constrain to go up high into the river seven or eight league , into a good harbour and ground that we with our boat find out , and through the evil weather , tempest , and darkness that be , we stay in the say harbour till the five and twenty of the month , not be able to put out : in the mean time we see a great multitude of wild man that be fish for mackerel , whereof there be great store . their boat be about 40 , and the person what with man , woman and child two hundred , which after they have haunt our company a while , they come very familiar with their boat to the side of our ship . we give they knife , comb , bead of glass , and other trifle of small value , for which they make many sign of gladness , lift their hand up to heaven dance and sing in their boat . Theise man may very well and true be call wild , because there be no poor people 201 in the world . for i think all that they have together , beside their boat and net be not ’ worth five souse . they go altogether naked save their privity , which be cover with a little skin , and certain old skin that they cast upon they . neither in nature nor in language , do they any whit agree with they which we find first : their head be altogether shave , except one bush of hair which they suffer to grow upon the top of their crown as long as a horse tail , and then with certain leather string bind it in a knot upon their head . they have no other dwelling but their boat , which they turn upside down , and under they they lie themselves all along upon the bare ground . they eat their flesh almost raw , save only that they heat it a little upon embers of coal , so do they their fish . upon Magdalen day we with our boat go to the bank of the river , and free go on shore among they , whereat they make many sign , and all their man in two or three company begin to sing and dance , seem to be very glad of our come . they have cause all the young woman to flee into the wood , two or three except , that stay with they , to each of which we give a comb , and a little bell make of tin , for which they be very glad , thank our captain , rub his arm and breast with their hand . when the man see we give something unto those that have stay , it cause all the rest to come out of the wood , to the end they shall have as much as the other : these woman be about twenty , who altogether in a knot fall upon our captain , touch and rub he with their hand , accord to their manner of cherish and make much of one , who give to each of they a little tin bell : then sudden they begin to dance , and sing many song . there we find great store of mackrel , that they have take upon the shore , with certain net that they make to fish , of a kind of hemfe . hemp that grow in that place where ordinary they abide , for they never come to the sea , but only in fish time . as far as i understand , there grow likewise a 202 kind of millet as big as peason , like unto that which Maiz . grow in Bresil , which they eat in stead of bread . they have great store of it . they call it in their tongue Kapaige . they have also prune ( that be to say dam - tamsin , fig , sin ) which they dry for winter as we do , they call they a ^ es - honesta . they have also fig , nut , apple , and other fruit , and bean , that they call Sahu , their nut Cahehya . if we show they any thing that they have not , nor know not what it be , shake their head , they will say Nohda , which be as much to say , they have it not , nor they know it not . of those thing they have , they will with sign show we how to dress they , and how they grow . they eat nothing that have any taste of salt . they be very great thief , for they will filch and steal whatsoever they can lay hold of ,