they may . this answer we have the sixth day : and the seven in the fornoone we arrive in the english port , and cast anchor aloof from the other ship : which do , i go aboard the admiral , to desire the performance of his promise : who send for Johannes de heart , who be content to restore most of our thing again : whereupon i go aboard his ship to have 174 they restore . this day and the eight i spend in procure such thing as they have rob ; but yet in the end we want a great part thereof . than we be brief with they , and will they either to restore we the rest of our thing which they have , or else we will both enforce they to do it , and also have satisfaction for our victual and merchandise which by their mean be lose in the Chancewell . the nine in the morning we prepare our ship to go near unto they . whereupon their admiral send his boat aboard , and desire to speak with i : than i go aboard unto he , and desire to have our thing with peace and quietness , proffer to make he and the master of the two ship of rochel our umpire , and what they shall advise i will stand unto . hereupon he go aboard the other ship to make peace ; but they will hear no reason , neither yet condescend to restore any thing else which they have of we . than i desire that as i come in peace unto they , they will so set i aboard my ship again : which they deny to do , but most unjust detain i and Stephen van Herwicke who be with i . a while after our shallop come with four man to know how i do , and to fetch i aboard : but so soon as she come to the admiral ship side , his man enter , and take she away , detain our man also as prisoner with we . then present all the three biskainer make towards our ship , which be not careless to get the wind of they all : and have by the mercy of God obtain the same , she then stay for they : but when they see they have lose their advantage , they present turn their course , make as great haste in again as they do out before . afterwards i attempt twice to go aboard , but be still enforce back by the two other biskainer , who seek our life : so that in the end the master of the admiral be enforce to man his great boat to waft we : and yet notwithstanding they bend a piece of great ordinance at we : for we be to pass by they unto our ship : but 175 we rescue our shallop under our master great boat ; and by that mean pass in safety . the next morning be the ten of the month , we purpose if the wind have serve our turn , to have make they to repent their evil deal , and to restore we our own again , or else to have sink their ship if we can . but the wind serve not our turn for that purpose ; they depart but carry we to sea : so that the same morning we to ° ke our course towards the bay of saint Laurence in ‘ Newfoundland : where we hope to find a spanish ship , which as we have intelligence , do fish at that place . S . Peter the thirteenth day we have sight of saint Peter island . island . and the fourteen day be foggy and misty weather , while we make towards the land , we send our shallop before the ship to discover danger : but in the fog , through the man negligence which be in she , she lose we : yet we keep on our course , think that although we can not see they , yet they may see our ship : and coming into sixteen fathom water we cast anchor , suppose our self to be near the shore : and in the evening it please God to give we for the space of one quarter of a hour clear weather , by which we find our self to be imbay , and also have sight of our shallop , which be at the point of a land about one league from we . the same night we go further into the same bay , where we have very good ride . the fifteen we go on shore , and in that place find foot of dear , and before we return we kill one . the eighteenth we depart towards saint Laurence : the same evening we have sight of saint Laurence , and send off our boat in the night with our master and sixteen man to surprise the a spanish . Spaniard , which lie in little saint Laurence ; who pre - shlp take . sent upon the entrance of our man surrender up their ship and good . the nineteenth in the morning before day , the master of our ship with two more , and three Spaniard , take a boat and come forth to meet our ship , but be foggy , he cast anchor by the mouth of the harbour ( think in fair weather to put out to our ship , which through the current and foggy weather be put five or six league to leeward : and while they be at anchor in the boat they be surprise again by certain bask of saint John de Luz who be in great saint Laurence hard by . Theise bask with their force ( have receive intelligence by one of the Spaniard , who sleep on shore , escape unto they overland ) on the sudden surprise the say boat with our master and other : and then present make unto the ship ; but our man aboard defend they off . in the end they threaten that unless they will yield , they will kill m . Crafton and our other man before m . Crafton . their eye . so at last upon m . craftons entreaty and our man , to save their life , they yield up the ship again , upon condition , that they shall not injury any of our man , but shall let they all with their weapon peaceable depart : yet when our man have yield , they break their covenant , proffer they great violence , threaten to kill they , disarm they , strip their clothes from their back , and use they more like dog than man . after they have thus rob our man of their prize and weapon , they present tow the ship with their boat out of that harbour into great saint Laurence , where their own ship do ride , and within less than a hour after they have carry our prize away , our ship arrive in the bay : where after we have be a while at anchor , our shallop come aboard unto we , with most part of our sixteen man , who tell we the whole story before recite , as also that captain Laurence have carry away our master , and Stephen van Herwicke prisoner , and