turn the rest of our man on shore in the wood , without either meat , drink , or almost any apparel . the 20 all our man come aboard , except the two prisoner : and the same day we take with our boat three of the Spaniard shallop , with five hogshead of train oil in each of they , and in one boat four Spaniard ; but the man of the other two shall lop flee on shore . the same day also we take vni 177 m the master of one of the ship which be in the harbour with three other of his man , who we detain prisoner to ransom m . Crafton and Stephen van Herwick . the 22 captain Laurence send they aboard , and we also release all our prisoner , except one Spaniard , who be boatswain of the spanish ship , who we keep with we : and the same day we set sail from thence . the 24 we have advice of our Spaniard of certain the harbour leaguer which be in the harbour of cape S . mary . ° Marie § whereupon the same night , be within five or six ' league of the harbour , i send off our two shallop with thirty man to discover the harbour , and to surprise the enemy . the 25 in the morning we approach the harbour with our ship , and in the mouth thereof we espy three shallop , two whereof be we , and the three of a ship of rochel , which they have surprise with four man in she : who tell they that there be but two ship in the harbour , whereof one be of rochel , and the other of bell isle . and as we be discourse with the rocheller , we have sight of the ship : whereupon we send our boat aboard the rocheller to certify he that we be his friend , and to request he not to hinder our fight with the enemy . this message be send , we make all the haste we can unto the ship of bell isle , which first begin with we with three great shot , one whereof hit our maintopsaile , but both the other miss we . and we also send one unto they : then be approach near unto they ten or twelve of we go in a shallop to enter they , and we carry also a warp with we to make fast unto their ship , whereby our ship may the better come up to aid we . and when we board they in our boat , they betake themselves to their close fight , play chief upon we with shot and pike out at two port , between which we enter very dangerous , escape near danger both by shot and pike . some of our man be wound , but no great harm be do . and i own piece in enter , be shoot out of my hand into 178 the sea ; which shoot also burst one side of the ladder , by which i enter . we have not long be aboard , but through the help of God we cause they to yield unto our mercy . there be of they in the ship above forty A briton ship man , most whereof we send aboard of our ship , there ial °° tunnes ’ to be keep in hold , with order to our chirurgeon to dress the wound man , one of which be wound unto death . that do , we have then time to view our prize , which we find of great defence , and a notable strong ship , almost two hundred tun in burden , very well appoint , and in all thing fit for a man of war . they have also fourteen or fifteen man more , which be then absent from the ship ; otherwise we shall have have the hot fight . the same day we get our sail to the yard , and our top mast on end , and rig the ship what we can . the 26 day we get some oil aboard , and there we tarry until the second of August , fit our self for the sea , and get fish aboard as weather serve we . during our abode there we divide our man , and appoint to each ship their company , my self and my friend be resolve to take our passage in the prize ; wherein when we be ship , and the company , there arise great enmity against we by the other ship , which afterward be quiet . the second day of August , have take in water and wood , we put to sea from that harbour in company of the Hopewell , with purpose to go direct to parlican , which be a harbour in the north part of Newfoundland , where we expect another prize . but when we come to sea we find our sail so old , our rope so rot , and our provision of bread and drink so short , as that we be constrain to make our resolution direct for England : whereupon we draw out our reason the four day of August , and send they aboard the Hopewell , to certify they the cause of our resolution for England : whereat they be general offend , think and say , that we in the prize go about to cousin and deceive they . to conclude , they send we 179 word that they will keep we company for England . but i have give William Crafton commission before to go for the island of the azore , and there to spend his victual for a man of war . the next day be the five of August , have a fair wind , we put off from the coast of Newfoundland , and keep our course direct for England , the Hopewell keep we company until midday , whenas have lose we in a fog , she shoot off two piece of ordinance , and we answer she with three : afterward we speak not with she , suppose that she go for the island . the 27 of August , draw near the coast of England , we sound and find ground at seventy fathom . some of the mariner think we be in Bristol channel , and other in silly channel : so that through variety of judgement , and evil marinership we be fain to dance the hay four day together , sometime run to the north - east , sometime to the southeast , then again to the east , and eastnortheast . thus do we spend fair wind , and lose our time until the last of August . and then it please God that we fall with the island of Lundy within the channel of Bristol ; from whence we shape our course : and after diverse danger , the three of September we meet with the Tramontane of the queen off of Dartmouth ; to the captain whereof we give certain thing that he have need of . the five of September i land on the outside of the isle of wight , and within few day after it please God to bring the ship in safety to London , where she be make prize as belong to the enemy of this land .