and come to three hand , two of which be as steep and upright as any wall , so that it be not possible to climb they : and between they there be a little rock . Theise hand be as full of bird , as any field or meadow be of grass , which there do make their nest : and in the great of they , there be a great and infinite number of those that we call Margaulx , that be white , and big than any goose , which be sever in one part . in the other be only Godetz , but towards the shore there be of those Godetz , and great Apponatz , like to those of that hand that we above have mention : we go down to the low part of the least hand , where we kill above a thousand of those Godetz , and Apponatz . we put into our boat so many of they as we please , for in less than one hour we may have fill thirty such boat of the island they : we name they the hand of Margaulx . about of Margaulx . gve ] eague from the say hand on the west , there be another hand that be about two league in length , and so much in breadth : there do we stay all night to take in water and wood . that island be environ round about with sand , and have a very good road about it three or four fathom deep . those hand have the best soil that ever we see , for that one of their field be more worth than all the new land . we find it all full of goodly tree , meadow , field full of wild corn and peason bloom , as thick , as rank , and as fair as any can be see in Britain , so that they seem to have be plow and sow . there be also a great store of gooseberry , strawberry , damask rose , parsley , morse or sea other very sweet and pleasant herb . about the ox . say island be very great beast as great as ox , which 192 have two great tooth in their mouth like unto elephant tooth , and live also in the sea we see one of they sleep upon the bank of the water : we think to take it , go to it with our boat , but so soon as he hear we , he cast himself into the sea we also see bear 8c wolf : we name it brion hand . about brion hand . it towards southeast , and northwest , there be great lake . as far as i can gather and comprehend , i think that there be some passage between new find land , and brion land . if so it be , it will be a great shorten , aswell of the time as of the way , if any perfection can be find in it . about four league from that hand towards west - southwest be the firm land , which seem to be as a hand compass about with little hand of sand . there be a goodly cape which we name cape dolphin , for there be the beginning of good ground . on the 27 . of June we compass the say land about that lie west Southwest : and a far off they seem to be little hill of sand , for they be but low land : we can neither go to they , nor land on they , because the wind be against we . that day we go 15 league . of the hand call Alezai , and of the cape of saint Peter . the next day we go along the say land about 10 . league , till we come to a cape of red land , that be all craggy , within the which there be a brack look towards the north . it be a very low country . there be also between the sea and a certain pool , a plain field : and from that cape of land and the pool unto another cape , there be about 14 league . the land be fashion as it be half a circle , all compass about with sand like a ditch , over which as far as one eye can stretch , there be nothing but marsh ground and stand pool . and before you come to the first cape , very near the main land there be two little hand . about five league from the second cape towards the southwest , viii 193 n there be another island very high and point , which we name Alezai . the first cape we name saint Peter cape , because upon that day we come thither . of the cape call cape Orleans : of the river of boat : of wild man cape : and of the quality and temperature of the country . from brion island to this place there be good anchorage of sand , and have sound towards Southwest even to the shore about five league , we find twenty and five fathom water , and within one league twelve fathom , and very near the shore six fathom , rather more then less , and also good anchorage . but because we will be the better acquaint with this stony and rochie ground , we stroohe our sail low and athwart . the next day be the last of the month save one , the wind blow south and by east . we sail westward until Tuesday morning at sun rise , be the last of the month , without any sight or knowledge of any land except in the evening towards sun set , that we discover a land which seem to be two hand , that be beyond we west southwest , about nine or ten league . all the next day till the next morning at sun rise we sail westward about fourty league , and by the way we perceive that the land we have see like hand , be firm land , lie south southeast , and north northwest , to a very good cape of land call cape Orleans . a exceed all the say land be low and plain , ’ and the fair goodly land . may possible be see , full of goodly meadow and tree . true it be that we can find no harbour there , because it be all full of shelf and sand . we with our boat go on shore in many place , and among the rest we enter into a goodly river , but very shallow , which we name the river of boat , because that there we see boat full of wild man that be cross the river . we have no other notice of the say wild man : for the wind come from 194