the voyage of m . Charles Leigh , and diverse other to cape Briton and the isle of Ramea . he Hopewell of London of the burden of 120 ton , whereof be m . William Crafton , and the chancewel of London of the burden of 70 ton , whereof be m . Steven Bennet , bind unto the river of Canada , set to sea at the sole and proper charge of Charles Leigh and Abraham van Herwick of London merchant ( the say Charles Leigh himself , and Steven Van Herwick brother to the say Abraham , go themselves in the say ship as chief commander of the voyage ) depart from gravesend on Friday morning the 8 of April 1597 ^ and after some hindrance , arrive at Falmouth in Cornewal the 28 of the say month put to sea again . and with prosperous wind the 18 of may we be upon the bank of Newfoundland . the 19 we lose the chancewel . the 20 we have sight of land and enter within the bay of Assumption , where our man contrary to my knowledge fight with a french ship : and afterward in the same bay we meet with our consort . whereupon we present put to sea again : and the next day we arrive at caplen bay , where we remain by extremity of foul weather , and to mend a pin of 7 or 8 ton ( which be give we at Farrillon by m . Wil . sayer of Dartmouth the admiral of that place ) until the last of may . on which day depart from thence in the afternoon we put in to Rogneuse to seek shallop but can find none . the first of June we set sail from Rogneuse , and the second we put room to a bay under the northside of cape Raz be enforce in by a extreme storm . the 4 we set sail , and this day we see a great island of ice . the 5 at night we lose the Chancewell in a fog at the mouth of the bay of Placentia . the 11 at sun set we have sight of cape Briton . and the 12 by 166 reason of contrary wind we cast anchor under the north - east end of the isle of Menego to the north of cape isle of Briton in 16 fathom reasonable ground . in that place we catch great store of cod , which be large and better fish than any in Newfoundland . the 13 we weigh anchor again , and be becalm about a league from the shore we fall to fish where the cod do bite at least 20 fathom above ground , and almost as fast as we can hale they into the ship . the 14 we come to the 2 island of bird , some 23 league from Menego : 2 island where there be such abundance of bird , as be almost ° fstrdes - incredible to report . and upon the less of these island of bird , we see great store of morss or sea ox , store of which be a sleep upon the rock : but when we approach near unto they with our boat they cast themselves into the sea and pursue we with such fury as that we be glad to flee from they . the 16 we arrive at Brian island , which lie 5 league west from the island of bird . about this island there be as great abundance of cod as in any place can be find . in little more than a hour we catch with 4 hook 250 of they . here we catch also a great Turbut which be a ell long and a yard broad : which be so great that the hook can not hold she into the ship : but when she be above water she bend the hook and escape . in this i ” Bryans Island we find exceed good ground both for corn and meadow , and great store of wood , but of small grow . for forne and spring of fresh water we find none in all the island , meadow . but some stand pool of rain water . the same day at night we weigh anchor again . the 17 we have stormy weather . the 18 we come to the isle of Ramea , where then be ! e of we appoint to meet with ' our consort . and approach - ramea - ing near unto the harbour of Halabolina we cast anchor in 3 fathom water and send our great boat into the harbour , with the master mate and some dozen more of the company : who when they come in , find 4 ship . namely 2 of saint Malo in Britaigne , and two of Sibiburo adjoin to saint John de luz be the french 167 king subject , who they suppose to have be of Spain , and so affirm unto we . whereupon we go present into harbour , find but eleven foot and a half of water upon the bar and a mighty great current in , when we have cast anchor we send present to speak with the master of all the ship : but those only of saint Malo come aboard , who we entertain very friendly , and demand of whence the other two ship be . they say as they think of saint John de Luz or Sibiburo . than we present send our boat for the master of both the say ship , to request they to come aboard , and to bring with they their charter party and other evidence , to the end we may know of whence they be . at which message one of the say master come aboard , with the pilot and master mate of the other ship : who when we have examine , they say that they be of Sibiburo , and the french king subject . we request they for our better security in the harbour peaceable to deliver up their powder and munition : promise they that if we find they to be the french king subject it shall be keep in safety for they without diminish . but they will not consent thereunto : whereunto we reply , that unless they will consent thereunto we will hold they to be our enemy . they not consent , we send the boat well man to fetch their powder and munition from aboard their ship : but straight command our man not to touch any thing else in the ship upon their further peril : which they promise to perform . when they come aboard the say ship which be more together , they be resist by force of arm , but quick they get the victory : which do , they fall present to pillage of the bask , contrary to their promise : whereupon we send another to forbid they ; but when he come to they , none be more ready of pillage than he . whereupon i go my self , and take away from our man whatsoever they have pillage , and give it again to the owner : only i send aboard our own ship their powder 168 and munition to be keep in safety until we know far what they be . when i have do , i give the bask possession of their ship again and tell they