the sea , and so beat we against the shore , that we be constrain to retire our self with our boat towards our ship . till the next day morning at sun rise , be the first of July , we sail Northeast , in which time there rise great mist and storm , and therefore we strike our sail till two of the clock in the afternoon , that the weather become clear , and there we have sight of cape Orleans , and of another about seven league from we , lie north and by east , and that we call wild man cape . on the northside of this cape about half a league , there be a very dangerous shelf , and bank of stone . while we be at this cape , we see a man run after our boat that be go along the coast , who make sign unto we that we shall return towards the say cape again . we see such sign , begin to turn towards he , but he see we come , begin to flee : so soon as we be come on shore , we set a knife before he and a woollen girdle on a little staff , and then come to our ship again . that day we trend the say land about 9 or 10 . league , hope to find some good harbour , but it be not possible : for as i have say already , it be a very low land , and environ round about with great shelf . nevertheless we go that day on shore in four place to see the goodly and sweet smell tree that be there : we varie ^ of find they to be cedar , ewetree , pine , white elm , trees ‘ ash , willow , with many other sort of tree to we unknown , but without any fruit . the ground where no wood be , be very fair , and all full of peason , white and red gooseberry , strawberry , blackebery , and wild corn , even like unto rye , which seem to have be sow and plow . this country be of better temperature than any other that can be see , and very hot . there be many thrush , stockdove , and other bird : to be short , there want nothing but good harborough . [ of the 195 of the bay call saint Lunario , and other notable bay and cape of land , and of the quality , and goodness of those ground . the next day be the second of July we discover and have sight of land on the northern side towards we , that do join unto the land abovesaid , all compass about , and we know that it have about * inn depth , and as much athwart , we name it saint lunarios bay , and with our boat we go to the cape towards the north , and find the shore so shallow , that for the space of a league from land there be but a fathom water . on the north - east side from the say cape about 7 . or 8 . league there be another cape of land , in the midst whereof there be a bay fashion trianglewise , very deep , and as far off as we can ken from it the same lie Northeast . the say bay be compass about with sand and shelf about 10 . league from land , and there be but two fathom water : from the say cape to the bank of the other , there be about 15 . league . we be a cross the say cape , discover another land and cape , and as far as we can ken , it lie north and by east . all that night the weather be very ill , and great wind , so that we be constrain to bear a small sail until the next morning , be the third of July when the wind come from the west : and we sail northward to have a sight of the land that we have leave on the north - east side , above the low land , among which high and low land there be a gulf or breach in some place about 55 . fathom deep , and 15 . league in breadth . by reason of the great depth and breadth of the gulf , and change of the land , we conceive hope that we shall find a passage , like unto the passage of the castle . the say gulf lie east Northeast , and west southwest . the ground that lie on the southside of the say gulf , be as good and easy to be manure , and full of as goodly field and meadow , as any that ever we have see , as 196 plain and smooth as any die : and that which lie on the north be a country altogether hilly , full of wood , and very high and great tree of sundry sort : among the rest there be as goodly ceder , and fir tree , as possible can be see , able to make mast for ship of three hundred tun : neither do we see any place that be not full of the say tree , except two only that be full of goodly meadow , with two very fair lake . the midst of the say bay be 47 . degree and half in latitude . tree able to mast ship of 300 . ton . of the cape d ’ esperance , or the cape of hope , and of saint Martins creek , and how 7 . boat full of wild man come to our boat , will not retire themselves , but be terrify with our culverin which we shoot at they , and our lance , they flee with great haste . the cape of the say south land be call the cape of hope , through the hope that there we have to find some passage . the four of July we go along the coast of the say land on the northerly side to find some harbour , where we enter into a creek altogether open towards the south , where there be no succour against the wind : we think good to name it saint Martin creek . there we stay from the four of July until the twelve : while we be there , on Monday be the six of the month , service be do , we with one of our boat go to discoyer a cape and point of land that on the western side be about seven or eight league from we , to see which way it do bend , and be within half a league of it , we see two company of boat of wild man forty or 5 ° go from one land to the