some doubt of two island that be on the right side , one of the which be distant from the say point three league , and the other seven , either more or less than the first , be a low and plain land , and it seem to be part of the main land . i name it saint Katherine island ; in which , towards the north - east there be very dry soil ; but about a quarter of a league from it , very ill ground , so that you must go a little about . the say island 8c the port of castle trend towards north north - east , and south southwest , and they be about 15 . league asunder . from the say port of castle to the port of gut , which be in the northern part of the say bay , that trend towards east north - east , and west southwest , there be 12 . league and a half : and about two league from the port of balance , that be to say , the three part athwart the say bay the depth be sound it be about 38 . fathom : and from the say port of balance to the Blanc 8ablon , white sand towards west southwest there be 15 . league , arwhite8and . you must ( - take heed of a shelf that lie about 3 . league outward from the say white sand on the southwest side above water like a boat . of the place call Blanc Sablon , or the white sand : of the hand of breast , and of the hand of bird , of the sort and quantity of bird that there be find : and of the port call the islette . white sand be a road in the which there be no place guard from the south , nor southeast . but towards south southwest from the say road there be two 186 hand , one of the which be call breast hand , and the other the hand of bird , in which there be great store of Godetz , and crow with red beak and red foot : they make their nest in hole under the ground even as cony . a point of land be pass about a league from white sand , there be a port and passage find call the islette , a better place than white sand : and there be great fish . from the say port of the islette unto another call breast , the circuit be about ten league . breast a place this port be in latitude 51 . degree and 55 . minute , and * north . in longitude * . from the islette to that place there be i ” and . m many other hand : and the say port of breast be also among those hand . Moreover the hand do compass more than 3 . league from the say breast , be low , and over they be then other land above mention see . how we with our ship enter into the port of breast , and sail onward towards the west we pass amid the islette , which be so many in number , that it be not possible to tell they : and how we name they the islette . upon the 10 . of June we with our ship enter into the port of breast , to furnish our self with water and wood , and to make we ready to pass the say bay upon saint Barnabas day service be hear , we with our boat go beyond the say port towards the west , to see what harboroughe be there : we pass through the midst of the islette , which be so many in number that it be not possible they may be tell , for they continue about 10 . league beyond the say port . we to rest our self stay in one of they a night , and there we find great store of duck egg , and other bird that there do make their nest , we name they all the islette . 187 [ of the of the port call saint Antony port , saint Servans port , James Cartiers port : of the river call S . James : of the custom and apparel of the inhabitant in the hand of white Sand . the next day we pass the say hand , and beyond they all we find a good haven , which we name saint Antony haven , and one or two league beyond we find a little river toward the southwest coast , that be between two other hand , and be a good harbour . there we set up a cross , and name it saint Servans port : and on the southwest side of the say port and river , about one league there be a small hand as round as a oven , environ about with many other little hand that give notice to the say port . further about two league there be another great river , in which we take good store of salmon , that we name saint James his river . be in the say river , we see a ship of rochel that the night before have pass the port of breast , where they think to have go a fish : but the mariner know not where they be . we with our boat approach near unto it , and do direct it to another port one league more towards the west then the say river of saint James , which i take to be one of the best in all the world , and therefore we name it James carthiers sound . if the soil be as good as the harboroughe be , it be a great commodity : but it be not to be call the new land , but rather stone and wild crag , and a place fit for wild beast , for in all the north hand i do not see a cartload of good earth : yet go i on shore in many place , and in the hand of white sand , there be nothing else but moss and small thorn scatter here and there , wither and dry . to be short , i believe that this be the land that God allot to Cain . there be man of a indifferent good stature and bigness , but wild and unruly : they wear their hair tie on the top like a wreath of hay , and put a wooden pin within it , or any other such thing in stead of a nail , and with they 188 they bind certain bird feather . they be clothe with beast skin as well the man as woman , but that the woman go somewhat strait and close in their garment then the man do , with their waste gird : they paint themselves with certain roan