work be do . and to make his tale seem true and likely , he will make all his man whole and sound to make a great noise with knock stick , stone , hammer , and other thing together , at which time we be so oppress and grieve with that sickness , that we have lose all hope ever to see France again , if God of his infinite goodness and mercy have not with his pitiful eye look upon we , and reveal a singular and excellent remedy against all disease unto we , the best that ever be find upon earth , as hereafter shall follow . 248 how long we stay in the port of the holy cross amid the snow and ice , and how many die of the say disease , from the begin of it to the midst of march . Chap . 14 . from the midst of November until the midst of march , we be keep in amid the ice above two fathom thick , and snow above four foot high and more , high than the side of our ship , which last till that time , in such sort , that all our drink be freeze in the vessel , and the ice through all the ship be above a handbreadth thick , as well above hatch as beneath , and so much of the river as be fresh , even to Hochelaga , be freeze , in which space there die five and twenty of our best and chief man , and all the rest be so sick , that we think they shall never recover again , only three or four except . than it please God to cast his pitiful eye upon we , and send we the knowledge of remedy of our health and recovery , in such manner as in the next chapter shall be show . how by the grace of God we have notice of a certain tree , whereby we all recover our health : and the manner how to use it . Chap . 15 . our captain consider our estate ( and how that sickness be increase and hot among we ) one day go forth of the fort , and walk upon the ice , he see a troop of those countryman come from Stadacona , among which be Domagaia , who not pass ten or twelve day afore , have be very sick with that disease , and have his knee swell as big as a child of two year old , all his sinew shrink together , his tooth spoil , his gum rot , and stink . our captain see he whole and sound , be thereat marvellous glad , hope to understand and 249 a perfect remedy against the french pock . know of he how he have heal himself , to the end he may ease and help his man . so soon as they be come near he , he ask Domagaia how he have do to heal himself : he answer , that he have take the juice and sap of the leaf of a certain tree , and therewith have heal himself : for it be a singular remedy against that disease . than our captain ask of he if any be to be have thereabouts , desire he to show he , for to heal a servant of he , who while he be in Canada with Donnacona , be strike with that disease : that he do because he will not show the number of his sick man . Domagaia straight send two woman to fetch some of it , which bring ten or twelve branch of it , and therewithal ! show the way how to use it , and that be thus , to take the bark and leaf of the say tree , and boil they together , then to drink of the say decoction every other day , and to put the dregs of it upon his leg that be sick : moreover , they tell we , that the virtue of that tree be , to heal any other disease : the tree be in their language call Ameda or Hanneda , this be think to be the sassafras tree . our captain present cause some of that drink to be make for his man to drink of it , but there be none dare taste of it , except one or two , who venture the drink of it , only to taste and prove it : the other see that do the like , and present recover their health , and be deliver of that sickness , and what other disease soever , in such sort , that there be some have be disease and trouble with the french pock four or five year , and with this drink be clean heal . after this medicine be find and prove to be true , there be such strife about it , who shall be first to take of it , that they be ready to kill one another , so that a tree as big as any oak in France be spoil and lop bare , and occupy all in five or six day , and it wrought so well , that if all the physician of Mountpelier and Louvain have be there with all the drug of Alexan - 250 dria , they will not have do so much in one year , as that tree do in six day , for it do so prevail , that as many as use of it , by the grace of God recover their health . how the lord Donnacona accompany with Taignoagny and diverse other , feign that they will go to hunt stag , and deer , tarry out two month , and at their return bring a great multitude of people with they , that we be not wont to see before . A . D . * 535 - Chap . 16 . while that disease last in our ship , the lord Donnacona , Taignoagny , with many other go from home , feign that they will go to catch stag and deer , which be in their tongue call Ajounesta , and asquenoudo , because the ice and snow be not so break along the river that they can