fresh water find , and as they have hear say of those of Saguenay , there be never man hear of that find out the end thereof : for , as they tell we , they themselves be never there . Moreover they tell we , that where we have leave our pinnace when we go to Hochelaga , there be a river that go southwest , from whence there be a whole month sail to go to a certain land , where there be neither ice nor snow see , where the inhabitant do continual war one against another , where be great store of orange , almond , nut , and apple , with many other sort of fruit , and that the man and woman be clad with beast skin even as they : we ask they if there be any gold or red copper , they answer no . i take this place to be towards Florida , as far as i can perceive and understand by their sign and token . of a strange and cruel disease that come to the people of Stadacona , wherewith because we do haunt their company , we be so infect , that there die 25 of our company . Chap . 13 . in the month of December , we understand that the pestilence be come among the people of Stadacona , in such sort , that before we know of it , accord to their confession , there be dead above 50 : whereupon we charge they neither to come near our fort , nor about our ship , or we . and albeit we have drive they from we , the say unknown sickness begin to spread itself among we after the strange sort that ever be either hear of or see , insomuch as some do lose all their strength , and can not stand on their foot , then do their leg swell , their sinew shrink as black as any cole * other also have all their skin spot with spot of blood of a purple colour : then do it ascend up to their ankel , . knee , thigh , shoulder , arm , and neck : their mouth become stink , their gum so rot , that all the flesh do fall off , even to the root of the tooth , which . 246 do also almost all fall out . with such infection do this sickness spread it self in our three ship , that about the middle of February , of a hundred and ten person that we be , there be not ten whole , so that one can not help the other , a most horrible and pitiful case , consider the place we be in , forsomuch as the people of the country will daily come before our fort , and see but few of we . there be already eight dead , and more than fifty sick , and as we think , past all hope of recovery . our captain see this our misery , and that the sickness be go so far , ordain and command , that every one shall devout prepare himself to prayer , and in remembrance of Christ , cause his image to be set upon a tree , about a flight shoot from the fort amid the ice and snow , give all man to understand , that on the Sunday follow , service shall be say there , and that whosoever can go , sick or whole , shall go thither in procession , sing the seven psalm of David , with other litany , pray most hearty that it will please the say our Christ to have compassion upon we . service be do , and as well celebrate as we can , our captain there make a vow , that if it will please God to give he leave to return into France , he will go on pilgrimage to our lady of Rocquemado . that day Philip Rouge - mount , bear in Amboise , die , be 22 year old , and because the sickness be to we unknown , our captain cause he to be rip to see if by any mean possible we may know what it be , and so seek mean to save and preserve the rest of the company : he be find to have his heart white , but rot , and more than a quart of red water about it : his liver be indifferent fair , but his lung black and mortify , his blood be altogether shrink about the heart , so that when he be open great quantity of rot blood issue out from about his heart : his milt towards the back be somewhat perish , rough as if it have be rub against a stone . Moreover , because one of his thigh be very black without , it be 247 open , but within it be whole and sound : that do , as well as we can he be bury . in such sort do the sickness continue and increase , that there be not above three sound man in the ship , and none be able to go under hatch to draw drink for himself , nor for his fellow . sometime we be constrain to bury some of the dead under the snow , because we be not able to dig any grave for they the ground be so hard freeze , and we so weak . beside this , we do great fear that the people of the country will perceive our weakness and misery , which to hide , our captain , who it please God always to keep in health , will go out with two or three of the company , some sick and some whole , who when he see out of the fort , he will throw stone at they and chide they , feign that so soon as he come again , he will beat they , and then with sign show the people of the country that he cause all his man to work and labour in the ship , some in calk they , some in beat of chalk , some in one thing , and some in another , and that he will not have they come forth till their