horrible thing to hear ) and each one have take leave of the 222 other for that day , we go aboard again . the day follow we bring our two great ship within the river and harbour , where the water be at the high , be three fathom deep , and at the low , but half a fathom . we leave our pinnace without the road to the end we may bring it to Hochelaga . so soon as we have safe place our ship , behold we see Donnacona , Taignoagny and Domagaia , with more than five hundred person , man , woman and child , and the say lord with ten or twelve of the chief of the country come aboard of our ship , who be all courteous receive , and friendly entertain both of our captain and of we all : and diverse gift of small value be give they . then do Taignoagny tell our captain , that his lord do great sorrow that he will go to Hochelaga , and that he will not by any mean permit that any of they shall go with he , because the river be of no importance . our captain answer he , that for all his say , he will not leave off his go thither , if by any mean it be possible , for that that he be command by his king to go as far as possible he can : and that if he ( that be to say Taignoagny ) will go with he , as he have promise , he shall be very well entertain , beside that , he shall have such a gift give he , as he shall well content himself : for he shall do nothing else but go with he to Hochelaga and come again . to who Taignoagny answer , that he will not by any mean go , and thereupon they sudden return to their house . the next day be the 17 of September , Donnacona and his company return even as at the first , and bring with he many eel , with sundry sort of other fish , whereof they take great store in the say river , as more large hereafter shall be show . and as soon as they be come to our ship , accord to their wont use they begin to sing and dance . this do , Donnacona cause all his people to be set on the one side : then make a round circle upon the sand he cause our captain with all his people to enter thereinto , 223 than he begin to make a long oration , hold in one of his hand a maiden child of ten or twelve year old , which he present unto our captain : then sudden begin all his people to make three great shriek , or howl , in sign of joy and league of friendship : present upon that he do present unto he two other young male child one after another , but young than the other , at the give of which even as before they give out shriek and howl very loud , with other ceremony : for which present , our captain give the say lord great and hearty thanks . then Taignoagny tell our captain , that one of the child be his own brother , and that the maiden child be daughter unto the say lord own sister , and the present be only give he to the end he shall not go to Hochelaga at all : to who our captain answer , that if they be only give he to that intent , if so he will , he shall take they again , for that by no mean he will leave his go off , for as much as he be so command of his king . but concern this , Domagaia tell our captain that their lord have give he those child as a sign and token of goodwill and security , and that he be content to go with he to Hochelaga , upon which talk great word arise between Taignoagny and Domagaia , by which we plain perceive that Taignoagny be but a crafty knave , and that he intend but mischief and treason , as well by this deed as other that we by he have see . after that our captain cause the say child to be put in our ship , and cause two sword and two copper basin , the one wrought , the other plain , to be bring unto he , and they he give to Donnacona , who be therewith great content , yield most hearty thanks unto our captain for they , and present upon that he command all his people to sing and dance , and desire our captain to cause a piece of artillery to be shoot off , because Taignoagny and Domagaia make great brag of it , and have tell they marvellous thing , and also , because they have never hear nor see 224 . any before : to who our captain answer , that he be content : and by and by he command his man to shoot off twelve cannon charge with bullet into the wood that be hard by those people and ship , at who noise they be great astonish and amaze , for they think that heaven have fall upon they , and put themselves to flight , howl , cry , and shriek , so that it seem hell be break loose . but before we go thence , Taignoagny cause other man to tell we , that those man which we have leave in our pinnace in the road , have slay two man of their company , with a piece of ordinance that they have shoot off , whereupon the rest have put themselves all to flight , as though they shall all have be slay : which afterward we find untrue , because our man have not shoot off any piece at all that day . how Donnacona and Taignoagny with other , devise a pretty sleight or policy : for they cause three of their man to be attire like devil , feign themselves to be send from their god Cudruaigny , only to hinder our voyage to Hochelaga . Chap .