here follow the course from belle isle , Carpont , and the grand bay in Newfoundland up the river of Canada for the space of 230 . league , observe by John Alphonse of Xanctoigne chief pilot to monsieur Roberval , 1542 . else isle be in 51 degree and % . bell Belle isle . Isles and Carpont be northnorthwest and southsoutheast , and they be ten league distant . Carpont be in 52 de - carpant inn agree . Carpont and bell isle from the 52 - degree . grand bay be Northeast and Southwest , and the distance from bell isle to the grand bay be 7 league . the midst of the grand bay be the grand in 52 degree and a half , and on the northside thereof there be a rock : half a league from the isle , over against i ' Carpont towards the east there be a small flat island , and on the side towards the north - east there be a flat rock . a flat rock . and when thou come out of the harbour of Carpont thou must leave this rock on the starreboord side , and also on the larboard side there be two or three small isle : and when thou come out on the north - east side , range along the shore towards the west about two pike length in the midway there be a shall which lie on thy starboard side : and sail thou by the north coast , and leave two part of the grand bay towards the south ; because there be a rock which run 2 or 3 league into the sea . and when thou be come athwart the haven of Butes , run along the north shore about one league or Butes . a half off , for the coast be without all danger : bell isle in the mouth of the grand bay , and the isle of Blanc the isle of Sablon , which be within the grand bay , near unto the Blanc sablm north shore lie Northeast , west and Southwest , and the ° r m lie san * distance be 30 league . the grand bay at the entrance the several be but 7 league broad from land to land until it come bq ^ ndba * over against the bay des chasteaux : and from thence you forward it have not pass 5 league in breadth . and 275 Blanc Sab Ion . in 51 . deg . 2 . thirdpart . the isle de la damoiselle in 50 . deg . 3 . four part . many isle wonderful good harbour . cape tienot in 50 deg . one four part . against Blanc Sablon it be 8 league broad from land to land . and the land on the south shore be all low land along the sea coast . the north shore be reasonable high land , Blanc Sablon be in 5 if degree . the isle of Blanc Sablon and the isle de la damoiselle , be north - east , Westsouthwest , and take a little of the westsouthwest , and they be distant 36 league : these isle be in 50 . deg . and there be a good haven : and you may enter by a high cape which lie along towards the north - east , and within the distance of a pike and a half , because of a rock which lie on your larrebord side , and you may anchor in 10 fathom water over against a little nook : and from the great headland unto the place where thou do anchor there be not above the length of 2 cable . and if thou will go out by the west side , thou must sail near the isle by the starrebord , and give room unto the isle on the larboard at the come forth : and when thou be not past a cable length out thou must sail hard by the isle on the larboard side , by reason of a sink flat which lie on the starrebord , and thou shall sail so on to the southsouthwest , until thou come in sight of a rock which shine , which be about half a league in the sea distant from the isle , and thou shall leave it on the larrebord : ( and from the isle of damoiselle unto Newfoundland the sea be not in breadth above 36 . league , because that Newfoundland even unto cape Briton run not but northnortheast and Southsouthwest . ) between the isle de la damoiselle and the isle of blank Sablon there be many isle and good harbour : and on this coast there be falcon and hawk , and certain fowl which seem to be feasant . the isle de la damoiselle and cape Tienot be Northeast and Westsouthwest and take a little of the north - east and southwest , and they be distant 18 league . cape Tienot be in 50 . deg . and f . and there the sea be broad . and it may be to the end of Newfoundland , which be at the entrance of Cape briton 70 league , which be the great breadth of the sea . and there be 6 or 7 isle between the isle de 276 la damoiselle and cape Tienot . cape Tienot have in the sea 5 or 6 league distant from it a sink hand dangerous for ship . the cape Tienot and the midst of the isle of ascension be north - east and southsouthwest , and they be 22 . league distant , the midst of the isle of ascension be the in 49 deg . and J . ‘ the say isle lie northwest and southeast , then northwest end be in 50 . degree of latitude or natiscotec . and the southeast end be in 48 . degree and a half and it be about 25 . league long and 4 . or 5 . league broad : and from the northwest end of the isle unto the firm land of the north side the sea be not above seven league broad , but unto the firm land on the south side be about 15 . league . cape Tienot and the end of the isle of ascension towards the southeast be north - east and Southwest , and be distant 30 . league . the say cape of Tienot and than northwest end of the isle of ascension be east and west , and take a little of the north - east and Southwest , and they be distant 34 . league . the isle of the com - ascension be a goodly isle , and a goodly champion land without any hill , stand all upon white rock and i alabaster , all cover with tree unto the sea shore , and there be all sort of tree as there be in France : and there be wild beast , as bear , lusern , porkespick . and from cape from the southeast end of the isle of ascension unto the t0 tJie entrance of cape Briton be but 50 . league . the north - west end of the isle and the cape des Monts nostre dame , ascension be which be on the main land towards the south , be north - but tfileague . east and westsouth west , and the distance between they cape ° f be 15 . league . the cape be in 49 . degree , which be a D ^ n ‘ ! tri very high land . the cape and end of the isle of ascension towards the southeast be east and west and there be 15 . league distance between they . the bay of molve the bay of or gaspay