so that we trended the say northerly cost , which run Northeast and Southwest , be fashion like unto half a bow , and be a very high land , but yet not so high as that on the south part . the Thursday follow we come to seven very the seven high island , which we name the round island . Theise islesislands be distant from the south shore about 40 league , and stretch out into the sea about 3 or 4 league . against these there be goodly low ground to be see full of goodly tree , which we then Friday follow , with our boat compass about . overthwart these land there be diverse sandy shelf more than two league into the sea , very dangerous , which at a low water remain almost dry . at the further bound of these low land , that contain about ten league , there be a river of fresh water , that with such swiftness run a swift river . into the sea , that for the space of one league within it the water be as fresh as any fountain water . we with our boat enter into the say river , at the entrance of which we find about one fathom and a half of water . 215 sea - horse . there be in this river many fish shape like horse , which as our wild man tell we , all the day long lie in the water , and the night on land : of which we see therein a great number . the next day be the 21 of the month , by break of day we hoist sail , and sail so long along the say coast , that we have sight of the rest of the say northern coast , which as yet we have the isle of not see , and of the island of the assumption which Assumption , we go to discover , depart from the say land : ' which thing so soon as we have do , and that we be certify not other passage to be there , we come to our ship again , which we have leave at the say island , where be a good harbour , the water be about nine or ten fathom . in the same place by occasion of contrary wind and foggy mist , we be constrain to stay , not be either able to come out of it , or hoist sail , till the 24 of the month : on which day we depart and come to a haven on the southerly coast about 80 league from a haven on the say island . this haven be over against three flat the southern isiand that lie amid the river , because on the midway ’ between those island , and the say haven towards the great north , there be a very great river that run between rw ' the high and low land , and more than three league into the sea it have many shelf , and there be not altogether two fathom water , so that the place be very dangerous : and near unto the say shelf , there be either fifteen or 20 fathom from shore to shore . all the northerly coast run north - east and by north , and Southwest 8c by south . the say haven wherein we stay on the south side , be as it be but a sluice of the water that rise by the flood , 8c but of small saint Johns islet , account : we name they saint Johns islet , because we find they , 8c enter into they the day of the behead of that saint . and before you come to the say haven , there be a island lie eastward about 5 league distant from the same : between which and the land there be no passage save only for small boat . the haven of saint Johns islet dry up all the water that rise 216 by flow , although they flow two fathom at the least . the best place to harbour ship therein be on the south part of a little island that be over against the say haven , whereby the bank or shore of the island rise . upon the first of September we depart out of the say haven , purpose to go towards Canada ; and about 15 league from it towards the west , and westsouthwest , amid the river , there be three island , over against the which there be a river which run swift , and be of a great depth , and it be that which lead , and run into the country and kingdom of Saguenay , as by the two wild man of Canada it be tell we . this river pass and run along very high and steep hill of bare stone , where very little earth be , and notwithstanding there be great quantity of sundry sort of tree that grow in the say bare stone , even as upon good and fertile ground , in such sort that we have see some so great as well will suffice to make a mast for a ship of 30 ton burden , and as green as possible can be , grow in a stony rock without any earth at all . at the entrance of the say river we meet with 4 boat full of wild man , which as far as we can perceive , very fearful come towards we , so that some of they go back again , and the other come as near we as easy they may hear and understand one of our wild man , who tell they his name , and then take acquaintance of they , upon who word they come to we . the next day be the 2 of September , we come out of the say river to go to Canada , and by reason of the sea flow , the tide be very swift and dangerous , for that on the south part of it there lie two island , about which , more than three league compass , lie many rock and great stone , and but two fathom water : and the flow amid those island be very unconstant and doubtful ,