that river to Hochelaga there be about 300 league distance : the originali beginning of it be in the river that come from Saguenay , which rise and spring among high and steep hill : it enter into that river before it come to the province of Canada on the north side . that river be very deep , high , and straight , wherefore it be very dangerous for any vessel to go upon it . after that river follow the province of Canada , wherein be many people dwell in open borough and village . there be also in the circuit and territory of Canada , along , and within the say river , many other hand , some great and some small , among which there be one that contain above ten league in length , full of goodly and high tree , and also many vine . you may go into it from both side , but yet the sure passage be on the south side . on the shore or bank of that river westward , there be a goodly , fair , and delectable bay or creek , convenient and fit for to 243 it be now find to be but 200 league . harbour ship . hard by there be in that river one place very narrow , deep , and swift run , but it be not pass the three part of a league , over against the which there be a goodly high piece of land , with a town therein : and the country about it be very well till and wrought , and as good as possible can be see . that be the place and abode of Donnacona , and of our two man we take in our first voyage , it be call Stadacona . but before we come to it , there be 4 other people town , that be to say , Ayraste , Starnatan , Tailla , which stand upon a hill , Scitadin , and then Stadagona , under which town towards the north the river and port of the holy cross be , where we stay from the 15 of September , until the 16 of May 1536 , and there our ship remain dry , as we have say before . that place be pass , we find the habitation of the people call Teguenondahi , stand upon a high mountain , and the valley of hochelay , which stand in a champagne country . all the say country on both side of the river as far as hochelay and beyond , be as fair and plain as ever be see . there be certain mountain far distant from the say river , which be to be see above the foresay river fall town , from which mountain diverse river descend , from moun - which fall into the say great river . all that country ‘ be full of sundry sort of wood and many vine , unless it be about the place that be inhabit , where they have pull up the tree to till and labour the ground , and to build their house and lodging . there be great store of beast . stag , deer , bear , and other such like sort of beast , as cony , hare , martern , fox , otter , beaver , weasel , badger , and rat exceed great , and diverse other sort of wild beast . they cloth themselves with the skin of those beast , because they have nothing else to make they apparel ! withal . there be bird . also many sort of bird , as crane , swan , bustard , wild goose white and grey , duck , thrush , blackbird , turtle , wild pigeon , Lenites , finche , redbreast , stare , nightingale , sparrow , and other bird , 244 even as in France . also , as we have say before , the say river be the plentifull of fish that ever have of any man fish . be see or hear of , because that from the mouth to the end of it , accord to their season , you shall find all sort of fresh water fish and salt . there be also many whale , porpoise , seahorse , and adhothuis , which be a kind of fish that we have never see nor hear of before . they be as great as porpoise , as white as any snow , their body and head fashion as a grayhound , they be wont always to abide between the fresh and salt water , which begin between the river of Saguenay and Canada . of certain advertisement and note give unto we by those countryman , after our return from Hochelaga . Chap . 12 . after our return from Hochelaga , we deal , traffic , and with great familiarity and love be conversant with those that dwell near unto our ship , except that sometime we have strife and contention with certain naughty people , full sore against the will of the other . we understand of Donnacona and of other , that the say river be call the river of Saguenay , and go to ' Saguenay , be somewhat more than a league far westnorthwest , and that 8 or 9 day journey beyond , it will bear but small boat . but the right and ready the right way way to Saguenay be up that river to Hochelaga , and then t0 Saguenay . into another that come from Saguenay , and then enter into the foresay river , and that there be yet one month sail thither . Moreover , they tell we and give we to understand , that there be people clad with cloth as we be , very honest , and many inhabit town , and that they have great store of gold and red copper : and that tear ° f about the land beyond the say first river to Hochelaga read copper . and Saguenay , be a hand environ round about with that and other river , and that beyond Saguenay the say Twg or three river enter into two or 3 great lake , and that there be great lake . 245 the river of irrouacasfalling into the lake ofango - lesme . a sea of