we deliver your worship a little bracelet ) and those be of the bigness of good pease . the rest of her woman of the better sort have pendant of copper hang in either ear , and some of the child of the king brother and other noble man , have five or six in either ear : he himself have upon his head a broad plate of gold , or copper , for be unpolished we know not what metal it shall be , neither will he by any mean suffer we to take it off his head , but feel it , it will bow very easy . his apparel be as his wife , only the woman wear their hair long on both side , and the man but on one . they be of colour yellowish , and their hair black for the most part , and yet we see child that have very fine aburne , and chestnut colour hair . after that these woman have be there , there come down from all part great store of people , bring with they leather , coral , diverse kind of die very excellent , and exchange with we : but when Granganimeo the king brother be present , none dare trade but himself : except such as wear red piece of copper on their head like himself : for that be the difference between the noble man , and the governor of country , and the mean sort . and we both note there , and you have understand since by these man , which we bring home , that no people in the world carry more respect to their king , nobili tie , and governor , than these doe . the 302 king brother wife , when she come to we ( as she do many time ) be follow with forty or fifty woman always : and when she come into the ship , she leave they all on land , save she two daughter , her nurse and one or two more . the king brother always keep this order , as many boat as he will come withal to the ship , so many fire will he make on the shore a far off , to the end we may understand with what strength and company he approach . their boat be make of one tree , either of pine or of pitch tree : a pitch tree . wood not common know to our people , nor find grow in England . they have no edge - tool to make they withal : if they have any they be very few , and those it seem they have twenty year since , which , as those two man declare , be out of a wreck which happen upon their coast of some christian ship , be beat that way by some storm and outrageous weather , whereof none of the people be save , but only the ship , or some part of her be cast upon the sand , out of who side they draw the nail and the spike , and with those they make their best instrument . the man - manner ner of make their boat be thus : they burn down some great tree , or take such as be wind fall , and put gum and rosin upon one side thereof , they set fire into it , and when it have burn it hollow , they cut out the coal with their shell , and ever where they will burn it deep or wide they lie on gum , which burn away the timber , and by this mean they fashion very fine boat , and such as will transport twenty man . their oar be like scoop , and many time they set with long pool , as the depth serve . the king brother have great like of our armour , a sword , and diverse other thing which we have : and offer to lay a great box of pearl in gage for they : but we refuse it for this time , because we will not make they know , that we esteem thereof , until we have understood in what place of the country the pearl grow : which now your worship do very well understand . 3 ° 3 he be very just of his promise : for many time we deliver he merchandise upon his word , but ever he come within the day and perform his promise . he send we every day a brace or two of fat buck , cony , hare , fish the best of the world . he send we diverse kind of fruit , melon , walnut , cucumber , gourd , pease , and diverse root , and fruit very excellent good , and of their country corn , which be very white , fair and well taste , and grow three time in five month : in may they sow , in July they reap , in June they sow , in August they reap : in July they sow , in September they reap : only they cast the corn into the ground , break a little of the soft turf with a wooden mattock , or pickeaxe : our self prove the soil , and put some of our pease in the ground , and in ten day they be of fourteen inche high : they have also bean very fair of diverse colour and wonderful plenty : some grow natural , and some in their garden , and so have they both wheat and oat . the soil be the most plentiful , sweet , fruitful and wholesome of all the world : there be above fourteen several sweet smell timber tree , and the most part of their underwoods be bay and such like : they have those oak that we have , but far great and better . after they have be diverse time aboard our ship , my self , with seven moor go twenty mile into the river , that run toward the city of skicoak , which river they call Occam : and the evening follow , we come to a koanoak island , which they call Raonoak , distant from the harbour island , by which we enter , seven league : and at the north end thereof be a village of nine house , build of cedar , and fortify round about with sharp tree , to keep out their enemy , and the entrance into it ' make like a turn pike very artificial ; when we come towards