: but that which be bring hither be not yet know , neither by we nor by the inhabitant to serve for any use or purpose , although the root in shape be very like . coscushaw some of our company take to be that kind of root which the Spaniard in the west Indies call cassavy , whereupon also many call it by that name : it grow in very muddy pool , and moist ground . be dress accord to the country manner , it make a good bread , and also a good spoonmeat , and be use very much by the inhabitant . the juice of this root be the juice of poison , and therefore heed must be take before any thing cofushaw u be mad therewithal ! : either the root must be first slice and dry in the sun , or by the fire , and then be pun into flower , will make good bread : or else while they be green they be to be pare , cut in piece , and stamp : loaf of the same to be lay near or over the fire until it be sour ; and then be well pun again , bread or spoonmeat very good in taste and wholesome may be make thereof . 365 Habascon be a root of hot taste , almost of the form and bigness of a parsnip : off it self it be no victuali , but only a help , be boil together with other meat . there be also leek , differ little from we in England , that grow in many place of the country ; of which , when we come in place where they be , we gather and eat many , but the natural inhabitant never . of fruit . chestnut there be in diverse place great store : some they use to eat raw , some they stamp and boil to make spoonmeat , and with some be sodden , they make such a manner of dough bread as they use of their bean before mention . walnut . there be two kind of walnut , and of they infinite store : in many place , where be very great wood for many mile together , the three part of tree be walnut tree . the one kind be of the same taste and form , or little differ from we of England , but that they be hard and thick shell : the other be great , and have a very ragged and hard shell : but the kernel great , very oily and sweet . beside their eat of they after our ordinary manner , they break they with stone , and pun they in mortar with water , to make a milk which they use to put into some sort of their spoonemeat : also among their sod wheat , pease , bean and pompion , which make they have a far more pleasant taste . medlar , a kind of very good fruit : so call by we chief for these respect : first in that they be not good until they be rot , then in that they open at the head as our medlar , and be about the same bigness : otherwise in taste and colour they be far different ; for they be as red as cherry , and very sweet : but whereas the cherry be sharp sweet , they be luscious sweet . Mutaquesunnauk , a kind of pleasant fruit almost of the shape and bigness of english pear , but that they be 366 of a perfect red colour aswell within as without . they there be Hi . grow on a plant who leaf be very thick , and full of ^ dfofTmua prickle as sharp as needle . some that have be in the Indies , where they have see that kind of red die of nofruithbring - great price , which be call cochinile , to grow , do de - eth forth . the scribe his plant right like unto this of Metaquesunnauk ; Gothinillo . but whether it be the true cochinile , or a bastard or wild kind , it can yet be certify , see that also , as i hear , cochinile be not of the fruit , but find on the leaf of the plant : which leave for such matter we have not so special observe . grape there be of two sort , which i mention in the merchantable commodity . strawberry there be as good and as great as those which we have in our english garden . mulberry , applecrab , hurt or hurtlebery , such as we have in England . sacquenummene , a kind of berry almost like unto caper , but somewhat great , which grow together in cluster upon a plant or herb that be find in shallow water : be boil eight or nine hour accord to their kind , be very good meat and wholesome ; otherwise if they be eat they will make a man for the time frantic or extreme sick . there be a kind of reed which bear a seed almost like unto our rye or wheat ; and be boil be good meat . in our travel in some place we find wild pease like unto we in England , but that they be less , which be also good meat . of a kind of fruit or berry in form of acorn . there be a kind of berry or acorn , of which there be five sort that grow on several kind of tree : the one be call sagatemener , the second osamener , the three pummuckoner . Theise kind of acorn they use to dry upon hurdle make of reed , with fire underneath , almost after the manner as we dry malt in England . when they 367 be to be use , they first water they until they be soft , and then be sodden , they make a good victuali , either to eat so simple , or else be also pun to make loaf or lump of bread . Theise be also the three kind , of which i say before the inhabitant use to make sweet oil . another sort be call sapummener , which be boil or parch , do eat and taste like unto chestnut . they sometime also make bread of this sort . the five sort be call Mangummenauk , and be the acorn of their kind of oak , the which