inhabitant of Seco tan , which appear to be very true , for they wonder marvelous when we be among they at the whiteness of our skin , ever covet to touch our breast , and to view the same . beside they have our ship in marvelous admiration , and all thing else be so strange unto they , as it appear that none of they have ever see the like . when we discharge any piece , be it but a hargubuz , they will tremble thereat for very fear , and for the strangeness of the same : for the weapon which themselves use be bow and arrow : the arrow be but of small cane , head with a sharp shell or tooth of a fish sufficient enough to kill a naked man . their sword be of wood harden : likewise they their wa - use wooden breastplate for their defence . they have pan ' beside a kind of club , in the end whereof they fasten the sharp horn of a stag , or other beast . when they go to war they carry about with they their idol , 307 of who they ask counsel , as the roman be wont of the oracle of Apollo . they sing song as they march towards the battle in stead of drum and trumpet : their war be very cruel and bloody , by reason whereof , and of their civil dissension which have happen of late year among they , the people be marvelous waste , and in some place the country leave desolate . adjoin to this country aforesaid call Secotan begin a country call Pomovik , belong to another king who they call piamacum , and this king be in league with the next king adjoin towards the set of the sun , and the country newsiok , situate upon a goodly river call Neus : these king have mortali war with Wingina king of Wingandacoa : but about two year pass there be a peace make between the king Piemacum , and the lord of Secotan , as these man which we have bring with we to England , have give we to understand : but there remain a mortali malice in the secotane , for many injury and slaughter do upon they by this Piemacum . they invite diverse man , and thirty woman of the best of his country to their town to a feast : and when they be altogether merry , and pray before their idol , ( which be nothing else but a mere illusion of the devil ) the captain or lord of the town come sudden upon they , and slay they every one , reserve the woman and child : and these two have oftentimes since persuade we to surprise Piemacum his town , have promise and assure we , that there will be find in it great store of commodity . but whether their persuasion be to the end they may be revenge of their enemy , or for the love they bear to we , we leave that to the trial hereafter . beyond this island call Roanoak , be main island very plentiful of fruit and other natural increase , together with many town , and village , along the side of the continent , some bound upon the island , and some stretch up further into the land . when we first have sight of this country , some think 308 the first land we see to be the continent : but after we enter into the haven , we see before we another mighty long sea : for there lie along the coast a tract of island , two hundred mile in length , adjoin to the ocean sea , and between the island , two or three entrance : when you be enter between they ( these island be very narrow for the most part , as in most place six mile broad , in some place less , in few more ) than there appear another great sea , contain in breadth in some place , forty , and in some fifty , in some twenty mile over , before you come unto the continent : and in this enclose sea there be above a hundred island of diverse bigness , whereof one be sixteen mile long , at which we be , find it a most pleasant and fertile ground , replenish with goodly cedar , and diverse other sweet wood , full of corrant , of flax , and many other notable commodity , which we at that time have no leisure to view . beside this island there be many , as i have say , some of two , or three , of four , of five mile , some more , some less , most beautiful and pleasant to behold , replenish with deer , cony , hare and diverse beast , and about they the goodly and best fish in the world , and in great abundance . thus sir , we have acquaint you with the particular of our discovery , make this present voyage , as far forth as the shortness of the time we there continue will affbord we take view of : and so content our self with this service at this time , which we hope hereafter to enlarge , as occasion and assistance shall | be give , we resolve to leave the country , and to apply our self to return for England , which we do accord , and arrive safe in the west of England about the midst of September . and whereas we have above certify you of the country take in possession by we , to her majesty use , and so to you by her majesty grant , we think good for the better assurance thereof to record some of the particular gentleman , and man of account , who then be 3 ° 9 Roanoak sixteen mile long . present , as witness of the same , that thereby all occasion of cavil to the title of the country , in her majesty behalf may be prevent , which otherwise , such as like not the action may use and pretend , who name be : master Philip Amadas , master Arthur Barlow , j - captain . ' William Greenevile , John wood , James Browewich , ! Henry green , ’ Benjamin wood , Simon Ferdinando , Nicholas Petman , John Hewes , ► of the company . we bring home also two of the savage be lusty man , who name be Wanchese and Manteo .