; but notwithstanding they be very good meat , as also their egg . some have be find of a yard in breadth and better . and thus have i make relation of all sort of victuali that we feed upon for the time we be in Virginia , as also the inhabitant themselves , as far forth as i know and can remember , or that be special worthy to be remember . the three and last part of such other thing as be behooveful for those which shall plant and inhabit to know of , with a description of the nature and manner of the people of the country . of commodity for building and other necessary use . hose other thing which i be more to make rehearsal of , be such as concern building , and other mechanical necessary use , as diverse sort of tree for house and ship - timber , and other use else : also lime , stone , and brick , lest that be not mention some might have be doubt of , or by some that be malicious the contrary report . oak there be as fair , straight , tall , and as good timber as any can be , and also great store , and in some place very great . Walnut tree , as i have say before very many , some have be see excellent fair timber of four and five 371 fathom , and above fourscore foot straight without bough . fir tree fit for mast of ship , some very tall and great . Rakiock , a kind of tree so call that be sweet wood , of which the inhabitant that be near unto we do common make their boat or canoas of the form of trow , only with the help of fire , hatchet of stone , and shell : we have know some so great be make in that sort of one tree , that they have carry well 20 . man at once , beside much baggage : the timber be great , tall , strait , soft , light , and yet tough enough i think ( beside other use ) to be fit also for mast of ship . cedar , a sweet wood good for ceiling , chest , box , bedstead , lute , virginal , and many thing else , as i have also say before . some of our company which have wander in some place where i have not be , have make certain affirmation of Cyprus , which for such and other excellent use be also a wood of price and no small estimation . Maple , and also which - hazel , whereof the inhabitant use to make their bow . holly , a necessary thing for the make of birdlime . willow good for the make of wear and weeles to take fish after the english manner , although the inhabitant use only reed , which because they be so strong as also flexible , do serve for that turn very well and sufficient . beech and Ashe , good for cask - hoop , and if need require , plow work , as also for many thing else . Eime . } { sassafras tree . Ascopo a kind of tree very like unto laurel , the bark be hot in taste and spicy , it be very like to that tree which monardes describe to be cassia Lignea of the west Indies . there be many other strange tree who name i know not but in the virginian language , of which i be 372 not now able , neither be it so convenient for the present to trouble you with particular relation : see that for timber and other necessary use , i have name sufficient . and of many of the rest , but that they may be apply to good use , 1 know no cause to doubt . now for stone , brick , and lime , thus it be . near unto the sea coast where we dwell , there be no kind of stone to be find ( except a few small pebble about four mile off ) but such as have be bring from further out of the main . in some of our voyage we have see diverse hard raggy stone , great pebble , and a kind of grey stone like unto marble of which the inhabitant make their hatchet to cleave wood . upon inquiry we hear that a little further up into the country be of all sort very many , although of quarry they be ignorant , neither have they use of any store whereupon they shall have occasion to seek any . for if every household have one or two to crack nut , grind shell , whet copper , and sometime other stone for hatchet , they have enough : neither use they any dig , but only for grave about three foot deep : and therefore no marveile that they know neither quarry , nor lime - stone , which both may be in place near than they wot of . in the mean time until there be discovery of sufficient store in some place or other convenient , the want of you which be and shall the planter therein may be as well supply by brick : for the make whereof in diverse place of the country there be clay both excellent good , and plenty , and also by lime make of oyster shell , and of other burn , after the manner as they use in the isle of tenet and shepy , and also in diverse other place of England : which kind of lime be well know to be as good as any other . and of oyster shell there be plenty enough : for beside diverse other particular place where be abundance , there be one shallow sound along the coast , where for the space of many mile together in length , and two or three mile in breadth , the ground be 373 Jaques Cartier , voyage 2 , chapter 8 . nothing else , be but half a foot or a foot under water for the most part . thus much can i say furthermore of stone , that about 120 . mile from our fort near the water in the side of a hill , be find by a gentleman of our company , a great vein of hard rag stone , which i think good to remember unto you .