part of his boat with the chief man of our fleet , every man appoint , and furnish in the best sort : at the land of our general , the spanish governor receive he very courteous , and the spanish gentleman salute 3X3 our english gentleman , and their inferior sort do also salute our soldier and sea man , like our man , and likewise their quality , although at the first they seem to stand in fear of we , and of so many of our boat , whereof they desire that all may not land their man , yet in the end , the courtesy that pass on both side be so great , that all fear and mistrust on the Spaniard part be abandon . in the mean time while our english general and the spanish governor discourse betwixt they of diverse matter , as of the state of the country , the multitude of the town and people , and the commodity of the hand , our man provide two banquet house cover with green bough , the one for the gentleman , the other for the servant , and a sumptuous banquet be bring in serve by we all in plate , with the sound of trumpet , and consort of music , wherewith the Spaniard be more than delight . which banquet be end , the Spaniard in recompense of our courtesy , cause a great hear of white bull , and cow to be bring together from the mountain , and appointed for every gentleman and captain that will ride , a horse ready saddle , and then single out three of the best of they to be hunt by horseman after their manner , so that the pastime grow very pleasant for the space of three hour , wherein all three of the beast be kill , whereof one take the sea , and there be slay with a musket . after this sport , many rare present and gift be give and bestow on both part , and the next day we play the merchant in bargain with they by way of truck and exchange of diverse of their commodity , as horse , mere , cow , bull , goat , swine , sheep , bullhides , sugar , ginger , pearl , tobacco , and such like commodity of the hand . the 7 . day we depart with great good will from the Spaniard from the hand of Hispaniola : but the wise sort do impute this great show of friendship , and courtesy use towards we by the Spaniard rather to the 314 force that we be of , and the vigilancy , and watchful - ness that be among we , then to any hearty good will , or sure friendly entertainment : for doubtless if they have be strong than we , we may have look for no better courtesy at their hand , than master John haukin receive at saint John de ullua , or John Oxnam near the strait of Dariene , and diverse other of our countryman in other place . the 8 . day we anchor at a small hand to take seal , which in that place we understand to have be in great quantity , where the general and certain other with he in the pinnace be in very great danger to have be all cast away , but by the help of God they escape the hazard , and return aboard the admiral in safety . the 9 , day we arrive and land in the he of Caycos , they land on in which hand we search for salte - ponde , upon the pes ° f advertisement and information of a Portugal : who in aic0 ' deed abuse our general and we , deserve a halter for his hire , if it have so please we . the 12 . we anchor at guanima , and land . guanima . the 15 . and 16 . we anchor and land at Cyguateo . Cyguateo . the 20 . we fall with the main of Florida . the 23 . we be in great danger of a wrack on a breach call the cape of fear . the 24 . we come to anchor in a harbour , where we catch in one tide so much fish as will have yield we twenty pound in London : this be our first land they land in in Florida . Florida . the 26 . we come to anchor at Wocokon . the 29 . we weigh anchor to bring the tiger into the harbour , where through the unskilfulness of the master who name be Fernando , the admiral strike on ground , and sink . the 3 . we send word of our arrive at Wococon , to July . Wingina at Roanoak . the 6 . m . John Arundel be send to the main , and Manteo with he : and captain Aubry and captain boniten the same day be send to croatoan , where they 315 find two of our man leave there with 30 . other by captain Reymond , some 20 . day before . the 8 . captain Aubry and captain Boniten return , with two of our man find by they , to we at Wocokon . the 11 . day the general accompany in his tilt boat with master John Arundel , master Stukley , and diverse other gentleman , master lane , master candish , master Hariot , and twenty other in the new pinnace , captain Amadas , captain Clarke , with ten other in a shipboat , Francis brook , and John white in another ship - boat , pass over the water from Wococon to the main land victual for eight day , in which voyage we first discover the town of pomejok , Aquascogoc and Secotan , and also the great lake call by the savage paquipe , with diverse other place , and so return with that discovery to our fleet . the 12 . we come to the town of pomeiok . the 13 . we pass by water to aquascogok . the 15 . we come to Secotan , and be well entertain there of the savage . the 16 . we return thence , and one of our boat with the admiral be send to aquascogok , to demand a silver cup which one of the savage have steal from we , and not receive it accord to his promise , we burn , and spoil their corn , and town , all the people be flee . the 18 . we return from the discovery of Secotan , and the same day come aboard our fleet ride at Wococon . the 21 . our fleet anker at Wococon , we weigh anchor for Hatoraske . the 27 . our fleet anchor at Hatorask , and there we rest . the 29 . Grangino brother to king Wingina come aboard the admiral , and Manteo with he . the 2 . the admiral be send to weapomeiok . the 5 . m . John Arundel be send for England . 316 the 25 . our general weigh anchor , and set sail for England . about the 31 . he take a spanish ship of 300 ton rich load , board she with a boat make with board of chest , which fall asunder , and sink at the ship side , assoon as ever he and his man be out of it . the 10 . of September , by foul weather the general September . then ship in the prize , lose sight of the tiger . the 6 . the tiger fall with the land end , and the October . same day come to anchor at Falmouth . the 18 . the general come with the prize to Plymmouth , and be courteous receive by diverse of his worshipful friend .