break : or boil the flower with water into a pap - .... Okindgier , call by we bean , because in greatness and partly in shape they be like to the bean in England , save that they be flatter , of more diverse colour , and some pied . the leaf also of the stem be much different . in taste they be altogether as good as our english pease . wickonzowr , call by we pease , in respect of the bean , for distinction sake , because they be much less , although in form they little differ : but in goodness of taste much like , and be far better than our english pease . both the bean and pease be ripe in ten week after they be set . they make they victuali either by boil they all to piece into a broth , or boil they whole until they be soft , and begin to break , as be use in England , either by themselves , or mixed together : sometime they mingle of the wheat with they : sometime also , be whole sodden , they bruise or pun they in a mortar , and thereof make loaf or lump of doughish bread , which they use to eat for variety . macocquer , accord to their several form , call by we pompion , melon , and gourd , because they be of the like form as those kind in England . in Virginia such of several form be of one taste , and very good , and do also spring from one seed . there be of two sort : one be ripe in the space of a month , and the other in two month . there be a herb which in dutch be call Melden . some of those that i describe it unto take it to be a kind of orage : it grow about four or five foot high : of the seed thereof they make a thick broth , and pottage of a very good taste : of the stalk by burn into ash they make a kind of salt earth , wherewithal ! many use sometime to season their broth : other salt they know not . we our self use the leaf also for potherb . 360 there be also another great herb , in form of a marigold , about six foot in height , the head with the flower be a span in breadth . some take it to be Planta solis : of the seed hereof they make both a kind of bread and broth . all the aforesaid commodity for victuali be set or sow , sometime in ground apart and several by themselves , but for the most part together in one ground mixed : the manner thereof , with the dress and prepare of the ground , because i will note unto you the fertility of the soil , i think good brief to describe . the ground they never fatten with muck , dung , or any other thing , neither plow nor dig it as we in England , but only prepare it in sort as follow . a few day before they sow or set , the man with wooden instrument make almost in form of mattock or hoe with long handle : the woman with short pecker or parer , because they use they sit , of a foot long , and about five inch in breadth , do only break the upper part of the ground to raise up the weed , grass , and old stub of corn stalk with their root . the which after a day or two day dry in the sun , be scrap up into many small heap , to save they labour for carry they away , they burn into ash . and whereas some may think that they use the ash for to better the ground , i say that then they will either disperse the ash abroad , which we observe they do not , except the heap be too great , or else will take speciali care to set their corn where the ash lie , which also we find they be careless of . and this be all the husband of their ground that they use . then their set or sow be after this manner . first for their corn , begin in one corner of the plot , with a pecker they make a hole , wherein they put four grain , with care that they touch not one another ( about a inch asunder ) and cover they with the mould 361 again : and so throughout the whole plot make such hole , and use they after such manner , but with this regard , that they be make in rank , every rank differ from other half a fathom or a yard , and the hole also in every rank as much . by this mean there be a yard spare ground between every hole : where accord to discretion here and there , they set as many bean and Peaze ; in diverse place also among the seed of macocquer , Melden , and Planta solis . the ground be thus set accord to the rate by we experiment , a english acre contain forty perch in length , and four in breadth , do there yield in crop or ofcome of corn , bean and Peaze , at the least two hundred London bushel , beside the macocquer , Melden , and Planta solis ; when as in England forty bushel of our wheat yield out of such a acre be think to be much . i think also good to note this unto you , that you which shall inhabit , and plant there , may know how special that country corn be there to be prefer before we : beside , the manifold way in apply it to victual , the increase be so much , that small labour and pain be needful in respect of that which must be use for we . for this i can assure you that accord to the rate we have make proof of , one man may prepare and husband so much ground ( have once bear corn before ) with less than four and twenty hour labour , as shall yield he victual in a large proportion for a twelvemonth , if he have nothing else but that which the same ground will yield , and of that kind only which i have