that all my company make much of he , he flat discover all unto i , which also afterward be reveal unto i by one of pemisapans own man , that night before he be slay . these mischief be all instant upon i and my company to be put in execution , it stand i in hand to study how to prevent they , and also to save all other , which be at that time as aforesaid so far from i : whereupon i send to Pemisapan to put suspicion out of his head , that 1 mean present to go to croatoan , for that i have hear of the arrival of our fleet , ( though i in truth have neither herd nor hope for so good adventure , ) and that i mean to come by he , to borrow of his man to fish for my company , and to hunt for i at croatoan , as also to buy some four day provision to serve for my voyage . he send i word that he will himself come over to Roanoak , but from day to day he defer , only to bring the weopomeiok with he and the mandoag , who time appoint be within eight day after . it be the last of May 1586 when all his own savage begin to make their assembly at Roanoak , at his commandment send abroad unto they , and i resolve not to stay long upon his come over , since he mean to come with so good company , but think good to go and visit he with such as i have , which i resolve to do the next day : but that night i mean by the way to give they in the island a canvisado , and at the instant to seize upon all the canoas about the island , to keep he from advertisement . but the town take the alarm before i mean it to 340 they : the occasion be this . i have send the master of the light horseman , with a few with he , to gather up all the canoas in the set of the sun , and to take as many as be go from we to Dasamonquepeio , but to suffer any that come from thence , to land . he meet with a Canoa go from the shore , and overthrow the Canoa , and cut off slaughter two Savages head : this be not do so secret but he be discover from the shore ; whereupon the cry arise : for in truth they , privy to their own villainous purpose against we , hold as good espial upon we , both day and night , as we do upon they . the alarm give , they take themselves to their bow , and we to our arm : some three or four of they at the first be slay with our shot : the rest flee into the wood . the next morning with the light horseman and one Canoa take 25 with the colonel of the chesepians , and the sergeant major , i go to Dasamonquepeio : and be land , send Pemisapan word by one of his own savage that meet i at the shore , that i be go to croatoan , and mean to take he in the way to complain unto he of Osocon , who the night pass be convey away my prisoner , who i have there present tie in a handlocke . hereupon the king do abide my come to he , and find my self amid seven or eight of he principali weroance and follower , ( not regard any of the common sort ) i give the watchword agree upon , ( which be , Christ our victory ) and immediate those his chief man and himself have by the mercy of God for our deliverance , that which they have purpose for we . the king himself be shoot through by the colonel with a pistol , lie on the ground for dead , and i look as watchful for the save of Manteos friend , as other be busy that none of the rest shall escape , sudden he start up , and run away as though he have not be touch , insomuch as he overrun all the company , be by the way shoot thwart the buttock by my irish boy with my petronel . in the end a 341 irish man serve i , one Nugent , and the deputy provost , undertake he ; and follow he in the wood , overtake he : and i in some doubt lest we have lose both the king and my man by our own negligence to have be intercept by the savage , we meet he Pemisapan return out of the wood with pemisapans head in slay - he hand .. this fall out the first of June 1586 , and the eight of the same come advertisement to i from captain Stafford , lie at my lord admiral island , that he have discover a great fleet of three and twenty sail : but whether they be friend or foe , he can not yet discern . he advise i to stand upon as good guard as i can . the nine of the say month he himself come unto i , have that night before , and that same day travel by land twenty mile : and i must true report of he from the first to the last ; he be the gentleman that never spare labour or peril either by land or water , fair weather or foul , to perform any service commit unto he . a letter from he bring i a letter from the general sir Francis sir Francis Drake , with a most bountiful and honourable offer for ’ the supply of our necessity to the performance of the action we be enter into ; and that not only of victual , munition , and clothe , but also of bark , pinnaces , and boat ; they also by he to be victual , man , and furnish to my contentation . the ten day he arrive in the road of our bad harbour : and come there to a anchor , the eleven day i come to he , who i find in deed most honourable to perform that which in writing and message he have most courteous offer , he have aforehand propound the matter to all the captain of his fleet , and get their like and consent thereto . with such thank unto he and his captain for his care both of we and of our action , not as the matter deserve , but as i can both for my company and my 342 ' self , i ( be aforehand prepare what i will desire )