of the nature and manner of the people . t rest i speak a word or two of the natural inhabitant , their nature and manner , leave large discourse thereof until time more convenient hereafter : now only so far forth , as that you may know , how that they in respect of trouble our inhabit and plant , be not to be fear , but that they shall have cause both to fear and love we , that shall inhabit with they . they be a people clothe with loose mantle make of dear skin , and apron of the same round about their middle , all else naked , of such a difference of stature only as we in England , have no edge tool or weapon of iron or steel to offend we withal , neither know they how to make any : those weapon that they • have , be only bow make of witch - hazel , and arrow of reed , flat edge truncheon also of wood about a yard long , neither have they any thing to defend themselves but target make of bark , and some armour make of stick wicker together with thread . their town be but small , and near the sea coast but few , some contain but ten or twelve house ; some 20 . the great that we have see have be but of 30 . house : if they be wall , it be only do with bark of tree make fast to stake , or else with pole only fix upright , and close one by another . their house be make of small pole , make fast at the top in round form after the manner as be use in many arbory in our garden of England , in most . five . 4 town cover with bark , and in some with artificiali mat make of long rush , from the top of the house down to the ground . the length of they be common double to the breadth , in some place they be but 12 . and 16 . yard long , and in other some we have see of four and twenty . in some place of the country , one only town belong to the government of a wiroan or chief lord , in other some two or three , in some six , eight , and more : the great wiroan that yet we have deal with , have but eighteen town in his government , and able to make not above seven or eight hundred fight man at the most . the language of every government be different from any other , and the further they be distant , the great be the difference . their manner of war among themselves be either by sudden surprise one a other most common about the dawn of the day , or moonlight , or else by ambush , or some subtle devise . set battle be very rare , except it fall out where there be many tree , where either part may have some hope of defence , after the delivery of every arrow , in leap behind some or other . if there fall out any war between we and they , what their fight be likely to be , we have advantage against they so many manner of way , as by our discipline , our strange weapon and devise else , especial ordinance great and small , it may easy be imagine : by the experience we have have in some place , the turn up of their heal against we in run away be their best defence . in respect of we they be a people poor , and for want of skill and judgement in the knowledge and use of our thing , do esteem our trifle before thing of great value : notwithstanding , in their proper manner ( consider the want of such mean as we have ) , they seem very ingenious . for although they have no such tool , nor any such craft , science and art as 375 we , yet in those thing they do , they show excellende of wit . and by how much they upon due consideration shall find our manner of knowledge and craft to exceed they in perfection , and speed for do or execution , by so much the more be it probable that they shall desire our friendship and love , and have the great respect for please and obey we . whereby may be hope , if mean of good government be use , that they may in short time be bring to civility , and the embrace of true religion . some religion they have already , which although it be far from the truth , yet be as it be , there be hope it may be the easy and soon reform . they believe that there be many god , which they call Mantoac , but of different sort and degree , one only chief and great God , which have be from all eternity . who , as they affirm , when he purpose to make the world , make first other god of a principali order , to be as mean and instrument to be use in the creation and government to follow , and after the sun , moon , and star as petty god , and the instrument of the other order more principal . first ( they say ) be make water , out of which by the god be make all diversity of creature that be visible or invisible . for mankind they say a woman be make first , which by the work of one of the god , conceive and bring forth child : and in such sort they say they have their beginning . but how many year or age have pass since , they say they can make no relation , have no letter nor other such mean as we to keep record of the particularity of time pass , but only tradition from father to son . they think that all the god be of humane shape , and therefore they represent they by image in the form of man , which they call kewasowok , one alone be call Kewas : they they place in house appropriate or temple , which they call Machicomuck , where they 376 worship , pray , sing , and make many time offer unto they . in some MachicOmuck we have see but one Kewas , in some two , and in other some three . the common sort think they to be also god . they believe also the immortality of the soul , that after this life as soon as the soul be depart from the body , accord to the work it have do , it be either carry to heaven the habitacle of god , there to enjoy perpetuali bliss and happiness , or else to a