be dry after the manner of the first sort , and afterward water , they boil they , and their servant , or sometime the chief themselves , either for variety or for want of bread , do eat they with their fish or flesh . of beast . deer , in some place there be great store : near unto the sea coast they be of the ordinary bigness of we in England , and some less : but further up into the country , where there be better food , they be great : they differ from we only in this , their tail be long , and the snag of their home look backward . cony . those that we have see , and all that we can hear off be of a grey colour like unto hare : in some place there be such plenty that all the people of some town make they mantle of the fur or fly of the skin of those which they usual take . saquenuckot and Maquowoc , two kind of small beast great than cony , which be very good meat . we never take any of they our self but sometime eat of such as the inhabitant have take and bring unto we . squirrel , which be of a grey colour , we have take and eat . bear , which be off black colour . the bear of this country be good meat . the inhabitant in time of winter do use to take and eat many : so also sometime do we . they be take common in this sort : in 368 some island or place where they be , be hunt for , assoon as they have espial of a man , they present run away , and then be chase , they climb and get up the next tree they can : from whence with arrow they be shoot down stark dead , or with those wound that they may after easy be kill . we sometime shoot they down with our caliver . i have the name of eight and twenty several sort of beast , which i have hear of to be here and there disperse in the country , especial in the main : of which there be only twelve kind that we have yet discover ; and of those that be good meat we know only they before mention . the inhabitant sometime kill the lion , and eat he : and we sometime as they come to our hand of their wolves or wolvish dog , which i have not set down for good meat , lest that some will understand my judgement therein to be more simple than need , although i can allege the difference in taste of those kind from we , which by some of our company have be experiment in both . of foul . TUrkie cock and turquoise hen , stockdove , partridge , crane , Hernes , and in winter great store of swan and goose . of all sort of foul i have the name in the country language of fourscore and six , of which number , beside those that be name , we have take , eat , and have the picture as they be there draw , with the name of the inhabitant , of several strange sort of water foul eight , and seventeen kind more of land foul , although we have see and eat of many more , which for want of leisure there for the purpose , can not be picture : and after we be better furnish and store upon further discovery with their strange beast , fish , tree , plant , and herb , they shall | be also publish . there be also parrot , falcon , and Marlin hauk , vin 369 2 a in the gulf of California they use the like fish . which although with we they be not use for meat , yet for other cause i think good to mention . of fish . for four month of the year , February , march , April and may , there be plenty of sturgeon . and also in the same month of herring , some of the ordinary bigness of we in England , but the most part far great , of eighteen , twenty inch , and some two foot in length and better : both these kind of fish in those month be most plentiful ! , and in best season , which we find to be most delicate and pleasant meat . there be also trout , porpoise , ray , oldwife , mullet , plaice , and very many other sort of excellent good fish , which we have take and eat , who name i know not but in the country language : we have the picture of twelve sort more , as they be draw in the country , with their name . the inhabitant use to take they two manner of way ; the one be by a kind of wear make of reed , which in that country be very strong : the other way , which be more strange , be with pole make sharp at one end , by shoot they into the fish after the manner as irish man cast dart , either as they be row in their boat , or else as they be wade in the shallows for the purpose . there be also in many place plenty of these kind which follow : sea - crab , such as we have in England . oyster , some very great , and some small , some round , and some of a long shape : they be find both in salt water and brackish , and those that we have out of salt water be far better than the other , as in our country . also muscle , scalop , periwinkle , and crevice . Seekanauk , a kind of crusty shellfish , which be good meat , about a foot in breadth , have a crusty tail many leg like a crab , and her eye in her back . they 37 ° 1586 . be find in shallows of water , and sometime on the shore . there be many tortoise both of land and sea kind , their back and belly be shell very thick ; their head , foot , and tail , which be in appearance , seem ugly , as though they be member of a serpent or venomous beast