the voyage make by sir Richard Greenvile , for sir Walter Ralegh , to Virginia , in the year 1585 . he 9 day of April , in the year abovesaid , we depart from Plymmouth , our fleet consist of the number of seven sail , to wit , the tiger , of the burden of seven score ton , a flyboat call the roebuck , of the like burden , the lion of a hundred ton or thereabouts , the Elizabeth , of fifty ton , and the Dorothy , a small bark : whereunto be also adjoin for speedy service , two small pinnace . the principali gendeman of our company , be these , m . Ralph lane , m . Tomas Candish , m . John Arundel , m . Raymund , m . Stukley , m . Bremige , m . Vincent , and m . John Clarke , and diverse other , whereof some be captain , and other some assistant for counsel , and good direction in the voyage . the 14 . day of April we fall with Lancerota and Forteventura , isle of the canary , and from thence 310 we continue our course for Dominica , one of the antiles of the west India , wherewith we fall the 7 . day of May , and the 10 . day follow we come to a anchor at Cotesa , a little hand situate near to the hand of S . John , where we land , and refresh our self all that day . the 12 . day of may we come to a anchor in the bay of moskito , in the hand of S . John , within a falcon shoot of the shore : where our general sir Richard greenevil , and the most part of our company land , and begin to fortify very near to the sea side : the river run by the one side of our fort , and the other two side be environ with wood . the 13 . day we begin to build a new pinnace within the fort , with the timber that we then fell in the country , some part whereof we fetch three mile up in the land , and bring it to our fort upon truck , the Spaniard not dare to make or offer resistance . the 16 . day there appear unto we out of the wood eight horseman of the Spaniard , about a quarter of a mile from our fort , stay about half a hour in view our force : but assoon as they see ten of our shot march towards they , they present retire into the wood . the 19 day master candish , who have be separate from our fleet in a storm in the bay of Portugal , arrive at Cotesa , within the sight of the tiger : our think he a far off to have be either a Spaniard or Frenchman of war , think it good to weigh anchor , and to go room with he , which the tiger do , and discern he at last to be one of our consort , for joy of who come our ship discharge their ordinance , and salute he accord to the manner of the sea . the 22 . day twenty other spanish horseman show themselves to we upon the other side of the river : who be see , our general dispatch 20 . footman towards they , and two horseman of we , mount upon spanish horse , which we before have take in the time 311 A . D . I585 - they land upon the hand of . john ’ de Porto Rico . of our be on the hand : they show to our man a flag of truce , and make sign to have a parley with we : whereupon two of our man go half of the way upon the sand , and two of they come and meet they : the two Spaniard offer very great salutation to our man , but begin accord to their spanish proud humour , to - expostulate with they about their arrival and fortify in their country , who notwithstanding by our man discreet answer be so cool , that ( whereas they be tell , that our principali intention be only to furnish our self with water and victuales , and other necessary , whereof we stand in need , which we crave may be yield we with fair and friendly mean , otherwise our resolution be to practise force , and to relieve ourselves by the sword ) the Spaniard in conclusion see our man so resolute , yield to our request with large promise of all courtesy , and great favour , and so our man and they depart . the 23 . day our pinnace be finish , and launch : which be do , our general with his captain and gentleman , march up into the country about the space of 4 . mile , where in a plain marsh they stay expect the come of the Spaniard accord to their promise , to furnish we with victual : who keep their old custom for perjury and breach of promise , come not , whereupon our general fire the wood thereabouts , and so retire to our fort , which the same day be fire also , and each man come aboard to be ready to set sail the next morning . the 29 . day we set sail from saint Johns , be many of we sting before upon shore with the muskito : but the same night we take a spanish frigate , which be forsake by the Spaniard upon the sight of we , and the next day in the morning very early we take another frigate , with good and rich fraught , and diverse Spaniards of account in she , which afterward we ransom for good round sum , and land they in saint Johns . 312 the 26 . day our lieutenant master Ralph lane go in one of the frigate which we have take , to roxo bay upon the southwest side of saint Johns , to fetch salt , be thither conduct by a spanish pilot : as soon as he arrive there , he land with his man to the number of 20 . and entrench himself upon the sand immediate , compass one of their salt hill within the trench : who be see of the Spaniard , there come down towards he two or three troop of horseman and footman , who give he the look , and gaze on , but dare not come near he to offer any resistance , so that master lane maugre their troop , carry their salt aboard and jade his frigate , and so return again to our fleet the 29 . day , which ride at saint germane bay the same day we all depart , and the next day arrive in the hand of Hispaniola . June . the 1 . day of June our anchor at Isabel , on the north side of Hispaniola . the 3 . day of June , the governor of Isabel , and captain of the port de plata , be certify by the report of sundry Spaniards , who have be well entertained aboard our ship by our general , that in our fleet be many brave and gallant gentleman , who great desire to see the governor aforesaid , he thereupon send gentle commendation to our general , promise within few day to come to he in person , which he perform accord . the 5 . day the aforesaid governor accompany with a lusty friar , and twenty other Spaniard , with their servant , and negro , come down to the sea side , where our ship ride at anchor , who be see , our general man immediate the most