before speak of : the say ground be also but of five and twenty yard square . and if need require , but that there be ground enough , there may be raise out of one and the selfsame ground two harvest or ofcome : for they sow or set , and may at any time when they think good , from the midst of march until the end of June : so that they also set when they have eat of their first crop . in some 362 1586 . place of the country notwithstanding they have two harvest , as we have hear , out of one and the same ground . for english corn nevertheless , whether to use or not to use it , you that inhabit may do as you shall have further cause to think best . of the growth you need not to doubt : for barley , oat , and pease , we have see proof of , not be purposely sow , but fall casual in the worst sort of ground , and yet to be as fair as any we have ever see here in England . but of wheat , because it be musty , and have take salt water , we can make no trial : and of rye we have none . thus much have i digress , and i hope not unnecessary : now will i return again to my course , and entreat of that which yet remain , appertain to this chapter . there be a herb which be sow apart by it self , and be call by the inhabitant Uppowoc : in the west Indies it have diverse name , accord to the several place and country where it grow and be use : the Spaniard general call it tobacco . the leaf thereof tobacco . be dry and bring into powder , they use to take the fume or smoke thereof , by suck it through pipe make of clay , into their stomach and head ; from whence it purge superfluous flame and other gross humour , and open all the pore and passage of the body : by which mean the use thereof not only preserve the body from obstruction , but also ( if any be , so that they have not be of too long continuance ) in short time break they : whereby their body be notable preserve in health , and know not many grievous disease , wherewithal ! we in England be often time afflict . this Uppowoc be of so precious estimation among they , that they think their god be marvellous delight therewith : whereupon sometime they make hallow fire , and cast some of the powder therein for a sacrifice : be in a storm upon the water , to pacific their god , they cast some up into the air and into the 363 water : so a wear for fish be new set up , they cast some therein and into the air : also after a escape of danger , they cast some into the air likewise : but all do with strange gesture , stamp , sometime dance , clap of hand , hold up of hand , and stare up into the heaven , utter therewithal ! , and chatter strange word and noise . we our self , during the time we be there , use to suck it after their manner , as also since our return , and have find many rare and wonder experiment of the virtue thereof : of which the relation will require a volume by it self : the use of it by so many of late man and woman of great call , as else , and some learned physician also , be sufficient witness . and these be all the commodity for sustenance of life , that i know and can remember , they use to husband : all else that follow , be find grow natural or wild . of root . OPenauk be a kind of root of round form , some of the bigness of walnut , some far great , which be find in moist and marish ground grow many together one by another in rope , as though they be fasten with a string . be boil or sodden , mmardes they be very good meat . monardes call these root , part z . lib . 1 . gea ( js or pater nostri of Santa Helena . cap - 4 - okeepenauk be also of round shape , find in dry ground : some be of the bigness of a man head . they be to be eat as they be take out of the ground : for by reason of their dryness they will neither roast nor seethe . their taste be not so good as of the former root : notwithstanding for want of bread , and sometime for variety the inhabitant use to eat they with fish or flesh , and in my judgement they do as well as the household bread make of rye here in England . Kaishucpenauk , a white kind of root about the bigness of hen egg , and near of that form : their taste be not so good to our seem as of the other , and 364 1586 . therefore their place and manner of grow not so much care for by we : the inhabitant notwithstanding use to boil and eat many . Tsinaw , a kind of root much like unto that which in England be call the china root bring from the east Indies . and we know not any thing to the contrary but that it may be of the same kind . Theise root grow many together in great cluster , and do bring forth a brier stalk , but the leaf in shape far unlike : which be support by the tree it grow near unto , will reach or climb to the top of the high . from these root while they be new or fresh , be chop into small piece , and stamp , be strain with water a juice that make bread , and also be boil , a very good spoonmeat in manner of a jelly , and be much better in taste , if it be temper with oil . This Tsinaw be not of that sort , which by some be cause to be bring into England for the china root ; for it be discover since , and be in use as be aforesaid