such purpose . what benefit hereof may grow in cordage and linen who can easy understand ? alum . there be a vein of earth along the sea coast for the space of forty or fifty mile , whereof by the judgement of some that have make trial here in England , be make good alum , of that kind which be call Roch alum . the richness of such a commodity be so well know , that i need not to say any thing thereof . the same earth do also yield white coprasse , nitrum , and Alumen plumeum , but nothing so plentiful as the common alum , which be also of price , and profitable . wapeih . a kind of earth so call by the natural inhabitant , very like to terra sigillata , and have be refine , it have be find by some of our physician and Chyrurgians , to be of the same kind of virtue , and more effectual . the inhabitant use it very much for the cure of sore and wound : there be in diverse place great plentv . and in some place of a blue sort . pitch , tar , resin and turpentine . there be those kind of tree which yield they abundant and great store . in the very same island where we be seat , be fifteen mile of length , and five or six 35 + mile in breadth , there be few tree else but of the same kind , the whole island be full . sassafras , call by the inhabitant winauk , a kind of wood of most pleasant and sweet smell , and of most rare virtue in physic for the cure of many disease . it be find by experience to be far better and of more use than the wood which be call Guaiacum , or lignum vitas . for the description , the manner of use , and the manifold virtue thereof , i refer you to the book of monardes , translate and entitle in english , the joy full news from the west Indies . cedar . a very sweet wood , and fine timber , whereof if nest of chest be there make , or timber thereof fit for sweet and fine bedsted , table , desk , lute , virginal , and many thing else , ( of which there have be proof make already ) to make up fraught with other principali commodity , will yield profit . wine . there be two kind of grape that the soil do yield natural , the one be small and sour , of the ordinary bigness as we in England , the other far great and of himself luscious sweet . when they be plant and husband as they ought , a principali commodity of wine by they may be raise . oil . there be two sort of walnut , both hold oil ; but the one far more plentiful than the other . when there be mill and other device for the purpose , a commodity of they may be raise , because there be infinite store . there be also three several kind of berry in the form of oke - akorne , which also by the experience and use of the inhabitant , we find to yield very good and sweet oil . Furthermore , the bear of the country be common very fat , and in some place there be many . their fatness , because it be so liquid , may well be term oil , and have many speciali use . fur . all along the sea coast there be great store of otter , which be take by wear and other engine make for the purpose , will yield good profit . we hope 355 A . D . 1586 . also of marten fur , and make no doubt by the relation of the people , but that in some place of the country there be store , although there be but two skin that come to our hand . Luzernes also we have understanding of , although for the time we see none . deer skin dress after the manner of chamoes , or undress , be to be have of the natural inhabitant thousand yearly by way of traffic for trifle , and no more waste or spoil of deer then be and have be ordinary in time before . civet - cat . in our travel there be find one to have be kill by a savage or inhabitant , and in another place the smell where one or more have late be before , whereby we gather , beside then by the relation of the people , that there be some in the country : good profit will rise by they . iron . in two place of the country special , one about fourscore , and the other six score mile from the fort or place where we dwell , we find near the water side the ground to be rocky , which by the trial of a minerali man be find to hold iron rich . it be find in many place of the country else : i know nothing to the contrary , but that it may be allow for a good merchantable commodity , consider there the small charge for the labour and feed of man , the infinite store of wood , the want of wood and deerenesse thereof in England , and the necessity of ballast of ship . copper . a hundred and fifty mile into the main in two town we find with the inhabitant diverse small plate of copper , that have be make as we understand by the inhabitant that dwell further into the country , where as they say be mountain and river that yield also white grain of mettle , which be to be deem silver . for confirmation whereof , at the time of our first arrival in the country , i see , with some other with i , two small piece of silver gross beat , about the weight of a testron , hang in the ear of a 356 wiroan or chief lord that dwell about fourscore mile from we : of who through inquiry , by the number of day and the way , i learn that it have come to his hand from the same place or near , where i after understand the copper be make , and the white grain of metal find . the aforesaid copper we also