it unpunished or not revenge ( because we seek by all mean possible to win they by gentleness ) but that within a few day after our departure from every such town , the people begin to die very fast , and many in short space , in some town about twenty , in some fourty , and in one six score , which in truth be very many in respect of their number . This happen in no place that we can learn , but where we have be , where they use some practise against we , and after such time . the disease also be so strange , that they neither know what it be , nor how to cure it , the like by report of the old man in the country never happen before , time out of mind . a thing special observe by we , as also by the natural inhabitant themselves . insomuch that when some of the inhabitant which be our friend , and especial the wiroan Wingina , have observe such effect in four or five town to follow their wicked practise , they be persuade that it be the work of our god through our mean , and that we by he it may kill and slay who we will without weapon , and not come near they . and thereupon when it have happen that they have understanding that any of their enemy have abuse we in our journey , hear that we have wrought no revenge with our weapon , and fear upon some cause the matter shall so rest : do come and entreat we that we will be a mean to our God that they as other that have deal ill with we might in like sort die , 380 allege how much it will be for our credit and profit , as also they , and hope furthermore that we will do so much at their request in respect of the friendship we profess they . who entreaty although we show that they be ungodly , affirm that our god will not subject himself to any such prayer and request of man : that indeed all thing have be and be to be do according to his good pleasure as he have ordain : and that we to show our self his true servant ought rather to make petition for the contrary , that they with they may live together with we , be make partaker of his truth , and serve he in righteousness , but notwithstanding in such sort , that we refer that , as all other thing , to be do according to his divine will and pleasure , and as by his wisdom he have ordain to be best . yet because the effect fall out so sudden and short after accord to their desire , they think nevertheless it come to pass by our mean , and that we in use such speech unto they , do but dissemble the matter , and therefore come unto we to give we thanks in their manner , that although we satisfy they not in promise , yet in deed and effect we have fulfil their desire . this marvelous accident in all the country wrought so strange opinion of we , that some people can not tell whether to think we god or man , and the rather because that all the space of their sickness , there be no man of we know to die , or that be special sick : they note also that we have no woman among we , neither that we do care for any of they . some therefore be of opinion that we be not bear of woman , and therefore not mortal , but that we be man of a old generation many year past , then rise again to immortality . some will likewise seem to prophecy that there be more of our generation yet 3 » i to come to kill they and take their place , as some think the purpose be , by that which be already do . those that be immediate to come after we they imagine to be in the air , yet invisible and without body , and that they by our intreaty and for the love of we , do make the people to die in that sort as they do , by shoot invisible bullet into they . to confirm this opinion , their physician ( to excuse their ignorance in cure the disease ) will not be ashamed to say , but earnest make the simple people believe , that the string of blood that they suck out of the sick body , be the string wherewithal ! the invisible bullet be tie and cast . some also think that we shoot they our self out of our piece , from the place where we dwell , and kill the people in any town that have offend we , as we list , how far distant from we soever it be . and other some say , that it be the speciali work of God for our sake , as we our self have cause in some sort to think no less , whatsoever some do , or may imagine to the contrary , special some astrologer , know of the eclipse of the sun which we see the same year before in our voyage thitherward , which unto they appear very terrible . and also of a comet which begin to appear but a few day before the begin of the say sickness . but to exclude they from be the speciali cause of so speciali a accident , there be further reason than i think fit at this present to be allege . Theise their opinion i have set down the more at large , that it may appear unto you that there be good hope they may be bring through discreet deal and government to the embracing of the truth , and consequent to honour , obey , fear and love we . and although some of our company towards the end of the year , show themselves too fierce in slay some of the people in some town , upon cause that on our part may easy enough have be bear 382 with | all : yet notwithstanding , because it be on their part just deserve , the alteration of their opinion general and for the most part concern we be the less to be doubt . and whatsoever else they may be , by carefulness of our self need nothing at all to be fear , the conclusion . owe i have ( as i hope ) make relation not of so few and small thing , but that the country ( of man that be indifferent and well dispose ) may be sufficient like : if there be no more know than i have mention , which doubtless and in great reason be nothing to that which remain to be discover