the four voyage make to Virginia with three ship , in the year 1587 . wherein be transport the second colony . the year of our lord 1587 . sir Walter Ralegh intend to persevere in the plant of his country of Virginia , prepare a new colony of one hundred and fifty man to be send thither , under the charge of John white , who he appoint governor , and also appoint unto he twelve assistant , unto who he give a charter , and incorporate they by the name of governor and assistant of the city of Ralegh in Virginia . April . our fleet be in number three sail , viz . the admiral a ship of one hundred and twenty ton , a flyboat , and a pinnace , depart the six and twenty of April from Portesmouth , and the same day come to a anchor at the cow in the isle of wight , where we stay eight day . 386 the four voyage to Virginia a . d . 1587 . may . the five of May , at nine of the clock at night we come to Plymouth , where we remain the space of two day . the 8 we weigh anchor at Plymouth , and depart thence for Virginia . the 16 Simon Ferdinando , master of our admiral , lewd forsake our flyboat , leave her distress in the bay of Portugal . June . the 19 we fall with “ Dominica , and the same evening we sail between it , and Guadalupe : the 21 the flyboat also fall with Dominica . the 22 we come to a anchor at a island call Santa Cruz , where all the planter be set on land , stay there till the 25 of the same month . at our first land on this island , some of our woman , and man , by eat a small fruit like green apple , be fearful trouble with a sudden burn in their mouth , and swell of their tongue so big , that some of they can not speak . also a child by suck one of those woman breast , have at that instant his mouth set on such a burn , that it be strange to see how the infant be torment for the time : but after 24 hour , it wear away of it self . also the first night of our be on this island , we take five great Torteses , some of they of such bigness , that sixteen of our strong man be tire with carrying of one of they but from the sea side to our cabin . in this island we find no water place , but a stand pond , the water whereof be so evil , that many of our company fall sick with drink thereof : and as many as do but wash their face with that water , in the morning before the sun have draw away the corruption , their face do so burn and swell , that their eye be shut up , and can not see in five or six day , or long . 387 “ one of the isle of the Indies inhabit with savage . circumspection to be use in strange place . the second day of our abode there , we send forth some of our man to search the island for fresh water , three one way , and two another way . the governor also , with six other , go up to the top of a high hill , to view the island , but can perceive no sign of any man , or beast , nor any goodness , but parrot , and tree of Guiacum . return back to our cabin another way , he find in the descent of a hill , certain potsherd of savage make , make of the earth of that island : whereupon it be judge , that this island be inhabit with savage , though Fernando have tell we for certain the contrary . the same day at night , the rest of our company very late return to the governor . the one company affirm , that they have scene in a valley eleven Savages , and diverse house half a mile distant from the steep , or top of the hill where they stay . the other company have find run out of a high rock a very fair spring of water , whereof they bring three bottle to the company : for before that time , we drink the stink water of the pond . the same second day at night captain Stafford , with the pinnace , depart from our fleet , ride at Santa Cruz , to a island , call beak , lie near saint John , be so direct by Ferdinando , who assure he he shall there find great plenty of sheep . the next day at night , our planter leave Santa Cruz , and come all aboard , and the next morning after , be the 25 of June we weigh anchor , and depart from Santa Cruz . the seven and twenty we come to anchor at Cottea , where we find the pinnace ride at our come . the 28 we weigh anchor at Cottea , and present come to anchor at saint Johns in Musketos bay , where we spend three day unprofitable in take in fresh water , spend in the mean time more beer than the quantity of the water come unto . 388 the four voyage to Virginia a . d . 1587 . Julie . the first day we weigh anchor at “ Musketoes bay , “ Musketos where be leave behind two irish man of our come - pany , Derby Glaven , and Denice Carrell , bear along fa soot ] i the coast of saint Johns till evening , at which time we fall of . Johns with Rosse bay at this place Ferdinando have promise island , where we shall take in salt , and have cause we before , to t % e ™ make and provide as many sack for that purpose , as i we can . the governor also , for that he understand there be a town in the bottom of the bay , not far from the salt hill , appoint thirty shot , ten pike , and ten target , to man the pinnace , and to go aland for salt . Ferdinando perceive they in a readiness , send to the governor , use great persuasion with he , not to take in salt there , say that he know not well whether the same be the place or not : also , that if the pinnace go into the bay , she can not without great danger come back , till the next day at night , and that if in the mean time any storm shall rise , the admiral be in danger to be cast away . while he be thus persuading , he cause the lead to be cast , and have crafty bring the ship in three fathom and a half water , he sudden begin to swear , and tear God in piece , dissemble great danger , cry to he at the helm , bear up hard , bear up hard : so we go off , and be disappoint of our salt ,