of sweet and pleasant countenance , imitate much the old fashion . i write not to your majesty of the other part of their body , have all such proportion as appertain to any handsome man . the woman be of the like conformity and beauty : very handsome and well favour , of pleasant countenance , and comely to behold : they be as well manner and continent as any woman , and of good education : they be all naked save their privy part , which they cover with a dear skin branch or embroider as the man use : there be also of they which be on their arm very rich skin of Luzernes : they adorn their head with diverse ornament make of their own hair , which hang down before on both side their breast : other use other kind of dress themselves like unto 432 the woman of Egypt and Syria , these be of the elder sort : and when they be marry , they be diverse toy , accord to the usage of the people of the east , aswell man as woman . among who we see many plate of wrought copper , which they esteem more than gold , which for the colour they make no account of , for that among all other it be count the base : they make most account of azure and Red . the thing that they esteem most of all those which we give they , be bell , crystal of azure colour , and other toy to hang at their ear or about their neck . they do not desire cloth of silk or of gold , much less of any other sort , neither care they for thing make of steel and iron , which we often show they in our armour which they make no wonder at , and in behold they they only ask the art of make they : the like they do at our glass , which when they behold , they sudden laugh and give they we again . they be very liberali , for they give that which they have : we become great friend with these , and one day we enter into the haven with our ship , whereas before we ride a league off at sea by reason of the contrary weather . they come in great company of their small boat unto the ship with their face all bepaint with diverse colour , show we that it be a sign of joy , bring we of their victual , they make sign unto we where we may safe ride in the haven for the safeguard of our ship keep still our company : and after we be come to a anchor , we bestow 15 day in provide our self many necessary thing , whither every day the people repair to see our ship bring their wife with they , whereof they be very jealous : and they themselves enter aboard the ship and stay there a good space , cause their wife to stay in their boat , and for all the intreaty we can make , offer to give they diverse thing , we can never obtain that Viii 1524 . copper more esteem than guide . 433 2 e they will suffer they to come aboard our ship . and oftentimes one of the two king come with his queen , and many gentleman for their pleasure to see we , they all stay on the shore 200 pace from we , send a small boat to give we intelligence of their come , say they will come to see our ship : this they do in token of safety , and assoon as they have answer from we , they come immediate , and have stay a while to behold it , they wonder at hear the cry and noise of the mariner . the queen and her maid stay in a very light boat , at a hand a quarter of a league off , while the king abide a long space in our ship utter diverse conceit with gesture , view with great admiration all the furniture of the ship , demand the property of every thing particular . he take likewise great pleasure in behold our apparel , and in taste our meat , and so courteous take his leave depart . and sometime our man stay 2 or 3 day on a little hand near the ship for diverse necessary ( as it be the use of seaman ) he return with 7 or 8 of his gentleman to see what we do , and ask of we oftentimes if we mean to make any long abode there , offer we of their provision : then the king draw his bow and run up and down with his gentleman , make much sport to gratify our man : we be oftentimes within the land 5 or 6 league , which we find as pleasant as be possible to declare , very apt for any kind of husbandry of corn , wine and oil : for that there be plain 25 or 30 league broad , open and without any impediment , of tree of such fruitfulness , that any seed be sow therein , will bring forth most excellent fruit . we enter afterward into the wood , which we find so great and thick , that any army be it never so great may have hide it self therein , the tree whereof be oak , cypress tree , and other sort unknown in Europe . we find Pomi appii , damson tree , and nut tree , and 434 many other sort of fruit differ from we : there be beast in great abundance , as heart , dear , luzern , and other kind which they take with their net and bow which be their chief weapon : the arrow which they use be make with great cunning , and in stead of iron , they head they with flint , with jasper stone and hard marble and other sharp stone which they use in stead of iron to cut tree , and to make their boat of one whole piece of wood , make it hollow with great and wonderful art , wherein io . or 12 . man may sit commodious : their oar be short and broad at the end , and they use they in the sea without any danger , and by main force of arm , with as great speediness as they listen themselves . we see their house make in circular or round form io the fashion of or 12 pace in compass , make with half circle of their houses - timber , separate one from another without any order of building , cover with mat of straw wrought cunning together , which save they from the wind and rain : and if they have the order of building and perfect skill of workmanship as we have , there be no doubt but that they will also make eftsoons great and stately building . for all the sea coast be full of clear and glister stone , and alabaster , and therefore it be full of good haven and the coast full harborough for ship . they move the foresay house from one place to another accord to the commodity of the place and season wherein they will make their abode , and only take off the mat , they have other house bud incontinent . the father and the whole family dwell