aforesaid , and not for any difficulty to pass through the wood , see they be not so thick but that a man may pass through they . neither do we think that they partake of the east world round about they , be altogether void of drug or spicery , and other riches of gold , see the colour of the land do so much argue it . and the land be full of many beast , as stag , deer and hare , and likewise of lake and pool of fresh water , with great plenty of fowl , convenient for all kind of pleasant game . this land be in latitude 34 . degree , with good and wholesome air , temperate , between hot and cold , no vehement wind do blow in those region , and those that do common reign in those coast , be then northwest and west wind in tlje summer season , ( in the beginning whereof we be there ) the sky clear and filire with very little rain : and if at any time the air be cloudy and misty with the southern wind , immediate it be dissolve and wax clear and fair again . the sea be calm , not 426 boisterous , the wave gentle : and although all the shore be somewhat shall and without harbour , yet be it not dangerous to the sailor , be free from rock and deep , so that within 4 or 5 . foot of the shore , there be 20 . foot deep of water without ebb or flood , the depth still increase in such uniform proportion . there be very good ride at sea : for any ship be shake in a tempest , can never perish there by break of her cable , which we have prove by experience . for in the begin of march ( as it be usual in all region ) be in the sea oppress with northern wind , and ride there , we find our anchor break before the earth fail or move at all . we depart from this place , still run along the the coast coast , which we find to trend towards the east , and we t0 the see every where very great fire , by reason of the j ^- eesof multitude of the inhabitant . while we ride on that latitude . coast , partly because it have no harbour , and for that we want water , we send our boat ashore with 25 . man : where by reason of great and continual wave that beat against the shore , be a open coast , without succour , none of our man can possible go ashore without loose our boat . we see there many people which come unto the shore , make diverse courteous and sign of friendship , and show that they be content we shall come aland , and by trial we find they to be very courteous and gentle , as your majesty shall understand by the success . to the intent we may send they of our thing , which the Indians common desire and esteem , as sheet of paper , glass , bell , and such like trifle ; we send a young man one of our mariner ashore , who swim towards they , and be within 3 . or 4 . yard of the shore , not trust they , cast the thing upon the shore : but seek afterward to return , he be with such violence of the wave beat upon the shore , that he be so bruise that he lie there almost dead : which the Indians perceive , run to catch he , and draw he out , they 427 carry he a iide way off from the sea . the young man perceive they carry he , be at the first dismayed , begin then great to fear , and cry out piteous : likewise do the indian which do accompany he , go about to cheer he and to give he courage , and then set he on the ground at the foot of a little hill against the sun , they begin to behold he with great admiration , marvel at the whiteness of his flesh : and put off his clothes , they make he warm at a great fire , not without our great fear which remain in the boat , that they will have roast he at that fire , and have eat he . the young man have recover his strength , and have stay a while with they , show they by sign that he be desirous to return to the ship : and they with great love clap he fast about with many embrace , accompany he unto the sea , and to put he in more assurance , leave he alone , go unto a high ground and stand there , behold he until he be enter into the boat . this young man observe , as we do also , that these be of colour incline to black as the other be , with their flesh very shine , of mean stature , handsome visage , and delicate limb , and of very little strength , but of prompt wit : far we observe not .. depart from hence , follow the shore which trend somewhat towards the north , in 50 . league space we come to another land which show much more fair and full of wood , be very great , where we ride at anchor : and that we may have some knowledge thereof , we . send 20 . man aland , which enter into the country about 2 . league , and they find that the people be flee to the wood for fear . they see only one old woman with a young maid of 18 . or 20 . year old , which see our company , hide themselves in the grass for fear : the old woman carry two infant on her shoulder , and behind her neck a child of 8 . year old . the young woman be lade 428 likewise with as many : but when our man come unto they , the woman cry out : the old woman make sign that the man be flee unto the wood . assoon as they see we to quiet they and to win their favour , our man give they such victual as they have with they , to eat , which the old woman receive thankful : but the young woman disdain they all , and throw they disdainful on the ground . they take a child from the old woman to bring into France , and go about to take the young woman which be very beautiful and of tall stature , they can not possible , for the great outcry that she make , bring she to the sea : and especial have great wood to pass through , and be far from the ship , we purpose to leave she behind , bear away the child only . we find those folk to be more white than those that we find before , be clad with certain leaf that hang on bough of tree , which they few together with thread of wild hemp : their head be truss up wild after the same manner as the former be : their ordinary food be of pulse , whereof they have great store , differ in colour and taste from we ;