together in one house in great number : in some of they we see 25 or 30 person . they feed as the other doe aforesaid of pulse which grow in that country with better order of husbandry then in the other . they observe in their sow the course of the moon and the rise of certain star , and diverse other custom speak of by antiquity . Moreover they live by 435 their cure with tobacco and perfume . ^ . degree and 2 . tierce . the description of a notable haven in 41 . deg . and 2 . tierce . 150 league . a show of minerail . hunt and fish . they live long , and be seidome sick , and if they chance to fall sick at any time , they heal themselves with fire without any physician , and they say that they die for very age . they be very pitiful and charitable towards their neighbour , they make great lamentation in their adversity : and in their misery , the kindred reckon up all their felicity . at their departure out of life , they use mourning mix with sing , which continue for a long space . this be as as we can learn of they . this land be situate in the Paralele of Rome , in 41 . degree and 2 terce : but somewhat more cold by accidentali cause and not of nature , ( as i will declare unto your highness elsewhere ) describe at this present the situation of the foresay country , which lie east and west , i say that the mouth of the haven lie open to the south half a league broad , and be enter within it between the east and the north , it stretch twelve league : where it wax broad and broad , and make a gulf about 20 . league in compass , wherein be five small island very fruitful and pleasant , full of hie and broad tree , among the which island any great navy may ride safe without any fear of tempest or other danger . afterwards turn towards the south in the enter into the haven on both side there be most pleasant hill , with many river of most clear water fall into the sea in the midst of this entrance there be a rock of free stone grow by nature apt to build any castle or fortress there , for the keep of the haven . the five of May be furnish with all thing necessary , we depart from the say coast keep along in the sight thereof , and we sail 150 . league find it always after one manner : but the land somewhat high with certain mountain , all which bear a show of minerail matter , we seek not to land there in any place , because the weather serve our turn for sail : but we suppose that it be like the former , the coast 436 the coast runningeastward 50 . league . here the people be ^ n to be more savage . run eastward for the space of fifty league . and trending afterward to the north , we find another land high full of thick wood , the tree whereof be firre , cipress and such like as be wont to grow in cold country . the people differ much from the other , and look how much the former seem to be courteous and gentle : so much be these full of rudeness and ill manner , and so barbarous that by no sign that ever we can make , we can have any kind of traffic with they . they cloth themselves with bear skin and luzerne and seal and other beast skin . their food , as far as we can perceive , repair often unto their dwelling , we suppose to be by hunt and fish , and of certain fruit , which be a kind of root which the earth yield of her own accord . they have no grain , neither saw we any kind or sign of tillage , neither be the land , for the barrenness thereof , apt to bear fruit or seed . if at any time we desire by exchange to have any of their commodity , they use to come to the sea shore upon certain craggy rock , and we stand in our boat , they let down with a rope what it please they to give we , cry continual that we shall not approach to the land , demand immediate the exchange , take nothing but knife , fishooke , and tool to cut withal , neither do they make any account of our courtesy . and when we have nothing leave to exchange with they , when we depart from they , the people show all sign of discourtesy and disdain , as be possible for any creature to invent . we be in despite of they 2 or 3 league within the land , be in number 25 arm man of we : and when we go on shore they shoot at we with their bow make great outcry , and afterward flee into the wood . we find not in this land any thing notable , or of importance , save very great wood and certain hill , they may have some minerali matter in they , because we see many of they bead of have beadstone of copper hang at their ear . we copper . 437 depart from thence keep our course Northeast along the coast , which we find more pleasant champion and without wood , with high mountain within the land continue direct along the coast for the space of fifty league , we discover 32 island lie all near the land , be small and pleasant to the view , high and have many turn and wind between they , make many fair harborough and channel as they do in the gulf of Venice in Sclavonia , and Dalmatia , we have no knowledge or acquaintance with the people : we suppose they be of the same manner and nature as the other be . sail Northeast for the space of 150 . league we approach to the land that in time past be discover by the briton , which be in fifty degree . have now spend all our provision and victual , and have discover about 700 league and more of new country , and be furnish with water and wood , we conclude to return into France . touch the religion of this people , which we have find , for want of their language we can not understand neither by sign nor gesture that they have any religion or law at all , or that they do acknowledge any first cause or mover , neither that they worship the heaven or star the sun or moon or other planet , and much less whither they be idolater , neither can we learn whither that they use any kind of sacrifice or other adoration , neither in their village have they any temple or house of prayer . we suppose that they have no religion at all , and that they live at their own liberty . and that all this proceed of ignorance , for that they be very easy to be persuade : and all that they see we christian do in our divine service , they do the same with the like imitation as they see we to do it .