and dissension , which begin about a soldier name Guernache , which be a drummer of the french band : which , as it be tell i , be very cruel hang by his own captain , and for a small fault : which captain also use to threathen the rest of his soldier which stay behind under his obedience , and peradventure ( as it be to be presume ) be not so obedient to he as they shall have be , be the cause that they fall into a mutiny , because that many time he put his threaten in execution : whereupon they so chase he , that at the last they put he to death . and the principali occasion that move they thereunto be , because he degrade another soldier name la cheer ( which he have banish ) and because he have not perform his 482 • .. 15871 promise : for he have promise to send he victual , from 8 day to 8 day , which thing he do not , but say on the contrary , that he will be glad to hear of his death . he say moreover , that he will chastise other also , and use so evil sound speech , that honesty forbid i to repeat they . the soldier captain . see his madness to increase from day to day , and Albert slay rear to rail into the danger or the other , resolve to soul < liar . kill he . have execute their purpose , they go to seek the soldier that be banish , which be in a small island distant from charles - fort about 3 league , where they find he almost half dead for hunger . when they be come home again , they assemble themselves together to choose one to be governor over they who name be Nicolas bar a man worthy of commendation , Nicolas and one which know so well to quite himself of his bar . > c ! t0 ! en charge , that all rancour and dissension cease among ca ^ tain ' they , and they live peaceable one with another . during this time , they begin to build a small pinnace , with hope to return into France , if no succour come unto they , as they expect from day to day . and though there be no man among they that have any skill , notwithstanding necessity , which be the mistress of all science , teach they the way to build it . after that it be finish , they think of nothing else save how to furnish it with all thing necessary to undertake the voyage . but they want those thing that of all other be most needful , as cordage and sail , without which the enterprise can not come to effect . have no mean to recover these thing , they be in worse case than at the first , and almost ready to fall into despair . but that good God , which never forsake the afflict , do succour they in their necessity . as they be in these perplexity king Audusta and Maccou come to they , accompany with two hundred Indians at the least , who our Frenchman go forth to meet withal , and show the king in what need of cordage they stand : who promise they to return 483 cordage for tackle . they put to the sea without sufficient victual . within two day , and to bring so much as shall suffice to furnish the pinnace with tackle . our man be please with these good news and promise , bestow upon they certain cut hook and shirt . after their departure our man seek all mean to recover rosin in the wood , wherein they cut the pine tree round about , out of which they draw sufficient reasonable quantity to bray the vessel . also they gather a kind of moss which grow on the tree of this country , to serve to calk the same withal . there now want nothing but sail , which they make of their own shirt and of their sheet . within few day after the indian king return to Charles fort with so good store of cordage , that there be find sufficient for tackle of the small pinnace . our man as glad as may be , use great liberality towards they , and at their leave of the country , leave they all the merchandise that remain , leave they thereby so full satisfy , that they depart from they with all the contentation of the world . they go forward therefore to finish the brigandine , and use so speedy diligence , that within . a short time afterward they make it ready furnish with all thing . in the mean season the wind come so fit for their purpose that it seem to invite they to put to the sea : which they do without delay , after they have set all their thing in order . but before they depart they embark their artillery , their forge , and other munition of war ' re which captain Ribault have leave they , and then as much mill as they can gather together . but be drunken with the too excessive joy , which they have conceive for their return into France , or rather deprive of all foresight and consideration , without regard the inconstancy of the wind , which change in a moment , they put themselves to sea , and with so slender victual , that the end of their enterprise become unlucky and fortunate . for after they have sail the three part ot their way , they be surprise with calm which do so much hinder they , that in three week they sail not above 484 five and twenty league . during this ti ’ me their victual consume , and become so short , that every man be their victual constrain to eat not past twelve grain of mill by the utterh con day , which may be in value as much as twelve peason . fume ' yea , and this felici tie last not long : for their victual fail they altogether at once : and they have nothing for their moor assure refuge but their shoe and leather jerkin which they do eat . touch their beverage , some of they drink the sea water , other do drink their they drink own urine : and they remain in such desperate necessity a very long space , during the which part of water 0 they die for hunger . beside this extreme famine , which do so grievous oppress they , they fall every minute of a hour out of all hope ever to see France again , insomuch that they be constrain to cast the water continual out , that on all side enter into their bark .