we may obtain some supply of our want . and thus continue our course for the azore , sometime with calm , and sometime with very scarce wind , on the fifteen of September the wind come south southeast , and blow so exceed , that we be force to lie atry all that day . at this time by account we judge our self to be about twenty league to the west of Cuervo and Flores , but about night the storm cease , and fair weather ensue . on Thursday the seventeenth we see Cuervo and Flores , but we can not come to anchor that night , by reason the wind shift . the next morning be the eighteenth , stand in again with Cuervo , we escry a sail ahead we , to who we give chase : but when we come near he , we know he to be a Spaniard , and hope to make sure purchase of he : but we understand at our speak with he , that he be a prize , and of the Domingo fleet already take by the John our consort , in the Indies . we learn also of this prize , that our vice - admiral and pinnace have fight with the rest of the Domingo fleet , and have force they with their admiral to flee unto Jamaica under the fort for succour , and some of they run themselves aground , whereof one of they they bring away , and take out of some other so much as the time will permit . and further we understand of they , that in their return from Jamaica about the organ near cape saint Anthony , our vice - admiral meet with two ship of the main land , come from Mexico , bind for Havana , with who he fight : in which fight our viceadmirals lieutenant be slay , 420 and the captain right arm strike off , with four other of his man slay , and sixteen hurt . but in the end he enter , and take one of the spanish ship , which be so sore shoot by we under water , that before they can take out her treasure she sink ; so that we lose thirteen pipe of silver which sink with she , 13 - Pfa * ° f beside much other rich merchandise . and in the stlver ’ mean time the other spanish ship be pierce with nine shot under water , get away ; who our vice - admiral intend to pursue : but some of their man in the top make certain rock , which they see above water near the shore , to be galley of Havana and Cartagena , come from Havana to rescue the two ship ; wherefore they give over their chase , and go for England . after this intelligence be give we by this our prize , he depart from we , and go for England . on Saturday the 19 of September we come to a anchor near a small village on the north side of Flores , where we find ride 5 . English man of war , of who we understand that our vice - admiral and prize be go thence for England . one of these five be the moonlight our consort , who upon the first sight of our come into Flores , set sail and go for England , not take any leave of we . on Sunday the 20 . the mary rose , admiral of the queen fleet , wherein be general sir John Hawkins , stand in with flores , and diverse other of the queen ship , namely the hope , the Nonpareilia , the rainbow , the swift - sure , the foresight , with many other good merchant ship of war , as the Edward Bonaventure , the merchant royal , the amity , the eagle , the dainty of sir John Hawkins , and many other good ship and pinnace , all attend to meet with the king of Spain fleet , come from terra firma of the west Indies . the 22 . of September we go aboard the rainbow , and towards night we speak with the swift - sure , and give he 3 . piece . the captain desire our 421 company ; wherefore we willing attend on they : who at this time with io . other ship stand for faial . but the general with the rest of the fleet be separate from we , make two fleet , for the sure meeting with the spanish fleet . on Wednesday the 23 . we see gratiosa , where the admiral and the rest of the queen fleet be come together . the admiral put forth a flag of counsel , in which be determine that the whole fleet shall go for the main , and spread themselves on the coast of Spain and Portugal , so far as convenient they may , for the sure meeting of the spanish fleet in those part . the 26 . we come to faial , where the admiral with some other of the fleet anchor , othersome ply up and down between that and the Pico until midnight , at which time the Antony shoot off a piece and weigh , show his light : after who the whole fleet stand to the east , the wind at Northeast by east . on Sunday the 27 . towards evening we take our leave of the admiral and the whole fleet , who stand to the east . but our ship accompany with a flyboat stand in again with saint George , where we purpose to take in more fresh water , and some other fresh victual . on Wednesday the 30 . of September , see the wind hang so northerly , that we can not attain the hand of S . George , we give over our purpose to water there , and the next day frame our due course for England . October . the 2 . of October in the morning we see saint Michael hand on our star board quarter . the 23 . at 10 . of the clock afore noon , we see Ushant in Britaigne . on Saturday the 24 . we come in safety , God be thank , to a anchor at Plymmouth .