Jawas : and they be as it be three Jawas be priest of the indian law : to who they give credit and their rtestes - beliefe partly because that by kindred they be ordain to be over their sacrifice , and partly also because they be so subtle magician that any thing that be lose be Maidans . straightway recover by their mean . again they be position . not only reverence for these thing , but also because they heal disease by i wot not what kind of knowledge and skill they have . those that run so through the wood return two day after : after their return they begin to dance with a cheerful courage in the midst of the fair place , and to cheer up their good old indian father , which either by reason of their too great age , or by reason of their natural indisposition and feebleness be not call to the feast . when all these dance be end , they fall on eat with such a greediness , that they seem rather to devour their meat then to eat it , for they have neither eat nor drink the day of the feast , nor the two day follow . our man be not forget at this good cheer , for the indian send for they all thither , show themselves very glad of their presence . while they remain certain time with the Indians , a man of we get a young boy for certain trifle , and inquire of he , what the Indians do in the wood during their absence : which boy make he understand by sign , that the Jawas have make invocation to Toya , and that by magical character invocation of they have make he come that they may speak with the Jawas or he and demand diverse strange thing of he , which for unt ° fear of the Jawas he dare not utter . they have also y ’ many other ceremony , which i will not here rehearse for fear of molest the reader with a matter of so small importance . when the feast therefore be finish our man return unto charles - fort : where have remain but a while their victual begin to wax short , which force they their victual to have recourse unto their neighbour , and to pray they fail they . to succour they in their necessity : which give they 477 the indian manner of live in the winter time of mast and root . king Covexis mighty and renown . king ovade . king Maccou . ovade country in the river Belle . part of all the victual which they have , and keep no more unto themselves then will serve to sow their field . they tell they far that for this cause it be needful for they to retire themselves into the wood , to live of mast and root until the time of harvest , be as sorry as may be that they be not able any far to aid they . they give they also counsel to go towards the country of king Covexis a man of might and renown in this province , which make his abode towards the south abound at all season and replenish with such quantity of mill , corn , and bean that by his only succour they may be able to live a very long time . but before they shall come into his territory , they be to repair unto a king call ovade the brother of Covexis , which in mill , bean , and corn be no less wealthy , and withal be very liberali , and which will be very joy full if he may but once see they . our man perceive the good relation which the Indians make they of those two king resolve to go thither ; for they feel already the necessity which oppress they . therefore they make request unto king Maccou , that it will please he to give they one of his subject to guide they the right way thither : whereupon he condescend very willing , know that without his favour they shall have much ado to bring their interprize to pass . wherefore after they have give order for all thing necessary for the voyage , they put themselves to sea , and sail so far that in the end they come into the country of ovade , which they find to be in the river Belle . be there arrive they perceive a company of Indians , which assoon as they know of their be there come before they . assoon as they be come near they , their guide show they by sign that ovade be in this company , wherefore our man set forward to salute he . and then two of his son which be with he , be goodly and strong man salute they again in very good sort , and use very friendly entertainment on their part . the king immediate begin to make a oration in his indian language of the great pleasure and contentment which he have to see they in that place , protest that he will become so loyal a friend of they hereafter , that he will be their faithful defendor against all they that will offer to be their enemy . after these speech he lead they towards his house , where he seek to entreat they very courteous . his house be hang about with tapestry of feather of diverse colour the height of a tapistrieof pike . Moreover the place where the king take his rest be cover with white coverlette embroider ietsedgedwlth with devise of very witty and fine workmanship , and red fringe . fringe round about with a fringe die in the colour of scarlet . they advertise the king by one of the guide which they bring with they , how that ( have hear of his great liberality ) they have put to the sea to come to beseech he to succour they with victual in their great want and necessity : and that in so do , he shall bind they all hereafter to remain his faithful friend and loyal defender against all his enemy . this good indian assoon ready to do they pleasure , as they be to demand it , command his subject that they shall fill our pinnace with will and bean . afterwards he thehberahtie cause they to bring he six piece of his tapestry ofkingqvade . make like little coverlet , and give they to lour man with so liberal a mind , as they easy perceive the desire which he have to become their friend . in recompense of all these gift our man give he two cut hook and certain other trifle , wherewith he hold himself great satisfy . This be do , our man take their leave of the king , which for their farewell , say