quiver full of arrow . all his man follow he , which have likewise their bow and arrow . while they fight , they make great cry and exclamation . they take no enterprise in hand , but first they assemble oftentimes their council together , and they take very good advisement before they grow to a resolution . they meet together every morning in a great common house , whither their king repair , and set he down upon a seat which be high than the seat of the other : where all of they one after another come and salute he : their salute and the most ancient begin their salutation , lift up of their king , their hand twice as high as their face , say , ha , he , ya , and the rest answer ha , ha . assoon as they have do their salutation , every man sit he down upon the seat which be round about in the house . if there be any thing to entreat of , the king call the Jawas , that be to say , their priest , and the most ancient man , and ask they their advice . afterwards he command Cassine to be brew , which be a drink make of they the drink leaf of a certain tree : they drink this cassine very ° LfonfhL i otte : he rink first , than he cause to be give to battle thereof to all of they one after another in the same bowl , which hold well a quart measure of Paris . the honour ex - they make so great account of this drink , that no man menofvdure taste thereof in this assembly , unless he have make above other . proote ot his valour in the war . Moreover this drink the excellent - have such a virtue , that assoon as they have drink it aeof cassine . they become all in a sweat , which sweat be pass , it 454 take away hunger and thirst for four and twenty hour after . when a king die , they bury he very their manner solemn , and upon his grave they set the cup oft ^^ all wherein he be wont to drink : and round about the say grave they stick many arrow , and weep and fast three day together without cease . all the king which be his friend make the like mourning : and in token of the love which they bear he , they their cut cut of more than the one half of their hair , as well man as woman . during the space of six moon ( so tr they reckon their month ) there be certain woman appoint which bewail the death of this king , cry with a loud voice thrice a day , to wit , in the morning , at noon , and at evening . all the good of this king be put into his house , and afterward they set it on fire , so that nothing be ever more after to be see . the like be do with the good of the priest , and beside they bury the body of the priest the burial of their priest . soio twice in 6 month . maiz from the time that it be sow until the time that it be ready to be gather , be but three month on the ground . the other 6 . month they let the earth rest . they have also fair pumpion , and very fair pumpi - good bean . they never dung their land , only ms - when they will sow , they set the weed on fire , goodh bean . which grow up the 6 . month , and burn they all . they dig their ground with a instrument of wood instrument which be fashion like a broad mattock , wherewith . they dig their vine in France , they put two grain encage etr of Maiz together . when the land be to be sow , ’ the king command one of his man to assemble his subject every day to labour , during which labour the king cause store of that drink to be make for they , whereof we have speak . at the time when the bring the Maiz be gather , it be all carry into a int0 a common common house , where it be distribute to every man house . 455 in their house , and then they set they on fire . they sow their Maiz twice a year , to wit , in march and in June , and all in one and the same soil . the say their provi - accord to his quality . they sow no more but sum of corn that which they think will serve their turn for for 6 month six month > and that very scarce . for during the ' r ^ ir manner winter they retire themselves for three or four month of live in in the year into the wood , where they make little the winter , cottage of palm bough for their retreat , and live there of Maste , of fish which they take , of oyster , of stag , of turkeycocke , and other beast which Thedressingoj - they take . they eat all their meat broil on they their meat in coal , and dress in the smoke , which in their the smoke . janguage they call boucane . they eat willing the flesh of the crocodile : and in deed it be fair and white : and be it not that it savour too much like their manner musk we will oftentimes have eat thereof . they of cure this - have a custom among they , that when they find ease ' themselves sick , where they feel the pain , whereas we cause ourselves to be let blood , their physician suck they until they make the blood follow . their woman the woman be likewise of good proportion and ndm ^ rs tal1 ’ and ° f the same colour that the man be of , ' paint as the man be : howbeit when they be bear , they be not so much of a olive colour , and be far oil in white . for the chief cause that make they to be Florida . of cojour proceed of anointing of oil which they use among they : and they do it for a certain ceremony which i can not learn , and because of the sun which shine hot upon their body . the woman great agility of the woman be so great , that they can swimmer . swim over the great river bear their child upon one of their arm . they climb up also very nimble upon the high tree in the country . behold in brief the description of the country , with the nature and custom of the inhabitant : which i be very willing to write , before i enter any further into the discourse of my history , to the end that the reader may be the better prepare to understand that , which i mean hereafter to entreat of .