place to be inhabit . wherefore he embark himself very early in the morning and command they to follow he that be desirous to inhabit there , to the intent that they may like the better of the place . Having sail up the great river on the north side , in coast a isle which end with a sharp point towards the mouth of the river , have sail a while , he discover a small river , which enter into the island , which he will not fail to search out . which do , and find the same deep enough to harbour therein galley and galliot in good number , proceed further , he find a very open place , join upon the brink thereof , where he go on land , and see the place fit to build a fortress in , and commodious for they that be willing to plant there , he resolve incontinent to cause the bigness of the fortification to be measure out . and consider that there stay but six and twenty there , he cause the fort to be make in length but the length and sixteen fathom , and thirteen in breadth , with flank p ^ ak ^ by accord to the proportion thereof . the measure be Laudonnier ? take by " i and captain Salles , we send unto they and captain ship for man , and to bring shovel , pickax and other instrument necessary to make the fortification . 471 a fort build we travail so diligent , that in a short space the fort in port royal be make in some sort defenciable . in which mean by Ribault . time john Ribault cause victual and warlike munition to be bring for the defence of the place . after he have furnish they with all such thing as they have need of , he determine to take his leave of they . but before his departure he use this speech unto captain Albert , which he leave in this place . ribault captain Albert , i have to request you in the speech to cap - presence of a ] these man , that you will quit your tame ere | it . se | pe so w | sejy your charge , and govern so modest your small company which i leave you , which with so good cheer remain under your obedience , that i never have occasion but to commend you , and to recount unto the king ( as i be desirous ) the faithful service which before we all you undertake to do he in his new France : and you companion , ( quoth he to the soldier ) i beseech you also to esteem of captain Albert as if he be my self that stay here with you , yield he that obedience which a true soldier owe unto his general and captain , live as brethren one with another , without all dissension : and in so do god will assist you and bless your enterprise . have end his exhortation , we take our leaf of each of they , and sail towards our ship , call the fort by the name of charles - fort , and the river by the name Chenonceau . the next day we determine to depart from this place be as well content as be possible that we have so happy end our business , with good hope , if occasion will permit , to discover perfect the river of Jordan . for this cause we hoist our sail about ten of the clock in the morning : after we be ready to depart captain Ribault command to shoot off our ordinance to give a farewell unto our Frenchman , which fail not to do the like on their part . This be do we sail towards the north : and then we name this river porte royal , because of the largeness and excellent 472 the aforesaid fort be call charles - fort . port royal . fairness of the same . after that we have sail about 15 league from thence , we espy a river , whereupon we send our pinnace thither to discover it . at their return they bring we word that they find not past ward of port half a fathom water in the mouth thereof . which royal . when we understand , without do any thing else , we continue our way , and call it the base or shallow river . as we still go on sound we find not shallow water . past five or six fathom water , although we be six P ^ ' good league from the shore : at length we find not past three fathom , which give we occasion great to muse . and without make any far way we strike our sail , partly because we want water , and partly because the night approach : during which time captain John Ribault bethink with himself whether it be best for he to pass any far , because of the eminent danger which every hour we see before our eye : or whither he shall content himself with that which he have certain discover , and also leave man to inhabit the country . be not able for that time to resolve with himself , he refer it until the next day . the morning be come he propose to all the company what be best to be do , to the end that with good advisement every man may deliver his opinion . some make answer , that accord to their judgement he have occasion full to content himself , consider he can do no more : lay before his eye , that he have discover more in six week , than the Spaniard have do in two year in the conquest of their new Spain : and that he shall do the king very great service , if he do bring he news in so short a time of his happy discovery . other show unto he the loss and spoil of his victual , and on the other side the inconvenience that may happen by the shallow water that they find continual along the coast . which thing be well and at large debate we resolve to leave the coast , forsake the north , to take our way towards the east , which be the right way and course to our 473 their arrwall France , where we happy arrive the twenty day of in France July , the year 1562 . 1562 . ^ 20 7 7 i of my . the state and condition of those which be leave behind in charles - fort . KingAudusta . note . Mayon . Hoya . Touppa . stalame . our man after our departure never rest , but night and day do fortify themselves , be in good hope that after their fort be finish , they will