begin to discover far up within the river . it happen one day , as certain of they be in cut of root in the grove , that they espy on the sudden a indian that hunt the deer , which find himself so near upon they , be much dismay , but our man begin to draw near unto he and to use he so courteous , that he become assure and follow they to charles - fort , where every man seek to do he pleasure . captain Albert be very joyful of his come , which after he have give he a shirt and some other trifle , he ask he of his dwell : the indian answer he that it be far up within the river , and that he be vassal of king Audusta : he also show he with his hand the limit of his habitation . after much other talk the indian desire leave to depart , because it draw towards night , which captain Albert grant he very willing . certain day after the captain determine to sail towards Audusta , where be arrive , by reason of the honest entertainment which he have give to the indian , he be so courteous receive , that the king talk with he of nothing else but of the desire which he have to become his friend : give he beside to understand that he be his friend and ally , he shall have the amity of four other king , which in might and authority be able to do much for his sake : beside all this , in his necessity they may be able to succour he with victual . one of these king be call Mayon , another Hoya , the three Touppo , and the four stalame . he tell he moreover , that they will be very glad , when they shall understand the news of his come , and 474 therefore he pray he to vouchsafe to visit they . the captain willing consent unto he , for the desire that he have to purchase friend in that place . therefore they depart the next morning very early , and first arrive at the house of king Touppa , and afterward go into the other king house , except the house of king stalame . he receive of each of they all the amiable courtesy that may be : they show themselves to be as affection friend unto he as be possible , and offer unto he a thousand small present . after that he have remain by the space of certain day with these strange king , he determine to take his leave : and be come back to the house of Audusta , he command all his man to go aboard their pinnace : for he be mind to go towards the country of king stalame , the country which dwell towards the north the distance of 15 great league from charles - fort . therefore as they sail up kagfus north - the river they enter into a great current , which they ward of it follow so far till they come at the last to the house of charles - fort . stalame : which bring he into his lodging , where he seek to make they the best cheer he can devise . he present immediate unto captain Albert his bow and arrow , which be a sign and confirmation of alliance between they . he present he with chamoy chamoy skin . the captain see the best part of the day s ^ nnes - was now past , take his leave of king stalame to return to charles - fort , where he arrive the day follow . by this time the friendship be grow so great between our man and king Audusta , that in a manner all thing be common between he and they : in such sort that this good indian king do nothing of importance , but he call our man thereunto . for when the time draw the feast of near of the celebrate their feast of Toya , which be ceremony most strange to recite , he send ambassador pjj j to our man to request they on his behalf to be there present . whereunto they agree most willing for the desire that they have to understand what this may be . they embark themselves therefore and sail towards 475 the Indians trim of themselves with rich feather . the king house , which be already come forth on the way towards they , to receive they courteous , to bid they welcome and bring they to his house , where he seek to entreat they the best he may . in the mean while the indian prepare themselves to celebrate the feast the morrow after , and the king bring they to see the place , wherein the feast shall be keep : where they see many woman round about , which labour by all mean to make the place clean and neat . this place be a great circuit of ground with open prospect and round in figure . on the morrow therefore early in the morning , all they which be choose to celebrate the feast , be paint and trim with rich feather of diverse colour , put themselves on the way to go from the king house towards the place of Toya : whereunto when they be come they set themselves in order , and follow three Indians , which in paint and in gesture be differ from the rest : each of they bear a Tabret in their hand , dance and sing in a lamentable tune , when they begin to enter into the midst of the round circuit , be follow of other which answer they again . after that they have sing , dance , and turn 3 time , they fall on run like unbridle horse , through the midst of the thick wood . and then the indian woman continue all the rest of the day in tear as sad and woeful as be possible : and in such rage they cut the arm of the young girl , which they lance so cruel with sharp shell of muscle that the blood follow which they fling into the air , cry out three time , he Toya . the king Audusta have gather all our man into his house , while the feast be celebrate , and be exceed offend when he see they laugh . this he do , because the Indians be very angry when they be see in their ceremony . notwithstanding one of our man make such shift that by subtle mean he get out of the house of Audusta , and secret go and hide himself behind a very thick bush , where at his pleasure , he may easy descry the ceremony of the feast . they three that begin 476 1587 - the feast be name