we be constrain to lie at anchor by reason of the tide that be against we , but we hoist sail the next day very early in the morning , and return to our ship . assoon as we be come to our ship , every one seek to gratify these 2 Indians , and to show they the best countenance that be possible : to the intent that by such courtesy they may perceive the good desire and affection which we have to remain their friend in time to come . than we offer they meat to eat , but they vin 465 2 g the indian eat not before the sun be set . laudonniers put down in write the word and phrase of the indian speech . the feast of Toya . this seem to be la grand Gopal , refuse it , and make we understand that they be accustom to wash their face and to stay until the sun be set before they do eat , which be a ceremony common to all the Indians of new France . nevertheless in the end they be constrain to forget their superstition , and to apply themselves to our nature , which be somewhat strange unto they at the first . they become therefore more jocunde , every hour make we a 1000 discourse , be merveilous sorry that we can not understand they . a few day after they begin to bear so good will towards i , that , as i think , they will rather have perish with hunger and thirst , then have take their refection at any man hand but i . see this their good will , i seek to learn some indian word , and begin to ask they question , show they the thing whereof i desire to know the name , how they call it . they be very glad to tell it i , and know the desire that i have to learn their language , they encourage i afterward to ask they every thing . so that put down in write the word and phrase of the indian speech , i be able to understand the great part of their discourse . Every day they do nothing but speak unto i of the desire that they have to use i well , if we return unto their house , and cause i to receive all the pleasure that they can devise , aswell in hunt as in see their very strange and superstitious ceremony at a certain feast which they call Toya . which feast they observe as straight as we observe the Sunday . they give i to understand , that they will bring i to see the great lord of this country which they call Chiquola , which exceed they in height ( as they tell i ) a good foot and a half . they say unto i that he dwell within the land in a very large place and enclose exceed high , but i can not learn wherewith . and as far as i can judge , this place whereof they speak unto i , be a very fair city . for they say unto i that within the enclosure there be great store of house which be build very high , wherein there be a infinite number of man like 466 unto themselves , which make none account of gold , of silver , nor of pearl , see they have thereof in abundance . i begin then to show they all the part of heaven , to the intent to learn in which quarter they dwell . and straightway one of they stretch out his hand show i y ‘ they dwell towards the north , which make i think that it be the river of Jordan . and now i remember , that in the reign of the emperor Charles the five , certain Spaniards inhabitant of saint Domingo ( which make a voyage to get certain slave to work in their mine ) steal away by subtlety the inhabitant of this river , to the number of 40 , think to carry they into their new Spain . but they lose their labour : for in despite they die all for hunger , save one that be bring to the emperor , which a little while after he cause to be baptise , and give he his own name and call he Charles of Chiquola , because he speak so much of this lord of Chiquola who subject he be . also , he report continual , that Chiquola make his abode within a very great enclose city . beside this proof , those which be leave in the first voyage have certify i , that the Indians show they by evident sign , that far within the land towards the north , there be a great enclosure or city , where Chiquola dwell . after they have stay a while in our ship , they begin to be sorry , and still demand of i when they shall return . i make they understand that the captain will be to send they home again , but that first he will bestow apparel of they , which few day after be deliver unto they . but see he will not give they licence to depart , they resolve with themselves to steal away by night , and to get a little boat which we have , and by die help of the tide to sail home towards their dwelling , and by this mean to save themselves . which thing they fail not to do , and put their enter - than 2 Indians prize in execution , yet leave behind they the apparel escafe awa3 - which the captain have give they , and carry away nothing but that which be their own , show well 467 hereby that they be not void of reason . the captain care not great for their departure , consider they have not be use otherwise then well : and that therefore they will not estrange themselves from the Frenchman . captain Ribault therefore know the singular fairness of this river , desire by all mean to encourage some of his man to dwell there , well foresee that this thing may be of great importance for the king service , and the relief of the common wealth of France . therefore proceed on with his intent , he command the anchor to be weigh and to set thing in order to return unto the open of the river , to the end that if the wind come fair he may pass out to accomplish the rest of his meaning . when therefore we be come to the mouth of the river , he make they cast anchor , whereupon we stay without discover any thing all the rest of the day . the next day he command that all the man of his ship shall come up upon the deck , say that he have somewhat to say unto they . they all come up , and immediate the captain begin to speak unto they in this manner .