the five voyage of m . John white into the west Indies and part of America call Virginia , in the year 1590 . the 20 of march the three ship the Hopewell , the John Evangelist , and the little John , put to sea from Plymmouth with two small shallop . the 25 at midnight both our shallop be sink be tow at the ship stearne by the boatswain negligence . on the 30 we see a head we that part of the coast of Barbary , lie east of cape Cantyn , and the bay of Asaphi . the next day we come to the he of mogador , where ride , at our pass by , a pinnace of London call the moonshine . April . on the first of April we ankor in Santa Cruz ride , where we find two great ship of London lade in sugar , of who we have 2 shipboat to supply the loss of our shallop . 406 on the 2 we set sail from the road of Santa Cruz , for the canary . on Saturday the 4 we see Alegranza , the east lie of the canary . on Sunday the 5 of April we give chase to a double flyboat , the which , we also the same day fight with , and take she , with loss of three of their man slay , and one hurt . on Monday the 6 we see grand canary , and the next day we land and take in fresh water on the southside thereof . on the 9 we depart from grand canary , and . frame our course for Dominica . the last of April we see Dominica , and the same night we come to a anchor on the southside thereof . may . the first of May in the morning many of the savage come aboard our ship in their canow , and do traffic with we ; we also the same day land and enter their town from whence we return the same day aboard without any resistance of the savage ; or any offence do to they . the 2 of May our admiral and our pinnace depart from Dominica leave the John our viceadmiral play off and on about Dominica , hope to take some Spaniard outward bind to the Indies ; the same night we have sight of three small hand call los Santos , leave Guadalupe and they on our starboard . the 3 we have sight of saint Christopher hand , bear Northeast and by east off we . on the 4 we sail by the virgin , which be many break hand , lie at the east end of saint Johns hand : and the same day towards evening we land upon one of they call Blanca , where we kill a incredible number of fowl : here we stay 4 ° 7 but three hour , and from thence stand into the shore northwest , and have bring this hand southeast off we , we put towards night through a open or swatch , call the passage , lie between the virgin , and the east end of saint John : here the pinnace leave we and sail on the south side of saint John . the 5 and 6 the admiral sail along the northside of saint John , so near the shore that the Spaniard discern we to be man of war ; and therefore make fire along the coast as we sail by , for so their custom be , when they see any man of war on their coast . the 7 we land on the northwest end of saint John , where we water in a good river call Yaguana , and the same night follow we take a frigate of ten tun come from Gwathanelo lade with hide and ginger . in this place Pedro a Mollato , who know all our state , run from we to the Spaniard . on the 9 we depart from Yaguana . the 13 we land on a hand call Mona , whereon be 10 or 12 house inhabit of the Spaniard ; these we burn and take from they a pinnace , which they have draw a ground and sink , and carry all her sail , mast , and rudder into the wood , because we shall not take he away ; we also chase the Spaniard over all the hand ; but they hide they in cave , hollow rock , and bush , so that we can not find they . on the 14 we depart from Mona , and the next day after we come to a hand call Saona , about 5 league distant from Mona , lie on the southside of Hispaniola near the east end : between these two hand we lie off and on 4 or 5 day , hope to take some of the Domingo fleet double this hand , as a near way to Spain then by cape Tyburon , or by cape S . Anthony . on Thursday be the 19 our vice - admiral , from who we depart at Dominica , come to we at Saona , 408 with who we leave a spanish frigate , and appoint he to lie off and on other five day between Saona and Mona to the end aforesaid ; then we depart from they at Saona for cape Tyburon . here i be inform that our man of the vice - admiral , at their departure from Dominica bring away two young savage , which be the chief caciques son of that country and part of Dominica , but they short after run away from they at Santa Cruz hand , where the vice - admiral land to take in ballast . on the 21 the admiral come to the cape Tyburon , where we find the John Evangelist our pinnace stay for we : here we take in two Spaniard almost starve on the shore , who make a fire to our ship as we pass by . those place for a 100 mile in length be nothing else but a desolate and mere wilderness , without any habitation of people , and full of wild bull and boar , and great serpent . the 22 our pinnace come also to a anchor in aligato bay at cape Tyburon . here we understand