and i likewise for my part bestow diverse of our trifle frank on he , to the end he may know the good will we bear he , and thereby make he more desirous of our friendship , in such sort , that as the day increase , so our amity and friendship increase also . after that our fort be bring into form , i begin to build a grange to retire my munition and thing necessary for the defence of our fort : pray the Paracoussy to command his subject to make we a cover of palm leave , and this to the end that when that ln Florida be do , i may unfreight my ship , and put under coverture those thing that be in they . sudden the palm Paracoussy command in my presence all the indian leaf . of his company to dress the next day morning so good a number of palm leave , that the grange be cover in less than two day : so that business be finish . for in the space of those two day , the Indians never cease from work , some in fetch palm leave , other in interlace of they : in such sort that their king commandment be execute as he desire . our fort be build in form of a triangle . the side the form of towards the west , which be towards the land , be in - fortcaro - closed with a little trench and raise with trave make in the west side . form of a battlement of nine foot high : the other side which be towards the river , be enclose with a palisado of plank of timber after the manner that gabions be make . on the south side there be a kind of bastion TheSouthside . within which i cause a house for the munition to be build : it be all build with faggot and sand , save about two or three foot high with turf , whereof the battlement be make . in the midst i cause a great ix 17 b Caroline . the first voyage twenty league . court to be make of eighteen pace long and broad , in the midst whereof on the one side draw towards the south i build a corpse de guard , and a house on the other side towards the north , which i cause to be raise somewhat too high : for within a short while after the wind beat it down : and experience teach i , that high build may not build with high stage in this country , be mtlipod fi > r by reason of the wind whereunto it be subject . one ountrey . fl - ia 1 be / ' locxarl my cmirf trrliir ’ k t morla of the side that enclose my court , which i make very fair and large , reach unto the grange of my muni tion : and on the other side towards the river be i own lodging , round about which be gallery all cover . the principali door of my lodging be in the midst of the great place , and the other be toward the river . a good distance from the fort i build a oven to avoid the danger against fire , because the house be of palm leave , which will soon be burn after the fire catch hold of they , so that with much ado a man shall have leisure to quench they . Loe here in brief the description of our four tress , which i name Caroline in the honour of our prince king Charles . after we be furnish with that which be most necessary , i will not lose a minute of a hour , without employ of the same in some virtuous exercise : therefore i charge monsieur de Ottigni my lieutenant , a man in truth worthy of all honour for his honesty and virtue , to search up within the river , what this Thimogoa may be , whereof the Paracoussy Satourioua have speak to we so often at our come on shore . for execution hereof the Paracoussy give he two Indians for his guide , which take upon they to lead he in this voyage , seem to go unto a wedding , so desirous they be to fight with their enemy . be embark they hoist sail , and have sail about twenty league , the Indians which still look on this side and that side to espy some of their enemy , discover three canoas . and immediate they begin to 18 cry Thimogoa , Thimogoa , and speak nothing else but to hasten forward to go fight with they : which the captain seem to be willing to do , to content they . when they come to board they , one of the indian get hold of a halberd , another of a cutlass in such a rage , that he will have leap into the water to have fight with they alone . nevertheless Ottigni will not let they do it , for while he defer to board they , he give the other respite to turn the prowess of their canoas towards the shore , and so to escape into the wood . again , the meaning of Ottigni be not to make war upon they of Thimogoa , but rather to make they friend , and to make they thenceforth to live in peace one with another if it be possible , hope by this mean to discover daily some new thing , and especial the certain course of the river . for this purpose he cause the bark to retire , wherein be the two Indians his guide , and go with his man toward the canoas which be on the river side . be come unto they , he put certain trifle into they , and then retire a good way from they , which thing cause the Indians which be flee away to return to their boat , and to understand by this sign , that those of our bark be none of their enemy , but rather come only to traffic with they . wherefore be thus assure of we , they call to our man to come near unto they : which they do incontinent and set foot on land , and speak free unto they , with diverse ceremony over long to recount .