that by this time the maiz be ripe in the great part of their quarter . whereupon utina signify unto i that in case i will carry he home to his house , he will take such good order that i shall have plenty of maiz and bean : and withal , that the field which he have cause to be sow for i , shall be reserve to my use . i consult with my man concern this matter , and find by the advice of all my company , that it be best to grant he his request , say , that he have mean to succour we with food sufficient to serve our turn for [ three . 34 . 5 . ] our embarkement , and that therefore i may do well to carry he home . wherefore i cause the two bark forthwith to be make ready , wherein i sail to Patica , a patica a place distant from his village 8 or 9 league , where i village . find no body , for they be get into the wood , and will not show themselves , albeit utina show himself unto they , for as much as they imagine that i shall be constrain to let he go . but see no body to show themselves , i be constrain to hazard one of my man which have be acquaint with the state of the country , to who i deliver the young son of utina , and command he to go with diligence to the village of utina , unto his father in law and his wife , to advertise they that if they will have their king again , they shall bring i victual unto the side of the little river whither i be go . at my man come every one make much of the little child , neither be there a man that think not himself well appaide to touch he . his father in law and his wife hear of these news come present towards our bark , and bring bread which they give unto my soldier , they hold i there three day , and in the mean while do all that they can to take i : which present i discover , and therefore stand diligent upon my guard . wherefore perceive they can not have their purpose , and that they be already desire of revenge root in the savage . discover , they send to advertise i that as yet they can not help i to victual , and that the corn be not yet ripe . thus i be constrain to return and to carry back utina home , where i have much ado to save he from the rage of my soldier : which perceive the maliciousness of the Indians , go about to have murder he . Moreover it seem they be content that they have get the son , and that they care not great for the father . now my hope fail i on this side , i devise to send my man to the village where i think the maiz be by this time ripe ; i go to diverse place , and continue so do 15 day after , when as utina beseech i again to send he unto his village , assure himself that his subject will not stick to give i victual : and that in case they refuse so to do , he be content that i shall do what i think good with he . i undertake this voyage the second time with the two bark furnish as before . at my come unto the little river , we find his subject there , which fail not to come thither with some quantity of bread , bean , and fish , to give my soldier . nevertheless return again to their former practice they seek all mean to entrap i , hope to cry quittance for the imprisonment of their king , if they may have get the victory of i . but after that they see the small mean , which they have to annoy i , they return to entreaty , and offer that if i will give they their king with certain of my soldier , they will conduct they unto the village , and that the subject see he , will be more willing to give we victual . which thing notwithstanding i will not grant unto they ( mistrust their subtility , which be not so covert , but that one may espy day at a little hole ) until they have first give i two man in pledge with charge that by the next day they shall bring i victual . which thing they grant , and give i two man which i put in chain for fear they shall escape away , as i know well they be instruct to do . four day be spend in these conference , at the end whereof they declare unto i , that they can not full and whole perform their promise : and that the uttermost that they can do for the present , be to cause each subject to bring his burden of mill . to conclude , they be content to do so on condition that i will send they their two pledge within ten day . as my lieutenant be ready to depart , i warn he above all a necessary thing to take heed he fall not into the indian hand : admonition . because i know they to be very subtle and crafty to enterprise and execute any thing to our disadvantage . he depart therefore with his troop , and come to the small river whereinto we be accustom to enter to approach as near as we can unto the village of utina , be six french league distant from thence . there he go on shore , put his man in good array , and draw straight towards the great house that be the king , where the chief man of the country be assemble , which cause very great store of victual to be bring now one and then another , in do whereof they spend notwithstanding three or four day : in which mean while they gather man together , to set upon we in our retreat . they use therefore many mean to hold the we still in breath . for one while they demand their floridians pledge , another while ( see my lieutenant will not stt ill