Laudonnieres a JY friend , you know the cause why our king send ' muthtw oul we unto country ; you know that he be our jurs ’ natural prince , who we be bind to obey accord to the commandment of God , in such sort , that we ought neither to spare our good nor life to do those thing that concern his service : you know , or at least you can be ignorant , that beside this general and natural obligation , you have this also join thereunto , that in receive of he reasonable pay and wage , you be bind to follow those who he have establish over you to be your governor , and to command you in his name , have for this purpose give he a oath of fidelity , which you can by any mean revoke for any fair appearance which you have to do the contrary : for this be reason , that see you live upon his charge on this condition , ( this be reason i say ) that you shall be faithful unto he . notwithstanding you have have more regard unto your unbridle affection then unto virtue , which invite you to the observance of your oath , in such sort that be become contemners of all honesty , you have pass your bond , and think that all thing be lawful for you . whereupon it be fall out , that while you think to escape the justice of man , you can not avoid the judgement of God , which as a thing by no mean to be avoid have lead you , and in spite of you have make you to arrive in this place , to make you confess 46 how true his judgement be , and that he never suffer so foul a fault to escape unpunished . after that i have use unto they these or the like speech , follow that which we have agree upon in council , in respect of the crime which they have commit , aswell against the king majesty as against i which be their captain , i command that they shall be hang . see therefore that there be no start hole , nor mean at all to save themselves from this arrest , they take themselves unto their prayer : yet one of the four , think to raise a mutiny among my soldier , say thus unto they : what , brethren and companion , will you suffer we to die so shameful ? And take the word out of his mouth , i say unto he , that they be not companion of author of sedition and rebel unto the king service . hereupon the soldier beseech i not to hang they , but rather let they be shoot through , and then afterward , if i think good , their body may be hang upon certain gibbet along the haven mouth : which i cause present to be put in execution . Loe here what be the end of my mutinous soldier , without which i have always live peaceable , and enjoy the good desire which i have to make a happy and quiet voyage . but because 1 have speak of nothing but their accident and adventure which happen unto they after their departure , without make any mention of our fort , i will return to the matter from which i digress , to declare that which fall out after their departure . first i begin to consider to the end i may confirm and make my self more constant in my affliction , that these murmurer can not ground their sedition upon want of victual : for from the time of our arrival , every soldier daily unto this day , and beside until the eight and twenty of February , have a loaf of bread weigh two and twenty ounce . again i recount with my self that all new conquest by sea or by land be ordinary trouble with rebellion , which be A . D . 1565 . the sentence of death . execution . the continuation of the history . new conquest subject to re - . , . r „ . r , - - bellionsand easy to be raise , aswell ! in respect or the distance of mutiny . place , as in respect of the hope that the soldier have to make their profit , as we may be well inform both by ancient history and also by the trouble which late happen unto Christopher Columbus , after his first discovery , to Francis Pizarro , and Diego de Almagro in Peru , and to Fernando Cortes . a hundred thousand other thing come unto my mind , to encourage and confirm i . my lieutenant Ottigny , and my sergeant of my band come to seek i in the ship , where i be prisoner , and carry i from thence in a bark assoon Laudonniere as our rebel be depart . after i be come unto set thing the fort , i cause all my company that remain , to be ismurne ^ ut assemble in the midst of the place before the corpse de of prison to the guard , and declare unto they the fault which they fort . that have forsake we have commit , pray they to bear they in memory , to bear witness thereof when need shall require . forthwith i ordain new captain to command the troop ; and prescribe they a order , accord whereunto they be to govern themselves from thence forward , and to enter into their watch : for the great part of the soldier , of who i have the best opinion , be go away with they . my declaration end , they promise i all with one accord to obey i most humble , and to do whatsoever i shall command they , though it be to die at my foot for the king service ; wherein assure they never after fail : so that i dare say , after the departure of my mutinous companion i be as well obey as ever be captain in place where he command . the next day after my return unto the fort , i assemble my man together again , to declare unto they that our fort be not yet finish , and that it be needful that all of we shall put thereto our help hand , to assure our self against the Indians