the ceremony which they use before they go to war . upon the head of the paracoussy , and cast the rest as it be in a rage and despite into a fire which be there prepare for the purpose . this do , he cry out thrice , he Thimogoa , and be follow with five hundred Satourioua fol - indians at the least , which be there assemble , which low with cry all with one voice , he Thimogoa . this ceremony , as a certain indian tell i familiar , signify nothing else , but that Satourioua beseech the sun to grant unto he so happy a victory , that he may shed his enemy blood , as he have shed that water at his pleasure . moreover , that the paracoussy which be sprinkle with a part of that water , may return with the head of their enemy , which be the only and chief triumph of their victory . the Paracoussy Satourioua have no soon end his ceremony and have take a view of all his company , but he embark himself , and use such diligence with his Almadies or boat , that the next day two hour before the sun set , he arrive on the territory of his enemy about eight or ten league from their village . consultation afterwards cause they all to go on land , he assemble ^ { saulnheir counse ^ > wherein it be agree that five of the paraenemy , coussy shall sail up the river with half of the troop , and by the break of the day shall approach unto the dwell of their enemy : for his own part , that he will take his journey through the wood and forest as secret as he can : that when they be come thither , as well they that go by water as he which go by land shall not fail by the break of the day to enter into the village , and cut they all in piece , except the woman and little child . how they use these thing which be thus agree upon , be ^ hch ^ the ^ execute with as great fury as be possible : which when take in war they have do , they take the head of their enemy which they have slay , and cut off their hair round about with a piece of their skull : they take also four and twenty prisoner , which they lead away , and retire themselves immediate unto their boat which wait for they . be come thither , they begin to singe praise unto the sun , to who they attribute their victory . and afterward they put the skin of those head on the end of their javelin , and go altogether towards the king Omoloa . territory of Paracoussy Omoloa , one of they which be in the company . be come thither , they divide their prisoner equal to each of the paracoussy , and leave thirteen of they to Satourioua , which straightway dispatch a indian his subject , to carry news before of the victory to they which stay at home to guard their 28 ... i564 ' house , which immediate begin to weep . but assoon as night be come , they never leave dance and play a thousand gambol in honour of the feast . the next day the Paracoussy Satourioua come home , who before he enter into his lodging cause all the hairy skull of his enemy to be set up before his door , and crown they with branch of laurel , show by this glorious spectacle the triumph of the victory which ° f triumfh - hee have obtain . straightway begin lamentation and mourning , which assoon as the night begin be turn into pleasure and dance . after that i be advertise of these thing , i send a soldier unto Satourioua , pray he to send i two of his prisoner : which he deny i , say that he be nothing behold unto i , and that i have break my promise , against the oath which i have swear unto he at my arrival . which when i understand by my soldier , which be come back with speed , i devise how i may be revenge of this savage , and to make he know how dear this bold bravado of he shall cost he : therefore i command my sergeant to provide i twenty soldier to go with i to the house of Satourioua : where after i be come and enter into the hall without any manner of salutation , i go and sit i down by he , and stay a long while without speak any word unto he , or show he any sign of friendship , which thing put he deep in his dump : beside that certain soldier remain at the gate , to who i have give express commandment to suffer no indian to go forth : have stand still about half a hour with this countenance , at length i demanded where the prisoner be which he have take at Thimogoa , and command they present to be bring unto i . whereunto the Paracoussy angry at the heart , and astonish wonderful , stand a long while without make any answer , notwithstanding at last he answer i very stout , that be afraid to see we come thither in such warlike manner they flee into the wood , and that not know which way they be go , they be not able by any mean to bring they again ; then i seem to make as though i understand not what he say , and ask for his prisoner again , and for some of he principali ally . then Satourioua command his son athore to seek out the prisoner , and to cause they to be bring into that place , which thing he do within a hour after . after they be come to the lodging of the Paracoussy , they humble salute i , and lift up their hand before i , they will have fall down prostrate as it be at my foot : but i will not suffer they , and soon after lead they away with i unto my own fort the Paracoussy be wonderful offend with this bravado , bethink himself by all mean how he may be revenge of we