until the next day , when i purpose to go on land , where i suffer he to depart after i have give he a shirt , and certain small trifle , wherewith he depart very well content from we . the place where we go on shore be hard by a very high rock , out of which there run a little river of sweet and excellent good water : by which river we stay certain day to discover the thing which be worthy to be see , and traffic daily with the Indians : which above all thing beseech we that none of our man shall come near their lodging nor their garden , otherwise that we shall give they great cause of jealousy , and that in so do , we shall not want of their fruit which they call Ananas , whereof they offer we very liberal , receive in recompense certain thing of small value . this notwithstanding , it happen on a day that certain of our man desirous to see some new thing in these strange country , walk through the wood : and follow still the little river side , they spy two serpent of exceed bigness , which go side by side overthwart the way . my soldier go before they think to let they from go into the wood : but the serpent nothing at all astonish at these gesture glance into the bush with fearful hyssing : yet for all that , my man draw their sword and kill they , and find they afterward 9 great foot long , and as big as a man leg . during this combat , certain other more undiscreet go and gather their ananas in the indian garden , trample through they without any discretion : and not therewithal ! content they go towards their dwelling ; whereat the Indians be so much offend , that without regard any thing they rush upon they and discharge their shot , so that they hit one of my man name Martine chaveau , which remain behind . we can not know whether he be kill on the place , or whether he be take prisoner : for those of his company have enough to do to save themselves without think of their companion . whereof Monsieur de Ottigni my lieutenant be advertise , send unto i to know whether i think good that he shall lay a ambush for the Indians which have either take or kill our man , or whether he shall go direct to their dwelling to know the truth . i send unto he after good deliberation hereupon , that he shall not attempt any thing , and that for diverse occasion : but contrariwise that he shall embark himself with all diligence , and consequent all they that be on land : which he do with speed . but as he sail towards our ship he perceive along the shore a great number of Indians which begin to charge they with their arrow : he for his part discharge store of shot against they , yet be not able to hurt they , or by any mean to surprise they : for which cause he quite forsake they , and come unto our ship . where stay until the next day morning we set sail follow our wont course , and keep the same , we discover diverse isle conquer by the Spaniard , as the isle of S . Christopher , and of the saint , of Monserrate , and la Redonda : afterwards we pass between Anguilla and Anegada , sail towards new France . where we arrive 15 day after , to wit , on Thursday the 22 of June about 3 of the clock in the afternoon , and land near a little river which be 30 degree distant from the equator , and 10 lague above cape Francois draw towards the south , and about thirty league above the river of May . after we have strike sail and cast anchor athwart the river , i determine to go on shore to discover the same . therefore be accompany with monsieur Ottigni , with monsieur de Arlac my ensign , and a certain number of gentleman and soldier , i embark my self about 3 or 4 of the clock in the evening . And be arrive at the mouth of the river , i cause the channel to be sound , which be find to be very shallow , although that far within the same the water be there find reasonable deep , which separate it self into two great arm , whereof one run towards the south , and the other he arrival in Florida the zz of June 1564 . cape Francois be between the river of dolphin and the river of May , make that the distance 30 league about , which be but 10 league over land . towards the north . have thus search the river , i go on land to speak with the Indians which wait for we upon the shore , which at our come on land , come before we , cry with a loud voice in their indian language , Antipola Bonassou , which be as much to say , as brother , friend , or some such like thing . after they have make very much of we , they show we their Paracoussy , that be to say , their king and governor , to who i present certain toy , wherewith he be well please . and for my own the great love part , i praise God continual , for the great love andc ^ eof which i have find in these savage , which be sorry t e on tans . nothing , but that the night approach , and make we retire unto our ship . for though they endeavour by all mean to make we tarry with they , and show by sign the desire that they have to present we with some rare thing , yet nevertheless for many just and reasonable occasion i will not stay on shore all night : but excuse my self for all their offer , i embark my self again and return towards my ship . howbeit , before my then river of departure , i name this river , the river of dolphin , dolphin , because that at my arrival , i see there a great the savage , number or