spanish , i do not this as unto french man , but as unto lutheran , Gourgues cause to be imprint with a sear iron in a table of Firrewood , i do not this as unto Spaniard , nor as unto mariner , but as unto traitor , robber , and murderer . afterwards consider he have not man enough to keep his fort which he have win , much less to store they , fear also lest the Spaniard which have dominion near adjoin shall renew his force , or the savage shall prevail against the french man , unless his majesty will send thither , he resolve to raze they . and indeed , after he have assemble , and in the end persuade all the savage king so to do , they cause their subject to run thither with such affection , that they overthrow all the three fort flat even with the ground in one day . this do by Gourgues , that he may return to his ship which be leave in the river of Seyne call Tacatacourou , fifteen league distant from thence , he send Cazenove and the artillery by water : afterward with fourscore harquebusier , arm with corslet , and match light , follow with forty mariner bear pike , by reason of the small confidence he be to have in so many savage , he march by land always in battle ray , find the way cover with savage , which come to honour he with present and praise , as the deliverer of all the country round about adjoin . 109 A . D . 1568 . the write hang over the french and Spaniards slay in Florida . the three fort raze . great honour do by the savage to Gourgues . a old woman among the rest say unto he , that now she care not any more to dye , since she have see the Frenchman once again in Florida , and the Spaniard chase out . brief be arrive , and find his ship set in order , and every thing ready to set sail , he counsel the king to continue in the amity and ancient league which they have make with the king of France , which will defend they against all nation : which they all promise , shed tear because of his departure . Olocotara especial : for appease of who he promise they to return within twelve moon , ( so they count the year ) and that his king will send knife in they a army , and store of knife for present , and all great estima - other thing necessary . so that after he have take his tun ’ leave of they , and assemble his man , he thank God of all his success since his set forth , and pray to the three of he for a happy return . the three of May 1568 , all thing be make ready , the rendezvous appoint , and the anchor weigh to set sail so prosperous , that in seventeen day they run eleven hundred the arrival league : continue which course they arrive at rochel ° fg ° ufg ! fsat the sixth of June , the four and thirty day after their sixth of June , departure from the river or may , have lose but a small pinnace and eight man in it , with a few gentleman and other which be slay in the assault of the fort . after the cheer and good entertainment which he receive of those of rochel , he sail to Bordeaux to inform monsieur Monluc of the thing above mention , albeit he be advertise of eighteen pinnace , and a great ship of two hundred ton full of Spaniard , which be assure of the defeat in Florida , and that che - de Bois , he be at rochel , come as far as che - de Bois , the same day that he depart thence , and follow he as far as Blay ( but he be get already to Bourdeaux ) to make he yield another account of his voyage , then that , wherewith he make many Frenchman right glad . the catholic king be afterward inform that Gourgues can not easy be take , offer a great sum of iio money to he that can bring he his head , pray moreover king Charles to do justice on he as of the author of so bloody a act contrary to their alliance and good league of friendship . in so much as come to Paris to present himself unto the king , to signify unto he the success of his voyage , and the mean which he have to subdue this whole country unto his obedience , ( wherein he offer to employ his life , and all his good ) he find his entertainment and answer so contrary to his expectation , that in fine he be constrain to hide himself a long space in the court of Roan , about the year 1570 . and without the assistance of precedent Marigny , in who house he remain certain day , and of the receiver of vacquieulx , which always be his faithful friend , he have be in great danger . which grieve not a little Dominique de Gourgues , consider the service which he have do aswell unto he as to his predecessor king of France . he be the birth , bear in mount Marsan in Guyenne , and employ for lifiand death the service of the most christian king in all the army make since these twenty five or thirty year : at last he have the charge and honour of a captain , which in a place near unto see , with thirty soldier sustain the brunt of a part of the spanish army , by which be take in the assault , and have all his man cut in piece , he be put into a galley in token of the good war and singular favour which the Spaniard be wont to show we . but as the galley be go towards Sicillie , be take by the Turk , lead away to Rhodes , and thence to Constantinople , it be short afterward recover by Romeguas , commander over the army of Malta . by this mean return home , he make a voyage on the coast of Africa , whence he take his course to Bresil , and to the south sea at length be desirous to rapayre the honour of France , he set upon Florida with such success as you have hear . so that be become by his continual warlike action both by land and sea no less valiant captain then skilful mariner , he have make himself fear of the Spaniard , and acceptable unto the queen of England for the desert of his virtue . to conclude , he die in the year 1582 , to the great grief of such as know he .