away into the wood : where i find certain laudonnier of my man which be escape , of which number there esc0pe - were three or four which be sore hurt . then speak i thus unto they : sir , since it have please God that this mischance be happen unto we , we must needs take the pain to get over the marsh unto the ship which be at the mouth of the river . some will needs go to a little village which be in the wood , the rest fol - John du che - min a faithful servant . the diligence of the mariner to save they that escape out of the fort . among these be Jaques Morgues painter sometime live in the Blackfriar in London . low i through the reed in the water , where be able to go no far by reason of my sickness which i have , i send two of my man which be with i , which can swim well , unto the ship , to advertise they of that which have happen , and to send they word to come and help i . they be not able that day to get unto the ship to certify they thereof : so i be constrain to stand in the water up to the shoulder all that night long , with one of my man which will never forsake i . the next day morning , be scarce able to draw my breath any more , i betake i to my prayer with the soldier which be with i , who name be John du chemin : for i feel my self so feeble , that i be afraid i shall die sudden : and in truth if he have not embrace i in both his arm , and so hold i up , it have not be possible to save i . after we have make a end of our prayer , i hear a voice , which in my judgement be one of they which i have send , which be over against the ship and call for the ship boat , which be so in deed : and because those of the ship have understanding of the take of the fort by one call John de Hais , master Carpenter , which flee unto they in a shallop ; they have set sail to run along the coast to see if they may save any : wherein doubtless they do very well their endeavour . they go straight to the place where the two man be which i have send , and which call they . assoon as they have receive they in and understand where i be , they come and find i in a pitiful case . five or six of they take i and carry i into the shallop : for i be not able by any mean to go one foot . after i be bring into the shallop some of the mariner take their clothes from their back to lend they i , and will have carry i present to their ship to give i a little aqua vitae . howbeit i will not go thither , until i have first go with the boat along the reed , to seek out the poor soul which be scatter abroad , where we gather up 18 or 20 of they . the last that i take 96 in be the nephew of the treasurer le Beau . after we be all come to the ship , i comfort they as well as i can , and send back the boat again with speed to see if they can find yet any more . upon her return , the mariner tell i how that captain James Ribault which be in his ship about two musket shoot distant from the fort , have part with the Spaniard , and that Francis Jean come unto his ship , where he stay a long space , whereat they great marveil , consider he be the cause of this enterprise , how he will let he escape . after i be come into the ship call the greyhound , captain James Ribault and captain Valvot come to see i : and there we conclude to return into France . now forasmuch as i find the ship unfurnish of captain , pilot , master , and masters - mate , i give advice to choose out one of the most able man among all the mariner , and that by their own voice . i take also six man out of another small ship , which we have sink because it want ballast and can not be save . thus i increase the furniture of the ship wherein i be my self embark , and make one , which have be masters - mate in the foresay small ship , master of i . and because i lack a pilot , i pray James Ribault that he will grant i one of the four man that he have in his ship , which i shall name unto he , to serve i for a pilot : he promise to give i they , which nevertheless he do not at the instant when we be ready to depart , notwithstanding all the speech i use to he , in declare that it be for the king service . i be constrain to leave the ship behind i which i have buy of the english captain , because i want man to bring she away . for captain James Ribault have take away her furniture : i take away her ordinance only , which be all dismount , whereof i give nine piece to James Ribault to carry into France , the other five i put into my ship . the 25 of September we set sail to return into France , and captain James Ribault and i keep company all that ix 97 g A . D . 1565 . Francis Jean cause of this enterprise . the bad deal of James Ribault . our return into France the 25 . of September 1565 . day and the next until three or four a clock in the afternoon : but because his ship be better at bowline than we , he keep he to the wind and leave we then same day . thus we continue our voyage