yield to they , until such time as they have bring the victual unto the boat ; accord to the agreement pass between we ) they signify unto he that the woman and young child be afiraide out of all measure to see fire in their match so near their harquebuss : and that therefore they most earnest beseech they to put they out , that they may more easy get people enough to carry the victual , and that they for their part will leave their bow and arrow , and will be content that their servant shall carry they . this second request be as flat deny they as the former : for it be a easy matter to smell out their intention . but while these thing be thus in handle , utina by no mean be to be 71 see , but hide and keep himself secret in a little house apart , where certain choose man of i go to see he show themselves aggrieve with he for the long delay of his subject : whereunto he answer , that his subject be so much incense against we , that by no mean possible he be able to keep they in such obedience as he willing will have do , and that he can not hold they from wage of war against monsieur de Ottigny . that he also call to mind , that even while he be prisoner , at what time our man lead he into his country to obtain some victual , he see along the high way arrow stick up , at the end whereof long hair be fasten , which be a certain sign of open war proclaim , which arrow the captain also carry with he to the fort . he say further that in respect of the good will he bear to the captain , he forewarn his lieutenant that his subject be determine to cut down the tree , and cause they to fall a thwart the little river where the boat be , to keep they from depart thence , that they may fight with they at their ease , and that if it thus fall out , he assure he for his part he will not be there to meddle in the matter . and that which much moor augment the suspicion of war be , that as my messenger depart from utina , they hear the voice of one of my man , which during the voyage have always be among the Indians , and who as yet they will never render , until they have get their pledge home . this poor fellow cry out a main because two Indians will have carry he into the wood to have cut his throat : whereupon he be succour and deliver . Theise admonition be well understood , after ripe deliberation thereof Monsieur de Ottigny resolve to retire himself the seven and twenty of July . wherefore he set his soldier in order , and deliver to each of they a sack full of mill : and afterward he march towards his bark , think to prevent the enterprise of the savage . there be at the a alley of 3 or 4 hundred pace long . come forth of the village a great alley about three or four hundred pace long , which be cover on both side with great tree . my lieutenant dispose his man in this alley and set they in such order as they desire to march : for he be well assure that if there be any ambush , it will be at the come out of the tree . therefore he cause Monsieur de Arlac my ensign to march somewhat before with 8 harquebusier to discover whether there be any danger : beside he command one of my sergeant and corporal to march on the out side of the alley with four harquebusier while he himself conduct the rest of his company through it . now as he suspect , so it fall out : for monsieur de Arlac meet with two or three hundred Indians at the end of the alley , which salute he with a infinite number of their arrow , and with such fury that it be easy to see with what desire they seek to charge we . howbeit they be so well sustain in the first assault which my ensign give they , that they which fall down dead , do somewhat abate the choler of those which remain alive . this do my lieutenant haste to gain ground in such sort as i have already say . after he have march about four hundred pace , he be charge afresh with a new troop of savage which be in number about 300 , which assail he before , while the rest of the former set upon he behind . this second assault be so valiant sustain , that i may just say that monsieur de Ottigny so well discharge his duty , as be possible for a good captain to do . and so it stand they upon : for he have to deal with such kind of man , as know well how to fight and to obey their head which conduct they , and which know so well to behave themselves in this conflict , as if Ottigny have not prevent their practice , he have be in danger to have be defeat . their manner in this fight be , that when two hundred have shoot , they retire themselves and give place to the rest that be behind , and all a skirmish between the savage and the french . a second fresh charge of savage . theflorldians manner of fight . the while have their eye and foot so quick and ready , that assoon as ever they see the harquebus lay to the cheek , so soon be they on the ground , and eftsoon up to answer with their bow and to fly their way , if by chance they perceive we go about thefloridians to take they : for there be nothing that they fear so mefe fear . much , because of our sword and dagger . this conflict continue and last from nine of the clock in the morning , until the night depart they . and if Ottigny have not bethink himself to cause his man to break the arrow which they find in the way , and so to deprive the savage of the mean to begin again , without all