he furthermore , that on condition that Laudonniere he will continue in his good affection , no more ordinance shall be discharge against he hereafter : and ^ “ profit beside that i will become his faithful protector against his great enemy . the indian content with my answer return to assure their Paracoussy , which notwithstanding the assurance withdraw himself from his dwelling twenty or five and twenty league off and that for the space of more than two month . after that three day be expire , the fire be quite extinguish . but for two day after there follow such a excessive heat in the air , that a wonderfuu the river near unto which we plant our habitation , heate - became so hot , that i think it be almost ready to see . for there die so great abundance of fish , and that of so many diverse sort , that in the mouth of the river only there be find dead enough to have load fifty fifty cart load cart , whereof there issue a putrefaction in the air , deadph which breed many dangerous disease among we , insomuch that most of my man fall sick , and almost ready to end their day . yet notwithstanding it please our merciful God so to provide by his providence , that all our man recover their health without the loss of any one of they . monsieur de Arlac , captain Vasseur , and one of my then third sergeant be embark with their ten soldier voyage they about the ten of September , to carry back the prisoner unto utina , sail so far up the river , that they do - e ^ um er ' cover a place call Mayarqua distant from our fort Mayarqua a about fourscore league , where the Indians give they fa * 8o - good entertainment , and in many other village which ^ “ ersgfmay they find . from this place they row to the dwell - ix 33 c ling of Paracoussy utina , which after he have feast they accord to his ability and power , pray monsieur de Arlac and all his soldier to stay a while with he , to aid and assist he in battle against one of his KingPatanou . enemy call Potanou , whereunto Monsieur de Arlac consent willing . and because he know not how long he may have occasion to stay in these part , he send i captain Vasseur and the bark back again , which bring home only five soldier with he . the Indians now because the custom of the Indians be always to manner of war . wage war by surprise , utina resolve to take his enemy Potanou in the morning by the break of the day : to bring this to pass , he make his man to travail all the two hundred night , which may be in number two hundred person , Indians . so wep advise , that they pray our french - shot to be in the forefront , to the end ( as they say ) that the noise of their piece may astonish their enemy : notwithstanding they can not march so secret , but that those of the village of Potanou , distant from the dwell of utina about five and twenty league , be ware of they : which sudden employ and bestow a village in - all their endeavour to defend their village enclose all dose with with tree , and issue out in great company : but ' find themselves charge with shot , ( a thing where - with they never have be acquaint ) also behold the captain of their band fall down dead in the begin of their skirmish , with a shot of a harquebus which strike he in the forehead , discharge by the hand of monsieur de Arlac , they leave the place : and the Indians of utina gate into the village , take utina get man , woman , and child prisoner . thus Paracoussy the victory of utina obtain the victory by the aid of our man , ^ imofth ^ which slay many of his enemy , and lose in this conflict trench . one their companion , wherewith utina be very much grieve . eight or ten day after , i send captain Vasseur back again with a bark to fetch home Monsieur de Arlac and his soldier , which at their return bring i certain present from utina , as .... i564 ' some silver , a small quantity of gold , paint skin , silver , and and other thing , with a thousand thanks , which the geld , and Paracoussy give i , which promise that if in any enterprise of importance i shall have need of his sister tnne ' man , he will furnish i with three hundred and above . while i thus travail to purchase friend , and to practise one while with one here , a other while with another there , certain soldier of my company be suborn under hand by one name la Roquette of the country la coquette of Perigort , which put in their head that he be a cmspirade . great magician , and that by the secret of art - magicke he have discover a i of gold and silver far up within the river , whereby ( upon the loss of his life , ) every soldier shall receive in ready bullion the value of ten thousand crown , beside and above fifteen hundred thousand which shall be reserve for the king majesty : wherefore they ally themselves with la Roquette and another of his confederate , who name be le Genre , in who notwithstanding i have great affiance . This Genre exceed desirous to enrich monsieur de himself in those part , and seek to be revenge , Genre . because i will not give he the carriage of the Paquet into France , secret inform the soldier that be already suborn by la Roquette , that i will deprive they of this great gain , in that i do set they daily on work , not send they on every side to discover the country : therefore that it be a good deed , after they have make i understand so much , to seek mean to dispatch i out of the way , and to choose another captain in my place