hard for i to do so : nevertheless i send you twelve small mantle , such as the people of the country be wont to wear , and a certain garment also , which seem unto i to be well 38 ° - ] make : i keep the same , because it seem to i to be excellent well wrought , because i believe that no man broideredwith ever see any needle work in these Indies , except it be needle work . since the Spaniard inhabit the same . i send your lordship also two clothes paint with the beast of this country , although as i have say , the picture be ix 161 l the death of Stephan the negro . very rude do , because the painter spend but one day in draw of the same . i have see other picture on the wall of the house of this city with far better proportion , and better make . i send your honour one oxhide , certain turquese , and two earring of the same , and fifteen comb of the Indians , and certain tablet set with these turquese , and two small basket make of wicker , whereof the Indians have great store . i send your lordship also two roll which the woman in these part be wont to wear on their head when they fetch water from their well , as we use to do in Spain . and one of these indian woman with one of these roll on her head , will carry a pitcher of water without touch the same with her hand up a lather . i send you also a muster of the weapon wherewith these people be wont to fight , a buckler , a mace , a bow , and certain arrow , among which be two with point of bone , the like whereof , as these conqueror say , have never be see . i can say nothing unto your lordship touch the apparel of their woman . for the indian keep they so careful from we , that hitherto i have not see any of they , save only two old woman , and these have two long robe down to the foot open before , and gird to they , and they be button with certain cordon of cotton . i request the Indians to give i one of these robe , which they wear , to send your honour the same , see they will not show i their woman . and they bring i two mantle which be these , which i send you as it be paint : they have two pendent like the woman of Spain , which hang somewhat over their shoulder . the death of the negro be most certain : for here be many of the thing find which he carry with he : and the Indians tell i that they kill he here , because the Indians of Chichilticale tell they that he be a wicked villain , and not like unto the Christians : because the christian kill nowoman : and he kill woman ; and also he touch their woman , which the Indians love more than themselves ; therefore 162 they determine to kill he : but they do it not after such sort as be report , for they kill none of the rest of those that come with he : neither slay they the young lad which be with he of the province of Petatlan , but they take he and keep he in safe custody until now . and when i seek to have he , they excuse themselves two or three day to give he i , tell i that he be dead , and sometime that the Indians of Acucu have carry he away . but in conclusion , when Acucu . i tell they that i shall be very angry if they do not give he i , they give he unto i . he be a interpreter , for though he can well speak their language , yet he understand the same very well . in this place there be find some quantity of gold and and s ^- silver , which those which be skilful in minerail matter esteem to be very good . to this hour i can never ’ learn of these people from whence they have it : and i see they refuse to tell i the truth in all thing , imagine , as i have say , that in short time i will depart hence , but i hope in God they shall no long excuse themselves . i beseech your lordship to certify his majesty of the success of this voyage . for see we have no more than that which be aforesaid , and until such time as it please God that we find that which we desire , i mean not to write my self . our lord God keep and preserve your excellende . from the province of Cibola , and from this city of Granada the three of August 1540 Francis Vasques de Coronado kiss the hand of your excellende . the rest of this voyage to Acuco , Tiguex , Cicuic , and Quivira , and unto the western ocean , be thus write in the general history of the west Indies by Francis Lopez de Gomara , Chap . 214 . because they will not return to Mexico without do something , nor with empty hand , they agree to pass further into the country , which be tell they to be better and better . so they come to 163 the western sea discover . Tiguex . axa and Quivira . a town burn . another town assault . mantle . Turqueses . feather . precious thing . acuco a town upon a exceed strong hill . and from thence don Garcias Lopez de Cardenas with his company of horseman go unto the sea : and Francis Vasques go to Tiguex , which stand on the bank of a great river . there they have news of Axa and Quivira . there they say be a king who name be Tatarrax , with a long beard , hoary head , and rich , which be gird with a bracamart , which pray upon a pair of bead , which worship a cross of gold , and the image of a woman , the queen of heaven . this news do great rejoice and cheer up the army : although some think it to be false , and the report of the friar . they determine to go thither , with intention to winter in so rich a country as that be report to be .