high rock which be above fifty pace above 6000 have no other entrance but by a ladder or pair person . of stair hew into the same rock , whereat our people marvel not a little : all the water of this town be keep in cistern . the chief man of this town come peaceable to visit the Spaniard , bring they many mantle , and chamois - skinne excellent dress , and great plenty of victual . their cornfield be two league from thence , and they fetch water out of a small river never thereunto , to water the same , on the brink whereof they see many great bank of rose like those of Castille . sign of here be many mountain that bear show of metal , metal . but they go not to see they , because the indian dwell upon they be many in number , and very warlike . our man remain in this place three day , upon one of the which the inhabitant make before they a very solemn dance , come forth in the same with gallant apparel , use very witty sport , wherewith our man be exceed delight . twenty four league from hence towards the west , they come to a certain province call by the inhabitant zunyorsunne . themselves zuny , and by the Spaniard Cibola , contain great number of Indians ; in which province Francisco Vazquez de Coronado have be , and have erect many 198 cross and other token of Christianity , which remain as yet stand . here also they find three indian Christians which have remain there ever since the say journey , who name be Andrew the culiacan , Gaspar de Mexico , and Antonio de Guadalajara , who have almost forget their own language , but can speak that country speech very well ; howbeit after some small conference with our man , they easy understand one another . by these three Indians they be inform , that threescore day journey from this place there be a very mighty lake , upon the bank whereof stand many great and good town , and that the inhabitant of the same have plenty of gold , a evident argument whereof be their wear of golden bracelet and earring : and also that after the say Francis Vasquez de Coronado have perfect intelligence thereof , he depart out of this province of Cibola to go thither , and that have proceed twelve day journey , he begin to want water ; and thereupon determine to return , as he do indeed , with intention to make a second voyage thither at his better opportunity ; which afterward he perform not , be prevent of his determine journey by death . upon the news of these riches the say captain Antony de Espeio be desirous to go thither ; and though some of his companion be of his opinion , yet the great part and the friar be of the contrary , say that it be now high time to return home unto new Biscay from whence they come , to give account of that which they have see : which the say great part within few day put in execution , leave the captain with a mighty lake 60 dale journey from Cibola . plenty ofgolde . nine companion only that willing follow he : who after he have full certify himself of the riches abovesaid , and of the great quantity of excellent metal that be about that lake , depart out of this province of mightiepro - another Cibola with his companion ; and travel direct towards Vince w " five - the west , after he have pass 28 league , he find another very great province , which by estimation con - ^ iied ^ mo - tein above 50000 soul : the inhabitant whereof 199 a witty politic to be use by the english in like case . assoon as they understand of their approach , send they word , upon pain of death to come no near to their town : whereto the captain answer , that their come be in no wise to hurt they , as they shall well perceive , and therefore request they not to molest he in his intend voyage , and withal give to the messenger a reward of such thing as they bring with they : who thereupon make so good report of our people , and so appease the trouble mind of the Indians , that they grant they free access unto their town , and so they go thither with 15 . Indians their friend of the province of Cibola aforesaid , and the three Mexican Indians before mention . when they be come within a league of the first town , there come forth to meet they above 2000 Indians lade with victual , who the captain reward with some thing of small value , which they make great account of , and esteem more precious than gold . as they approach near unto the town which be name Zaguato , a great multitude of Indians come forth to meet they , and among the rest their cacique , with so great demonstration of joy and gladness , that they cast much meal of Maiz upon the ground for the horse to tread upon : with this triumph they enter the town , where they be very well lodge and much make of , which the captain do in part requite , give to the chief among they hat , and bead of glass , with many such trifle , which he carry with he for the like purpose . the say cacique present give notice to the whole province of the arrival of these new guest , who they report to be a courteous people , and such as offer they no harm : which be occasion sufficient to make they all come lade with present unto our people , and to entreat they to go and make merry with they in their town ; which they yield unto , though always with great foresight what may follow . whereupon the captain use a certain policy , make the cacique believe , that forasmuch as his horse be very fierce ( for they 200 have tell the Indians that they will kill they ) therefore it be necessary to make a fort of lime and stone to enclose they , for the avoid of such inconvenience as otherwise may happen unto the indian by they . this tale be so steadfast believe by the casque , that in five hour they assemble such store of people together , that with incredible celerity they build the say fort which our man require . moreover , when the captain say that he will depart , they bring unto he a present of 40000 . mantle of cotton , both white and of other colour , and great store of hand - towel , with tassel at the corner , with diverse other thing , and among the rest rich metal , which seem to hold much silver . rich metal . among these Indians they learn very much concern the great lake aforesaid , who report agree whole with the relation of the former , as touch the