which we bring with we , and to some other that have lose their cattle in the way , and be not able to carry their victual so far which they bring from culiacan . it please God that we gate some small quantity of Maiz with this traffic , whereby certain Indians be relieve and some Spaniard . and by that time that we be come to this valley of the Caracones , some ten or twelve of our horse be dead through weariness : for be overcharge with great burden , and have but little meat , they can not endure the travail . likewise some of our negro and some of our Indians dye here ; which be no small want unto we for the performance of our enterprise . they the valley de tell i that this valley of the Caracones be five day isumt ^ ve5 journey fr ° m the western sea i send for the indian davet intima of the sea coast to understand their estate , and while i from the wes - stay for they the horse rest : and i stay there team sea . four day , in which space the Indians of the sea coast come unto i : which tell i , that two day sail seven or eight from their coast of the sea , there be seven or eight ^ t ^ isks s ^ an ^ s tight over against they , well inhabit with of California , people , but bad furnish with victual , and be a rude people : and they tell i , that they have see a ship see a ship pass by not far from the shore : which i coast . wot not what to think whither it be one or those that go to discover the country , or else a ship of the Portugal . 148 they come to chichilticale : after they have rest themselves two day there , they enter into a country very barren of victual , and hard to travail for thirty league , beyond which they find a country very pleasant , and a river call Rio deal Lino , they fight with the Indians be assault by they , and with victory vanquish their city , they relieve themselves of their pinch hunger . 1 depart from the Caracones , and always keep by the sea coast as near as i can judge , and in very deed i still find my self the far off : in such sort that when i arrive at chichilticale i find my self ten day journey from the sea : and the father provinciali say that it be only but five league distance , and that he have see the same . we all conceive great grief and be not a little confound , when we see that we find every thing contrary to the information which he have give your lordship . the Indians of chichilticale say , that if at any time they go to the sea for fish , and other thing that they carry , they go traverse , and be ten day journey in go thither . and i be of opinion that the information which the Indians give i shall be true . the sea return towards the west right over against the Caracones the space of ten or twelve league . where i find that your lordship ship be see , which go to discover the haven of chichilticale , which father Marcus of ni ? a say to be in five and thirty degree . God know what grief of mind i have sustain : because i be in doubt that some mishap be fall unto they : and if they follow the coast , as they say they will , as long as their victual last which they carry with they , whereof i leave they store in culiacan , and if they be not fall into some misfortune , i hope well in God that by this they have make some good discovery , and in this respect their long stay out may be pardon . 149 chichilticale ten day journey from the sea . this chichil - ticaleisindeede but in 28 . deg . i rest my self two day in chichilticale , and to have do well i shall have stay long , in respect that here we find our horse so tire : but because we want victual , we have no leisure to rest any long : i enter the confine of the desert country on the 23 . of saint Johns eve , and to refresh our former travail , the June . first day we find no grass , but worse way of mountain and bid passage , than we have pass already : and the horse be tire , be great molest therewith : so that in this last desert we lose more horse than we have lose before : and some of my Indians which be our friend die , and one Spaniard who name be Spinosa ; and two negro , which die with eat certain herb for lack of victual . from this place i send before i one day journey the master don Garcia of the field don Garcia Lopez de Cardenas with fifteen nas ^^^ ' h ° rses to discover the country , and prepare our way : ' wherein he do like himself , and accord to the confidence which your lordship repose in he . and well i wot he fail not to do his part : for as i have inform your lordship , it be most wicked way , at least thirty league and more , because they be inaccessible mountain . a godly and but after we have pass these thirty league , we fruitful con - founj fresh river , and grass like that of Castille , and ’ special of that sort which we call Scaramoio , many nut tree and mulberry tree , but the nut tree differ from those of Spain in the leaf : and there be flax , but chief near the bank of a certain river which Rio deal Lino , therefore we call el Rio del Lino , that be say , the river of flax : we find no Indians at all for a day travail , but afterward four Indians come out unto we in peaceable manner , say that they be send even to that desert place to signify unto we that we be welcome , and that the next day all the people will come out to meet we on the way with victual : and the master of the field give they a cross , will they to signify