call he , and make much of he , give he certain bead , with a hat and certain hook of we , and then let he go . and it seem that after he be return to his companion , he declare unto they how we have do he no harm at all , show they the thing which we have give he : whereupon they also determine to come unto we to our boat , but because it be now night , and that our ship be far from we , we force not to stay for they , especial because it be a bad place and a dangerous . this country have on the sea - coast high and bare mountain with certain grass in some place like unto our broom , or like unto wood of rosemary . bottle of beast skin and fishhook of bone Ancon de S . Andres , or the haven of saint Andrew in 32 degree . two Indians of exceed huge stature . the next day we sail near to the coast on the same side , with very scarce wind , and in a manner calm , and run not above five league , and all the night follow we lay becalm , and we see on the shore five or six fire . the land be high with very - high mountain without grass , have certain cave in they : the next day also , and part of the night follow we be becalm : and the morrow after we follow our course along the say coast , and pass between a great island full of exceed high mountain , and the main land , where we see a very great haven in the firm land in which we anchor to see what it be , and be come to a anchor , the captain and some of we go on land the same day to see if there be any people and fresh water , and we find certain small cottage cover with dry grass , with certain little staff lay overthwart , and we go a little way into the country which be very baren , by certain small and strait path , and find a little pond or pit , but dry and without water ; and here the captain take possession for the mark of the valley in the name of his majesty , and after this we return to our ship , and that night we see four or five fire on the land . the next day the captain determine , because he have see these fire , to go on shore , and so with our two boat we go fifteen or twenty of we unto certain crooked strand two league from the place where our ship ride , and where we have see the fire , and we find two Indians of exceed huge stature , so that they cause we great to wonder ; they carry their bow and arrow in their hand , and as soon as they see we leap on shore they run away , and we follow they unto their dwelling and lodging , which be certain cottage and bower cover with bough , and there we find great and small step of many people , but they have no kind of victual but only cuttle - fish which we find there . the country towards the sea side seem but barren , for we see neither tree nor green grass there , yet be there certain small path not well beat , and along the sea - coast we see many tract of dog , hare , and cony , and in certain small island near unto the main we see seal - fish . this haven be call Ancon Ancon de Zant de Sant Andres . Andres . Chap . 5 . they discover a mountainous island very great , and near unto it certain other island with a goodly green and pleasant country . they have sight of certain Indians in canoas of cane , who language sound like the flemish tongue , with who they can not have any traffic . the next day we proceed on our voyage , sail between the main and a island , which we suppose to be in circuit about a hundred or eighty league , sail sometime within one , and sometime within two league of the main . the soil of this island be of certain mountain not very steep with cave in they , and as far as we can descry by the coast , there appear no sign of any plain country . here from this day forward we begin to be afraid , consider that we be to return to the port of Santa Cruz ; for it be suppose , that all along this mighty gulf from the entrance in at culiacan until the return back unto the say haven , be all firm land , and also because we have the firm land always on our right hand and it go round circlewise unto the say haven ; but many thought and hope that we shall find some mouth or outlet , whereby we may pass through unto the other coast . what our success be our will declare in the relation follow . the next day be Thursday we sail with scant wind , for it be almost calm , and pass beyond that great island , have firm land always on our right hand , and coast ( as i say ) very near unto it . the next day likewise we sail with little wind , it be in a manner calm , and pass near unto the shore by certain round bay , and certain point which the land make , which be pleasant to behold be somewhat green , and there seem to be some a great island . they return from the bot - tomeofthegulf of California . 219 creek there . This Friday at night we sail altogether with a fresh gale , and at break of day we another be between the main land , and a island on our island . | eft hand , which be somewhat big , as far as we can discern . there be a great bay in the firm land , and before it be a point which stretch far into the sea . the firm land seem to be much fresh and pleasant than those land which we have pass , have many bank and hill of indifferent