who i have many other thing to impart . but to return to my journey , i arrive at Quicama , Quicoma . where the Indians come forth with great joy and gladness to receive i , advertise i that their lord wait for my come ; to who when i be come i find that he have with he five or six thousand man without weapon , from who he go apart with some two hundred only , all which bring victual with they , and so he come towards i , go before the rest with great authority , and before he and on each side of he be certain which make the people stand aside , make he way to pass . he wear a garment close before and behind and open on both side , fasten with button , wrought with white and black chequer work , it be very soft and well make , be of the skin of certain delicate fish call sea bream . assoon as he be come to the water side his servant take he up in their arm , and bring he into my boat , where i embrace he and receive he with great joy , show unto he much kindness : upon which entertainment his people stand by and behold the same seem not a little to rejoice . this lord turn himself to his people will they to consider my courtesy , and that he be of his own accord come unto i with a strange people , they may see how good a man i be , and with how great love i have entertain he , and that therefore they shall take i for their lord , and that all of they shall become my servant , and do whatsoever 1 will command they . there i cause he to sit down , and to eat certain conserves of sugar which i have bring with i , and will the interpreter to thank he in my name for the favour which he have do i in vouchsafe to come to see i , recommend unto he the worship of the cross , and all such other thing as i have recommend to the 313 rest of the Indians ; namely that they shall live in peace , and shall leave off war , and shall continue always good friend together : he answer that of long time they have continue in war with their neighbour , but that from thence forward he will command his people that they shall give food to all stranger that pass through his kingdom , and that they shall do they no kind of wrong , and that if any nation shall come to invade he , he say he will tell they how i have command that they shall live in peace , and if they refuse the same , he will defend himself , and promise i , that he will never go to seek war , if other come not to invade he . than i give he certain trifle , as well of the seed which i bring , as of the hen of Castille , wherewith he be not a little please . and at my departure i carry certain of his people with i , to make friendship between they and those other people which dwell above the river : and here the interpreter come unto i , to crave leave to return home ; and i give he certain gift wherewith he depart great satisfy . coama . the next day i come to Coama , and many of they know i not , see i clad in other aparrel , but the old man which be there as soon as he know i leap into the water , say unto i , sir , lo here be the man which you leave with i , which come forth very joyful and pleasant declare unto i the great courtesy which that people have show he , say that they have stroven together who shall have he to his house , and that it be incredible to think what care they have at the rise of the sun to hold up their hand and kneel before the cross . i give they of my seed , and thank they hearty for the good entertainment which they have show my man , and they beseech i that i will leave he with they , which i grant they until my return , and he stay among they very willing . thus i go forward up the river , take that old man in my company , which tell i , that two 314 indian come from Cumana to inquire for the christian , Cumana . and that he have answer they that he know none such , but that he know one which be the son of the sun , and that they have persuade he to join with they treason of they to kill i and my companion . i wish he to lend i two Indians , and i will send word by they , that i will come unto they , and be desirous of their friendship , but if that they on the contrary will have war , i will make such a war with they , that shall displease they . and so i pass through all that people , and some come and ask i , why i have not give they cross as well as the rest , and so i give they some . Chap . 9 they go on land , and see the people worship the cross which they have give they . the captain cause a indian to make a draught of the country : he send a cross to the lord of Cumana , and go down the river with the stream , he arrive at his ship . of the error of the pilot of Cortes as touch the situation of this coast . the next day i go on land to see certain cottage , and i find many woman and child hold up their hand and kneel before a cross which i have give they . when i come thither i do the like my self ; and confer with the old man , he begin to inform i of as many people and province as he know . and when evening be come i call the old man to come and lodge with i in my boat ; he answer that he will not go with i because i will weary he with ask he question of so