and by Francis Preciado get his target on his arm , and his sword in his hand , run unto the other side of the valley , which on that part be not very steep , cry saint Iago , upon they my master , and after he leap Haro , Teresa , Spinosa , and a crossebow - man call Montanno , and after they follow the captain , 238 1539 - though very lame , with a negro and a soldier which accompany he , encourage and comfort they , will they not to fear . thus we drive they to the place where they have fortify themselves , and from whence they descend , and we take another hill over against they within a dart cast of they . and have breathe our self a little , the captain come unto we , and say , go too my master , upon they before they strengthen themselves on this hill , for now we see plain that they be afeard of we , see we chase they continual from their fort : and sudden 3 or 4 of we go towards they well cover with target , unto the foot of their fort where they be assemble , and the rest of our company follow we : the Indians begin to make head against we , and to fling many stone upon we , and shoot many arrow , and we with our sword in our hand rush upon they in such sort , that they see how furious we set upon they , abandon the fort , and run down the hill as swift as deer , and flee unto another hill over against we , where the other squadron of the indian stand , of who they be rescue , and they begin to talk among themselves , but in a low voice , and join together 6 and 6 and 8 8c 8 in a company , and make a fire and warm themselves , and we stand quiet behold what they do . 239 [ Chap . 9 after the skirmish the captain be wound , and the rest of the soldier see the indian depart , return unto their ship . the next day take in fresh water at the say place he send mariner to sound the mouth of the lake . depart thence they come to the port call Baya de Sant Abad , and endure a dangerous storm at sea . and afterward come near the shore to take fresh water in the say haven , they see certain peaceable Indians . by this time it be late and the night approach , and the Indians see this , within a short while after determine to get they pack , and each of they or the great part take firebrand in their hand , and get they away into craggy place . when the captain see this he command we to return aboard our boat , it be now dark night , thank we all for the good service we have do he . And be not able to stand upon his leg , he lean with his arm upon Francis Preciado ; and thus we return to our boat , where with much ado we get aboard , by reason of the great tide and roughness of the sea , so that our boat be fill with every wave . thus very weary , wet , and some wound ( as be aforesaid ) each man return unto his ship , where our bed which we find , and our refresh , and the cheer we have at supper do not great comfort we in regard of our former travel . we pass that night in this sort , and the next day be Tuesday the captain find himself great pain with his wound , and chief with that on his leg , because it be great swell with his go upon it . we lack 12 butt to fill with water , and the barrel in both the ship , and the captain will have go out to cause they to be fill , but we will not suffer he , and therefore we leave off the business for that day . but he appoint that the crossbow shall be make ready , and two speciali good 240 harquebuss , and the next day be Wednesday very early , he command Juan Castilio chief pilot to go out with both the boat and with all the soldier and mariner that he can make , have the day before command the Trinity to go as near the shore as she may , and to make ready some of her ordinance , that if the Indians shall show themselves , they may affright they , and do they as much hurt as they can . wherefore on the Wednesday all we that be soldier , save the wound person , go on shore with certain mariner in the best order that we can , and take the first hill , where we have fortify our self , stand all upon our guard until the water be fill , and until we be call , during which time not one indian show himself . thus we go aboard when we think good our self , at least without any suspicion of the Indians , although the tide of the sea go so high y ‘ it put we to great trouble , for oftentimes with great wave it beat into our boat . this be on the Wednesday the 3 of December . and to avoid loss of time the captain command Juan Castilio the chief pilot to take a boat and certain mariner as he shall think good , and to view the mouth of the lake to see whether the entrance be deep enough for to harbour the ship . he take the boat of the admiral with 8 mariner , and we of the Trinity , go and sound the mouth , and on the shallow place of the bar without they find 3 fathom a special good depth , and far in 4 , and up high 5 , always increase unto 10 or 12 fathom , when they be come into the two point of the say lake , which be a league broad from one point to the other , and all their sound be exceed good ground . than they go over to the southeast point , and there they see a great boat or raft which they endeavour to