this place we see the country full of fresh and green grass , howbeit differ from that of new Spain , and up within the country we see many great and very green mountain . this country seem very goodly and delightsome to all of we , in regard of the greenness and beauty thereof , and we judge it to be very populous within the land . from this haven we depart and keep our way towards the northwest with good weather , and begin to find hard by the seashore exceed high mountain spot with white , and in they we see many fowl which have their nest in certain hole of those rock , and sail io . league until night , all which night we be becalm . the next day we follow our course northwest with good weather : and from that day forward we begin to see on the western shore ( whereon the foresay haven of saint Cruz stand ) certain island or high land , whereat we rejoice not a little . and so sail a island . forward we meet with a island about two league in bigness , and on the east shore have still the main land and island in sight , we sail 15 . league until the evening , always find hard by the sea - coast exceed high mountain bare of tree , the land appear still more plain unto we on the western shore . where - some take they upon we begin to be of diverse opinion , some think lfomiaafe ' that coast of Santa Cruz be a firm land , and nothing but that join with the continent of Nueva Espanna , island . other think the contrary , and that they be nothing else but island , which be to the westward . and in this sort we proceed forward , have the land on both side of we , so far , that we all begin to wonder at it . this day we sail some 15 . league , and call this cape Capo de las plaias . Capo roxo . the coast run it northward . fishingweare like those of Virginia . of the strait which they discover on the coast of Capo de las plaias , and of the pleasant country which they find before they come to the rock call los diamantes . of the wonderful whiteness of that sea , and of the ebb and flow thereof : and of the multitude of island and land , which extend themselves northward from the haven of Santa Cruz . the day follow we sail until night with so good weather , that we run about 20 . league . all this coast along the shore be full of little hill without grass or tree : and that night our ancker in 20 . fathom water . the next day we follow our voyage beginning to sail before break of day northwestward , and we come into the midst of a strait or mouth which be straight of 12 league broad from one land to the other , which straight have two hand in the midst thereof be 4 . cede depth league distant the one from the other : and here we discern the country to be plain , and certain mountain , 8c it seem that a certain gut of water like a brook run through the plain . This straight ( as far as we can perceive ) be very deep , for we can find no bottom : and here we see the land stretch afar off from the one shore to the other , and on the western shore of the haven of saint Cruz , the land be more high with very bare mountain . the day follow we pass on our way towards the north , and sail some the strait 15 . league , and in the midst of our way we find a ^ re rume circuit or bay of 6 . league into the land with many northward . coove or creek , and the next day follow continue our course we sail some 10 . league , and the coast in this day journey be all of high mountain naked and bare without any tree . it be very deep hard by the shore , and that night we be constrain to stay by reason of the contrary wind . the next morning before break of day we sail still along the coast to the northwest until evening , and run about some 15 . league . all along this shore we see very goodly mountain within the land , and many plain and down with some few tree , and the sea shore be all sandy . in the midst of this day course we find certain small rock in the sea 4 . league distant from the main , be the say land make a great point into the sea , and here we stay the rest of the night , where we have a very great shower of rain . the day follow we proceed on our voyage , and sail until night by a compass or turn , some 8 . or 9 league , and see within land a few mountain have no tree upon they , but the sun shine always very clear , as far as we can descry , they be very great , on the western shore of the haven of Santa Cruz . here we stay all night because we find very shallow water and see the sea very white , and in a manner like to chalk , so that we all begin to marveile thereat . the day follow we go forward again along the coast northwestward , and sail eight league , and see another land which stretch northwest , and be full of high mountain . and still continue this course we search very diligent to see if there be any passage through between both the land , for right forward we see no land . and thus sail we always find more shallow water , and the sea thick , black , and very muddy , and come at length into five fathom water ; and see this , we determine to pass over to the land which we have see on the other side , and here likewise we find as little depth and less , whereupon we ride all night in five fathom water , and we perceive the sea to run with so great a