. three day after this city be take , certain Indians of these people come to offer i peace , and bring i certain turquese and bid mantle , and i re - turqueses . ceive they in his majesty name with all the good mant ^ es - speaches that i can devise , certify they of the purpose of my come into this country , which be in the name of his majesty , and by the commandment of your lordship , that they and all the rest of the people of this province shall become Christians , and shall know the true God for their lord , and receive his majesty for their king , and earthly sovereign : and herewithal they return to their house , and sudden Indians the next day they set in order all their good and sub - A * / 1 ’ stance , their woman and child , and flee to the hill , w - tves child leave their town as it be abandon , wherein re - and good . maim very few of they . when i see this , within eight or ten day after be recover of my wound , i go to the city , which i say to be great than a city great this where i be , and find there some few of they , ^ Granada . to who i say that they shall not be afraid , and that they shall call their governor unto i : howbeit , forasmuch as i can learn or gather , none of they have any governor : for i see not there any chief house , whereby any preeminence of one over another may be gather . after this a old man come , which say that he be their lord , with a piece of a mantle make of many piece , with who i reason that small while that he stay with i , and he say that within three day after , he and the rest of the chief of that town will come and visit i , and give order what course shall 159 be take with they . which they do : for they bring i certain mantle and some turquese . i advise they to come down from their hold , and to return with their wife and child to their house , and to become Christians , and that they will acknowledge the emperor majesty for their king and lord . and even to this present they keep in those strong hold their woman and child , and all the good which they have . two table i command they that they shall paint i out a paint by the of aq e beast which they know in their country : beasts0 ” 6 and such bid painter as they be , forthwith they another of paint i two clothes , one of their beast , another bird and of their bird and fish . they say that they will bring fish . their child , that our religious man may instruct they , and that they desire to know our law : and they assure ^^ thatlhcM we ’ a ^ ove year past be prophesy among part shall be they , that a certain people like we shall come , and subdue by from that part that we come from , and that they shall christian . subdue all that country . they worship that which these Indians worship as far as hitherto the water . we can } earnej be the water : for they say it cause their corn to grow , and maintain their life ; and that they know none other reason , but that their ancestor do so . i have seek by all mean possible to learn of the inhabitant of these town , whether they have any knowledge of other people , country and city : and seven city they tell i of seven city which be far distant from ^ Granada p ^ ace ’ i be bke unto these , though they have it not house like unto these , but they be of earth , and small : and that among they much cotton be gather . the chief of these town whereof they have knowledge , Tucana . they say be call Tucano : and they give i no perfect knowledge of the rest . and i think they do not tell i the truth , imagine that of necessity i must speedy depart from they , and return home . but herein they shall soon find themselves deceive . i send don Pedro de Tovar with his company of footman and with certain other horseman to see this town : and i will not 160 have dispatch this packet unto your lordship , until i have know what this town be , if i have think that within twelve or fifteen day i may have have news from he : for he will stay in this journey thirty day at least . and have examine that the knowledge hereof be of small importance , and that the cold and the water approach : i think it my duty to do according as your lordship give i charge in your instruction , which be , that immediate upon my arrival here , i shall signify so much unto your lordship , and so i do , send withal the bare relation of that which i have see . i have determine to send round about the country from hence to have knowledge of all thing , and rather to suffer all extremity , than to leave this enterprise to serve his majesty , if i may find any thing wherein i may perform it , and not to omit any diligence therein , until your lordship send i order what i shall do . we have great want of pasture : and your lordship also shall understand , that among all those which be here , there be not one pound of raisin , nor sugar , nor oil , nor any the Spaniard wine , save only one pint which be save to say mass : willing ™ for all be spend and spill by the way . now your lordship ’ may provide we what you think needful . and if your honour mean to send we cattle , your lordship must understand that they will be a summer in come unto we : for they will not be able to come unto we any soon . i will have send your lordship with this dispatch many muster of thing which be in this country : but the way be so long and rough , that it be