observe , in not take any thing from they , although in very deed there be little or nothing there , because the woman and Indians which be flee have carry all away . here we find a old man in a cave so extreme age as it be wonderful , which can neither see nor go , because he be so lame and crooked . the father friar Raimund say , it be good ( see he be so age ) to make he a Christian ; whereupon we christen he . the captain 265 give the Indians which we have take two pair of earring , and certain counterfeit diamond , and make much of they , suffy they to depart at their pleasure , and in this sort fair and soft they return to the rest of their fellow in the mountain . we take the matter of that village which be but a small quantity , and then the general command we to return to our ship , because we have eat nothing as yet , and after our repast we sail towards a bay which lie beyond that village , where we see a very great valley , and those of the Trinity say , that they have see there good store of water , and sufficient for we ; wherefore we anchor near unto that valley . and the general go on shore with both the boat , and the man that go on land in the morning with the two father friar Raimund , and friar Antony : and pass up that valley a crossebow - shot , we find a very small brook of water which nevertheless supply our necessity for we fill two butt thereof that evening , leave our vessel to take it with on shore until the next morning : and we rejoice not a little that we have find this water , for it be fresh , and the water which we have take up before be somewhat brackish , and do we great hurt both in our body and in our taste . Chap . 14 . they take possession of the isle of cedar for the emperors majesty , and depart from thence they be great toss with a tempest of the sea , and return to the island , as to a safe harbour . the next day be the two and twenty of January very early the general command we to go on shore , and that we shall have our dinner bring we , and shall take in the rest of our water , which we do , and fill 17 butt without see any indian at all the next day go out to fill 8 or 9 vessel which be not yet fill , a great wind at northwest take we , whereupon they make sign to we from the ship , that with all haste we shall come on board again , for the wind grow 266 .... I54 °‘ still high , and high , and the master be afraid that our cable will break , thus we be in the open sea . therefore be come aboard again not without great trouble , we return back over against the village of the Indians , * where we have slay the indian , and be - Cap . 12 . cause the wind grow more calm about midnight , the pilot do not cast anchor , but hull under the shelter of this island , which ( as i have say ) be call the isle of isladehsge - cedar , and be one of the 3 isle of S . Stephan , the great and chief of they , where the general take possession . while we hull here , about midnight , the Stephan . next Friday be the 23 of the month , without our expectation we have a fresh gale of wind from the southeast , which be very favourable for our voyage , and the long it continue , the more it increase : so that between that night and the next day be Saturday the 24 of the say month we sail 18 great league . while read cap . 11 . we be thus on our way , the wind grow so contrary a ^ out the end - and so tempestuous , that to our great grief we be constrain to coast about with our ship , and return twenty league back again , take for our succour the second time , the point of the lodging of the Indians , where the foresay Indian be slay , and here we stay Monday , Tewsday , and Wednesday , during which time the northwest and the north wind blow continual , whereupon we determine not to stir from thence until we see good weather , and well settle for our voyage : for in this climate these wind do reign so great , that we fear they will stay we long there than we will ; and we be so weary of stay , that every day seem a month unto we . under this shelter we ride Thursday , Friday , and Saturday until noon , which be the last of January in the year 1540 about noon the wind begin to blow soft at Southwest , whereupon the general tell the pilot , that we shall do well to put over to the main land , where with some wind off the shore we may by the grace of God sail somewhat far . thus we hoist our sail , February . 267 and sail until evening three or four league , for the wind scant , and we remain becalm . the night be come there arise a contrary wind , and we be enforce of necessity to retire the three time to the same shelter of the isle of cedar , where we stay from the first of February until Shrovesunday , in the which mean time we take in two butt of water which we have spend . during the space of these eight day we seek to make sail two or three time , but as we go out a little beyond the point of this isle , we find the wind so boisterous and contrary , and the sea so grow , that of force we be constrain to return under the succour of the island , and often time we be in great fear that we shall not be able to get in thither again . during this time that