riches and great abundance of gold about that lake . great abun - the captain repose great confidence in this people 8c in their good disposition towards he determine after certain day , to leave there five of his companion with the rest of his indian friend , that they may return with his carriage to the province of Zuni , while himself with the four other which remain shall ride in post to discover certain very rich mine , whereof he have perfect information . And put this his purpose in execution he depart with his guide , and have travel due - west 45 . league he come unto the say mine , and take out of the same with his Exceedingrich own hand exceed rich metal hold great quantity mine of of silver : arid the mine which be of a very broad ' vein be in a mountain whereon they may easy ascend , by reason of a open way that lead up to the same . near unto these mine be certain town of Indians dwell upon the mountain , who show they friendship and come forth to receive they with cross on their head , and other token of peace . hereabout they find two river of a reasonable bigness , 201 upon the bank whereof grow many vine bear excellent grape , and great grove of walnuttree , and much a mighty flax like that of Castille : and they show our man by river ° f eight sjgne ) that behind those mountain there be a river run - about 8 . league broad , but they can not learn how ward the near it be : howbeit the indian make demonstration ' north sea . that it run towards the north sea , and that upon both ^ river snowfall s ^ es thereof stand many town of so great bigness , that into ^ theChese - c ° mparison thereof those wherein they dwell be but piouk bay , or small hamlet . into the great after he have receive all this information , the say itaeoftadoac . captain return towards the province of Zuni , whither ' he have send his say companion : and be arrive there in safety , have travail upon a very good way , he find in the same place his 5 . companion , and the say father Frier Bernardin Beltran , with the soldier which be determine to return , as be aforesaid , but upon certain occasion be not as yet depart : who the inhabitant have most friendly entreat , and furnish with all thing necessary in abundance , as afterward likewise they use the captain , and those that come with he , come forth to meet they with show of great joy , and give they great store of victual to serve they in their journey homeward , and request they to return again with speed , and to bring many castilian with they ( for so they call the Spaniard ) to who they promise food sufficient . for the better performance whereof they sow that year more grain and other fruit , than they have do at any time before . at this present the friar and soldier aforesaid resolve themselves in their former determination , and agree to return unto the province from whence they come with intention before mention , to seek the two friar that be slay , to who also Gregorio Hernandez who have be standard - bearer in the journey , join himself . who be depart , the captain accompany only with 8 . soldier , determine to prosecute his former attempt , and to pass up high than say river 202 call Rio deal norte , which he do accord . and have travel about 60 . league towards the province 60 . league . of the quire aforesaid , 12 league from thence towards the orient or east they find a province of Indians call Hubates , who receive they peaceable , and give Hubates . they great store of victual , inform they also of very rich mine which they find , whereout they get very rich glister and good metal , and therewith return to the mine . town from whence they come . this province contain by their estimation 25000 . person all very well apparel in colour mantle of cotton , and chamois - skin very well dress . they have many mountain full of pine and cedar , and the house of their town be house of 4 . of 4 . and 5 . story high . here they have notice of five story another province distant about one day journey from it thence inhabit by certain Indians call Tamos , and Tamos . contain above 40000 . soul : whither be come the inhabitant will neither give they any victual , nor admit they into their town : for which cause , and in regard of the danger wherein they be , and because some of the soldier be not well at ease , and for that they be so few ( as we have say ) they determine theirretume . to depart thence , and to return towards the land of the christian , which they put in execution in the begin of July 1583 , be guide by a indian that go with they , who lead they another way than they go forth by , down a river , which they call Rio de las vacas ; that the las be to say , the river of ox , in respect of the great multitude of ox or cow that feed upon the bank thereof , by the which they travel for the space of 120 . league , still meet with store of the say cattle . 120 . league . from hence they go forward to the river of Conchos by which they enter , and thence to the valley of saint Bartholomew , from whence they first enter into their discovery . upon their come thither they find that the say friar Bernardin Beltran and his company be safe arrive at the say town many day before , and be go from thence to the town of Guadiana . in Guadiana . 203 this town the foresay captain Antony de Espejo make most certain relation of all that be aforesaid , which relation present he send unto the conde of Corunna Vizroy of Nueva Espanna , who send the same to his majesty , and to the lord of his royal counsel of the Indies , to the end they may take such order as they think best , which they have already perform with great care and circumspection . almighty God vouchsafe his assistance in this business , that such number of soul redeem by his blood may not utter perish , of who good capacity , wherein they exceed those of Mexico and Peru ( as we be give to understand by those that have deal with they ) we may bold presume that they will easy embrace the gospel , and abandon such idolatry as now the most of they do live in : which almighty God grant for his honour and glory , and for the increase of the holy catholique faith .