kill he , that he may not give news unto cause these his brethren , where they dwell , and - that for this w ^ refire ^ te - cause they slay he , and cut he into many piece , the negro be which be divide among all those chief lord , that slalne . they may know assure that he be dead ; and also that he have a dog like i , which he likewise kill a great while after . i ask he whether they of Cevola have any enemy , and he say they have . and he reckon they off unto i 14 . or 15 . lord which have war with they : c ^^ have and that they have mantle , and bow like those above d ^ their mention : howbeit he tell i that i shall find go enemy . up the river a people that have no war neither with their neighbour , nor with any other . he tell i that they have 3 . or 4 . sort of tree bear most excellent fruit to eat : and that in a certain lake dwell a old anoldewoman woman , which be much honour and worship of call guatu - them : and that she remain in a little house which or - e be there , and that she never do eat any thing : and ship . that there they make thing which do sound , and that many mantle , feather and Maiz be give unto she . Antonio d ^ es - i ask what her name be , and he tell i that she be call Guatuzaca , and that thereabouts be many 1 ^ lord which in their life and death , use the like order which they of Cevola do , which have their dwelling in the summer with paint mantle , and in the winter dwell in house of wood of 2 . or 3 . loft high : and that he have see all these thing , save the old woman . ix 305 u this may be the crook back ox of Quivira . the sea side . and when again i begin to ask he more question , he will not answer i , say that he be weary of i : and many of those Indians come about i , they say among themselves : let we mark he well , that we may know he when he come back again . the Monday follow , the river be beset with people like to they , and i begin to request the old man to tell i what people be in that country , which tell i he think i will soon forget they : and here he reckon up unto i a great number of lord , and people at the least 200 . And discourse with he of their armour , he say that some of they have certain very large target of leather , above two finger thick . i ask he of what beast skin they make they : and he describe unto i a very great beast , like unto a ox , but long by a great handful , with broad foot , the leg as big as the thigh of a man , and the head seven handful long , the forehead of three span , and the eye big than one fist , and the home of the length of a man leg , out of which grow sharp point , a handful long , the forfeit and hinderfeete above seven handful big , with a wreathe tail , but very great ; and hold up his arm above his head , he say the beast be high than that . after this he give i information of another old woman which dwell towards the sea side . i spend this day in give cross to those people as i have do unto the former . this old man that be with i leap on shore , 8c fall in conference with another which that day have often call he ; and here both of they use many gesture in their speech , move their arm , and point at i . therefore i send my interpreter out , will he to draw near unto they , and listen what they say ; and within a while i call he , and ask he whereof they talk , and he say , that he which make those gesture say unto the other , that in Cevola there be other like unto we with beard , and that they say they be Christians , and that both of they say that we be all of one company , 306 and that it be a good deed to kill we , that those other may have no knowledge of we , lest they may come to do they harm : and that the old man have answer he , this be the son of the sun , and our lord , he do we good , and will not enter into our house , although we request he thereunto : he will take away nothing of we , he will meddle with none of our woman , and that to be short , he have speak many other thing in my commendation and favour : and for all this the other steadfast affirm that we be all one , and that the old man say , let we go unto he , and ask he whether he be a christian as the other 1540 the savage treason to be take heed of . be , or else the son of the sun : and the old man come unto i , and say : in the country of Cevola whereof you speak unto i doe other man like unto you dwell . than i begin to make as though i wonder , and answer he , that it be impossible ; and they assure i that it be true , and that two man have see they which come from thence , which report that they have thing which do shoot fire , and sword as we have . i ask they whether they have see they with their own eye ? and they answer no ; but that certain of their companion have see they . than he ask i whether i be the son of the sun , i answer he yea . they say that those Christians of Cevola say so likewise . and i answer they that it may well be . than they ask