will have give he a silken girdle of diverse colour , and he in a great rage bite his nether lip cruel , and give i a thump with his elbow on the breast , and turn in a great fury to speak unto his company . after that i see they advance their banner , i determine to return my self gentle to my boat , and with a small gale of wind i set sail , whereby we may break the current which be very great , although my company be not well please to go any far . in the mean space the indian come follow we along the shore of the river , make sign that i shall come on land , and that they will give i food to eat , some of they suck their finger , and other enter into the water with certain cake of Maiz , to give i they in my boat . Chap . 2 . of the habit , armour and stature of the Indians . a relation of many other with who he have by sign traffic , victual and many courtesy . in this sort we go up two league , and i arrive near a clifle of a hill , whereupon be a arbour make new , where they make sign unto i , cry 284 that i shall go thither , show i the same with their hand , and tell i that there be meat to eat . but i will not go thither , see the place be good forecast . apt for some ambush , but follow on my voyage , within a while after issue out from thence above a thousand arm man with their bow and arrow , and after that many woman and child show themselves , towards who i will not go , but because the sun be almost set , i ride in the midst of the river . Theise Indians come deck after sundry fashion , some come with a paint that cover their face all over , some have their face half cover , but all besmouch with Indians be - cole , and every one as it like he best . other carry visard before they of the same colour which have the ' shape of face . they wear on their head a piece of a dear skin two span broad set after the manner of a helmet , and upon it certain small stick with some sort of feather . their weapon be bow and arrow of hard wood , and two or three sort of mace of wood harden in the fire . this be a mighty people , well feitured , and without any grossness . they have hole bore in their nostril whereat certain pendent hang : and other wear shell , and their ear be full of hole , whereon they hang bone and shell . all of they both great and small wear a girdle about their waste make of diverse colour , and in the middle be fasten a round bunch of feather , which hang down behind like a tail . likewise on the brawn of their arm they wear a strait string , which they wind so often about that it become as broad as one hand . they be certain piece of dear bone fasten to their arm , wherewith they strike off the sweat , and at the other certain small pipe of cane . they carry pipe and also certain little long bag about a hand broad tie to their left arm , which serve they also in stead of dam continue ' braser for their bow , full of the powder of a certain herb , whereof they make a certain beverage . they have their body trace with coal , their hair cut before , 285 and behind it hang down to their waste . the woman go naked , and wear a great wreath of feather behind they , and before paint and glue together , and their hair like the man . there be among these Indians three or four man in woman apparel . now the next day be Saturday very early i go forward on my way up the river , set on shore two man for each boat to draw they with the rope , and about break forth of the sun , we hear a mighty cry of Indians on both side of the river with their weapon , but without any banner . i think good to attend their coming , aswell to see what they will have , as also to try whether our interpreter can understand they . when they come over against we they leap into the river on both side with their bow and arrow , and when they speak , our interpreter understand they not : whereupon i begin to make a sign unto they that they shall lay away their weapon , as the other have do . some do as i will they , and some do not , and those which do , i will to come near i and give they some thing which we have to truck withal , which when the other perceive , that they may likewise have their part , they lay away their weapon likewise . i judge my self to be in security leap on shore with they , and stand in the midst of they , who understand that i come not to fight with they , Skels and begin to give some of those shell and bead , and some bead . bring i certain skin well dress , and other maiz and a roll of the same naughty grind , so that none of they come unto i that bring i not some - thing , and before they give it i go a little way from i they begin to cry out amain , and make a sign with their body and arm , and afterward they approach to give i that which they bring . and now that the sun begin to set i put off from the shore , and ride in the midst of the river . the next morning before break of day on both side of the river we hear great cry and of more Indians , which 286 leap into the river to swim , and they come to bring i certain gourd full of Maiz , and of those wreathe which i speak of before . i show unto they wheat and bean , and other seed , to see whether they have any of