the relation of Francis Vazquez de Coronado , captain generail of the people which be send in the name of the emperor majesty to the country of Cibola new discover , which he send to don Antonio de Mendo9a viceroy of Mexico , of such thing as happen in his voyage from the 22 . of April in the year 1540 which depart from culiacan forward , and of such thing as he find in the country which he pass . Chap . 1 . Francis Vazquez depart with his army from culiacan , and after diverse trouble in his voyage , arrive at the valley of the people call los Caracones , which he find barren of Maiz : for obtain whereof he send to the valley call the valley of the lord : he be inform of the greatness of the valley of the people call Caracones , and of the nature of those people , and of certain island lie along that coast . he 22 . of the month of April last pass i depart from the province of culiacan with part of the army , and in such order as 1 mention unto your lordship , and accord to the success i assure my self , by all likelihood that i shall not bring all my army together in this enterprise : because the trouble have be so great and the want of victual , that i think all this year will not be sufficient to perform this enterprise , and if it shall be perform in so short a time , it will be to the great loss of our people . for as i write unto your lordship , i be fourscore day in travail to culiacan , in all which time i and those gentleman my companion which be horseman , carry on our back , ix 145 king this be but 200 . league from Mexico . and on our horse , a little victuali , so that from henceforward we carry none other needful apparel with we , that be above a pound weight : and all this notwithstanding , and though we put our self to such a small proportion of victual which we carry , for all the order that possible we can take , we be drive to our shift . and no marvel , because the way be rough and long : and with the carriage of our harquebuss down the mountain and hill , and in the passage of river , the great part of our corn be spoil . and because i send your lordship our voyage draw ' in a map , i will speak no more thereof in this my letter . thirty league before we arrive at the place which the father provinciali tell we so well of in his relation , i send Melchior Diaz before with fifteen horse , give he order to make but one day journey of two , because he may examine all thing , against my arrival : who travail four day journey through exceed rough mountain where he find neither victual , nor people , nor information of any thing , save that he find two or three poor little village , contain 20 . or 30 . cottage a piece , and by the inhabitant thereof he understand that from thence forward there be nothing but exceed rough mountain which run very far , utter disinhabit and void of people . and because it be labour lose , i will not write unto your lordship thereof . it grieve the whole company , that a thing so high commend , and whereof the father have make so great brag , shall be find so contrary , and it make they suspect that all the rest will fall out in like sort . which when i perceive i seek to encourage they the best i can , tell they that your lordship always be of opinion , that this voyage be a thing cast away , and that we shall fix our cogitation upon those seven city , and other province , whereof we have knowledge : that there shall be the end of our enterprise : and 146 ... i540 , with this resolution and purpose we all march cheerfully through a very bid way which be not passable but one by one , or else we must force out with pioner the path which we find , wherewith the soldier be not a little offend , find all that the friar have say to be quite contrary : for among other thing which the father say and affirm , this be one , that the way be plain and good , and that there be but one small hill of half a league in length . and yet in truth there be mountain which although the way be well mend can not be pass without great danger of break the horse neck : and the way be such , that of the cattle which your lordship send we for the provision of our army we lose a great part in the voyage through the roughness of the rock . the lamb and sheep lose their hoof in the way : and of those which i bring from culiacan , i leave the great part at the river of Lachimi , because they can not the river of keep company with we , and because they may come lachimi . soft after we , four man on horseback remain with they which be now come unto we , and have bring we not past four and twenty lamb , and four sheep , for all the rest be dead with travail through that rough passage , although they travail but two league a day , and rest themselves every day . at length i arrive at the valley of the people call the valley of Caracones , the 26 . day of the month of May : and from culiacan until i come thither , i can not help my ara ~ self , save only with a great quantity of bread of Maiz : for see the Maiz in the field be not yet ripe , i be constrain to leave they all behind i . in this valley of the Caracones we find more store of people then in any other part of the country which we have pass , and great store of tillage . but i understand that there be store thereof in another valley call the talk deal lord valley , which i will not disturb with force , sennor - but send thither Melchior Diaz with ware of exchange to procure some , and to give the say Maiz to the 147 indian our friend