that plain , and that they carry certain round green stone hang at their nostril , and at their ear , 127 Vacupa a town 40 . league from the bay of California . and that they have certain thin plate of that gold , wherewith they scrape off their sweat , and that the wall of their temple be cover therewith , and that they use it in all their household vessel . and because this valley be distant from the sea - coast , and my instruction be not to leave the coast , i determine to leave the discovery thereof until my return ; at which time i may do it more commodious . thus i travel three day journey through town inhabit by the say people , of who i be receive as i be of those which i have pass , and come unto a town of reasonable bigness , call Vacupa , where they show i great courtesy , and give i great store of good victual , because the soil be very fruitful , and may be water . this town be forty league distant from the sea and because i be so far from the sea , it be two day before passion Sunday , i determine to stay there until easter , to inform my self of the island , whereof i say before that i have information . and so i send certain Indians to the sea by three several way , who i command to bring i some Indians of the seacoast and of some of those island , that i may receive information of they : and i send Stephan Dorantez the negro another way , who i command to go direct northward fifty or threescore league , to see if by that way he may learn any news of any notable thing which we seek to discover , and i agree with he , that if he find any knowledge of any people and rich country which be of great importance , that he shall go no further , but shall return in person , or shall send i certain Indians with that token which we be agree upon , to wit , that if it be but a mean thing , he shall send i a white cross of one handful long ; and if it be any great matter , one of two handful long ; and if it be a country great and better than Nueva Espanna , he shall send i a great cross . So the 12 say Stephan depart from i on Passion - sunday after dinner : and within four day after the messenger of Stephan return unto i with a great cross as high as a man , and they bring i word from Stephan , that i shall forthwith come away after he , for he have find people which give he information of a very mighty province , and that he have certain Indians in his company , which have be in the say province , and that he have send i one of the say Indians . this indian tell i , that it be thirty day fr ° m Vacupa journey from the town where Stephan be , unto the ayes ^ 6 first city of the say province , which be call Cevola . jOumey . he affirm also that there be seven great city in this province , all under one lord , the house whereof be make of lime and stone , and be very great , and the least of they with one loft above head , and some of two and of three loft , and the house of the lord of the province of four , and that all of they join one unto the other in good order , and that in the gate of the principali house there be many turques - stone cunning wrought , whereof he say they have there great plenty : also that the people of this city go very well apparel : and that beyond this there be other province , all which ( he say ) be much great than these seven city . i give credit to his speech , because i find he to be a man of good understanding : but i defer my departure to follow Stephan Dorantes , both because i think he will stay for i , and also to attend the return of my messenger which i have send unto the sea , who return unto i upon easter day , bring with they certain inhabitant of the sea - coast , and of two of the island . of who i understand , that the island above mention be scarce of victual , as i have learn before , and that they be inhabit by people , which be greatpearles shell of pearl upon their forehead , and they say that tmd much gold they have great pearl , and much gold . they in - isk ° f form i of four and thirty island , lie one near ichare ’^ unto another : they say that the people on the sea - coast in number . ix 129 1 have small store of victual , as also those of the island , and that they traffic one with the other upon raft . this coast stretch northward as be to be see . Theise Indians of the coast bring i certain target make of cow - hydes very well dress , which be so large , that they cover they from the head to the very foot , with a hole in the top of the same to look out before : they be so strong , that a crossbow ( as i suppose ) will not pierce they . Chap . 2 . he have new information of the seven city by certain Indians call pintado , and of three other kingdom call Marata , Acus , and Totonteac , be country very rich in turquese and hide of cattle . follow his voyage through those country , he take possession thereof for the emperor majesty , and of the Indians be much honour and serve with victual . the same day come three Indians of those which i call pintado , because i see their face , breast and arm paint . Theise dwell far up into the country towards the east , and some of they border upon the seven city , which say they come to see i , because they have hear of i : and among other thing , they give i information of the seven city , and of the other province , which the indian that Stephan send i have tell i of , almost in the very same manner that Stephan have send i word ; and so i