rage into the land , that it be a thing much to be marveil at , and with the like fury it return back again with the ebb ; during which time we find 11 . fathom water , and the flood and ebb continue from six to six hour . the day follow the captain and pilot go up to the ship top , and see all the land full of sand in a great round compass , and join it self with the other shore , and it be so low , that whereas we be a league from the same we can not well discern it , and it seem that there be a inlet of the mouth of certain lake , whereby the sea go in and out . there be diverse opinion among we , and some thought that that current enter into those lake , and also that some great river there may be the cause thereof . and when we can perceive no passage through , nor can discern the country to be inhabit , the captain accompany with certain of we go to take possession thereof . the same day with the ebb of the sea we fall down from the other coast from the side of Nueva Espanna , though always we have in sight the firm land on the one side of we , and the other island on our left hand , on the side of the port of Santa Cruz situate on the western shore : for on that side there be so many island and land , so far as we can descry , that it be great to be wonder at : for from the say haven of Santa Cruz , and from the coast of culiacan we have always in a manner land on both side of we , and that so great a country , that i suppose if it shall so continue further inward , there be country enough for many year to conquer . this day we have the wind contrary , and cast anchor until the flood increase , which be in the afternoon , and then we set sail likewise with contrary wind until midnight , and then cast anchor . the next day we depart , shape our course along the coast Southwest , until midnight with little wind , and we see within the land high mountain with some opening , and we make way some three league , and all the next night we be becalm , and the next day we continue our course but a little while , for we sail not above five league , and all the night be becalm , and see the land full of bare and high mountain , and on our left hand we descry a plain country , and see in the night certain fire . chap 4 . they land upon a island to discover the same , and there they see many fire , which issue out of certain mountain , and many seal - fish . here they take a indian , and can not understand his language . run along they discover another island , and take possession thereof for the emperor majesty , and a great haven in the firm land , which they call Ancon de Sant Andres , or the haven of saint Andrew . the next day follow our course we see a great haven with a hand in the sea , within a crossbow shoot of the firm land , and in this island and on the firm land be see many smoke by the judgement of all the company ; wherefore the captain think good that we shall go on land to know the certainty of these smoke and fire , himself take ten or twelve of we with a boat in his company : and go on shore in the island , we find that the smoke proceed out of burn certain mountain and breach of burn earth , where - mountaine . out ascend into the air certain cinder and ash which mount up to the middle region of the air , in such great quantity , that we can not esteem less than twenty load of wood to be burn for the cause of every of those smoke , whereat we be all not a little amaze . in this island be such abundance of seal , as it be wonderful . here we stay that day , and kill a great number of these seal , with who we have some trouble : for they be so many , and aid one another so well , that it be strange to behold ; for it fall out , that while we be occupy in kill some of they with staff , they assemble twenty or thirty together , and lift abundance of themselves up assail we with their foot in a squadron , seal . and overthrow two or three of our company on the ground : whereupon let go those which they have in their hand , they and the other escape we and go into the sea , howbeit we kill good store of they , which be so fat as it be wonderful : and when we open some of they to have their liver , we find certain small b ' lacke stone in their body , whereat we much marveil . the next day we ride at anchor here for lack of good weather to sail withal : whereupon the captain determine to go on shore with nine or ten in his company , to see whether there be any people there , or any sign of people that have be there , and they find on the main land seven or eight Indians like to Chichimecas , which be go a fish , and have a raft rafi ° f of cane ; who so soon as they espy we run away and betake themselves to flight , but be pursue by we , in the end we take one of they , who language be so strange that we can by no mean understand he ; his clothing be nothing at all , for he be stark naked . Theise people carry their water in bottle make of beast skin , they fish with hook of bone , and we find good store of their fish , whereof we take three or four dozen . the indian which we have take see himself in our hand do nothing but weep , but the captain