thorough to discover what those lake be , and to search whether there be any good haven for his ship to ride in , or to harbour themselves , if any tempest shall arise ; and so he command a boat to be hoist out into the sea , with a master and five or six man to view they , and to sound the depth , and bottom of they : who go thither , and find the coast very shall , and the mouth of the lake ; whereupon they make no account of they , only because the shore be so shallow , for otherwise the land be very pleasant . here at evening we see on the shore 10 . or 12 . Indians and fire . the aforesaid two river be two league distant the one from the other little more or less , and be great , as i have say , and be in the last of they we go up to the ship - top , and see many lake , and one among the rest exceed great , and we suppose that they have their spring out of this great lake , as other river also have from other lake , for we see the course of they several each by themselves , have goodly wood grow all along their bank . the current of these river may be discern three league within the sea : and at the mouth of they be many small stake set up for mark : the shore here be plain and sandy , and the country very pleasant . Chap . 2 . sail along the coast from the two aforesaid great river , they discover three mouth of lake and a goodly country , they come unto Cabo Roxo , and take possession of those country for the emperor majesty . a discourse of the fair haven that be on those coast , and of very many island which they see , before they come to the cape call Capo de las plaias . this day we sail along the coast the space of 16 . league , and in the midst of this voyage there be a bay very fair of 4 . or 5 . league , have certain bank or fence in it , in behold whereof we take great pleasure . the night follow we ride in 20 . radome water . the next day we follow our voyage towards the north , and have sail 3 . or 4 . league we see 3 . mouth of lake which enter into the land , where they become like stand pool . we ride a league distance from these mouth in 6 . fathom water , to see what they be , and send our boat with certain man , to see if there be any entry for our ship : for half a league from shore we have not pass one or two fathom water . here our man see 7 . or 8 . Indians , and find sundry sort of green herb somewhat differ from those of Nueva Espanna . the country be plain , but far within land they see great and small hill extend themselves a great way , and be very fair and pleasant to behold . the day follow we proceed on our voyage , sail always in sight of the plain coast towards the northwest , in 10 . or 15 . fathom water . and have sail 6 . good league we find a bay on the coast within the land of about 5 . league over , from whence the coast trend northwest , and this day we sail about 16 . league . all this coast be plain , and not so pleasant as that which we have pass : here be certain small hill , but not so high as those which we have find before . thus we sail all night northwest , and until the next day at noon , at which time we fall with a headland of white sand , where by the height which we take that day we find our self to be in the latitude of 27 . degree and this cape we call Capo roxo . all the coast be plain and fair and clean sand , and we see within land some few tree not very great , with certain mountain 8c wood 3 . or 4 . league distant from the say cape : and here likewise appear a mouth of a river , which ( as far as we can discern ) make certain lake up within the land : from the mouth whereof for the space of a league into the sea it seem to be very shall , because the sea do break very much . here we see within the land 3 . or 4 . river . in this sort we sail on our voyage to the northward , 8c because we have not good weather we ride that night in a great haven lie in our way , where on the shore we see certain plain , and up within the land certain hill not very high : and continue our course towards the north about 3 . league from this haven we find a hand of about one league in circuit lie before the mouth of the say haven . And sail forward we find a haven which have two mouth into the sea , into which we enter by the northermost mouth , which have 10 . or 12 . fathom water , 8c so decrease till it come to 5 . fathom , where we ancker in a pool which the sea make , which be a strange thing to behold , for there be so many entrance 8c mouth of stream and haven , that we be all astonish at the sight thereof ; and these haven be so excellent frame by nature , as the like be not to be see in the world , wherein we find great store of fish . here we ancker , and the captain go on shore , and take possession , use all such ceremony as thereunto belong . here also we find certain wear to catch fish make by the Indians , and certain small cottage , wherein be diverse piece of earthen pot as fine make as those in Spain . here by commandment of the captain a cross be erect upon a hill , and it be set up by Francis Preciado . in