we be to follow he : for if the Indians have get that place from we , we shall have incur great danger , and the great part of we have like to have be slay , and none can have escape but such as by chance can have leap into the boat , and the tide go so high , that none can be save but such as be most excellent swimmer . but at length the captain bestir himself very nimble , use all celerity that be possible . therefore when he and Haro have win the gate , the rest of the soldier gate up after they , and the captain and Haro turn themselves to the Indians and make head against they , and the Indians assail they with such number of stone , arrow , and javelin ( which be a very strange thing ) that they break in piece the target which the captain have on his arm , and beside that wound he with a arrow in the bend of his knee , and though the wound be not great , yet be it very painful unto he . while they thus stand to withstand their assault , they strike Haro which be on the other side so forcible with a stone , that they throw he flat upon the ground : and by and by another stone light upon he which shiver his target , and they hit the captain with another arrow , and shoot he quite through one of his ear . another arrow come and strike a 236 soldier call Graviello Marques in the leg , of which he feel great pain and go halt . in the mean space Francis Preciado , and certain other soldier come up and join himself with the rest on the left hand of the captain , say unto he , sir , withdraw your self , for you be wound , but be you not dismay , for they be but Indians and can hurt we . in this wise we begin to rush in among they upon the side of a rock always gain ground of they , which great encourage our mind , and when we begin to enforce they to retire , we win a small woody hill , where we shelter our self , whereas before they shoot upon we from aloft , for they be on the high ground under covert in safety , and then by no mean we can offend they , but by run forcible upon they with our target on our arm , and our sword in our hand . on the other side , to approach and seek to overtake they be a vain thing , see they be as swift as wild goat . by this time Haro be get up on foot , and have clap a woollen cloth upon his head , which have bleed extreme , he join himself unto we , of who we receive no small aid . in the mean space the indian fortify themselves on the crag of a rock , from whence they do not a little molest we , and we likewise fortify our self upon a hillock , whereby we descend into their fort , and there be a small valley between they and we , which be not very deep from the upper part . there we be 6 soldier and two negro with the captain , and all of we be of opinion that it be not good to pass that place , lest you Indians be many may destroy we all , for the rest of our soldier which be beneath at the foot of the hill , make head against the other squadron of the Indians , keep they from hurt those which take in water on the strand and from break the butt of water , and be but few , we conclude to stay here , and so we stand still fortify our self as well as we can , especial consider that we have no succour on any side ; for Berecillo our mastive - dogge which shall have 237 A . D . 1539 - the Spaniard use mastiffs in their warn against the Indians . Reade more hereof cap . 12 . aid we be grievous wound with 3 arrow , so that by no mean we can get he from we : this mastive be wound in the first assault when the Indians come upon we , who behave himself very well , and great aid we ; for he set upon they , and put 8 or 10 of they out of array , 8c make they run away , leave many arrow behind they : but at length ( as i have say ) he be so wound , that by no mean we can get he to go from we to set any more upon the Indians , 8c the other two mastiff do we more harm than good : for when they go against they , they shoot at they with their bow , and we receive hurt and trouble in defend they . the captain leg when he wax cold be so swell , that we lap it up in a woollen cloth , and he halt much of it : and while the Indians thus stand still , one part of they begin to dance , sing , and shout , and then they begin all to lade themselves with stone , and to put their arrow into their bow , and to come down towards we very resolute to assault we , and with great outcry they begin to fling stone and to shoot their arrow . then Francis Preciado turn he to the captain and say : sir , these Indians know or think , that we be afeard of they , 8c in itrueth it be a great fait to give they this encouragement , it be better for we resolute to set upon they with these dog , 8c to assault they on this hill , that they may know we to be no dastard , for they be but Indians and dare not stand we ; and if we can get their fort upon the hill , God will give we victory in all the rest . the captain answer , that he like well of the motion , and that it be best so to do , although for any further pursuit up the hill , he think we be to take another course . by