not with they , but keep at home at their house and in their possession , and wrought : and that if by chance any one have company with man before she be marry , her husband forsake she , and go away into other country : and that those woman which fall into this fault , be account naughty pack . and that if after they be marry , any man be take in adultery with another woman , they put he to death : and that no man may have more than one wife , but very secret . they tell i that they burn those which die : and such as remain they bume widow , stay half a year , or a whole year before their dead - they marry . i desire to know what they think of such as be dead . he tell i that they go to another world , but that they have neither punishment nor glory . the great sickness that this people dye of , be vomit of blood by the mouth : and they have physician which cure they with charm and blow 297 which they make . the apparel of these people be pipe to drink like the former : they carry their pipe with they to tobacco with . perfume themselves , like as the people of new Spain use tobacco . i inquire whether they have any governor , and find that they have none , but that every family have their several governor . Theise people have beside Maiz , gourd , their maiz certain gourd , and another corn like unto mill : they have grindstone and earthen pot , wherein earthenpot , they boil those gourd , and fish or the river , which goodfish . be very good . my interpreter can go no far than this place : for he say that those which we shall find far on our way , be their enemy , and therefore i send he back very well content . not long after i espy many Indians to come cry with a loud voice , and run after i . i stay to know what they will have ; and they tell i that they have set up the cross which i have give they , in the midst of their dwelling as i have appoint , but that i be to this river wit , that when the river do overflow , it be wont to ‘ banks ^ fcer * 1 reac ^ to P ^ aceJ therefore they pray i to give they take season . eave to remove it , and to set it in another place where the river can not come at it , nor carry it away : which i grant they . Chap . 5 . of a indian of that country they have relation of the state of Cevola , and of the condition and custom of these people , and of their governor : and likewise of the country not far distant from thence , whereof one be call Quicoma , and the other coama : of the people of Quicoma , and of the other Indians not far distant they receive courtesy . thus sail i come where be many Indians , and another interpreter , which i cause to come with cold and i in my boat . and because it be cold , and my rain - people be wet , i leap on shore , and command a fire to be make , and as we stand thus warm our 298 w - selve , a indian come and strike i on the arm , point with his finger to a wood out of which i see two company of man come w ‘ their weapon , and he tell i that they come to set upon we : and because i mean not to fall out with any of they , i retire my company into our boat , and the Indians which be with i swim into the water , and save themselves on the other side of the river . in the mean season i inquire of that indian which i have with i , what people they be that come out of the wood : and he tell i that they be their enemy , and therefore these other at their approach without say any word leap into the water : and do so , because they mean to turn back again , be without weapon , because they bring none with they , because they understand my will and pleasure , that they shall carry none . i inquire the same thing of this interpreter which i have do of the other of the thing of that country , because i understand that among some people one man use to have many wife , and among other but one . now i understand by he , that he have be at Cevola , and that it be a month journey from his country , and that from that place by a path that go along that river a man Cevola 40 might easy travel thither in forty . day , and that the occasion that move he to go thither , be only to see tk ^ river * ? Cevola , because it be a great thing , and have very high house of stone of 3 . or 4 . loft , and window on each side ; that the house be compass about with a wall contain the height of a man and a half , and that aloft and beneath they be inhabit with people , and that they use the same weapon , that other use , which we have see , that be to say , bow and arrow , mace , staff and buckler : and that they have one governor , and that they be apparel with mantle , and with ox - hides , and that their mantle have a paint about they , and that their governor wear a long shirt very fine gird unto he , and over the same diverse mantle : and that the woman wear very long garment , and that they be 299 white , and go all cover : and that every day many Indians wait at the gate of their governor to serve turquese in he , and that they do wear many azure or blue stone , Cevola . which be dig out of a rock of stone , and that they have but one wife , with who they be marry , and that when their