outlet into the open sea . thus we sail along still view the situation of the country , rejoice all of we at the sight thereof , for it always please we moor and more , still appear moor green and pleasant , and the grass which we find near unto the shore be fresh and delectable , but not very high , be ( to all our judgement ) not past a span long . likewise the hill which we see , which be many , and many down make a very pleasant prospect , especial because we judge , that there be many valley and dale between they . Chap . 6 . they discover a very great bay with four small island in it , whereas they take possession . as they sail along and discover diverse island they come at length to the port of Santa Cruz , where not be able to get any knowledge of those Indians , although they lie in wait for they at a place call the well of Grijalva , they depart thence . they have a perilous and long tempest , which cease , after they have see a light on their shrowd . at our come out of these opening we begin to great find a bay with a very great haven , environ with havendiver small hill have upon they green wood and pleasant to behold . in this bay and strand be two small island near unto the shore , one of the which be like unto a table about half a league in bigness , and the other be a round hill almost as big as the former . Theise island serve we only to content our sight , for we pass by they without stay , have but a slack wind on Monday morning : all which day we follow our course with the foresay slack wind , and within a while after it become flat contrary , so that we be constrain to anchor at the say point of the say haven ; and on Tewesday at break of day we set sail , but make but little away all the day , because 223 the wind continue contrary , although but very weak . the night follow we be becalm a little beyond the point of this haven ; but about midnight we begin to have a fresh gale , and on Wednesday in the morning we be seven league distant from that point . this country show ( as it be indeed ) more plain than the rest , with certain small woody hill , and within the other point which be before descry , the situation seem to be more pleasant and delightsome than the rest which we have pass . and at the uttermost end of the point be two small islet . the say Wednesday about nine of the clock the wind blow a good gale , and we sail by evening between seven and eight league , and come over against a land not very high , where we see certain creek or breach not very ragged , into every of which a river seem to fall , because the soil be very green , and have certain tree grow on it far big than those which we have find before . here the captain with five or six man go on shore , and take possession pass up one of those river , and find the foot of many Indians upon the sand . on the bank of that river they see many fruitful tree , as cherry - tree and little appletree , and other white tree : they find also in the wood three or four beast call adibe , which be a kind of dog . the same night we set sail with the wind off - the land , which blow so fresh , that it make we to strike our foresail ; and on the sixeteenth of October at nine of the clock we come near unto a point of certain high mountain , on which day be Thursday we make little way , because the wind cease , but it rise again in the night , whereupon by the break of day on Friday we come before the say point be six or seven league off . the land seem to be very mountainous with certain sharp point not great clad with grass , but somewhat bare . on our left hand we see two island , the one of a league and a half , the other not so much , and it seem that we draw near 224 to the port of Santa Cruz , whereat we be sorry , because we be always in good hope to find some outlet into the main ocean in some place of that land , and that the same port be the same outlet , and also that by the say coast we may return to the foresay haven of Santa Cruz , and that we have commit a great error , because we have not certain seek out the secret , whether that be a strait or a river , which we have leave behind we unsearched at the bottom of this great sea or gulf . all Friday and the night follow we sail with a scant wind , and on Saturday at break of day we be between two point of land which make a bay , wherein - a bay with 4 we see before and behind four or five great and small or 5 inland . Islands . the land be very mountainous , part whereof be cover with grass , and part be void . within the land appear more mountain and hill , and in this place we be come near unto the haven of Santa Cruz , which be all firm land , except it be divide in the very nook by some streite or great river which part it from the main , which because we have not thorough discover , all of we that be employ in this voyage be not a little grieve . and this main land stretch so far in length , that i can well express it : for from the haven of Acapulco , which stand in seventeen degree and twenty minute of latitude , we have always the coast of the firm land on our right hand , until we come to the great current of the white and red sea : this current and here ( as i have say )