on the back , and without any stay draw his fellow along like a deer , and Berecillo be fain to leave he for pain , neither have he scarce take the dog off on he , but the indian get up , and flee so hasty toward the mountain , that within a short while he overtake his fellow which have save he from the paw of the dog , who ( as it appear ) betake he lusty to his heal , and thus they come unto their fellow which descend not down to the shore be about some twenty , and they be in all about fifty or sixty . after we have breathe our self a while , we view their house where they stand , which be certain cottage cover with shrub like broom and rosemary , with certain stake pight in the ground ; and the general will we to march all together without disperse of our self , a little way up those mountain , to see if there be any water and wood , because we 260 stand in great need of they both . and while we march forward , we see in certain little valley the good which the woman have leave there behind they in their flight : for the Indians as soon as they see we pursue they overtake the woman , and for fear charge they to fly away with their child leave their stuff in this place . we go unto this booty , and find good store of freshfish , and dry fish , and certain bag contain above 28 pound weight full of dry fish ground to powder , and many seal - skin , the most part dress with a fair white grain upon they , and other very bad dress . there be also their instrument to fish withal , as hook make of the prick of certain shrub and tree . here we take the say skin without leave any one in the place , and then we return to the sea , because it be now night , or at least very late , and find our boat wait for we . Chap . 13 . a description of the canoas of the Indians of the he of cedar , and how coast the same to find fresh water they find some , and desire to take thereof they go on shore , and be diverse molest with the weapon of the Indians . they christen a old indian , and return unto their ship . the canoas which they have be certain thick trunk of cedar , some of they of the thickness of two man , and three fathom long , be not make hollow at all , but be lay along and fasten together , they shove they into the sea , neither be they plain to any purpose , for we find no kind of edgetool , save that there be certain sharp stone , which we find upon certain rock that be very keen , wherewith we suppose that they do cut and flay those seal . and near the shore we find certain water , wherewith we fill certain bottle make of the skin of those seal , contain each of they above a great pail of water . the next day our general command we to 261 seale - skws well dress with a white grain . Isla de Ids cedros , or the lie of cedar in 28 deg . and a quarter . set sail , whereupon sail with a fresh gale about 2 league from the shore of this hand , trending about the same to see the end thereof , and also to approach near the firm land , to inform our self of the state thereof , because we have see 5 or 6 fire , we compass the same about : for by this mean we perform 2 or 3 good action , namely , we return to our right course , and search whether any river fall out of the coast of the firm land , or whether there be any tree there , or whether any store of Indians do show themselves or no . in this manner proceed on our way all the Friday be the 16 of January at evening , and seek to double the point of the hand , so fierce and contrary a northern wind encounter we , that it drive we back that night over against the lodging and habitation of the Indians , and here we stay all Saturday , what time we lose the Trinity again , but on sunday - night be the 18 we see she again , and begin to proceed on our way to compass that hand , if it please God to send we good weather . on Sunday , Monday , and Tuesday ( which be the twenty of the say month of Januarie ) we sail with scarce and contrary wind , and at length come to the cape of the point of the hand , which we call Isla de los cedros or the he of cedar , because that on the top of the mountain therein , there grow a wood of these cedar be very tall , as the nature of they be to be . this day the Trinity descry a village or town of the Indians , and find water : for on Sunday night we have new lose she , and have no sight of she until Tuesday , whenas we find she ride near the shore , not far from those cottage of the Indians . and as soon as we have descry she , we make towards she , and before we can reach she , we espy three canoas of Indians which come hard aboard the say ship call the Trinity , so that they touch almost the side of the ship , and give they of their fish , and our people 262 on the other side give they certain trifle in exchange , and after they have speak with they , the Indians go back to the shore , and at the same instant we come up unto the admiral and ride by they , and they all salute we , say that the indian be near they , and tell what have pass between they , whereat the general and we receive great contentment . they tell we moreover , that they have find fresh water , whereby they increase our great joy ,