little cottage or shed stand upon four stud , under which the labourer do eat , and pass away the heat of the day , for they be a people much give to labour , and do continual occupy themselves therein . this country be full of these high mountain and forest of pine tree . the weapon m ° untainesa ™ that they use be strong bow and arrow head with c ! ) two , nes offa flint , which will pierce through a coat of male , and country . macana which be club of half a yard long , so beset with sharp flint , that they be sufficient to cleave a man asunder in the midst : they use also a kind of target make of raw hide . have remain four day in this province , not the province far off they come to another call the province of ° ftisuas - tiguas contain sixteen town , in one whereof , call Poala , they understand that the inhabitant have slay the Poala . two father aforesaid , to wit , friar Francis Lopez , and friar Augustus Ruyz , who they go to seek , together with the three indian boy , and the mestizo . so soon as the people of this town and their neighbour see our man there , their own conscience accuse they , and fear that our man come to punish they , and to be avenge of the death of the foresay father , they dare not abide their come , but leave their house desolate they flee to the mountain next adjoin , from whence they can never cause they to descend , although our man attempt the same by diverse devise and enticements . they find in the town and house good store j9 of victual , with infinite number of hen in the country , and many sort of metal , whereof some seem to be very good . they can not perfect understand what number of people this province may contain , by reason they be flee into the mountain , as i have say before . have find those to be slay which they go to seek , they enter into consultation , whether they shall return to Nueva Biscaya , from whence they come , or shall proceed further in their journey ; whereabout there be diverse opinion : howbeit , understand there , that towards the orient or east part of that province , and very far distant from thence , there be great and rich town : and find themselves so far on the way , the say captain Antonio de Espeio with the consent of the foresay friar call Frier Bernardine Beltran , and the great part of his soldier and companion determine to proceed on the discovery , till such time as they do see to what end it will come ; to the end they may give certain and perfect knowledge thereof to his majesty , as eye - witness of the same . and so with one accord they determine , that while the army lie still there , the captain and two more of his company shall prosecute their desire , which they do accord . and within two day journey they come unto another province , where they find eleven town , and much people in they , which in their judgement be above forty thousand person . the country be very fertile and plentiful , who confine border upon the territory of Cibola , where there be great store of cow , with who hide and with cotton they apparel themselves , imitate in the form of their government their next neighbour . in this place be sign of very rich mine , some quantity of the metal whereof they find in the house of the Indians ; which Indians have and do worship idol . they receive our man peaceable , and give they victual . have see thus much , and the disposition of the country , they return to the camp , from whence they 196 1581 - 83 . depart , to inform their companion of the thing above mention . be return to the camp they have intelligence of quiresb ° rder it another province call los quire , which stand six uPm l0 league high up the river call Rio deal norte . and e ° rte ' in their journey thitherward , be arrive within a league of the place , there come forth very many Indians to receive they in peace , request they to bear they company to their town : which they do , and be marvellous well entertain and cherish . in this province they find five town only , wherein be great store of people , and those which they see be above 14000 soul , who worship idol as their neighbour do . in one of these town they find a pie in a cage after the manner of Castille , and certain shadow or canopy like unto those which be bring from China , wherein be paint the sun , the moon , and many star . where have take the height of the polestar , they find themselves to be in 37 degree and of northerly latitude . they depart out of this province , and keep still the same northerly course , fourteen league from thence they find another province call the cuname , where they see other five town , the great whereof be call Cia , be so large , that it contain eight marketplace , the house whereof be plaster and paint with diverse colour , be better than any which they have see in the province before mention : the people which they here see , they esteem to be above twenty thousand person . they present to our man many curious mantle , and victual excellent well dress ; so that our man deem this nation to be more curious , and of great civility , and better government , than any other that hitherto they have see . they show they rich metal , and the mountain also not far off whereout they dig they . here our people hear of another province stand towards the northwest , whereunto they purpose to go . 197 seven and thirty degree and a half . have travel about six league , they come to the amey , or say province , the people whereof be call amey , emex . wherein be seven very great town , contain , to their judgement , above thirty thousand soul . they report that one of the seven town be very great and fair , which our man will not go to see , both because it stand behind a mountain , and also for fear of some mishap , if in case they shall be separate one from another . this people be like unto their neighbour of the former province , be as well provide of all necessary as they , and of as good government . about fifteen league from this province , travel always towards the west , they find a great town call AcomaorAco - Acoma , contain above six thousand person , and man a town situa ^ e upon a