to those of their city that they shall not fear , and they shall 150 rather let the people stay in their house , because i come only in the name of his majesty to defend and aid they . and this do , Fernando Alvarado return to advertise i , that certain Indians be come unto they in peaceable manner , and that two of they stay for my come with the master of the field . whereupon i go unto they and give they bead and certain short cloak , will they to return unto their city , and bid they to stay quiet in their house , and fear nothing . and this do i send the master of the field to search wisefore - wheth there be any bad passage which the Indians cast it may keep against we , and that he shall take and defend it until the next day that i shall come thither . so he go , and find in the way a very bad passage , where we may have sustain very great harm : wherefore there he seat himself with his company that be with he : and that very night the Indians come to take that passage to defend it , and find it take , they assault our man there , and as they tell i , treason of they assault they like valiant man ; although in the the n ^ ans - ende they retire and flee away ; for the master of the field be watchful , and be in order with his company : the Indians in token of retreat sound on a certain small trumpet , and do no hurt among the Spaniard . the very same night the master of the great forecast field certify i hereof . whereupon the next day in the best order that i can i depart in so great want master . of victuali , that i think that if we shall stay one day long without food , we shall all perish for hunger , especial the Indians , for among we all we have not two bushel of corn : wherefore it behoove i to prick forward without delay . the Indians here and their make fire , and be answer again afar off as orderly as we for our life can have do , to give their fellow understanding , how we march and where we arrive . 0 . assoon as i come within sight of this city of Granada , at city y i send don Garcias Lopez campmaster , friar Daniel , Cibola . 151 the arrogande of the people of Cibola . and friar Lewis , and Fernando Vermizzo somewhat before with certain horseman , to seek the Indians and to advertise they that our come be not to hurt they , but to defend they in the name of the emperor our lord , accord as his majesty have give we in charge : which message be deliver to the inhabitant of that country by a interpreter . but they like arrogant people make small account thereof ; because we seem very few in their eye , and that they may destroy we without any difficulty ; and they strike friar Lewis with a arrow on the gown , which by the grace of God do he no harm . in the mean space i arrive with all the rest of the horseman , and footman , and find in the field a great sort of the Indians which begin to shoot at we with command - their arrow : and because i will obey your will and mean to use ^ g command of the mark , i will not let my and they savage people charge they , forbid my company , which entreat i that they may set upon they , in any wise to provoke they , say that that which the enemy do be nothing , and that it be not meet to set upon so few people . on the other side the Indians perceive that we stir not , take great stomach and courage unto they : insomuch that they come hard to our horse heal to shoot at we with their arrow . whereupon see that it be now time to stay no long , and that the friar also be off the same opinion , i set upon they without any danger : for sudden they flee part to the city which be near and well fortify , and other into the field , which way they can shift : and some of the indian be slay , and more have be if i will have suffer they to have be pursue . but consider that hereof we may reap but small profit , because the Indians that be without , be few , there be and those which be retire into the city , with they t ^ towne ' which stay within at the first be many , where the ' comara ^ ist . victual be whereof we have so great need , i assemble gen . cap . wonderful > - my people , and divide they as i think best to assault ! 52 the city , and i compass it about : and because the famine which we sustain suffer no delay , my self with certain of these gentleman and soldier put our self on foot , and command that the crossbow and harquebusier shall give the assault , and shall beat the enemy from the wall , that they may not hurt we , and i assault the wall on one side , where they tell i there be a scale ladder set up , and that there be one gate : but the crossebowman sudden break the string of their bow , and the harquebusier do nothing at all : for they come thither so weak and feeble , that scarce they can stand on their foot : and by this mean the people that be aloft on the wall to defend the town be no way hinder from do we all the mischief they can : so that twice they strike i to the ground with infinite number of great stone , which they cast down : and if i have not be defend with a excellent good headpiece which i wear , i think it have go hardly with i : nevertheless my company take i up with two small wound in the face , and a arrow stick in my foot , and many blow with stone on my arm and leg , and thus i go out of the battle very weak . i think that if don Garcias Lopez they defend the wait