height , and beautiful to behold . the country ( as far as we can discern ) be so pleasant and delightful , that we all desire to go on shore , and to search up into it two or three day journey , to see whether it be inhabit or not . we see within the land of that bay two fire . the night follow be Saturday we sail continual with a prosperous and fresh gale , and the wind be so great that we draw our bonnet to our main sail , and sail so till the morning . on Sunday the twelve of October we find our self altogether enclose with land , on the right hand with the main , which compass we before and behind , and on the left hand with a island of a league and a half ; and between the main and the island in the midst of the sea there lay a small Islet , and also between the say main and the island there be two mouth , through which there appear a passage whereby afterward we pass through . this main be much more fresh and green than the other which we have pass , and have certain plain and point of mountain of pleasant view , and full of green grass . here all this night we see two or three village which be very great , and at break of day we see a Canoa or boat make of cane , which come from the land out of a creek , and we stand still until it come near unto we in the ship , and they begin to speak in their language which no man understand , who pronunciation be like to the Fleming , and be 220 call they return with great haste unto the shore , and we be very sorry because our boat have not follow they . here happen unto we a very strange thing , which be , that as this indian return to the shore in certain of these creek where a number of his fellow Indians be , as we view that part , we see five canoas issue forth , which come towards we : whereupon we stay to see what they will do . in the mean while our admiral come up unto we , which be near the shore , for she also have see they , and so be come together we cast anchor , expect what those canoas will do . in the mean while our general command we to make ready our boat , and to furnish the same with oar and man , to try if we can by any mean take some of they , that we may come to some knowledge of they , and that we may give they some of our trifle , and special of our hook and bead to win their friendship . the indian with their five canoas approach within one or two stone cast of we , and then begin to speak very loud unto we in a very strange language , always stand upon their guard to retire themselves with speed . when our captain see this , and that they will not come near we , but rather retire , he command six mariner to go into the boat from the stern of the ship , and himself also go with they with all possible haste towards the Indians . the indian return to the shore with so great celerity , that they seem to fly in those little canoas of cane . nevertheless our man use such diligence that one of the Canaos be board and take ; but the indian in the Canoa see himself now take leap into the water , and our man follow with their boat to take he , but see himself within their reach , he duck with his head under their boat , and so deceive they , and then rise up again , and with their oar and with staff they give 221 he certain blow , to amaze he , but nothing will serve they ; for as they be about to lay hand upon he he still dive under water , and with his hand and foot get near to the shore : and as he rise up above the water , he call to his fellow which stand on the shore to behold , cry Belen with a loud voice , and so they pursue he , and strike he sometime be very near the shore , and he always go call the rest of his fellow to come and help he , whereupon within a short while after three other canoas come forth to succour he , be full of Indians with bow and arrow in their hand , cry with a loud voice , that we shall come on shore : these Indians be of great stature and savage , fat also and well set , and of a brown colour . our captain perceive this , lest they shall wound any of our people with their arrow , return back , and command we immediate to set sail , and so forthwith we depart . this day the wind scant , and we return to anchor in the foresay place , and our admiral ride from the firm land towards the island , and we which be in the ship call the Trinity lie near unto the main , and before break of day we depart with a fresh gale . and before we disemboque out of that channel we see certain grass very high and green upon the main : whereupon a mariner , and the pilot go up into the top , and see the mouth of a river which run through that green country into the sea . but because our admiral be under all her sail far from we , we can not tell they of this river , where we will have take water , whereof we have some need , and because it be a very good haven to go on shore to take it , and therefore without water we follow our course . on Monday we depart from this haven which be like unto a lake , for on all side we be compass with land , have the continent before , behind we , and on our right side , and the island on our left side , and we pass forth 222 1539 ' at those mouth beforemention , which show a