169 170 171 172 173 175 Suelasdevaca . ix 177 m quire . 179 180 7 , uni . , o Cibola . 185 [ a brief a brief relation of two notable voyage , the first make by friar Augustin Ruyz a franciscan , in the year 1581 : the second by Antonio de Espejo in the year 1583 : who together with his company discover a land wherein they find fifteen province all full of town , contain house of four and five story high , which they name new Mexico ; for that in many respect it resemble the province of old Mexico . this land be situate to the north of Nueva Espanna , and stretch from 24 to 34 degree and better : by the which and by other inhabit land it be think that man may travel even to terra de Labrador . take out of the history of China write by friar Juan Gonzales de Mendosa , and print in Madrid 1586 . the first voyage make by FrierAngus tin Ruiz to the province de los tiguas . have now declare in the title of this present discourse , that in the year 1583 there be discover fifteen province , which the discoverer call new Mexico , situate on the firm land of Nueva Espanna , and i promise to give notice of the say discovery , which i will do with as much brevity as be possible : for if i shall record at large all particular which they see and come to the knowledge of , it will require a full history . the substance thereof be as follow . in the year of our lord 1581 a certain franciscan friar call Augustin Ruiz which dwell in the valley of saint Bartholomew , be inform by the report of certain Indians call Conchos , which have deal and conversation with other of their neighbour call pas - 186 1581 - 83 . saguates ; that towards the north , travel always by land , there be certain great town not hitherto know nor discover by our Spaniard : move with a zeal of charity , and a desire to save soul , crave licence of the conde of Corunna as then viceroy of Nueva Espanna , and of his superior , to go to the say town , and to endeavour to learn their language , and have learn the same , to baptize they , and to preach the holy gospel unto they . after he have obtain licence of the party aforesaid , take with he other two companion of his own order , and eight soldier , 23 « « f who of their own good will offer to bear he company , he depart to put in execution his christian prancisc0 and zealous intent . who after certain day travel Sanchez come unto a country call the province de los tiguas Xamuzcado distant from the mine of Santa Barbara , from whence they begin their journey , 250 league towards the north : in which province the inhabitant , upon a certain occasion , slay one of the say friar two companion . the soldier that go with he see this mishap , and perceive the success , and likewise fear , that thereof may happen some great danger , determine with a common consent to return unto the mine from whence they depart : consider that their company be too small to resist the danger that may happen , be so far distant from the dwelling of the Spaniard , and from all necessary succour . but the two friar which remain alive do not only refuse their determination , but rather see fit occasion to put their good desire in execution , and so great a harvest ripe for the lord table , because they can not persuade the soldier to proceed any further in that discovery , remain behind in the say province with three indian boy , and one Mestizo , who they have carry with they ; think that although they remain alone , yet shall they be there in security , by reason of the great affability and love which the people of that place show unto they . 187 which intercept be come to our hand . the province de los tiguas distant 250 league northward from the mine of Santa Barbara . the mine of SantaBarbara 160 league distant from Mexico . the second voyage . las quatro Cienegas in the province offue five of Biscaya 70 league from the mine of Santa Barbara . the eight soldier be return to their wish home , immediate send news of all that have pass to the viceroy unto the city of Mexico , which be distant from the say mine of Santa Barbara 160 league . the friar of Sant Francis be very much aggrieve at the stay of their brethren behind in the country , and fear least the savage will kill they see they leave alone , they begin to move the mind of certain soldier to make another voyage to the say province in the company of another friar of the foresay order call Frier Bernardin Beltran , to deliver the aforesaid two religious man out of danger , and to prosecute their former enterprise . at the same time there be at the foresay mine upon some occasion a citizen of Mexico call Antonio de Espejo , a rich man , and of great courage and industry , and very zealous in the service of king Philip his sovereign , and be bear in Cordova . who understand the desire of the foresay friar , and the importance of the action , offer himself to go on that voyage , and also to spend part of his substance , and to adventure his life therein ; conditional that licence may be grant he to the same purpose from some person sufficient authorise by his majesty . which licence at the say friar procurement be grant unto he by the governor Juan de Ontiveros the king Alcalde may6r or chief justice in the town call las quatro Cienegas situate within the jurisdiction of Nueva Biscaya seventy league from the say mine of Santa Barbara ; authorize he both to take in hand the say voyage , and also to assemble such people and soldier as he can , which may accompany and aid he in the performance of this his christian intent . the say Antonio de Espejo be so earnest in this matter , that in very few day he have gather a company of soldier , and make provision of thing necessary for his voyage , spend therein a good part of his substance . and he depart with his whole company from the valley 188 of s . Bartholomew the ten of November 1582 ; take with he ( for whatsoever shall happen ) 115 horse and mule , with great store of weapon , munition , and victual , and some Indians to serve he in his journey . direct his course towards the north , after two day journey he meet with great store of the foresay Indians call Conchos , which dwell in village or hamlet of cottage cover with straw . who , so soon as they understand of his approach , have