come and ride in our company . 270 they go on land in the isle of cedar , and take diverse wild beast , and refresh and solace themselves . they be strange toss with the northwest wind , and seek often to depart they be force , for the avoid of many mischief , to repair thither again for harbour . the two and twenty of February be the second Sunday in Lent , the general go on shore with the great part of his people and the friar , near unto a valley which they see before they . And hear mass on land , certain soldier and mariner , with certain dog which we have in our company go into the say valley , and we meet with certain deer , whereof we take a female , which be little , but fat , who hair be like the hair of a wild goat then of a dear , and we find she not to be a perfect dear , for she have four dug like unto a cow full of milk , which make we much to marveile . and after we have flay off her skin , the flesh seem more like the flesh of a goat , then of a dear . we kill likewise a grey conie , in shape like unto those of Nueva Espanna , and another as black as heben - wood . in the cottage at the shelter above , where we break our cable , we find many pinenut open , which ( in my opinion ) the Indians have gather together to eat the kernel of they . on Monday the 23 of the say month we ride at anchor , take our pleasure and pastime with fish . and than northwest wind begin to blow , which wax so great a little before midnight , as it be wonderful : so that although we be under the shelter of the island , and great defend from that wind , yet for all that it be so furious , and the sea become so rage and boisterous , that it great shake our ship , and we be in great fear of break our cable , whereof ( to say the truth ) we have very much need : for have spend long time in this voyage than we look for , we have break two , and 271 lose two of our best anchor . this furious wind continue until the next day be Tewsday the 24 when as we go on shore with the friar , who say we mass , recommend our self to God , beseech he to vouchsafe to succour and help we with some good weather that we may proceed on our voyage , to the advancement of his service . and still the wind be so high and outrageous , that the devil seem to be loose in the air . whereupon the pilot cause all the mast to be let down , lest they shall be shake with the wind , and take off all the shrowd , and likewise cause the cabbens in the stern to be take away , that the wind may have more free passage , for the safety of the ship : yet for all this they cease not to be in great trouble . on Tewsday the second of march , about midnight or somewhat after , ride under the island in this distress , there come a gust of northwest wind , which make the cable of the admiral to slip , and the Trinity break her cable , and have be cast away , if God of his mercy have not provide for we , together with the diligence which the pilot use , in hoist the sail of the trinket and mizzen , wherewith they put to sea , and ride by another anchor until day , when the man of both the ship go with their boat to seek the anchor until noon , which at length they find and recover , not without great pain and diligence which they use in drag for it , for they be till noon in seek the same , and have much ado to recover it . after this we set up our shrowd , and all thing necessary to sail , for to proceed on our voyage , if it please God , and not to stay always in that place , as lose and forlese . thus on the Wednesday two or three hour after dinner we set sail , with a scarce wind at southeast , which be favourable for our course and very scant ; and our pilot 8c all the rest of we be in no small fear , that it will not continue long . we begin therefore to set forward , although we seem to see before our eye , that at the end of the 272 island we shall meet with contrary wind at north and northwest . this day about evening when our ship have discover the point of this isle of cedar , we begin to perceive those contrary wind , and the sea to go so lofty , that it be terrible to behold . and the far we go , the more the wind increase , so that they put we to great distress , sail always with the sheate of our mainesaile and trinket wary in our hand , and with great diligence we loose the tie of all the sail , to save they the better , that the wind may not charge they too vehement . for all this the mariner think it best to return back , and that by no mean we shall run far into the sea , because we be in extreme danger . whereupon we follow their counsel , turn back almost to the place from whence we depart , whereat we be all not a little grieve , because we can not prosecute our voyage , and begin to want many thing for the furniture of our ship . the 8 of march be Monday about noon the general command we to set sail , for a small gale of wind blow from the west , which be the wind whereof we have most need , to follow our voyage , whereat we be all glad for the great desire which we have to depart out of that place . therefore we begin to set sail , and to pass towards the point of the island ,