, hare , and partridge of the doarney - same colour and taste with those of Spain although they be not so big , for they be somewhat less . here meet we a indian the son of one of the chief man that accompany i , which have go before with Stephan , who come in a great fright , have his face and body all cover with sweat , and show exceed sadness in his countenance ; and he tell i that a day journey before Stephan come to Cevola he send his great mace make of a gourd by his messenger , as he be always wont to send they before he , that he may know in what sort he come unto they , which gourd have a string of bell upon it , and two feather one white and another red , in token that he demand safe conduct , and that he come peaceable . and when they come to Cevola before the magistrate , which the lord of the ci tie have place there for his lieutenant , they deliver he the say great gourd , who take the same in his hand , and after he have spy the bell , in a great rage and fury he cast it to the ground , and will the messenger to get they pack with speed , for he know well enough what people they be , and that they shall will they in no case to enter into the city , for if they do he will put they all to death . the messenger return and tell Stephan how thing have pass , who answer they , that it make no great matter , and will needs proceed on his voyage till he come to 139 the city of Cevola : where he find man that will not let he enter into the town , but shut he into a great house which stand without the city , and straightway take all thing from he which he carry to truck and barter with they , and certain turquese , and other thing which he have receive of the indian by the way , and they keep he there all that night without give he meat or drink , and the next day in the morning this indian be a thirst , and go out of the house to drink at a river that be near at hand , and within a little while after he see Stephan run away , and the people follow he , and slay certain of the Indians which go in his company . and when this indian see these thing , he hide himself on the bank of the river , and afterward cross the high way of the desert . the Indians that go with i hear these news begin incontinent to lament , and i think these heavy and bad news will cost i my life , neither do i fear so much the loss of my own life , as that i shall not be able to return to give information of the greatness of that country , where our lord God may be glorify : and straightway i cut the cord of my budget which i carry with i full of merchandise for traffic , which i will not do till then , nor give any thing to any man , and begin to divide all that i carry with i among the principali man , will they not to be afraid , but to go forward with i , and so they do . And go on our way , within a day journey of Cevola we meet two other Indians of those which go with Stephan , which be bloody and wound in many place : and assoon as they come to we , they which be with i begin to make great lamentation . Theise wound Indians i ask for Stephan , and they agree in all point with the first Indian say , that after they have put he into the foresay great house without give he meat or drink all that day and all that night , they take from Stephan all the thing which he carry with he . the next day when 140 the sun be a lance high , Stephan go out of the house , and some of the chief man with he , and sudden come store of people from the city , who assoon as he see he begin to run away and we likewise , and forthwith they shoot at we and wound we , and certain dead man fall upon we , and so we lay till night and dare not stir , and we hear great rumour in the city , and see many man and woman keep watch and ward upon the wall thereof , and after this we can not see Stephan any more , and we think they have shoot he to death , as they have do all the rest which go with he , so that none be escape but we only . Chap . 5 . the situation and greatness of the city of Cevola , and how friar Marcus take possession thereof and of other province , call the same . the new kingdom of saint Francis , and how after his departure from thence be preserve by God in so dangerous a voyage , he arrive at Compostella in Nueva Galicia . have consider the former report of the Indians , and the evil mean which i have to prosecute my voyage as i desire , i think it not good wilful to loose my life as Stephan do : and so i tell they , that God will punish those of Cevola , and that the viceroy when he shall understand what have happen , will send many Christians to chastise they : but they will not believe i , for they say that no man be able to withstand the power of Cevola . and herewithal i leave they , and go aside two or three stone cast , and when i return i find a indian of i which i have bring from Mexico call Marcus , who weep and say unto i : father , these man have consult to kill we , for they say , that through your and Stephans mean their father be slay , and that neither man nor woman of they shall remain unslain . 141 A . D . 1539 - then again i divide among they certain other thing which i have , to appease they , whereupon they be somewhat pacify , albeit they still show great grief for the people which be slay . i request some of they to go to Cevola , to see if any other indian be escape , with