there be store thereof . this night we see a fire far within the land towards those mountain , which make we think that the country be thorough inhabit . the next day be Sunday and innocent day , the 28 of the say month at break of day we set sail , and by nine or ten of the clock have sail three or four league , where we meet with a point which stretch toward the west , the pleasant situation whereof delight we much . from the eight and twenty of December we run our course until Thursday be newyeares day of the year 1540 , and we run some 40 league , pass by certain inlet and bay , and certain high mountain cover with grass in colour like rosemary : but towards the seaside very bare and burn , and towards the top be certain crag somewhat of a red colour , and beyond these appear certain white mountain , and so all the country show unto a point which appear beyond 252 those burn white and red mountain which have neither any grass nor tree upon they , whereat we marvel not a little . this newyeares day we see near the main two small hand , and rejoice great to see they ; for we stand in great fear , that contrary wind will drive we as far back in one day , as we have sail in ten , which if they have take we , we can not have withstand they . we run from the first of January until Monday which be five day , and the land always stretch northwest from the mountain aforesaid . and on the Sunday we see a far off " ahead of we a high land somewhat sever from the main shore , and all of we begin to dispute whether it be the land which trend towards the northwest , for that way the pilot hope to discover a better country : and the say Monday the five of Januarie we come to this high land beforesaid , and it be two hand the one a small one and the other a great one : we coast these two hand some six league , which be green , and have on the top of they many high slender tree ; and the great hand be twenty league in compass . we coast in 6 league in length without see or discover any other thing , but we see before we high land which stretch eight or ten league northward , where we ride on Monday at night . from Thursday be newyeares day until the next Monday we sail about 35 league . and in this course we feel great cold , which grieve we much , especial be assail by two or three windy shower which pinch we much with cold . we ride over against this land two or three night , have it near unto we , always keep watch by equal hour , one while mariner , and another soldier , all the night long with great vigilancy . on Tuesday be twelve day we come within two or three league of this land , which we have descry the day before , seem to we very pleasant for it show green with green tree of a ordinary bigness , and we see 253 two small islet near the main . Isla de Ids cedros mention in the 13 chapter the land trend here northwest 35 league . Thistle degree of northerly latitude . many valley , out of which certain small mist arise , which continue in they for a long time , whereupon we gather , that they rise out of certain river . the same morning , to our great comfort we see great smoke , though we be above four league distant from they , and the captain make no great reckon to approach near unto they , nor to seek nor search what the matter be , and perchance because he be not then in the Santa Agueda , but be aboard the Trinity , as his manner be to come and stay there two or three day , as well to pass the time , as to give order for thing that be needful . in this country the winter and rain seem to be like that of Castille . we ride all night two or three league distance from shore , and towards evening we see five or six fire , whereat we all rejoice , but do not marvel thereat , because the situation of that country show to be habitable , be fair , pleasant , and all green , and likewise because the hand which we have leave behind we be ( as i have say ) twenty league in circuit , make show that it be well people . on the Wednesday we be 3 or 4 league at sea from the land , and begin to see two fire more , and therefore we assure our self that the country be very well inhabit ; and the far we sail , we always find it more civil . and for the space of fifty league before we come hither we always find swim on the sea certain float of weed of a ship length , and of the breadth of two ship , be round and full of gourd , and under these weed be many fish , and on some of they be store of fowl like unto white sea - meawes . we suppose that these float weed do grow upon some rock under the water . we be now in 30 degree of northerly latitude . we sail from the 7 of January until the 9 still with contrary wind : and on fry day about noon there rise a north and northeastern wind , which force we to return under the shelter of that hand which we leave behind we , from whence we have sail above 254 twenty league . and that Friday at night somewhat twenty late we have sail back above twelve league of the same , and because it be night we stay in the sea , ofqedar . where we and our ship be not a little trouble , so that all that night none of we sleep a wink , but watch every one . the next morning betimes be Saturday we proceed on our voyage , and gate under the shelter of the say hand , ride in thirty fathom water : and