at four fathom about two hundred cubit from the land , and then the town of manilla be two league northward from we . Chap . 2 . the course and voyage of the aforesaid Francisco gualle out of the haven or road of manilla , to the haven of Macao in China , with all the course and situation of the place . sail out of the haven of cabite , lie in the bay of manilla , we hold our course westward for the space of eighteen league , to the point call el Cabo de sambaly : and when we be eight league in our way , we leave the two hand maribillas on the south side , and sail about a league from they : the point of sambalies aforesaid lie under fourteen degree , and f . be low land , at the end of the same coast of lu ^ on , on the west side . from the hook or point aforesaid , we run north , and north and by west , for the space of five and twenty league ( about a league from the coast of lu ^ on ) to the point call Cabo de Bullinao : all this coast and cape be high and hilly ground , which cape lie under sixteen degree and - | . from this cape de Bullinao we hold our course north , and north and by east , for 45 . league to the point call el Cabo de Bojador , which be the further land northward from the hand Lu . ? on lie under 19 degree . the cape de Bullinao be past the land make a great creek or bough , and from this creek the coast run north to the point of bojador , be a land full of cliff and rock that reach into the sea , and the land of the hook or point be high and hilly ground . from the point of bojador , we hold our course 332 westnorthwest a hundred and twenty league , until we come to the hand call at ilha Branca , or the white hand , lie in the begin of the coast and bay of the river Canton under two and twenty degree , have four and twenty fathom brown muddy ground . from the hand ilha Branca , we hold the aforesaid course of westnorthwest , for the space of sixteen league , to the hand of Macao lie in the mouth of the river of Canton , and it make the river to have two mouth or entry , and it be a small hand about three league great . Canton 22 . degree . the hand of Macao . Chap . 3 . the navigation or course of the aforesaid Francisco gualle out of the haven of Macao to new Spain , with the situation and stretching of the same , with other notable and memorable thing concern the same voyage . when we have prepare our self , and have take our leaf of our friend in Macao , we set sail upon the four and twenty of July , hold our course southeast , and southeast and by east , be in the wane of the moon : for when the moon increase , it be hard hold the course between the hand , because as then the water and stream run very strong to the northwest ; we travail through many narrow channel by night , have the depth of eight or ten fathom , with soft muddy ground , until we be about the hand ilha Branca , yet we see it not , but by the height we ilha Branca . know that we be past it . be beyond it , we run eastsoutheast a hundred and fifty league , to get above the sand call os Baixos do pescadore , and the begin of the hand Lequeos on the east side , which hand be call as s ilhasfer - ilhas fermosa , that be to say , the fair hand . this mosa ' i understand by a Chinar call santy of Chinchon , and he say that they lie under one and twenty degree and there it be thirty fathom deep : and although 333 we see they not , notwithstanding by the height and depth of the water we know we be past they . be pass as ilhas fermosa , or the fair hand , we hold our course east , and east and by north , for two hundred and sixty league , until we be past the length Lequeos . of the hand Lequeos , sail about fifty league from they : the say Chinar tell i , that those hand call lequeos be very many , and that they have many and very good haven , and that the people and inhabitant thereof have their face and body paint like the Bysayas of the hand of Lu . go or philippinas and be mine of gild . apparel like the Bysayas , and that there also be mine of gold : he say likewise that they do often come with small ship and bark lade with buck and harts - hides , and with gold in grain or very small piece , to traffic with they of the coast of China , which he assure i to be most true , say that he have be nine time in the small hand , bring of the same ware with he to China : which i believe to be true , for that afterward i inquire thereof in Macao , and upon the coast of China , and find that he say true . the further or uttermost of these hand stretch northward and eastward , lie under nine and twenty degree . be past these hand , than you come to the hand of japon , whereof the first lie west and south , be Firando . the hand of Firando , where the Portugal use to traffic : they be in length altogether a hundred and thirty league , and the further eastward lie under two and thirty degree : we run still east , and east and by north , until we be past the say hundred and thirty league . all this information i have of the aforesaid Chinar , as also that there i shall see some mine of brimstone or fiery hill , be seventie league beyond they , and thirty league further i shall find four hand lie together , which i likewise find , as he have tell i : and that be in japon , he say he have there 334 see certain man of a very small stature , with great roll of linen cloth about their head , that bring gold in small piece , and some white Cangas of cotton , ( which be piece of cotton -