other thing reserve this glass : and from thence also bring i . have now be conversant with they about three or four hour , they bid she ask i if i will go my way . i answer she , that i desire nothing else . So the cacique cause two of his Indians to lead i forward in my way ; go before i with their bow and arrow , naked , the space of three league , till they bring i into a high way : and then make a sign unto i , they signify that in short time i shall come to a town where Christians inhabit , which be call S . Iago de los valle , stand in plain field , wall about with a mud wall : the number of the Christians that dwell therein , be not above four or five and twenty , unto which the king of Spain give Indians and town , to keep the country subject unto he . here the Christians have their mighty mule , which they carry for all the part of the Indies , and into Peru , for that all their merchandise be carry by this mean by land . in this town aforesaid , i find my company , which i have lose before , who make no other account of i but that i have be slay : and the Christians there likewise marvel to hear that i come from those kind of indian alive , which be a thing never see nor hear of before : for they take a great pride in kill a christian , and to wear any part of he where he have any hair grow , hang it about their neck , and so be account for valiant man . in this town i remain eighteen day , till i recover my health , and in the mean space there come one don Francisco de Pago , who the viceroy don Henrico Manriques have send for captain general , to open and discover a certain way from the sea side to the mine of Sacatecas , which be from this place 160 league , for to transport their merchandise by that way , leave the way by Mexico , which be seven or eight week travel . so this captain take i and my company , with the rest of his soldier , to the number of forty , which he have bring with he , and five hundred 373 sant Iago de los valle . mighty mule . do Henrico Manriques viceroy of Mexico . the mine of Sacatecas . the valley of saint Michael . Pueblo nuevo . mechuacan . copper mine . campeche . Merida . Rio de Tabasco . indian , which we take out of two town in this province call Tanchipa , and Tamaclipa , all good archer , and naked man , and go thence to the river de las Palmas , which be of great bigness , part the kingdom of Nova Hispania and Florida : and go still along by this river the space of three day , seek passage to pass over ; and find none , we be at length enforce to cut timber to make a balsam or raft , which when we have make , we sit on it , the Indians swim in the water , and thrust it before they to the other side . within thirty day after , travel through wood , hill , and mountain , we come to the mine of Sacatecas , which be the rich mine in all the Indies , and from thence they fetch most silver : at which mine there dwell above three hundred Christians : and there our captain give we leave to depart . so we come to the valley of saint Michael towards Mexico ; and from thence to Pueblo novo ; and from that place to the province of mechuacan , after which name the chief city of that place be call : where there dwell a bishop , and above a hundred Spaniard in it : it abound with all kind of spanish fruit , and have wood full of nut tree , and wild vine . here be many mine of copper , and great store of cattle . it lie 60 . league from Mexico , whither we come within four day after . the Indians of this country be very mighty and big man . afterwards i return another way to the province of sonsonate by Vera cruz , and so to Rio Alvarado , and from thence to the province of campeche , which lie on the south side of the bay of Mexico : the chief town of this province be call Merida , in which be a bishop and almost 100 Spaniard . the Indians of this province pay all their tribute in mantle of cotton wool and cacao . there be no port in all this province for a ship of 100 tun to ride in , but only in the river of Tabasco , by which river this city of Merida stand . the chief merchandise which they lade there in small frigate , be a certain 374 wood call campeche , ( wherewith they use to die ) as also hide and annile . by this there lie the province of lucatan , near the Honduras by the north sea coast , where there be also another bishop , and a town likewise name lucatan , where there dwell a few Spaniard . they have no force at all in all this coast to defend themselves withal , save only that the land be low , and there be no port to receive any ship , unless they be frigate , which carry from thence to the port of saint John de ullua , wax , cacao , honey , and also mantle of cotton wool , whereof they make there great store , and of which kind of merchandise there be great trade thence to Mexico : of the same also they pay their tribute to the king . the king have tribute bring he yearly out of the Indies into Spain between nine and ten million of gold and silver : for he receive of every Indian which be subject unto he ( except those which