be so relieve , we have sure perish : and yet all the provision that we have get that way be but slender . And continue thus straight keep in prison there for the space of two month , at the length we agree among our self to break forth of prison , come of it what will , for we be mind rather to suffer death then long to live in that miserable state . and so have escape out of prison , we know not what way to fly for the safety of our self , the night be dark , and it rain terrible , and not have any guide , we go we know not whither , and in the morning , at the appear of the day , we perceive our self to be come hard to the city of Mexico , which be 24 English mile from Tescuco . the day be come we be espy by the Spaniard , and pursue , and take , and bring before the vice Roy and head justice , who threaten to hang english we for break of the king prison . yet in the end they e ^ emen send we into a garden belong to the vice Roy , and 6 ’ come thither , we find there our english gentleman 421 which be deliver as hostage when as our general be betray at saint John de ullua , as be aforesaid , and with they we also find Robert Barret , the master of the Jesus , in which place we remain labour and do such thing as we be command , for the space of 4 month , have but two sheep a day allow to almost a suffice we all , be very near a hundred man , and for bread we have every man two loaf a day , of the quantity prhonenTn one halfpenny loaf . at the end of which four Mexico , month , they have remove our gentleman hostage , and the master of the Jesus to a prison in the vice Roy his own house , do cause it to be proclaim , that what gentleman Spaniard soever be willing , or will have any english man to serve he , and be bind to keep he forth come , to appear before the justice within one month after notice give , that they shall repair to the say garden , and there take their choice : which proclamation be no soon make , but the gentleman come and repair to the garden amain , so that happy be he that can soon get one of we . Chap . 5 . wherein be show in what good sort , and how wealthy we live with our master until the come of the inquisition , when as again our sorrow begin a fresh : of our imprisonment in the holy house , and of the severe judgement and sentence give against we , and with what rigour and cruelty the same be execute . the gentleman that thus take we for their servant or slave do new apparel we through out , with who we abide , do such service as they appoint we unto , which be for the most part to attend upon they at the table , and to be as their chamberlain , and to wait upon they when they go abroad , which they great account of ; for in that country not Spaniard will serve one another , but they be all of they attend and serve by Indians weekly , and by negro which 422 be their slave during their life . in this sort we remain and serve in the say city of Mexico , and thereabouts for the space of a year and somewhat long . afterwards many of we be by our master appoint to go to sundry of their mine where they have to do , and to be as overseer of the negro and Indians that labour there . in which mine many of we do profit and gain great : for first we be allow three hundred pezo a man for a year , which be threescore pound sterling , and beside that the Indians and negro which wrought under our charge , upon our well use and entreat of they , will at time as upon Saturdayes when they have leave work , labour for we , and blow as much silver as shall be worth unto we 3 mark or thereabouts , every mark be worth 6 pezo , and a half of their money , which 19 pezo and a half , be worth 4il 10 . of our money . sundry week we do gain so much by this mean beside our wage , that many of we become very rich , and be worth three thousand or four thousand pezo , for we live and gain thus in those mine some three or four year . as concern those gentleman which be deliver as hostage , and that be keep in prison , in the viceroy his house , after that we be go from out the garden to serve sundry gentleman as aforesaid , they remain prisoner in the say house for the space of 4 month after their come thither , at the end whereof the fleet be ready to depart from saint John de ullua , to go for Spain , the say gentleman be send away into Spain with the fleet , where as i have hear it credible report , many of they die with the cruel handle of the Spaniard in the inquisition house , as those which have be deliver home after they have suffer the persecution of that house can more perfect declare . Robert Barret also master of the Jesus , be send away with the fleet into Spain the next year follow , where afterward he suffer persecution in the inquisition , and at the last be con - 423 demean to be burn , and with he one more of our man who name be John Gilbert . now after that six year be full expire since our first come into the Indies , in which time we have be imprison and serve in the say country as be before true declare , in the year of our lord one thousand five hundred seventie four , the inquisition begin to be establish in the Indies ,