with the Frenchman in she go aboard the other ship that lie 340 hard by lade with sugar , and drive the Spaniard that be in she under hatch , and present let slip her cable and anchor , and set sail and carry she clean away , and after this sort deceive they : and they think or fear that we be the like , do shoot at we as they do . This be pass , the next day after our arrival in the say port , we do unbark our self and go on land up to the city or head town of the great Canaria , where we remain 18 . or 20 . day : and there find certain Englishman merchant servant of one Anthony ^ ngushfactors Hickman and Edward Castelin , merchant of the city the grand or . London that lie there in traffic , or who we receive great courtesy and much good cheer . after the which 20 . day be pass , in the which we have see the country , the people , and the disposition thereof , we depart from thence , and pass to the next he of the canary 18 . league off , call TenerifFe , and be come on land , go up to the city call la Laguna , where we remain 7 . month , attend the come of the whole fleet , which in the end come , and there have take that which they have need of , we ship our self in a ship of Cadiz , be one of the say fleet , which be belong to a Englishman John sweat marry in the city of Cadiz in Spain , who name be John sweat , and there come in the say ship for Cadiz , send captain also a Englishman marry in Cadiz , and son a ship of he in law to the say John sweat , who name be own int0 Leonard Chilton : there come also in the say ship another Englishman which have be a merchant of dust of his the city of Exeter , one of 50 . year or thereabouts , who son in law name be Ralph Sarre . so that we depart from Leonard chil - the say hand in the month of October the fore - rre ^^ say year , 8 . ship in our company , and so direct ’ our course towards the bay of Mexico , and by the way towards the hand of S . Domingo , otherwise call Hispaniola . so that within 32 . day after we depart from the isle of canary we arrive with our ship at the port of saint Domingo , and go in over the 341 many of our man die of these noorme at the take of Puerto rico . bar where our ship knock her keel at her entry : and there our ship rid before the town , where we go on land , 8c refresh our self 16 . day , where we find no bread make of wheat , but biscuit bring out of Spain , and out of the bay of Mexico : for the country it self do yield no kind of bread to make grain withal . but the bread they make there , be certain cake make of root call Cassavi , which be something substantiali , but it have but a unsavoury taste in the eat thereof . flesh of beef and mutton they have great store : for there be man that have 10000 head of cattle , of ox , bull and cow , which they do keep only for the hide : for the quantity of flesh be so great , that they be not able to spend the hundred part . hog flesh be there good store , very sweet and savoury , and so wholesome , that they give it to sick folk to eat in stead of hen and capon , although they have good store of poultry of that sort , as also of guinycock 8c Guinyhens . at the time of our be there , the city of saint Domingo be not off above 500 household of Spaniards , but of the indian dwelling in the suburb there be more . the country be most part of the year very hot , 8c very full of a kind of fly or gnat with long bill , which do prick 8c molest the people very much in the night when they be asleep , in prick their face and hand , and other part of their body that lie uncover , 8c make they to swell wonderful . also there be another kind of small worm which creep into the sole of man foot 8c especial of the black moor and child which use to go barefoot , 8c make their foot to grow as big as a man head , 8c do so ache that it will make one run mad . they have no remedy for the same , but to open the flesh sometime 3 . or 4 . inch 8c so dig they out . the country yield great store of sugar , hide of ox , bull and cow , ginger , Cana fistula 8c Salsa perillia : mine of silver 8c gold there be none , but in some river there be 342 find some small quantity of gold . the principal coin that they do traffic withal in that place , be black money make of copper and brass : and this they say they do use not for that they lack money of gold and silver to trade withal out of the other part of India , but because if they shall have good money , the merchant that deal with they in trade , will carry away their gold and silver , and let the country commodity lie still . and thus much for saint Domingo . so we be come from the isle of canary to saint Domingo , and there stay until the month of December , which be 3 . month . about the begin of January we depart thence towards the bay of Mexico and new Spain , towards which we set our course , and so sail 24 . day till we come within 15 . league of saint John de ullua , which be the port of Mexico of our right discharge : and be so near our say port , there rise a storm of northerly wind , which come off from terra Florida , which cause we to cast about into the sea again , for fear lest that night we shall be cast upon the shore before