ej anj bring open such marcban 0 392 dize as they have need of . and of these thing there have be bring into new Spain both cloth of gold and silver , and diverse manner of silk , and work of gold and silver , marvelous to be see . so by their say , there be not such a country in the whole world . the main land be from the island 190 . league : and the island be not far from the Malucos northwards . and the people of those island , which the Spaniard have , say , that if they will bring their wife and child , that than they shall have among they what they will have . so there go woman daily , and the king pay all the charge of the marry man and their wife , that go to those island . and there be no doubt but the trade will be marvelous rich in time to come . it be my fortune to be in company with one Diego Gutieres , who be the first pilot that ever go to that country of the phillippinas . he make report of many strange thing in that country , aswell riches , as other , and say , if there be any paradise upon earth , it be in that country : and add , that sit under a tree , you shall have such sweet smell , with such great content and pleasure , that you shall remember nothing , neither wife , nor child , nor have any kind of appetite to eat or drink , the odoriferous smell will be so sweet . this man have good live in Nova Hispania , notwithstanding he will return thither , with his wife and child , and as for treasure there be abundance , as he make mention . in this country of Nova Hispania there be many buck and do , but they have not so long home as they have here in England . the Spaniard kill they with handgun and with grayhound , and the Indians kill they with their bow and arrow , and with the skin they make chamoyce , such as we in Eng - chamoue . land make doublet and hose of , as good as the skin that spanish be dress in Flanders , and likewise they make marvelous leather . good spanish leather of they . there be a bird which be like unto a raven , but he have some of his feather white : voure c ’ ar 0 there be such abundance of they , that they eat all the rion . 393 wrong do to the indian punish . justice you cause of civil tie . corrupt and dead flesh which be in the country . otherwise the abundance of carrion be so much , that it will make a marvelous corrupt air in all the country , and be so noisome , that no man can abide it . therefore it be command there shall none of they be kill . Theise bird be always about city , and town , where there be much flesh kill . the indian be much favour by the justice of the country , and they call they their orphan . and if any Spaniard shall happen to do any of they harm , or to wrong he in take any thing from he , as many time they do , or to strike any of they , be in any town , whereas justice be , they be aswell punish for the same , as if they have do it one Spaniard to another . when a Spaniard be far from Mexico , or any place of justice , think to do with the poor indian what he list , consider he be so far from any place of remedy , he make the indian do what he command he , and if he will not do it , he beat and misuse he , accord to his own appetite . the indian hold his peace , until he find a opportunity , and then take a neighbour with he , and go to Mexico , although it be 20 . league off , and make his complaint . this his complaint be immediate hear , and although it be a knight , or a right good gentleman , he be forthwith send for , and punish both by his good , and also his person be imprison , at the pleasure of the justice . this be the occasion that the Indians be so tame and civil , as they be : and if they shall not have this favour , the Spaniard will soon dispatch all the Indians , or the Indians will kill they . but they may call they dog , and use other evil word , as much as they will , and the indian must needs put it up , and go his way . the poor Indians will go every day two or three league to a fair or market with a child upon their neck , with as much fruit or root , or some kind of ware , as cotton wool , or cadis of all colour , as shall be not past worth a penny : and they will maintain they - 394 i572 - selve upon the same . for they live with a marvelous small matter . they be in such poverty , that if you need to ride into the country , you shall have a indian to go with you all the day with your bed upon his back , for one royal of plate : and this you shall have from one town to another . here you be to understand , that all man that travel by the way , be always wont to carry their bed with they . they be great thief , and will steal all that they may , and you shall have no recom penny at their hand . the garment of the woman , be in this manner . The the apparel uppermost part be make almost like to a woman smock , of the Indians . save that it be as broad above as beneath , and have no sleeve , but hole on each side one to put out their arm .