be in danger of present shipwreck and loss of all their substance , which amount unto the value of one million and eight itisputdowne hundred thousand pound . again he see that if he suffer they to enter , he be assure that they ns ^ t it will practise by all manner of mean to betray he relation . and his , and on the other side the haven be so little , that the other fleet enter , the ship be to ride one hard aboard of another . also he see that if their fleet shall perish by his keep of they out , as of necessity they must if he shall have do so , then stand he in great fear of the queen our sovereign displeasure in so weighty a cause : therefore do he choose the least evil , which be to suffer they to enter under assurance , and so to stand upon his guard , and to defend himself and he from their treason which we be well assure they will practise , and so the messenger be return from don Martin de Henriques , the new viceroy , who come in the same fleet , and have sufficient authority to command in all case both 403 4 . article conclude upon , betwixt the english y the Spaniard ; although the treacherous Spaniards keep none of they . by sea and by land in this province of Mexico or new Spain , do certify our general , that for the better maintenance of amity between the king of Spain and our sovereign , all our request shall be both favourable grant , and faithful perform : signify further that he hear and understand of the honest and friendly deal of our general , towards the king of Spain subject in all place where he have be , as also in the say port : so that to be brief our request be article , and set down in writing . viz 1 the first be that we may have victual for our money , and license to sell as much ware , as may suffice to furnish our want . 2 the second , that we may be suffer peaceable to repair our ship . 3 the third that the island may be in our possession during the time of our abode there , in which island our general for the better safety of he and he , have already plant and place certain ordinance which be eleven piece of brass , therefore he require that the same may so continue , and that no Spaniard shall come to land in they . say island , have or wear any kind of weapon about he . 4 the four and the last , that for the better and more sure performance and maintenance of peace , and of all the condition , there may twelve gentleman of credit be deliver of either part as hostage . these condition be conclude and agree upon in write by the viceroy and sign with his hand , and seal with his seal , and 10 . hostage upon either part be receive . and further it be conclude that the two general shall meet , and give faith each to other for the performance of the premise . all which be do , the same be proclaim by the sound of a trumpet , and commandment be give that none of either part shall violate or break the peace upon pain of death : thus at the end of three day all be conclude , and the fleet enter the port , the ship 404 salute one another as the manner of the sea do require : the morrow after be Friday we labour on all side in place the english ship by themselves , and the spanish ship by themselves , the captain and inferior person of either part , offer , and show great courtesy one to another , and promise great amity upon all side . howbeit as the sequel show , the Spaniard mean nothing less upon their part . for the viceroy and governor thereabouts have secret at land assemble to the number of 1000 choose man , and well appoint , mean the next Thursday be the 24 . of September at dinner time to assault we , and set upon we on all side . but before i go any further , i think it not amiss brief to describe the manner of the island as it then be , and the force and strength , that it be now of . for the Spaniard since the time of our general be there , for the better fortify of the same place , have upon the same island build a fair castle , fain cutie and bulwark very well fortify : this port be then at our being there , a little island of stone , not past three faylaiuiqf foot above water in the high place , and not past a san Juan de bowshot over any way at the most , and it stand Ullua . from the main land , two bowshoote or moor : and there be not in all this coast any other place for ship safe to arrive at : also the north wind in this coast be of great violence and force , and unless the ship be safe more in , with their anchor fasten in this island , there be no remedy , but present destruction and shipwreck . all this our general wise foresee , do provide that he will have the say island in his custody , or else the Spaniard may at their pleasure , have but cut our cable , and so with the first northwind that blow we have have our passport , for our ship have go a shore . but to return to the matter . the time approach that their treason must be put in practice , the same Thursday morning , some appearance thereof begin to show it self , as shift of weapon from ship to ship , and plant , and bend thpir 405 the value of a spanishvice - roy his faith . the villainous treachery of the Spaniard and their cruelty . ordinance against our man that ward upon the land , with great repair of people : which apparent show of breach of the viceroy faith cause our general to send one to