this city , and of the rest , lie about Mexico , go clothe with mantle of linen cloth make of cotton wool , paint throughout with work of diverse and fine colour . it be distant from the city of the angel four Tlaxcalla league to the northward , and fourteen from Mexico . league there be another city a league from it , call Chetula , consist of more than sixty thousand Indians , tributary , angel . and there dwell not above twelve Spaniard there . from it , about two league , there be another , call Acassingo , of above fifty thousand Indians , and about eight or twelve Spaniard , which stand at the foot of the Vulcan of Mexico , on the east side . there be vukan be a beside these , three other great city , the one name ml that c < > n - tepiaca , a very famous city , Waxazingo , and tichama - chalcho : all these in time past belong to the kingdom ' of Tlaxcalla : and from these city they bring most of their Cochinilia into Spain . the distance from the Cochinilia . city of the angel , to the city of Mexico be twenty Pueblo de los league . this city of Mexico be the city of great angeles20 fame in all the Indies , have goodly and costly house in it , build all of lime and stone , and seven street ’ in length , and seven in breadth , with river run through every second street , by which they bring their provision in canoas . it be situate at the foot of certain hill , which contain in compass by estimation above twenty league , compass the say city on the one side , and a lake which be fourteen league about on the other side . upon which lake there be build many notable and sumptuous city , as the city of Tescuco , where the Spaniard build six frigate , at that time when they conquer Mexico , and where also Fernando Cortes make his abode five or six month in cure of the sickness of his people , which they have take at their come into the country . there dwell 363 he voyage from Mexico to Nueva Biscaia . new Biscay . the silver mine of tamascaltepec . the valley of saint barthoh - mew . the haven where you ship of China in thephiuppinas arrive . guaxaca . in this city about sixty thousand Indians , which pay tribute to the king . in this city the say Fernando build the fine church that ever be build in the Indies , the name whereof be saint Peter . after i have continue two year in this city , be desirous to see further the country , i employ that which i have , and take my voyage towards the province of California , in the which be discover a certain country , by a Biscaine , who name be Diego the guiara , and call it after the name of his country , new Biscay , where i sell my merchandise for exchange of silver , for there be there certain rich mine discover by the aforesaid biskaine . go from Mexico i direct my voyage somewhat towards the southwest , to certain mine , call Tamascaltepec , and so travel forward the space of twenty day through desert place unhabit , till i come to the valley of saint Bartholomew , which join to the province of new Biscay . in all these place the Indians for the most part go naked , and be wild people . their common armour be bow and arrow : they use to eat up such Christians as they come by . from hence depart , i come to another province name Xalisco , and from thence to the port of Navidad , which be 120 league from Mexico , in which port arrive always in the month of April , all the ship that come out of the south sea from China , and then philippinas , and there they lie their merchandise ashore . the most part whereof be mantle mad of cotton wool , wax , and fine platter gild , make of earth , and much gold . the next summer follow , be in the year 1570 ( which be the first year that the pope Buis be bring into the Indies ) i undertake another voyage towards the province of sonsonate , which be in the kingdom of Guatimala , whither i carry diverse merchandise of Spain , all by land on mule back . the way thitherward from Mexico be to the city of the angel , and from thence to another city of Christians 80 league off , call Guaxaca , in which there dwell about counterfeit 3 ^ 4 Spaniard , and many Indians . all the Indians of this province pay their tribute in mantle of cotton wool , and Cochinilia , whereof there grow abundance throughout this country . near to this place there lie a port in the south sea , call Aguatulco , in the which there agwtuko . dwell not above three or four Spaniard , with certain negro , which the king maintain there : in which place sir Francis Drake arrive in the year 1579 , in the month of April , where i lose with his be there above a thousand ducat , which he take away , with much other good of other merchant of Mexico from one Francisco Gomes Rangifa , factor there for all the spanish merchant that then trade in the south sea : for from this port they use to embark all their good that go for Peru , and to the kingdom of Honduras . from Guaxaca i come to a town name Nixapa , which stand Nixapa . upon certain very high hill in the province of sapot - Sapotecas . ecas , wherein inhabit about the number of twenty Spaniard , by the king of Spain commandment , to keep that country in peace : for the Indians be very rebellious : and for this purpose he bestow on they the town and city that be within that province . from hence i go to a city call Tecoantepec , which be the