navigable 8 . month in the year , and the other 4 . not , because that the sand of the plain do soak and drink up the water in such wise , that there remain so little , that there be no passage : howbeit in small lighter timber may be bring down this river one league from the place where it be cut , unto the place that i have speak of ; whereas big vessel may be make ; for nigh unto that place other brook and run water do join and meet , which make it a main river . it have nigh unto it in the mountain of Atoyaque , Cacatepec , and Amusgos many wood of pinetree , cork - tree , and oak of great bigness : and beneath those mountain in the warm country , near unto the river there be much 469 timber of those sort which i mention before to be about the river of Ometepec , which may easy be cut and carry down unto Tecuanapa in the time before specify . this river have likewise town adjoin to it ; the first at the foot of the mountain be the town of Atoiaque . Atoiaque belong to the king , and to the heir of Pronetto : their language be Niciecan , the country hot , the people politic , and it be from the sea 15 . league . it have about 200 . Indians . one league from this town , and 14 . from the sea Xicaian . be the town of Xicaian belong likewise to the king , and to the heir of Pronetto . they be Niciecan people and very comely , and in a hot country . it have by account 300 . Indians . there be resident in it the vicar and justice ; it be from the river a league and a half . a league from this town , and 14 . from the sea be pinotespan . situate the mansion of pinotespan subject to Tututepec , which have with the manor subject unto it 500 Indians . two league from the town , and one from Xicayan , and 13 . from Tecuanapa , and 3 . from the river be then the town of town of tlacamama : the people be very comely and tlacamama . poiit ; que . it contain some 100 Indians , and belongeth to the king . more towards the south 5 . league from the river , and two from this town , and 14 . from the sea be the town call Pinotespan deal Rey : they be handsome people , but of slow speech : this town contain about 100 indian like unto the former . they be wealthy , because a lake have they make great quantity of salt ; for they have a hard salt saite grow under the water , ( a thing the water . repugnant to nature , that two contrary do grow and be conserve together ) whereout they take it in break it with stone upon the ground under the water . it have also the town of Amusgos , which be in the 47 ° government of Fernando de Avila , which may be from tecuanapa 18 . league . they speak the Amusgan tongue . the country be hot : it stand on the high way from Nicieca : it have 400 . Indians , few more or less . these be all the town of account situate near this river . near upon this river be two farm , the one belong to Pedro Bravo , and the other to he that make this relation unto your excellency , which may be from the sea some 8 . or 9 league all plain ground . and in this territory there be but one town call Quesala situate upon the river , and 6 . league from the sea ; which in time pass have be a great town , and now have but three Indians only , and it be from the farm 3 . league . the mansion house of don Mattheo be more towards the south , stand in a large mountainous and waste country , which abound with cattle be 3 . league from the river ; and as far from Tecuanapa , as from the place where all the cattle be ; and the sea that way be from it but one league . a little below this mansion about 4 . league , and 7 . league from the sea , be a garden of Alonso Pedraza which bear Cacao . and 2 . league from this garden and 6 . league from the sea stand the town of Cuahintlan belong to the king , a town of 19 household , but very rich , for they gather much Cacao and the best in that country . they speak the Tlapanecan tongue . this town have the sea that way within half a league . and this coast from Cuahintlan to Tecuanapa , and the coast which run to Huatulco be a coast of much pearl , for in old time the Indians gather much pearl there . and 2 . league from Cuahintlan and 4 . from Tecuanapa be a garden of Cacao in the land of Francisco Maldonado , which be call cacahu - atoyaque . 471 Quesala . Cuahintlan del Rey . Huatulco or Guatulco in 15 . deg . and 50 . minute . the province of Tututepec and Tlapa . these be the thing worthy of relation from the head - spring of this river of tlacamama unto the sea : and this foresay river enter into the river of Ometepec 5 . league from Tecuanapa . the river of Tlacolula spring within the bound of Chilsiztlahuaca subject to Comastlahuaca a town of Suchistlahuaca , near which be many mountain . this river be navigable little moor than 2 . league before it enter into the river of Ometepec , where it be 5 . league from the sea . hard by it be the town of Tlacolula abovenamed ; and 3 . league from it be the town of Azoyoque a old manor of Tlapa . the town of Chilsiztlahuaca have but 3 . Indians ; and the town of Azoyoque have more than 300 . Indians . but because in this haven must be the build of ship , the province of Tlapa and Tututepec may stand they in great stead ; the province of Tututepec be neighbour to the river of tlacamama , and the province of Tlapa to the river of Tlacolula . for they may , as i have say , carry the timber in lighter or raft down the river , and may use the indian in the town thereabouts to fall , and draw the same out of the cold mountain ; for in the warm country the most be plain ground , whereas with very few man and ox it may be bring unto the place where it shall be embark . there may come flat bottom , and canoas unto the town thereabouts , and lade themselves with victual : for they have already come by that river to the road of Ometepec , and make there provision at the mansion of don Mattheo , and at the farm , at that time when his majesty do people the plain which be between these river , contain a large and void country sufficient for the erect of 20 . manor , be a country well furnish with water and pasture without any danger or peril , accord to the description hereunto annex . this small harbour of Tecuanapa be see and view , seem very commodious for to build ship 472 in , by reason of the great abundance of mountain full tecuanapa a of good timber for that purpose , with the commodity of most fit har - river , and with the service and victual from the town p ^ idMpsfior thereabouts , which be very good for coast town . south sea . the desire of he that make this relation , have be with zeal to serve your excellency ; who therewithal ! desire the lord God to give the success .