linen so call by the chinar ) as also saltfish like the spanish atun , or Tunney , which he say come out of other island east - hand ward from japon : and by the token and mark which eastward , ) f he show i , i guess whereabout those hand shall ‘ be , and find they not far from whence he say they lie . he say likewise that all the hand of japon have good haven and channel , be a country full of rice , corn , fish , and flesh , and that they be a in - difierent and reasonable people to trafiique with , and that there they have much silver . run thus east , and east and by north about three hundred league from japon , we find a very hollow water , with the stream run out of the north and northwest , with a full and very broad sea , without any hindrance or trouble in the way that we pass : and what wind soever blow , the sea continue all in one sort , with the same hollow water and stream , until we have pass seven hundred league . about JaPm 9 °°- two hundred league from the coast and land of new Spain we begin to lose the say hollow sea and America in stream : whereby i most assure think and believe , 37 degree that there you shall find a channel or straight passage , awl 1111 between the firm land of new Spain , and the country of Asia and Tartary . likewise all this way from the aforesaid seven hundred league , we find a great number of whale - fish and other fish call by the Spaniard atun or tunny , whereof many be find on the coast of Gibraltar in Spain , as also alba - coras and bonito , which be all fish , which common keep in channel , straight , and run water , there to disperse their seed when they breed : which make i more assure believe , that thereabouts be a channel or straight to pass through . be by the same course upon the coast of new 335 seven and Spain , under seven and thirty degree and J . we am &' and pass by a very high and fair land with many tree , read Francis whole without snow , and four league from the land , Ulloa chapter 16 . you find thereabouts many drift of root , leaf of tree , reed , and other leaf like fig leave , the like whereof we find in great abundance in the country of japon , which they eat : and some of those that we find , 1 cause to be sodden with flesh , and be sodden , they eat like colewort : there likewise we find great store of seal : whereby it be to be presume and certain to be believe , that there be many river , bay , and haven along by those coast to the haven of Acapulco . from thence we run southeast , southeast and by south , and southeast and by east , as we find the Cabo de San wind , to the point call el Cabo de Sant Lucas , which Lucas in 22 . js he beginning of the land of California , on the northwest side , lie under two and twenty degree , be five hundred league distant from cape Mendocino . in this way of the aforesaid five hundred league along by the coast , be many hand : and although they be but small , yet without doubt there be in they some haven late good haven , as also in the firm land , where you have find out . these haven follow , now late find out , as that of they he of Sant Augustine , lie under thirty degree and 4 . and the hand call Isla de cedros , scarce under eight and twenty deg . and j . and the hand lie beneath saint Martyn , under three and twenty degree and J . all this coast and country , as i think , be inhabit , and show to be a very good country : for there by night we see fire , and by day smoke , which be a most sure token that they be inhabit . from the point or hook of saint Lucas , to the southeast side of California , we hold our course eastsoutheast , for the space of 80 . league , to the point call el cabo de las corriente , that be , the cape of the stream lie under 19 degree and f . And run this course , northward about a league from we we see 33 < 5 1584 . three hand call las tres Maria , ( that be to say , the three Maries ) run the same course . about four league from the other hand , there be other hand , reach about two or three league : all this way from the mouth or gulf of California aforesaid , for the space of the say fourscore league , there be great stream that run westward . from the point or cape de las Corrientes , we run southeast , and sometime southeast and by east , for the space of a hundred and thirty league to the haven of Acapulco . in this way of a hundred and thirty league , be twenty league on the way , we have the haven of Natividad , that be , of the birth of the virgin mary : and other eight league further , the haven of saint Iago , or saint James : and six league further , the sea strand call la Playa de Colima , that be , the strand of Colima . all this coast from California to the haven of Acapulco be Acapulco . inhabit by people that have peace and traffic with the Spaniard , and be of condition and quality like the people of the other place of new Spain . the conclusion of the author of this last voyage . a li this description and navigation have i my self scene , prove , and well note in my voyage make and end in the year of our lord 1584 . from great china out of the haven and river of Canton , as i will more at large set it down unto your honour , with the longitude and latitude thereof , as God shall permit i time and leisure , who i beseech to send you long and happy day . and the same be true translate out of spanish into low dutch verbatim out of the originali copy , ( which be send unto the viceroy of the Portugal Indies ) by John huyghen van Linschoten .