dear , and crane , and wild goose , duck and other foul , and worm , and snake , and diverse other vermin , which they eat . they live very long : for i have see man that have be a hundred year of age . they have but very little hair in their face , nor on their body . the indian have the friar in great reverence : the occasion be , that by they and by their mean they be free and out of bondage ; which be so ordain by Charles the emperor : which be the occasion that now there be not so much gold and silver come into Europe as there be while the indian be slave . for when they be in bondage they can not choose but do their task every day , and bring their master so much metal out of their mine : but now they must be well pay , and much entreat to have they work . so it have be , and be a great hindrance to the owner of the mine , and to the king quinto or custom . there be many mine of copper in great quantity , whereof they spend in the country as much as serve their turn . there be some gold in it , but not so much as will pay the cost of the fine . the quantity of it be such , and the mine be so far from the sea , that it will not be worth the fraught to carry it into Spain . on the other side , the king officer will give no licence to make ordinance thereof ; whereupon the mine lie unlaboured , and of no valuation . there be much lead in the country ; so that with it they cover church , and other religious house : wherefore they shall not need any of our lead , as they have have need thereof in time past . the pomp and liberality of the owner of the mine 388 be marvellous to behold : the apparel both of they and of their wife be more to be compare to the apparel of noble person then otherwise . if their wife go out of their house , as unto the church , or any other place , they go out with great majesty , and with as many man and maid as though she be the wife of some noble man . i will assure you , i have see a miner wife go to the church with a hundred man , and twenty gentlewoman and maid . they keep open house : who will , may come to eat their meat . they call man with a bell to come to dinner and supper . they be prince in keep of their house , and bountiful in all manner of thing . a good owner of mine must have at the least a thing neces - hundred slave to carry and to stamp his metal ; he sap ‘° mines must have many mule , and man to keep the mine ; he must have mill to stamp his metal ; he must have 6 many wain and ox to bring home wood to fine the oar ; he must have much quicksilver , and a marvellous quantity of salt - brine for the metal ; and he must be at many other charge . and as for this charge of quicksilver , it be a new invention , which they find more profitable than to fine their oar with lead . howbeit the same be very costly : for there be never a hundred of quicksilver but cost at the least threescore pound sterling . and the mine fall daily in decay , and of less value : and the occasion be , the few Indians that man have to labour their mine . there be in new Spain a marvellous increase of cattle , the plenty of which daily do increase , and they be of a great growth catteli - then we be . you may have a great steer that have a hundred weight of tallow in his belly for sixteen shilling ; and some one man have 20000 head of cattle of his own . they sell the hide unto the merchant , who lade into Spain as many as may be well spare . they spend many in the country in shoe and boot , and in the mine : and as the country be great , so be the increase of the cattle wonder . in the island of Santo Domingo they common kill the beast for their hide 389 and tallow ; and the fowl eat the carcase : and so they do in Cuba and Porto Rico , whereas there be much sugar , and cana fistula , which daily they send into Spain . Sheene . they have great increase of sheep in like manner , and daily do intend to increase they . they have much wool . wool , and as good as the wool of Spain . they make cloth . cloth as much as serve the country , for the common people , and send much cloth into Peru . i have see cloth make in the city of Mexico , which have be sell for ten pezo a vare , which be almost four pound English , and the vare be less than our yard . they have wood . woad grow in the country , and alum , and brazil , and Prosili diverse other thing to die withal , so that they make all ‘ colour . in Peru they make no cloth : but hereafter our cloth will be little set by in these part , unless it be some fine cloth . the wool be common four shilling every rove , which be five and twenty pound : and in some place of the country that be far from the place where as they make cloth , it be worth nothing , and do serve but only to make bed for man to lie on . they make hat , as many as do serve the country , very fine and good , and sell they better cheap , than they can be bring out of Spain , and in like manner send they into Peru .