faith and promise give , and seek to have entrap we . a li thing be make in a readiness , at our general his appointment , upon the third day of February 1568 . we depart from the coast of Africa , have the 400 weather somewhat tempestuous , which make our passage the more hard ; and sail so for the space of 52 . day , upon the 27 . of march 1568 . we come in sight of a island call Dominica , upon the coast of America in the west Indies , situate in 14 . degree of latitude , and 322 . of longitude : from thence our general coast from place to place , ever make traffic with the Spaniard and Indians as he may , which be somewhat hardly obtain , for that the king have straight charge all his governor in those part not to trade with any : yet notwithstanding , during the month of April and may , our general have reasonable trade and traffic , and courteous entertainment in sundry place , as at Margarita , Coragao , and else where , till we come to cape de la vela , and Rio de Hacha , ( a place from whence all the pearl do come : ) the governor there will not by any mean permit we to have any trade or traffic , nor yet suffer we to take in fresh water : by mean whereof our general for the avoid of famine and thirst about the begin of June , be enforce to land two hundred of our man , and so by main force and strength to obtain that which by no fair mean he can procure : and so recover the town with the loss of two of our man , there be a secret and peaceable trade admit , and the Spaniard come in by night , and buy of our negro to the number of 200 . and upward , and of our other merchandise also . from thence we depart for Carthagena , where the governor be so straight , that we can not obtain any traffic there , and so for that our trade be near finish , our general think it best to depart from thence the rather for the avoid of certain dangerous storm call the huri - canos , which accustom to begin there about that time of the year , and so the 24 . of July 1568 . we depart from thence direct our course north : and leave the island of Cuba upon our right hand , to the eastward of we , and so sail towards Florida upon the 12 . of August a extreme tempest arise , which dure for the space of ix 401 2c Mexico 60 . league from 8 . Juan de ullua . 8 day , in which our ship be most dangerous toss and beat hither , and thither , so that we be in continual fear to be drown by reason of the shallowness of the coast , and in the end we be constrain to flee for succour to the port of saint John de ullua , or Vera Cruz , situate in 19 degree of latitude , and in 279 . degree of longitude , which be the port that serve for the city of Mexico : in our seek to recover this port our general meet by the way three small ship that carry passenger , which he take with he , and so the sixteenth of September 1568 . we enter the say port of saint John de ullua . the Spaniard there suppose we to have be the king of Spain fleet , the chief officer of the country thereabouts come present aboard our general , where perceive themselves to have make a unwise adventure , they be in great fear to have be take and stay : howbeit our general do use they all very courteous . in the say port there be twelve ship which by report have in they in treasure to the value of two hundred thousand pound all which be in our general his power and at his devotion , he do free set at liberty , as also the passenger which he have before stay , not take from any of they all the value of one groat : only he stay two man of credit and account , the one name don Laurenzo de Alva , and the other don Pedro de Rivera , and present our general send to the viceroy to Mexico which be threescore league off , certify he of our arrival there by force of weather , desire that forasmuch as our queen his sovereign , be the king of Spain his love sister and friend , that therefore he will , consider our necessity and want , furnish we with victual for our navy , and quiet suffer we to repair and amend our ship . and furthermore that at the arrival of the spanish fleet which be there daily expect and look for , to the end that there may not quarrel arise between they , and our general and his company for the breach of amity , he humble request of his excellency , that there 402 may in this behalf some special order be take . this message be send away the 16 . of September 1568 . it be the very day of our arrival there . the next morning be the sevententh of the same month , we descry 13 . sail of great ship : and after that our general understand , that it be the king of Spain fleet then look for , he present send to advertise the general hereof , of our be in the say port , and give he further to understand , that before he shall enter there into that harbour , it be requisite that there shall pass between the two general some order and condition to be observe on either part , for the better contrive of peace between they and they , accord to our general request make unto the viceroy . and at this instant our general be in a great perplexity of mind , consider with himself that if he shall keep out that fleet from enter into the port , a thing which he be very well able to do with the help of God , then shall that fleet