°° - negro king drive 7000 negro into you sea at low water , ta ^ en ' at the point of the land , where they be all drown in the Oz , for that they can not take their canoas to save themselves . we return back again in our pinnace to the ship , and there take in fresh water , and make ready sail towards Rio grande . at our come thither Rio grande . we enter with the angel , the Judith , and the 2 pinnace , 447 burboroata . and find there seven Portugal caravel , which make great fight with we . in the end by god help we win the victory , and drive they to the shore , from whence with the negro they flee , and we fetch the carvel from the shore into the river . the next morning m . Francis drake with his carvel , the swallow , and the William and John come into the river , with captain Dudley and his soldier , who land be but a hundred soldier , and fight with seven thousand negro , burn the town , and return to our general with the loss of one man . in that place there be many musk - cat , which breed in hollow tree : the negro take they in a net , and put they in a cage , and nourish they very dainty , and take the musk from they with a spoon . now we direct our course from Guinea towards the west Indies . and by the way die captain Dudley . in sail towards the Indies , the first land that we escry , be the hand call Dominica , where at our come we anchor , and take in fresh water and wood for our provision : which do , we sail towards the hand call Margarita , where our general in despite of the Spaniard anchor , land , and take in fresh victual . a mile off the hand there be a rock in the sea , wherein do breed many fowl like unto barnacle : in the night we go out in our boat , and with cudgel we kill many of they , and bring they with many of their egg aboard with we : their egg be as big as Turkey egg , and speckle like they . we do eat they , and find they very good meat . from thence we sail to Burboroata , which be in the main land of the west Indies : there we come in , more our ship , and tarry two month trim and dress our ship , and in the mean time trade with certain Spaniard of that country . there our general send we unto a town call Placencia , ( which stand on a high hill ) to have entreat a bishop that dwell there for 448 i56 & his favour and friendship in their law , who hear of our come , for fear forsake you town . in our way up the hill to Placencia , we find a Placencia in monstrous venomous worm with two head : his body the main , be as big as a man arm , and a yard long : our master Robert Barret do cut he in sunder with his sword , and it make it as black as if it be colour with ink . here be many tiger , monstrous and furious beast , which by subtlety devour and destroy many man : they use the trade way , and will show themselves twice or thrice to the traveller , and so depart secret , lurk till they be past , then sudden and at unaware they leap upon they and devour they : they have so use two of our company , have not one of they look behind . our general send three ship unto the hand call Coragao , to make provision for the rest , where they remain until his come . he send from thence the angel and the Judith to Rio de Hacha , where we anchor before the town . the Spaniard shoot three piece at we from the shore , who we requite with two of we , and shoot through the governor house : we weigh anchor , and anchor again without shot of the town , where we ride five day in despite of the Spaniard and their shot . in the mean space there come a caravel of advice from saint Domingo , who with the angel , and the Judith we chase and drive to the shore : we fetch he from thence in spite of 200 . Spaniards harquebus shoot , and anchor again before the town , and rid there with they , till our general come , who anchor , land his man , and valiant take the town , with the loss of one man , Rio de la who name be Thomas surgeon : we land and ^ acJia take , plant on the shore for our safety , our field ordinance : we drive the Spaniard up into the country above two league , whereby they be enforce to trade with our general , to who he sell most part of his negro . in this river we kill a monstrous Lagarto or crocodile in this port at sun set : seven of we go in the ix 449 2 f Cartagena . campeche . pinnace up into the river , carry with we a dog , unto who with ropeyarne we bind a great hook of steel , with a chain that have a swivel , which we put under the dog belly , the point of the hook come over his back fast bind , as aforesaid : we put he over board , and vex out our rope by little and little , row away with our boat : the lagarto come and present swallow up the dog , then do we row hard , till we have choke he : he plunge and make a wonderful stir in the water : we leap on shore , and hale he on land : he be 23 . foot by the rule , head like a hog , in body like a serpent , full of scale as broad as a saucer : his tail long and full of knot as big as a fawcon shot : he have four leg , his foot have long nail like unto a dragon : we open he , take out his gut , flay he , dry his skin , and stuff it with straw , mean