the travail of Job Hortop , which sir John Hawkins set on land within the bay of Mexico , after his departure from the haven of S . John de ullua in nueva espanna , the 8 . of October 1568 . ot untrue nor without cause say Job the faithful servant of God ( who the sacred scripture tell we , to have dwell in the land of hus ) that man be bear of a woman , live a short time , be replenish with many misery : which some know by read of history , many by the view of other calamity , and i by experience in my self , as this present treatise ensue shall show . it be not unknown unto many , that i job Hortop powder - maker be bear at Bourne , a town in Lincolnshire , from my age of twelve year bring up in redriffe near London , with m . Francis Lee , who be the queen majesty powder - maker , who i serve , until i be press to go on the 3 . voyage to the west Indies , with the right worshipful sir John Hawkins , who appoint i to be one of the gunner in her majesty ship call the Jesus of Lubeck , who set sail from Plymouth in the month of October 1567 . have with he another ship of her majesty , call the minion , and four ship of his own , namely the angel , the swallow , the Judith , and the William and John . he direct his vice - admiral , that if foul weather do separate they , to meet at the hand of tenerif . after which by the space of seven day and seven night , we have such storm es at sea , that we lose our long boat and a pinnace , with some man : come to the isle of 445 a temedie against foy - soned arrow . the river of Calousa . tenerif , there our general hear that his viceadmiral with the swallow , and the William and John be at the hand call Gomera , where find his viceadmiral , he anchor , take in fresh water , and set sail for cape blank , where in the way we take a Portugal caravel , lade with fish call mullet : from thence we sail to cape Verde . in our course thither we meet a Frenchman of rochel call captain Bland , who have take a Portugal caravel , who our vice admiral chase and take . captain Drake , now sir Francis Drake be make master and captain of the caravel , and so we keep our way till we come to cape Verde , and there we anchor , take our boat , and set soldier on shore . our general be the first that leap on land , and with he captain Dudley : there we take certain negro , but not without damage to our self . for our general , captain Dudley , and 8 . other of our company be hurt with poison arrow : about nine day after , the 8 . that be wound die . our general be teach by a negro , to draw the poison out of his wound with a clove of garlic , whereby he be cure . from thence we go to Sierra leona , where be monstrous fish call shark , which will devour man . i among other be send in the angel with two pinnaces into the river call Calousa , to seek two caravel thaf be there trade with the negro : we take one of they with the negro , and bring they away . in this river in you night time we have one of our pinnaces bulge by a sea - horse , so that our man swim about the river , be all take into the other pinnace , except two that take hold one of another , and be carry away by the sea - horse . this monster have the just proportion of a horse , save that his leg be short , his tooth very great , and a span in length : he use in the night to go on land into the wood , seek at unaware to devour the negro in their cabin , who they by their vigilancy prevent , and kill he in this manner . the negro keep watch , and diligent attend their come , and when they be go into the wood , 446 they forthwith lie a great tree overthwart the way , so that at their return , for that their leg be so short , they can go over it : then the negro set upon they with their bow , arrow and dart , and so destroy they . from thence we enter the river call the Casserroes , where there be other caravel trade with the negro , and they we take . in this hand betwixt the river and the main , tree grow with oyster upon they . there grow Palmito tree , which be as high as a ship main mast , and on their top grow nut , wine and oil , which they call Palmito wine and Palmito oil . the plantain tree also grow in that country ; the tree be as big as a man thigh , and as high as a fir pole , the leaf thereof be long and broad , and on the top grow the fruit which be call Plantanos : they be crooked , and a cubit long , and as big as a man wrist , they grow on cluster : when they be ripe they be very good and dainty to eat : sugar be not more delicate in taste than they be . from thence with the angel , the Judith , and the two pinn ess , we sail to Sierra leona , where our general at that time be , who with the captain and soldier go up into the river call Taggarin , to take a town of the river of the negro , where he find three king of that country Taggarin . with fifty thousand negro besiege the same town , which they can not take in many year before , when they have war with it . our general make a breach , enter and valiant take the town , wherein be find five Portugal which yield themselves to his mercy , and he save their life : we take and carry thence for traffic to the west Indies 500 negro . the three 5