truth i do take it to be so : for that i have see the like in other ship at sea , and in sundry ship at once . by this man may see how the papist be give to believe and worship such vain thing and toy , as God , to who all honour do appertain , and in their need and necessity do let to call upon the live God , who be the giver of all good thing . the 16 . of April in anno 1556 . we arrive at the port of saint John de ullua in new Spain , very naked and distress of apparel , and all other thing , by mean of the loss of our foresay ship and good , and from he arrival at thence we go to the new town call vera Cruz , five yera Cruz , league from the say port of saint John de ullua , march still by the sea side , where we find lie upon the sand great quantity of mighty great tree with root and all , some of they off four , five , and six cart load by our estimation , which , as the people tell we , be in the great stormy weather , which we endure at sea , Florida 300 . root out of the ground in Terra Florida , which be league from three hundred league over by sea , and bring thither . ^ ullua ^ $° we carne to the say town of Vera cruz , where we remain a month : and there the say John field chance to meet with a old friend of his acquaintance in Spain , call Gongalo Ruiz de Cordova , a very rich man of the say town of Vera cruz : who hear of his come thither with his wife and family , and of his misfortune by sea , come unto he and receive he and all his household into his house , and keep we there a whole month , make we very good cheer , and give we good entertainment , and also give we that be in all eight person of the say John field house , double apparel new out of the shop of very good cloth , coat , cloak , hose , shirt , smock , gown for the woman , hose , shoe , and all other necessary apparel , and for our way up to the city of Mexico , horse , moile , 346 and man , and money in our purse for the expense by the way , which by our account may amount unto the sum of 400 . crown . and after we be enter two day journey into the country , i the say Robert Tomson fall so sick of a ague , that the next day i be not able to sit on my horse , but be fain to be carry upon Indians back , from thence to Mexico . and when we come within half a day journey of the city of Mexico , the say John field also fall sick , and within three day after we arrive at the say city , he die : and present sicken one of his child , and two more of his household people , and within eight day die . so that within ten day after we arrive at the city of Mexico , of eight person that be of Mexico . we of the say company , there remain but four alive , and i the say Tomson be at the point of death of the sickness that i get upon the way , which continue with i the space of six month . at the end of which time it please almighty God to restore i my health again , although weak and great disable . And be some thing strong , i procure to seek mean to live , and to seek a way how to profit my self in the country , see it have please God to send we thither in safety . then by friendship of one Thomas Blake a Scottishman bear , who have dwell and have be marry in the say city above twenty year before i come to the say city , i be prefer to the service of a gentleman a Spaniard dwell there , a man of great wealth , and one of the first conqueror of the say ci tie , who name be Gongalo Cerezo , with who i dwell twelve month and a half . at the end of which i be malicious accuse by the holy house for matter of religion , and so apprehend and carry to prison , where i lie close prisoner seven month , without speak to any creature , but to the jailer that keep the say prison , when he bring i my meat and drink . in the mean time be bring into the say prison one Augustin Boacio a italian of Genoua also for matter 347 of religion , who be take at Sacatecas 80 . league to the northwest of the city of Mexico : at the end of the say seven month , we be both carry to the high church of Mexico , to do open penance upon a high scaffold , make before the high altar , upon a Sunday , in the presence of a very great number of people , who be at the least five or six thousand . for there be that come one hundred mile off , to see the say Auto ( as they call it ) for that there be never none before , that have do the like in the say country , nor can not tell what lutheran be , nor what it mean : for they never hear of any such thing before . we be bring into the church , every one with a saint Benito upon his back , which be half a yard of yellow cloth , with a hole to put in a man head in the midst , and cast over a man head : both flap hang one before , and another behind , and in the midst of every flap , a saint Andrew cross , make of red cloth , sow on upon the same , and that be call saint Benito . the common people before they see the penitent come into the church , be give to understand that we be heretic , infidel , and people that do despise God , and his work , and that we have be more like devil than man , and think we have have the favour of some monster