off our ship , and present fight with they : they come upon we on every side , and continue the fight from ten of the clock until it be night : they kill all our man that be on shore in the hand , save three , which by swim get aboard the Jesus of 0 « of those Lubeck . they sink the general ship call the angel , be and take the swallow : the Spaniard admiral have reof ' above threescore shot through she : many of his man be spoil : four other of their ship be sink . four Spanish there be in that fleet , and that come from the shore sum ” ko - to rescue they , fifteen hundred : we slay of they five hundred and fourty , as we be credible inform by a note that come to Mexico . in this fight the Jesus of Lubeck have five shot through her main mast : her foremast be strike in sunder under the hound with a chain shot , and her hull be wonderful pierce with shot , therefore it be unpossible to bring she away . they set two of their own ship on fire , intend therewith to have burn the Jesus of Lubeck , which we prevent by cut our cable in the halse , and wind off by our sternefast . the minion be force to set sail and stand off from we , and come to a anchor without shot of the island . our general courageous cheer up his soldier and gunner , and call to Samuel his page for a cup of beer , who bring it he in a silver cup , and he drink to all man will the gunner to stand by their ordinance lusty like man . he have no soon set the cup out of his hand , but a demy culverin shoot stroke away the cup and a Cooper plane that stand by the main mast , and run out on the other side of the ship : which nothing dismay our general , for he cease not to encourage we , say , fear nothing , for God , who have preserve i from this shot , will also deliver we from these traitor and villain . then captain Bland mean to have turn out of the port , have his main 453 about a hundred . Englishmen land . mast strike over board with a chain shoot that come from the shore , wherefore he anchor , fire his ship , take his pinnace with all his man , and come aboard the Jesus of Lubek to our general , who say unto he , that he think he will not have run away from he : he answer , that he be not mind to have run away from he , but his intent be to have turn up , and to have lay the weathermost ship of the spanish fleet aboard , and fire his ship in hope therewith to have set on fire the spanish fleet , he say if he have do so he have do well . with this , night come on . our general command the minion , for safeguard of her mast to be bring under the Jesus of Lubeck lee : he will m . Francis drake to come in with the Judith , and to lay the minion aboard , to take in man and other thing needful , and to go out , and so he do . at night when the wind come off the shore , we set sail , and go out in despite of the Spaniard and their shot , where we anchor , with two anchor under the island , the wind be northerly , which be wonderful dangerous , and we fear every hour to be drive with the lee shore . in the end when the wind come large , we weigh anchor , and set sail , seek the river of Panuco for water , whereof we have very little , and victual be so scarce , that we be drive to eat hide , cat , rat , parrot , monkey , and dog : wherefore our general be force to divide his company into two part , for there be a mutiny among they for want of victual : and some say that they have rather be on the shore to shift for themselves among the enemy , than to starve on shipboard . he ask they who will go on shore , and who will tarry on shipboard , those that will go on shore , he will to go on foremast , and those that will tarry , on baft mast : fourscore and sixteen of we be willing to depart . our general give unto every one of we six yard of Rouen cloth , and money to they that demand it . when we be land , he come unto we , where friendly embrace every one of 454 we , he be great grieve that he be force to leave we behind he , he counsel we to serve God , and to love one another , and thus courteous he give we a sorowfol farewell , and promise if God send he safe home , he will do what he can , that so many of we as live shall by some mean be bring into England , and so he do . since my return into England i have hear that many mislike that he leave we so behind he , and bring away negro : but the reason be this , for they he may have have victual , or any other thing needful , if by foul weather he have be drive upon the island , which for gold nor silver he can not have have . and thus our general depart to his ship , and we remain on land , where for our safety , fear the wild Indians that be about we , we keep watch all night , and at sun rise we march on our way , three and three in a rank , until that we come into a field under a grove , where the Indians come upon we , ask we what people we be , and how we come there . two of our company , namely Anthony Goddard and John cornish , for that they can speak the spanish tongue , go to they , and say we be Englishman , that never come in that country before , and that we have fight with the Spaniard , and for that we lack victual