, or heathen people . and when they see we come into the church in our player coat , the woman and child begin to cry out , and make such a noise , that it be strange to see and hear , say , that they never see goodly man in all their life , and that it be not possible that there can be in we so much evil as be report of we , and that we be more like angel among man , than such person of such evil religion as by the priest and friar we be report to be , and that it be great pity that we shall be so use for so small a offence . so that be bring into the say high church , and set upon the scaffold which be make before the high altar , in the presence of all the people , until high mass be do , and the sermon 348 make by a friar , concern our matter , they do put we in all the disgrace they can , to cause the people not to take so much compassion upon we , for that we be heretic , and people that be seduce of the devil , and have forsake the faith of the catholique church of Rome , with diverse other reproachful word , which be too long to recite in this place . high mass and sermon be do , our offence , as they call they , be recite , every man what he have say and do , and present be the sentence pronounce against we . that be , that the say Augustine Boacio be condemn to wear his saint Benito all the day of his life , and put into perpetuali prison , where he shall fulfil the same , and all his good confiscate and lose . and i the say Tomson to wear the saint Benito for three year , and then to be set at liberty . and for the accomplish of this sentence or condemnation , we must be present send down from Mexico , to vera Cruz , and from thence to saint John de ullua , and there to be ship for Spain , which be 65 . league by land , with strait commandment , that upon pain of 1000 ducat , the master every one shall look strait unto we , and carry we to Spain , and deliver we unto the inquisitor of the holy house of Seville , that they shall put we in the place , where we shall fulfil our penance that the archbishop of Mexico have enjoin unto we , by his sentence there give . for performance of the which , we be send down from Mexico , to the sea side , which be 65 . league , with fetter upon our foot , and there deliver to the master of the ship , to be carry for Spain , as before be say . and it be so , that the italian , fear that if he have present himself in Spain before the inquisitor , that they will have burn he , to prevent that danger , when we be come homeward , and be arrive at the island of Ter ? era , one of the ysle of the azore , the first night that we come into the say port to a anchor , about midnight he find the mean to get he naked out of the ship into the sea , and swim 349 naked a shore , and so present get he to the further side of the island , where he find a little Carvel ready to depart for Portugal , in the which he come to Lisbon , and pass into France , and so into England , where he end his life in the city of London . and i for my part keep still aboard the ship , and come into Spain , and be deliver to the inquisitor of the holy house of Seville , where they keep i in close prison , till i have fulfil the three year of my penance . which time be expire , i be free put out of prison , and set at liberty : and be in the city of Sivil a casher of one Hugh Typton , a english merchant of great do , by the space of one year , it fortune that there come out of the city of Mexico , a Spaniard , call John de la Barrera , that have be long time in the Indies , and have get great sum of gold and silver , and with one only daughter ship himself for to come for Spain , and by the way chance to die , and give all that he have unto his only daughter , who name be marie de la Barrera , and be arrive at the city of Sivil , it be my chance to marry with she . the marriage be worth to i 2500 . pound in bar of gold and silver , beside jewel of great price . this i think good to speak of , to show the goodness of God to all they that put their trust in he , that i be bring out of the Indies , in such great misery and infamy to the world , shall be provide at God hand in one moment , of more than in all my life before i can attain unto by my own labour . after we depart from Mexico , our saint benitoe be set up in the high church of the say city , with our name write in the same , accord to their use and custom , which be and will be a monument and a remembrance of we , as long as the romish church do reign in that country . the same have be see since by one John Chilton , and diverse other of our nation , which be leave in that country long since , by sir John Hawkins . and because it shall | be know wherefore it be 35 ° that i be so punish by the clergy hand , as before be mention , i will in brief word declare the same . it be so , that be in Mexico at the table , among many principali people at dinner , they begin to inquire of i be a Englishman , whether it be true , that in England they have overthrow all their church and house of religion , and that all the image of the saint of heaven that be in they be throw down , break , and