many people be set on work both in the one and in the other : they spin their wool as we do , and in steed hog grease of oil , they have hog grease : they twist not their thread its stead of oil . so much as we joej neither work so fine a thread . they make no kersy , but they make much cloth , which be course , and sell it for less than 12 . penny the vare . it be call Sayall . silk of sun - they have much silk , and make all manner of sort dry sort . thereof , as taffeta , satin , velvet of all colour , and they be as good as the silk of Spain , save that the colour be not so perfect : but the black be better then the black that come out of Spain . horse . they have many horse , and mere , and mule , which mule . the Spaniard bring thither . they have as good 390 jennet , as any be in Spain , and better cheap than jennet . they be in Spain . and with their mule they carry all their good from place to place . there be rain usual in this country , from the month of May , to the midst of October , every day , which time they call their winter , by reason of the say water . and if it be not for the water which fall in these hot season , their Maiz , which be the great part of their sustenance , will be destroy . This Maiz be the great maintenance which the indian Maize grain have , and also all the common people of the Spaniard . man and . and their horse and mule which labour , can be eat tn without the same . this grain be substantiali , and increases much blood . if the miner shall be without it , they can not labour their mine : for all their servant eat none other bread , but only of this Maize , and it be make in cake , as they make oaten cake , in some place of England . the indian pay tribute , be of the age of 20 . year , 4 . shilling of money , and a hanege of Maiz , AnHanegais which be worth 4 . shilling more unto the king every a year . this be pay in all nova Hispania , of as many m a * e ‘ as be of the age of 20 . year , save the city of Tlascalla , which be make free , because the citizen thereof be the occasion that Cortes take Mexico in so little a time . and although at the first they be free from payment of tribute , yet the Spaniard now begin to usurp upon they , and make they to till a great field of Maiz , at their own cost every year for the king , which be as beneficial unto he , and as great cost unto they , as though they pay their tribute , as the other doe . the ship which go out of Spain with good for Peru , go to number de dios , and there discharge the say good : and from thence they be carry over the neck of a land , unto a port town in the south sea , call Panama , which be 17 . league distant from number de dios . and there they do ship their good 391 again , and so from thence go to Peru . they be in go thither three month , and they come back again in 20 . day . they have seidome foul weather , and few ship be lose in the south sea . four year past , to wit 1568 , there be a ship make out of Peru , Salomons to seek Salomons island , and they come somewhat to and ^ f , m ^ n t ^ ie out equinoctial , and find a island with ten south sea many black people , in such number that the Spaniard 1568 . dare not go on land among they . and because they have be long upon the voyage , their people be very weak , and so go not on land , to know what commodity be upon it . and for want of victual , they arrive in Nova Hispania , in a port call Puerto de Navidad , and thence return back again unto Peru , whereas they be evil entreat , because they have not know more of the same island . they have in this port of Navidad ordinary their china find ship , which go to the island of China , which be cer - by the west , taine island which they have find within these 7 . year . they have bring from thence gold , and much cinamom , and dish of earth , and cup of the same , so fine , that every man that may have a piece of they , will give the weight of silver for it . there be a mariner that bring a pearl as big as a dove egg from thence , 8c a stone , for which the viceroy will have give 3000 . ducat . many thing they bring from thence , most excellent . there be many of these island , and the Spaniard have * this be to be not many of they as yet : * for the Portugal disturb understand of they much , and combat with they every day , say , it this discourse l part °* tneir conquest , and to the main land they be write , can come at any hand . there be goodly people in anno 1572 . they , and they be great mariner , rich apparel in cloth of gold , and silver , and silk of all sort , and go apparel after the manner of the Turk . this report make such as come from thence . the man of the main land have certain traffic with some of these china ship ylander , and come thither in a kind of ship , which with one sail . they have wjth one saj ]