a discourse write by one mile fillip Englishman , one of the company put on shore northward of Panuco , in the west Indies by m . John Hawkins 1568 . contain many special thing of that country and of the spanish government , but special of ' ’ cruelty use to our Englishman , among the rest to he self for the of 15 . or 16 . year together , until by and happy mean he be deliver 1 . the Jesus . 2 . the minion . ^ . TheWilliam and John . 4 . TheJudith . 5 . the angel . 6 . the swallow . their and space good from this fleet consist of 6 . ship . their bloody hand , and return into his own country . An . 1582 . Chap . 1 . wherein be show the day and time of our departure from the coast of England , with the number and name of the ship , their captain and master , and of our traffic and deal upon the coast of Africa . Pon Monday the second of October 1567 . the weather be reasonable fair , our general m . John Hawkins , have command all his captain and master to be in a readiness to make sail with he , he himself be embark in the Jesus , whereof be appoint for master Robert Barret , hoist sail , and depart from plymouth upon his intend voyage for the part of Africa , and America , be accompany with five other sail of ship , as namely the minion , wherein go for captain m . John Hampton , and John Garret master . the William and John , wherein be captain Thomas Bolton , and James Raunce master . the Judith , in who be captain m . Francis Drake afterward knight , and the angel , who master , as also the captain and master of the swallow i now remember not . and so 398 sail in company together upon our voyage until the ten of the same month , a extreme storm then take we near unto cape Finister , which dure for the space of four day , and so separate our ship , that we have lose one another , and our general find the Jesus to be but in ill case , be in mind to give over the voyage , and to return home . howbeit the eleven of the same month the sea wax calm , and the wind come fair he alter his purpose , and hold on the former intend voyage : and so come to the island of Gomera be one of the island of the canary , where accord to a order before appoint , we meet with all our ship which be before disperse , we then take in fresh water and depart from thence the four of November , and hold on our course , upon the eighteenth day of the same month we come to a anchor upon the coast of Africa , at cape Verde in twelve fathom water ; and here our general land certain of our man , to the number of 160 . or thereabouts , seek to take some ros . and they go up into the country for the space of six mile , be encounter with a great number of the negro : who with their envenome arrow do hurt a great number of our man , so that they be enforce to retire to the ship , in which conflict they recover but a few negro , and of these our man which be hurt with their envenom arrow , there die to the number of seven or eight in very strange manner , with their mouth shut , so that we be force to put stick and other thing into their mouth to keep they open , and so afterward pass the time upon the coast of Guinea , until the twelve of January , we obtain by that time the number of 150 . Negros . And be ready to depart from the sea coast , there be a negro send as a ambassador to our general , from a king of the negro , which be oppress with other king his border neighbour , desire our general to grant he succour and 399 the William and John separate and never after meet with the fleet . aid against those his enemy , which our general grant unto , and go himself in person a land , with the number of two hundred of our man or thereabouts , and the say king which have request our aid , do join his force with we , so that thereby our general assault , and set fire upon a town of the say king his enemy , in which there be at the least the number of eight or ten thousand negro , and they perceive that they be not able to make any resistance seek by flight to save themselves , in which their flight there be take prisoner to the number of eight or nine hundred , which our general ought to have have for his share : howbeit the negro king which request our aid , falsify his word and promise , secret in the night convey himself away with as many prisoner as he have in his custody : but our general notwithstanding find himself to have now very near the number of 500 Negros think it best without long abode to depart with they , and such merchandise as he have from the coast of Africa , towards the west Indies , and therefore command with all diligence to take in fresh water and fuel , and so with speed to prepare to depart . howbeit before we depart from thence , in a storm that we have , we lose one of our ship , namely the William and John , of which ship and of her people , we hear no tiding during the time of our voyage . Chap . 2 . wherein be show the day and time of our departure from the coast of Africa , with the day and time of our arrival in the west Indies , also of our trade , and traffic there , and also of the great cruelty that the Spaniard use towards we , by the viceroy his direction , and appointment , falsify his