in this place . all the whole proportion of this city do stand in a very plain ground , and in the midst of the say city be a square place of a good bow shoot over from side to side : and in the midst of the say place be the high church , very fair and well build all through , at that time not half finish , and round about the say place , be many fair house build : on the one side , be the house where Mutezuma the great king of Mexico that be , dwell , and now there lie always the viceroy that the king of Spain send thither every three year . and in my time there be for viceroy a gentleman of Castil , call don Luis de Velasco . and on the other side of the say place , over against the same , be the bishop house , very fair build , and many other house of goodly build . and hard by the same , be also other very fair house , build by the mark de Valle , otherwise call Hernando Cortes , who be he that first conquer the say city and country , who after the say conquest which he make with great labour and travail of his person , and danger of his life , and be grow great in the country , the king of Spain send for he , say that he have some particular matter to impart unto he . and when he come home , he can not be suffer to return back again , as the king before have promise he . with the which , for sorrow that he take , he die ; and this he have for the reward of his good service . the say city of Mexico have the street make very broad , and right , that a man be in the high place , 356 at the one end of the street , may see at the least a good mile forward , and in all the one part of the street of the north part of their city , there run a pretty lake of very clear water , that every man may put into his house as much as he will , without the cost of any thing , but of the let in . also there be a great cave or ditch of water , that come through the city , even unto the high place , where come every morning at the break of the day twenty or thirty canoas , or trough of the Indians , which bring in they all manner of provision for the city , which be make , and grow in the country , which be a very good commodity for the inhabitant of that place . and as for victual in the say city , of beef , mutton , and hen , capon , quail , guiny - cock , and such like , all be very good cheap : to say , the whole quarter of a ox , as much as a slave can carry away from the butcher , for five Tomynes , that be , five royal of plate , which be just two shilling and six penny , and a fat sheep at the butcher for three royal , which be 18 . penny and no more . bread be as good cheap as in Spain , and all other kind of fruit , as apple , pear , pomegranate , and quince , at a reasonable rate . the city go wonderful forward in build of friary and nunnery , and chapel , and be like in time to come , to be the most populous ci tie in the world , as it may be suppose . the weather be there always very temperate , the day differ but one hour of length all the year long . the field and the wood be always green . the wood full of popinjay , and many other kind of bird , that make such a harmonic of sing , and cry , that any man will rejoice to hear it . in the field be such odoriferous smell of flower and herb , that it give great content to the sense . about the city of Mexico two , three , or four league off , be diverse town of Indians , some of 4000 or 6000 . household , which do stand in such a goodly soil , that if Christians have the inhabitation thereof , it will be put to a further benefit . in my time be 357 dwell and alive in Mexico , many ancient man that Mexico be of the conqueror at the first conquest with conquer Hernando Cortes : for than it be about 36 . year ^ ” 1520 ^ a § oe ’ at sa ^ country be conquer . about Mexico there be diverse mine of silver , and also in other place there about , but the principali Mines that be in all new Spain be in Sacatecas , 80 . league from Mexico , and the mine of S . Martin , thirty league , both to the northwestward of Mexico , where be great store of gold and silver . also there be a place call the Misteca , fifty league to the northwest , which do yield great store of very good silk , and Cochinilla . wine and oil there be none grow in the country , but what come out of Spain . also there be many goodly fruit in that country , whereof we have none such , as Plantanos , guyave , Sapotes , Tunas , and in the wilderness great store of black cherry , and other whol - cochinilla be some fruit . the Cochinilia be not a worm , or a fly , not a worm as some say ft be > but a berry that grow upon certain beny bush in the wild field , which be gather in time of the year , when it be ripe . also the indigo that do come from thence to die blue , be a certain herb that grow in the wild field , and be gather at one time of the year , and burn , and of the ash thereof , with indigo . other confection put thereunto , the say indigo be make . balm , Salsa perilla , Cana fistula , sugar , ox hide , and many other good and serviceable thing the country do yield , which be yearly bring into Spain , and there sell and distribute to many nation . Robert Tomson .