a relation of the commodity of Nova Hispania , and the manner of the inhabitant , write by Henry Hawks merchant , which live five year in the say country , and draw the same at the request of m . Richard Hakluyt esquire of Eiton in the county of Hereford , 1572 . are John de ullua be a island not high above the water , where as now the Spaniard upon m . John Hawkins be there , be in make a strong fort . in this place all the ship that come out of Spain with good for these part , do unlade : for they have none other port so good as this be . the come into this place have three channel , and the best of all be the northermost , which go by the main land : and on every side of the channel there be many small rock as big as a small barrel : they will make man stand in doubt of they , but there be no fear of they . there be another island there by , call the island of sacrifice , whereas the Spaniard do in time past unlade their good : and for that , they say , there be upon it spirit or devil , it be not frequent as it have be . in these place the north wind have so great dominion , that oftentimes it destroy many ship and bark . this place be give to great sickness . Theise island stand in 18 degree and a half , and about the same be great plenty of fish . five league from saint John de ullua be a fair river ; it lie northwest from the port , and go to a little town of the Spaniard call Vera Cruz , and with small vessel or bark , which they call frigate , they carry all their merchandise which come out of Spain , to the say town : and in like manner bring all the gold , silver , cochinilla , hide , and all other thing that the ship carry into Spain unto they . and the good being in 378 vera Cruz , they carry they to Mexico , and to Pueblo de los angel , Sacatecas , and saint Martin , and diverse other place so far within the country , that some of they be 700 mile off , and some more , and some less , all upon horse , mule , and in wain draw with ox , and in car draw with mule . in this town of Vera Cruz within these twenty year , when woman be bring to bed , the child new bear incontinent die ; which be not so now in these day , God be thank . this town be incline to many kind of disease , by reason of the great heat , and a certain gnat or fly which they call a musquito , which bite both man and woman musquito . in their sleep ; and assoon as they be bite , incontinent the flesh swell as though they have be bite with some venomous worm . and this musquito or gnat do most follow such as be new come into the country . many there be that die of this annoyance . this town be situate upon the river aforesaid , and compass with wood of diverse manner and sort , and many fruit , as orange and limon , guiave , and diverse other , and bird in they , popinjay both small popinjay . and great , and some of they as big as a raven , and their tail as long as the tail of a fezant . there be also many other kind of bird of purple colour , and small monkey , marvellous proper . monkey . this hot or sick country continue five and forty mile towards the city of Mexico ; and the five and forty mile be pass , than there be a temperate country , and full of tillage : but they water all their corn with river which they turn in upon it . and they gather their wheat twice a year . and if they shall not wheat twice water the ground where as their corn be sow , the in a yeere - country be so hot it will burn all . before you come to Mexico , there be a great town call Tlaxcalla , which have in it above 16000 house - Tlaxcalla a hold . all the inhabitant thereof be free by the king free aty - 379 of Spain : for these be the occasion that Mexico be win in so short time , and with so little loss of man . wherefore they be all gentleman , and pay no tribute to the king . in this town be all the cochinilia grow . Mexico . Mexico be a great city ; it have more than fifty thousand household , whereof there be not pass five or six thousand house of Spaniard : all the other be the people of the country , which live under the Spaniard law . there be in this city stately building , and many monastery of friar and nun , which the Spaniard have make . and the build of the Indians be somewhat beautiful outward , and within full of small chamber , with very small window , which be not so comely as the build of the Spaniard . this city stand in the midst of a great lake , and the water go through all or the most part of the street , and there come small boat , which they call canoas , and in they they bring all thing necessary , as wood , and coal , and grass for their horse , stone and lime to build , and corn . this city be subject to many earthquake , which oftentimes cast down house , and kill people . this city be very well provide of water to drink , and with all manner of victual , as fruit , flesh and fish , bread , hen and capon , guiny cock and hen , and all other fowl . there be in this city every week three fair or market , which be frequent with many people , aswell Spaniard as the