sundry token make to he of friendship , and gold show as though they desire traffic , with the which the Spaniard be move , suspect no deceit at all , go ashore among they : who be no soon ashore , but with four or five Burbonata . more be take , the rest of his company be invade by they , save themselves by flight , but they that be take , pay their ransom with their life , and be present eat . and this be their practice to toll with their gold the ignorant to their snare : they be bloodsucker both of Spaniards , Indians , and all that light in their lap , not spare their own countryman if they can convenient come by they . their policy in fight with the Spaniards be marvelous : for they choose for their refuge the mountain and wood where the Spaniard with their horse can follow they , and if they fortune to be meet in the plain where one horseman may overrun 100 of they , they have a devise of late practise by they to pitch stake of wood in the ground , and also small iron pike to mischief their horse , wherein they show themselves politic warrior . they have more abundance of gold then all the Spaniard have , and live upon the mountain where the mine be in such number , that the Spaniard have much ado to get any of they from they , and yet sometime by assemble a great number of they , which happen once in two year , they get a piece from they , which afterward they keep sure enough . thus have escape the danger of they , we keep our course along the coast , and come the three of April to a town call Burboroata , where his ship come to a anchor , and he himself go a shore to speak with the Spaniard , to who he declare himself to be a Englishman , and come thither to trade with they by the way of merchandise , and therefore require licence for the same . unto who they make answer , that they be forbid by the king to traffic with any foreign nation , upon penalty to forfeit their good , therefore they desire he not to molest they any further , but to depart as he come , for other comfort he may not look for at their hand , because they be subject and may not go beyond the law . but he reply that his necessity be such , as he may not so do : for be in one of the queen armada of England , and have many soldier in they , he have need both of some refresh for they , and of victual , and of money also , without the which he can not depart , and with much other talk persuade they not to fear any dishonest part of his behalf towards they , for neither will he commit any such thing to the dishonour of his prince , not yet for his honest reputation and estimation , unless he be too rigorous deal withal , which he hope not to find at their hand , in that it shall as well redound to their profit as his own , and also he think they may do it without danger , because their prince be in amity one with another , and for our part we have free traffic in Spain and Flanders , which be in his dominion , and therefore he know no reason why he shall not have the like in all his dominion . to the which the Spaniard make answer , that it lie not in they to give any licence , for that they have a governor to who the government of those part be commit , but if they will stay ten day , they will send to their governor who be threescore league off , and will return answer within the space appoint , of his mind . in the mean time they be content he shall bring his ship into harbour , and there they will deliver he any victual he will require . whereupon the four day we go in , where be one day and receive all thing accord to promise , the captain advise himself , that to remain there ten day idle , spend victual and man wage , and perhaps in the end receive no good answer from the governor , it be mere folly , and therefore determine to make request to have licence for the sale of certain lean and sick negro which he have in his ship like to die upon his hand if he keep they ten day , have little or no refresh for they , whereas other man have they , they will be recover well enough . and 31 A . D . I565 . this request he be force to make , because he have not otherwise wherewith to pay for victual and for necessary which he shall take : which request be put in writing and present , the officer and town - dweller assemble together , and find his request so reasonable , grant he licence for thirty negro , which afterward they cause the officer to view , to the intent they shall grant to nothing but that be very reasonable , for fear of answer thereunto afterward . This be pass , our captain accord to their licence , think to have make sale , but the day past and none come to buy , who before make show that they have great need of they , and therefore wit not what to surmise of they , whether they go about to prolong the time of the governor his answer because they will keep themselves blameless , or for any other policy he know not , and for that purpose send they word , marvel what the matter be that none come to buy they . they answer , because they have grant licence only to the poor to buy those negro of small price , and their money be not so ready as other man of more wealth . more than that , as soon as ever they see the ship , they convey away their money by their wife that go into the mountain for fear , and be not yet return , and yet ask two day to seek their wife and fetch their money . notwithstanding , the next day diverse of they come to cheapen , but