it yield root pass good , Florida like dear marvellous store , with diverse other beast , and to the wine of fowl , serviceable to the use of man . Theise be thing Orleans . wherewith a man may live , have corn or maiz wherewith to make bread : for maiz make good savoury bread , and cake as fine as flower . also it make good meal , beat and sodden with water , and eat like pap wherewith we feed child . it make also good beverage , sodden in water , and nourishable ; which the Frenchman do use to drink of in the morning , and it assuage their thirst , so that they have no need to drink all the day after . and this maiz be the great lack they have , because they have no labourer to sow the same , labourer and therefore to they that shall inhabit the land it be “ inhabit new to have labourer to till and sow the ground : for country . they have victual of their own , whereby they neither rob nor spoil the inhabitant , may live not only quiet with they , who natural be more desirous of peace then of war , but also shall have abundance of victual proffer they for nothing : for it be with they as it be with one of we , when we see another man ever take away from we , although we have enough beside , yet than we think all too little for our self : for sure we have hear the Frenchman report , and i know it by the Indians , that a very little content they : for the indian with the head of maiz roast , will travel a whole 56 day , and when they be at the Spaniard find , they give they nothing but sodden herb and maiz : and in this order i see threescore of they feed , who be lade with ware , and come fifty league off . the floridians when they travel , have a kind of herb tobacco and the dry , who with a cane and a earthen cup in the end , at virtue with fire , and the dry herb put together , do suck * through the cane the smoke thereof , which smoke satisfi their hunger , and therewith they live four or five day without meat or drink , and this all the Frenchman use for this purpose : yet do they hold opinion withal , that it cause water and flame to void from their stomach . the commodity of this land be more than be yet know to any man : for beside the land it self , whereof there be more than any king Christian be able to inhabit , it flourish with meadow , pasture ground , with wood of cedar and cypress , and other sort , as better can not be in the world . they have for apothecary herb , tree , root and gum great store , as storax liquida , turpintine , gum , myrrh , and frankincense , with many other , whereof i know not the name . colour both red , black , yellow , and russet , very perfect , wherewith they so paint their body , and dear skin which they wear about they , that with water it neither fade away , nor alter colour . gold and silver they want not : for at the frenchmens first come thither they have the same offer they for little or nothing , for they receive for a hatchet two pound weight of gold , because they know not the estimation thereof : but the soldier be greedy of the same , do take it from they , give they nothing for it : the which they perceive , that both the Frenchman do great esteem it , and also do rigorous deal with they , by take the same away from they , at last will not be know they have any more , neither dare they be the same for fear of be take away : so that save at their first come , they can get none of they : and how they come by this gold and silver the 57 the variety of commodity in Florida . colour . gold and silver . this copper be find perfect gold , call by the savage , a . d . 1565 . french man know not as yet , but by guess , who have travel to the southwest of the cape , have find the same dangerous , by mean of sundry bank , as we also have find the same : and there find mast which be wrack of Spaniard come from Mexico , judge that they have get treasure by they . for it be most true that diverse wrack have be make of Spaniard , have much treasure : for the Frenchman have travel to the capeward a hundred and fifty two span - mile , do find two Spaniard with the floridians , which yard live they bring afterward to their fort , whereof one be floiidaans . '^ in a caravel come from the Indies , which be cast away fourteen year ago , and the other twelve year ; of who fellow some escape , othersome be slay by the inhabitant . it seem they have estimation of piece of gold their gold and silver , for it be wrought flat and grave , gr ^ en which they wear about their neck ; othersome make you on tan . rounj a pancake , with a hole in the midst , to bolster up their breast withal , because they think it a deformity to have great breast . as for mine either of gold or silver , the Frenchman can hear of none they have upon the island , but of copper , whereof as yet also they have not make the proof , because they be but few man : but it be not unlike , but that in the main where be high hill , may be gold and silver aswell as in Mexico , because it be all one main . the Frenchman obtain pearl of they of great bigness , but they be black , by mean of roast of they , Sycroa phyra . for they do not fish for they as the Spaniard doe , but for their meat : for the Spaniard use to keep daily afish some two or three hundred Indians , some of they that