: and further that the like be happen unto the minion : beside the captain Davie carlet and a merchant , with a dozen mariner betray by the negro at their first arrival thither , and remain prisoner with the Portugal ; and beside other misadventure of the loss of their man , happen through the great lack of fresh water , with great doubt of bring home the ship : which be most sorrowful for we to understand . thus have end our traffic here the 4 . of may , [ three . 51 i . i we depart , leave the Frenchman behind we , the night before the which the caribe , whereof i have make mention before , be to the number of 200 . come in their canoas to Burboroata , intend by night to have burn the town , and take the Spaniard , who be more vigilant because of our be there , than their custom be , perceive they come , raise the town , who in a moment be a horseback , by mean their custom be for all doubt to keep their horse horse keep ready saddle , in the night set upon they , and take one , read ? saddle - but the rest make shift for themselves , escape away . but this one , because he be their guide , and be the occasion that diverse time they have make invasion upon they , have for his travel a stake thrust through his fundament , and so out at his neck . the sixth of May aforesaid , we come to a island call Cura $ ao , where we have think to have ancker , but can not find ground , and have let fall a anchor with two cable , be fain to weigh it again : and the seven sail along the coast to seek a harbour , and find none , we come to a anchor where we ride open in the sea in this place we have traffic for hide , and find great refresh both of beef , mutton and lamb , whereof there be such plenty , that save the skin , we have the flesh give we for nothing , the exceed plenty whereof be so abundant , that the worst in the ship think scorn not only of mutton , but also of ’ sodden lamb , which they disdain to eat unroast . the increase of cattle in this island be marvelous , which from a dozen of each sort bring thither by the governor , in 25 . year he have a hundred thousand at the least , and of other cattle be able to kill without spoil of the increase 1500 . yearly , which he kill for the skin , and of the flesh save only the tongue , the rest he leave to the foul to devour . and this i be able to affirm , not only upon the governor own report , who be the first that bring the increase thither , which so remain unto this day , but also by that i see my self in one field , where a hundred ox lie one by another all whole , save the skin and tongue take away . and it be not so marvelous a thing why they do thus cast away the flesh in all the island of the west Indies , see the land be great , and more than they be able to inhabit , the people few , have delicate fruit and meat enough beside to feed upon , which they rather desire , and the increase which pass man reason to believe , when they come to a great number : for in saint Domingo a island call by the 36 finder thereof Hispaniola , be so great quantity of cattle , and such increase thereof , that notwithstanding the daily kill of they for their hide , it be not possible to assuage the number of they , but they be devour by wild dog , who number be such by suffer they qreat first to range the wood and mountain , that they eat number of and destroy 60000 . a year , and yet small lack find wme d » and - of they . and no marveile , for the say island be almost as big as all England , and be the first place that be find of all the Indies , and of long time inhabit before the rest , it ought therefore of reason to be most populous : and to this hour the viceroy and counsel royal abide there as in the chief place of all the Indies , to prescribe order to the rest for the king behalf , yet have they but one city and 13 . village in all the same island , whereby the spoil of they in respect of the increase be nothing . the 15 . of the foresay month we depart from Curasao , be not a little to the rejoice of our captain and we , that we have there end our traffic : but notwithstanding our sweet meat , we have sour sauce , for by reason of our ride so open at sea , what with blast whereby our anchor be a ground , three at once come home , and also with contrary wind blow , whereby for fear of the shore we be fain to hale off to have anchorhold , sometime a whole day and a night we turn up and down ; and this happen not once , but half a dozen time in the space of our be there . the 16 . we pass by a island call Aruba , and Aruba . the 17 . at night ancker six hour at the west end of Cabo de la vela , and in the morning be the 18 . weigh again , keep our course , in the which time the captain sail by the shore in the pinnace , come to the Rancheria , a place where the Spaniard use to LaRanchena . fish for pearl , and there speak with a Spaniard , who tell he how far off he be from Rio de la Hacha , which 7 ? » de la because he will not overshoot , he anchor that night hac , in - m . Hawkins his letter to the treasurer of Rio de la Hacha . again , and the 19 come thither ; where have talk with the king treasurer of the Indies resident there , he declare his