can do : and thereupon prepare his man in armour and weapon together , to the Portugal not to be trust . want of circumspection in our man . m . field captain of the Salomon slay . number of forty man well appoint , have to their guide certain Portugal , in a boat , who bring some of they to their death : we land boat after boat , and diverse of our man scatter themselves , contrary to the captain will , by one or two in a company , for the hope that they have to find gold in their house , ransack the same , in the mean time the negro come upon they , and hurt many be thus scatter , whereas if five or six have be together , they have be able , as their companion do , to give the overthrow to 40 of they , and be drive down to take their boat , be follow so hardly by a route of negro , who by that take courage to pursue they to their boat , that not only some of they , but other stand on shore , not look for any such matter by mean that the negro do flee at the first , and our company remain in the town , be sudden so set upon that some with great hurt recover their boat ; othersome not able to recover the same , take the water , and perish by mean of the oaze . while this be do , the captain who with a dozen man , go through the town , return , find 200 negro at the water side , shoot at they in the boat , and cut they in piece which be drown in the water , at who come , they run all away : so he enter his boat , and before he can put off from the shore , they return again , and shoot very fierce and hurt diverse of they . thus we return back some what discomfort , although the captain in a singular wise manner carry himself , with countenance very cheerful outward , as though he do little weigh the death of his man , nor yet the great hurt of the rest , although his heart1 inward be break in piece for it ; do to this end , that the Portugal be with he , shall not presume to resist against he , nor take occasion to put he to further displeasure or hindrance for the death of our man : have get by our go ten negro , and lose seven of our best man , whereof m . field captain of the Salomon , be one , and we have 27 of our man hurt . in the same hour while this be do , there happen at the same instant , a marvelous miracle to they in the ship , who ride ten league to seaward , by many shark or tiburon , who come about the ship : among which , one be take by the Jesus , and four by the Salomon , and one very sore hurt escape : and so it fall out of our man , whereof one of the Jesus man , and four of the Salomons be kill , and the five have twenty wound be rescue , and escape with much ado . the 28 they come to their ship , the Jesus , and the Salomon , and the 30 depart from thence to Taggarin . Taggarin . the first of January the two bark , and both the boat forsake the ship , and go into a river call river of the Casserroes , and the 6 have dispatch their busi - asserroe . ness , the two bark return , and come to Taggarin , where the two ship be at anchor . not two day after the come of the two ship thither , they put their water cask a shore , and fill it with water , to season the same , think to have fill it with fresh water afterward : and while their man be some on shore , and some at their boat , the negro set upon they in the boat , and hurt diverse of they , and come to the cask , and cut of the hoop of twelve butt , which lose we 4 or 5 day time , beside great want we have of the same : sojourn at Taggarin , the swallow go up the river about her traffic , where they see great town of the negro , and canoas , that have threescore man in a piece : there they understand by the Portugal , of a great battle between they of Sierra Leona side , and they of Taggarin : they of Sierra Leona , have prepare three hundred canoas to invade the other . the time be appoint not past six day after our departure from thence , which we will have see , to the intent we may have take some of a new assault by the negro . great town . very great canoas . the contagion they , have it not be for the death and sickness ofthecou - t of our man , which come by the contagiousness of the Jof Sierra place , which make we to make haste away . Leona . the 18 of Januarie at night , we depart from Taggarin , be bind for the west Indies , before which departure certain of the Salomons man go on shore to fill water in the night , and as they come on shore with their boat be ready to leap on land , one of they espy a negro in a white coat , stand upon a rock , be ready to have receive they when they come on shore , have in sight of his fellow also eight or nine , some in one place leap out , and some in another , but they hide themselves straight again : whereupon our man doubt they have be a great company , and seek to have take they at more advantage , as God will , depart to their ship , not think there have be such a mischief pretend towards they , as then be in deed . which the next day we understand of a Portugal that come down to we , who have traffic with the negro , by who he understand , that the king of Sierra Leona have make all the power he can , to take some of