be of choice a thousand : and their order be to go in canoas , or rather great pinnace , with thirty man in a piece , whereof the one half , or most part pearl . be diverse , the rest do open the same for the pearl : for it be not suffer that they shall use drag , for that will bring they out of estimation , and mar the bed of they . the oyster which have the small 58 sort of pearl be find in seven or eight fathom water , but the great in eleven or twelve fathom . the floridians have piece of unicorn home which unicorn they wear about their neck , whereof the Frenchman obtain many piece . of those unicorn they have many ; for that they do affirm it to be a beast with ma . one horn , which come to the river to drink , put the same into the water before he drink . of this unicorns horn there be of our company , that have get the same of the Frenchman , bring home thereof to show . it be therefore to be presuppose that there be more commodity aswell as that , which for want of time , and people sufficient to inhabit the same , can not yet come to light : but i trust God will reveal the same before it be long , to the great profit of they that shall take it in hand . of beast in this country beside beast . dear , fox , hare , polecat , cony , ounce , and leopard , i be not able certain to say : but it be think that there be lion and tiger as well as unicorn ; lion especial ; if it be true that be say , of the enmity between they and the unicorn : for there be no beast but have his enemy , as the cony the polecat , a sheep the wolf , the elephant the rinoceros ; and so of other beast the like : insomuch , that whereas the one be , the other can not be miss . And see i have make mention of the beast of this country , it shall not be from my purpose to speak also of the venomous beast , as crocodile , whereof there be great abundance , adder of great bigness , whereof our man kill some of a yard and a half long . also i hear a miracle of one of these adder , upon the which a falcon seize , the say adder falcon in do clasp her tail about she ; which the french captain flori ^ a - seeing , come to the rescue of the falcon , and take she slay the adder ; and this falcon be wild , he do reclaim she , and keep she for the space of two month , at which time for very want of meat he be fain to cast she off . on these adder the Frenchman do feed , to no little admiration of we , and affirm the same to be a delicate meat . and the captain of the Frenchman see also a serpent with three head and four foot , of the bigness of a great spaniel , which for want of a harquebus he dare not attempt to slay . of fish also they have in the river , pike , roch , salmon , trout , and diverse other small fish , and of great fish , some of the length of a man and long , be of bigness accord , have a snout much like a sword of a yard long . there be also of sea fish , which we see come along the coast fly , which be of the bigness of a smell , the big sort whereof have four wing , but the other have but two : of these we see come out of Guinea a hundred in a company , which be chase by the gilt - head , otherwise call the bonito , do to avoid they the better , take their flight out of the water , but yet be they not able to fly far , because of the dry of their wing , which serve they not to fly but when they be moist , and therefore when they can fly no further they fall into the water , and have wet their wing , take a new flight again . Theise bonito be of bigness like a carp , and in colour like a makarell , but it be the swift fish in swim that be , and follow her prey very fierce , not only in the water , but also out of the water : for as the fly fish take her flight , so do this bonito leap after they , and take they sometime above the water . there be some of those bonito , which be gall by a fisgig , do follow our ship come out of Guinea 500 league . there be a sea - foul also that chase this fly fish aswell as the bonito : for as the fly fish take her flight , so do this foul pursue to take she , which to behold be a great pleasure than hawk , for both the flight be as pleasant , and also more often than a hundred time : for the fowl can fly no way , but one or other light in her paw , the number of they be so abundant . there be a innumerable young fry of these fly fish , which common keep about the ship , and be not so big as butterfly , and yet by fly do avoid the unsatiableness of the bonito . of the big sort of these fish we take many , which both night and day fly into the sail of our ship , and there be not one of they which be not worth a bonito : for be put upon a hook drable in the water , the bonito will leap thereat , and so be take . also , we take many with a white cloth make fast to a hook , which be tie so short in the water , that it may leap out and in , the greedy bonito think it to be a fly fish leap thereat , and so be deceive . we take also dolphin dolphin . which be of very goodly colour and proportion to behold , and no less delicate in