the bark not be full ready as the rest , be fain for haste to cut the cable in 45 two hundred island for the most part not inhabit . the hawse , and loose both anchor and cable to save her self . the cape of thus the 17 . of June , we depart and on the 20 . we ^ cuba ^^ ' in west end of Cuba , call cape S . Antony , at | the where for the space of three day we double along , till we come beyond the shoal , which be 20 . league beyond saint Anthony . and the ordinary brise take we , which be the north - east wind , put we the 24 . from the shore , and therefore we go to the northwest to fetch Florida . wind , and also to the coast of Florida to have the help of the current , which be judge to have set to the eastward : so the 29 . we found our self in 27 . degree , and in the sounding of Florida , where we keep our self the space of four day , sail along the coast as near as we can , in ten or twelve fathom water , have all the while no sight of land . the five of July we have sight of certain island of the isle of sanj3 call the Tortugas ( which be low land ) where great store of the captain go in with his pinnace , and find such bird . a number of bird , that in half a hour he jade she with they ; and if they have be ten boat more , they may have do the like . Theise island bear the name of tortoise , because of the number of they , which there do breed , who nature be to live both in the water and upon land also , but breed only upon the shore , in make a great pit wherein they lie egg , to the number of three or four hundred , and cover they with sand , they be hatch by the heat of the sun ; and by this mean come the great increase . of these we take very great one , which have both back and belly all of bone , of the thickness of a inch : the fish whereof we prove , eat much like veil ; and find a number of egg in they , taste also of they , but they do eat very sweet . here we anchor six hour , and then a fair gale of wind spring , we weigh anchor , and make sail towards Cuba , whither we come the sixth a hill call day , and weather as far as the table , be a hill the table . so call , because of the form thereof : here we lay off and on all night , to keep that we have get to windward , intend to have water in the morning , if we can have do it , or else if the wind have come large , to have ply to windward to Havana , the port of which be a harbour whereunto all the fleet of they ha ™ 1 ™ - Spaniard come , and do there tarry to have one the company of another . this hill we think to have be the table , make account ( as it be indeed ) that Havana be but eight league to windward , but by the persuasion of a french man , who make the captain believe he know the table very well , and have be at Havana , say that it be not the table , and that the table be much high , and near to the sea side , and that there be no plain ground to the eastward , nor hill to the westward , but all be contrary , and that behind the hill to the westward be Havana . to which persuasion credit be give by some , and they not of the worst , the captain be persuade to go to leeward , and so sail along the seven and eight day , find no habitation , nor no other table ; and then perceive his folly to give ear to such prater , be not a little sorry , both because he do consider what time he shall spend year he can get so far to windward again , which will have be , with the weather which we have , ten or twelve day work , and what it will have be long he know not , and ( that which be worst ) he have not above a day water and therefore know not what shift to make : but in fine , because the want be such , that his man can not live with it , he determine to seek water , and to go further to leeward , to a place ( as it be set in the card ) call Rio de los puercos , which he be in doubt of , both whether it be inhabit , and whether there be water or not , and whether for the shoald he may have such access with his ship , that he may convenient take in the same . and while we be in these trouble , and keep our way to the place aforesaid , almighty God our guide ( who will not suffer 47 we to run into any further danger , which we have be like to have incur , if we have range the coast of Florida along as we do before , which be so dangerous ( by report ) that no ship escape which come thither , ( as the Spaniard have very well prove the same ) send we the eight day at night a fair westerly wind , whereupon the captain and company consult , determine not to refuse God gift , but every man be content to pinch his own belly , whatsoever have happen ; and take the say wind , the nine day of July get to the table , and sail the same night , unaware overshoot Havana ; at which place we think to have water : but the next day , not know that we have overshoot the same , sail along the coast , seek it , and the eleven day in the morning , by certain know mark , we understand that we have overshoot it 20 league : in which