the first voyage attempt and set forth by the expert and valiant captain m . Francis Drake himself , with a ship call the dragon , and another ship and a pinnace , to number de dios , and Dariene , about the year 1572 , write and record by one Lopez Vaz a Portugal bear in the city of Elvas , in manner follow : which Portugal , with the discourse about he , be take at the river of plate by the ship set forth by the right honourable the earl of Cumberland , in the year 1586 . here be a certain english man name Francis Drake , who have intelligence how the town of number de dios in Nueva Espanna , have but small store of people remain there , come on a night , and enter the port with four pinnaces , and land about 150 man , and leave 70 man with a trumpet , in a fort which be there , with the other 80 he enter the town , without do any harm , till he come to the market place , and there discharge his caliver , and sound a trumpet very loud , and the other which he have leave in the fort answer he after the same manner , with the discharge their caliver , and sound their trumpet : the people hereupon not think of any such matter , be put in great fear , and wake out of their sleep flee all into the mountain , inquire one of another what the matter shall be , remain as man amaze , not know what that uproar be which happen so sudden in the town . but 14 or 15 of they join together with their harquebuss , go to the market place to know what they be that be in the town , and in a corner of the market place they do discover the Englishman , and see they to be but few , discharge 75 their caliver at those Englishman : their fortune be such that they kill the trumpeter , and shoot one of the principali man through the leg , who see himself hurt , retire to the fort , where the rest of their company be leave : they which be in the fort sound their trumpet , and see that they in the town do not answer they , and hear the caliver , think that all they in the town have be slay , and thereupon flee to their pinnace : the english captain come to the fort , and not find his man which he leave there , he and his be in so great fear , that leave their furniture behind they , and put off their hose , they swim , and wade all to their pinnace , and so go with their ship again out of the port . thus this english captain call Francis Drake , depart from number de dios , and slay only one man in the town which be look out of a window to see what the matter be , and of his man have only his trumpeter slay . the valiant but he be discontent with the repulse which he exploit of m . haj receive there , come to the sound of Dariene , and betwixt e have conference with certain negro which be flee Panama and from their master of Panama , and number de dios , the number de Negros do tell he , that certain mule come lade with Dios . gold and silver from Panama to number de dios , who in company of these negro go thereupon on land , and stay in the way where the treasure shall come with a hundred shot , and so take two company of mule , which come only with their driver mistrust nothing , and he carry away the ( gold only , for they be not able to carry the silver through the mountain . m . Francis and two day after he come to the house of cross , ^ heNsusef w ^ ere kill six or seven merchant , but find no cross ? . guide nor silver but much merchandise : so he fire the house , where be burn above 200000 ducat in merchandise , and so go to his ship again : and within half a hour after he be a shipboard , there come down to the sand three hundred shot of the Spaniard 76 in the sight of his ship , of purpose to seek he , but he care little for they be out of their reach , and so depart with his treasure .