can not agree of price , because they think the price too high . whereupon the captain perceive they go about to bring down the price , and mean to buy , and will not confess if he have licence , that he may sell at any reasonable rate , as they be worth in other place , do send for the principal of the town , and make a show he will depart , declare himself to be very sorry that he have so much trouble they , and also that he have send for the governor to come down , see now his pretence be to depart , whereat they marveil much , and ask he what cause move he thereunto , see by their work he be in possibility to have his licence . to the which he reply , that it be not only a licence that he seek , but profit , which he perceive be not there to be have , and therefore will seek further , and withal show he his write what he pay for his negro , declare also the great charge he be at in his ship , and man wage , and therefore to countervail his charge , he must sell his negro for a great price than they offer . so they doubt his departure , put he in comfort to sell better there then in any other place . and if it fall out that he have no licence that he shall not loose his labour in tarry , for they will buy without licence . whereupon , the captain be put in comfort , promise they to stay , so that he may make sale of his lean negro , which they grant unto . and the next day do sell some of they , who have buy and pay for they , think to have have a discharge of the customer , for the custom of the negro , be the king duty , they give it away to the poor for God sake , and do refuse to give the discharge in write , and the poor not trust their word , for fear , lest hereafter it may be demand of they , do refrain from buy any more , so that nothing else be do until the governor come down , which be the fourteenth day , and then the captain make petition , declare that he be come thither in a ship of the queen majesty of England , be bind to guinie , and thither drive by wind and weather , so that be come thither , he have need of sundry necessary for the reparation of the say navy , and also great need of money for the payment of his soldier , unto who he have promise payment , and therefore although he will , yet will not they depart without it , and for that purpose he request licence for the sale of certain of his negro , declare that although they be forbid to traffic with stranger , yet for that there ten 33 c be a great amity between their prince , and that the thing pertain to our queen highness , he think he may do their prince great service , and that it will be well take at his hand , to do it in this cause . the which allegation with diverse other put in request , be present unto the governor , who sit in counsel for that matter , grant unto his request for licence . but yet there fall out another thing which be the abate of the king custom , be upon every slave 30 . ducat , which will not be grant unto . whereupon the captain perceive that they will neither come near his price he look for by a great deal , nor yet will abate the king custom of that they offer , so that either he must be a great loser by his ware , or else compel the officer to abate the same king custom which be too unreasonable , for to a high price he can not bring the buyer : therefore the sixteenth of April he prepare one hundred man well arm with bow , arrow , harquebuss and pike , with the which he march to the townewards , and be perceive by the governor , he straight with all expedition send messenger to know his request , desire he to march no further forward until he have answer again , which incontinent he shall have . so our captain declare how unreasonable a thing the king custom be , request to have the same abate , and to pay seven and a half per centum , which be the ordinary custom for ware through his dominion there , and unto this if they will not grant , he will displease they . and this word be carry to the governor , answer be return that all thing shall be to his content , and thereupon he determine to depart , but the soldier and mariner find so little credit in their promise , demand gage for the performance of the premise , or else they will not depart . and thus they be constrain to send gage , we depart , begin our traffic , and end the same without disturbance . thus have make traffic in the harbour until the 28 . our captain with his ship intend to go out of the road , and purpose to make show of his departure , because now the common sort have employed their money , the rich man be come to town , who make no show that they be come to buy , so that they go about to bring down the price , and by this policy the captain know they will be make the more eager , for fear lest we depart , and they shall go without any at all . the nine and twenty we be at anchor without the road , a french ship call the green dragon of Newhaven , whereof be captain one Bon temps come in , who salute we after the manner of the sea , with certain piece of ordinance , and we resalute he with the like again : with who have communication , he declare that he have be at the mine in guinie , and 2 % report off be beat off by the Portugal galley , and enforce to , . 1 ' , i 0 1 j the Minton tn come thither to make sale or such ware as he have