recovery of the man , which be not a little to the rejoice of the captain , and the whole company : and so then altogether they keep on their way along the coast of Florida , and the fifteen day come to a anchor , and so from six and twenty degree to thirty degree and a half , where the french man abide , range all the coast along , seek for fresh water , anker every night , because we will overshoot no place of fresh water , and in the day time the captain in the ship pinnace sail along the shore , go into every creek , speak with diverse of the floridians , because he will understand where the french man inhabit ; and not find they in eight and twenty degree , as it be declare unto he , marvel thereat , and never leave sail along the coast till he find they , who inhabit in a river , by they call the river of May , and stand in thirty degree and better . in range this coast along , the captain find it to be all a island , and therefore it be all low land , and very scant of fresh water , but the country be marvellous sweet , with both marsh and meadow ground , and goodly wood among . there they find sorel to grow as abundant as grass , and where their house be , great store of maiz and mill , and grape of great bigness , but of taste much like our english grape . also deer great plenty , which come upon the sand before they . their house be not many together , for in one house a hundred of they do lodge ; they be make much like a great barne , and in strength not inferior to we , for they have stanchion and rafter of whole tree , and be cover with palmito - leaves , have no place divide , but one small room for their king and queen . in the midst of this house be a hearth , where they make great fire all night , and they sleep upon certain piece of wood m . Hawkins range all the coast of Florida . the river of May . Florida find to be cut into island . Sorell . the commodity of Florida . the house of Florida . hew in for the bow of their back , and another place make high for their head , which they put one by another all along the wall on both side . in their house they remain only in the night , and in the day they desire the field , where they dress their meat , and make provision for victual , which they provide only for a meal from hand to mouth . there be one the \ manner of thing to be marvel at , for the make of their fire , ^ in ^ lorida ™ and not one ^ 7 ^ 7 ^ ut a ^ so negro do the same , ” m a ‘ which be make only by two stick , rub they one against another : and this they may do in any place they come , where they find stick sufficient for the purpose . in their apparel the man only use dear skin , wherewith some only cover their privy member , othersome use the same as garment to cover they before and behind ; which skin be paint , some yellow and red , some black and russet , and every man accord to his own fancy . they do not omit to paint their body also with curious knot , or antic work , as every man in his own fancy devise , which paint , to make it continue the better , they use with a thorn to prick their flesh , and dent in the same , whereby the paint may have better hold . in their war they use a slight colour of paint their face , thereby to make themselves show the more fierce ; which after their war end , they wash away again . in their war they use bow and arrow , whereof their bow be make of a kind of yew , but black then we , and for the most part pass the strength of the negro or Indians , for it be not great inferior to we : their arrow be also of a great length , but yet of reed like other Indians , but vary in two point , both in length and also for nock and feather , which the other lack , whereby they shoot very steady : the head of the same be viper tooth , bone of fish , flint stone , pike point of knife , which they have get of the french man , break the same , and put the point of they in their arrow head : some of they have their head of silver , othersome that have want of these , put in a kind of hard wood , notch , which pierce as far as any of the rest . in their fight , be in the wood , they use a marvellous policy for their own safeguard , which be by clasp a tree in their arm , and yet shoot notwithstanding : this policy they use with the french man in their fight , whereby it appear that they be people of some policy : and although they be call by the Spaniard gente triste , that be to say , bad people , mean thereby , that they be not man of capacity : yet have the french man find they so witty in their answer , that by the captain own report , a counseller with we can not give a more profound reason . the woman also for their apparel use paint skin , but most of they gown of moss , somewhat long than our moss , which they sow together artificial , and make the same surplesse wise , wear their hair down to their shoulder , like the Indians . in this river of may aforesaid , the captain enter with his pinnace , find a french ship of fourscore tun , and two pinnace of fifteen tun a piece , by she , and speak with the keeper thereof , they tell he of a fort the french two league up , which they have build , in which their fa ? - . captain monsieur Laudonniere be ,