a summary and true discourse of sir Francis drake West indian voyage , begin in the year 1585 . wherein be take the city of saint Iago , Santo Domingo , Cartagena , and the town of saint Augustine in Florida ; publish by m . Thomas cate . he worthy knight for the service of his prince and country have prepare his whole fleet , and get they down to Plymouth in Devonshire , to the number of five and twenty sail of ship and pinnaces , and have assemble of soldier and mariner , to the number of 2300 . in the whole , embark they and himself at Plymouth aforesaid , the 12 . day of September 1585 . be accompany with these man of name and charge , which hereafter follow : master Christopher carleil lieutenant general , a man ten 97 g of long experience in the war as well by sea as land , who have former carry high office in both kind in many fight , which he discharge always very happy , and with great good reputation . Anthony Powel sergeant major . captain Matthew Morgan , and captain John Samson , corporal of the field . these officer have commandment over the rest of the land - captaine , who name hereafter follow . captain Anthony Plat . it captain Edward winter . captain John Goring . captain Robert Pew . captain George Barton . " captain John merchant . captain William Cecill . « captain Walter big . captain John Hannam . captain Richard Stanton . captain Martine Frobisher vice - admiral , a man of great experience in seafaring action , who have carry the chief charge of many ship himself , in sundry voyage before , be now ship in the primrose . captain Francis Knolles , reereadmirall in the Galeon Leicester . master Thomas Vennor captain in the Elizabeth bonad - venture under the general . master Edward winter captain in the aid . master Christopher carleil the lieutenant general , captain of they tygar . Henry white captain of the sea dragon . Thomas Drake captain of the Thomas . Thomas silly captain of the minion . Baily captain of the bark Talbot . Robert cross captain of the bark bond George Fortescue captain of the bark Bonner . Edward careless captain of the hope . James Erizo captain of the white lion . Thomas moon captain of the Francis . John river captain of the vantage . John Vaughan captain of the drake . John Varney captain of the George . John Martin captain of the Benjamin . Edward Gilman captain of the scout . Richard Hawkins captain of the galiot call the duck . Bitfield captain of the swallow . after our go hence , which be the fourteen of September , in the year of our lord 1585 . and take our course towards Spain , we have the wind for a few day somewhat scant , and sometime calm . And be arrive near that part of Spain , which be call the moor , we happen to espy diverse sail , which keep their course close by the shore , the weather be fair and calm . the general cause the vice - admiral to go with the pinnace well man to see what they be , who upon sight of the say pinnace approach near unto they , abandon for the most part all their ship ( be Frenchmen ) lade all with salt , and bind homeward into France , among which ship ( be all of small burden ) there be one so well like , which also have no man in she , as be bring unto you general , he think good to make stay of she for the service , mean to pay for she , as also accord he perform at our return : which bark be call the drake . the rest of these ship ( be eight or nine ) be dismiss without any thing at all take from they . who be afterward put somewhat far offend from the shore , by the contrariety of the wind , we happen to meet with some other french ship , full lade with Newland fish , be upon their return homeward from the say Newfoundland : who the general after some speech have with they ( and see plain that they be Frenchman ) dismiss , without once suffer any man to go aboard of they . the day follow stand in with the shore again , we descry another tall ship of twelve score ton or thereabouts , upon who master Carliel the lieutenant 99 [ hl 535 - j general be in the tygar , undertake the chase , who also anon after the admiral follow , and the tygar have cause the say strange ship to strike her sail , keep she there without suffer any body to go aboard until the admiral be come up : who forthwith send for the master , and diverse other of their principali man , and cause they to be several examine , find the ship and good to be belong to the inhabitant of saint Sebastian in Spain , but the mariner to be for the most part belong to saint John de Luz , and the passage . in this ship be great store of dry Newland fish , common call with we poor John , whereof afterward ( be thus find a lawful prize ) there be distribution make into all the ship of the fleet , the same be so new and good , as it do very great bestead we in the whole course of our voyage . a day or two after the the isle of take of this ship , we put in within the isle of Bayon , Bayona . for jack of favourable wind : where we have not soon anchor some part of the fleet , but the general command all the pinnace with the shipboat to be man , and every man to be furnish with such arm as be needful for that present service ; which be do , the general put himself into his galley , which be also well furnish , and row towards the city of Bayon , with intent , and the favour of the almighty to surprise it , before we have advance one half league of our way , there come a messenger be a english merchant from the governor , to see what strange fleet we be , who come to our general , confer a while with he , and after a small time spend , our general call for captain Samson , and will he to go to the governor of the city , to resolve he