command present to embark , so as that night we put off to sea southsoutheast along towards the coast of Barbary . upon Saturday in the morning , be the 13 . of November , we fall with cape blank , which be a low land and shallow water , where we catch store of fish , and double the cape , we put into the bay , where we find certain french ship of war , who we entertain with great courtesy , and there leave they . this afternoon the whole fleet assemble , which be a little scatter about their fish , and put from thence to the isle of cape Verde , sail till the 16 . of the same month in the morning , on which day we descry the island of S . Iago , and in the evening we anchor the fleet between the town call the Playa or Praya , and 103 s . Iago , where we put on shore 1000 man or more , under the lead of m . Christopher carleil lieutenant general , who direct the service most like a wise commander . the place where we have first to march do afford no good order , for the ground be mountainous and full of dale , be a very stony and troublesome passage ; but such be his industrious disposition , as he will never leave , until we have get up to a fair plain , where we make stand for the assemble of the army . and when we be all gather together upon the plain , some 2 mile from the town , the lieutenant general think good not to make attempt till daylight : because there be not one that can serve for guide or give knowledge at all of you place . and therefore after have well rest , even half a hour before day , he command the army to be divide into 3 speciali part , such as he appoint , whereas before we have march by several company , be thereunto force by the badness of the way as be aforesaid . now by the time we be thus range into a very brave order , daylight begin to appear , and be advance hard to the wall , we see no enemy to resist , whereupon the lieutenant general appoint captain Samson with thirty shot , and captain Barton with other thirty , to go down into the town which stand in the valley under we , and may very plain be view all over from that place where the whole army be now arrive : and present after these captain be send the great ensign , which have nothing in it but the plain english cross , to be place toward the sea , that our fleet may see saint George cross flourish in the enemy fortress . order be give that all the ordinance throughout the town and upon all the platform , which be above fifty piece all ready charge , shall be shoot off in honour of the queen majesty coronation day , be the seventeenth of November , after the yearly custom of England , 104 which be so answer again by the ordinance out of all the ship in the fleet which now be come near , as it be strange to hear such a thunder noise last so long together . in this mean while the lieutenant general hold still the most part of his force on the hill top , till such time as the town be quarter out for the lodging of the whole army : which be do every captain take his own quarter , and in the evening be place such a sufficient guard upon every part of the town that we have no cause to fear any present enemy . thus we continue in the city the space of 14 . the title of day , take such spoil as the place yield , which ta ^ en be for the most part , wine , oil , meal , and some such like thing for victuali , as vinegar , olive , and some such other trash , as merchandise for their Indians trade . but there be not find any treasure at all , or any thing else of worth beside . the situation of saint Iago be somewhat strange , in form like a triangle , have on the east and west side two mountain of rock and cliff , as it be hang over it , upon the top of which two mountain be build certain fortification to preserve the town from any harm that may be offer , as in a plot be plain show . from thence , on the south side of the town be the main sea , and on the north side , the valley lie between the foresay mountain , wherein the town stand : the say valley and town both do grow very narrow , insomuch that the space between the two cliff of this end of the town be estimate not to be above 10 . or 12 . score over . in the midst of the valley come down a riveret , rill , or brook of fresh water , which hard by the sea side make a pond or pool , whereout our ship be water with very great ease and pleasure . somewhat above the town on the north side between the two mountain , the valley wax somewhat large than at the town end , which valley be whole convert into i ° 5 garden and orchard well replenish with diverse sort of fruit , herb and tree , as lymmon , orange , sugar - cane , cochar or cocho nut , plantan , potato - root , cucumber , small and round onion , garlic , and some other thing not now remember , among which the cocho nut , and plantan be very pleasant fruit , the say cocho have a hard shell and a green husk over it , as have our walnut , but it far exceed in greatness , for this cocho in his green husk be big than any man two fist : of the hard shell many drink cup be make here in England , and set in silver as i have often see . next within this hard shell be a white rind resemble in show very much even as any thing may do , to the white of a egg when it be hard boil . and within this white of the nut lie a water , which be whitish and very clear , to the quantity of half a pint or thereabouts , which water and white rind before speak of , be both