a voyage of the honourable gentleman m . Robert Duddeley , now knight , to the isle of Trinidad , and the coast of Paria : with his return home by the isle of Granata , Santa Cruz , Sant Juan de puerto rico , Mona , Zacheo , the shoald call Abreojos , and the isle of Bermuda . in which voyage he and his company take and sink nine spanish ship , whereof one be a armada of 600 ton . write at the request of m . Richard Hakluyt . ave ever since i can conceive of any thing be delight with the discovery of navigation , i foster in my self that disposition till i be of more year and better ability to undertake such a matter . to this purpose i call to i the advice of sufficient seaman , and principal undertake a voyage for the south sea ; but by reason that many before have miscarry in the same enterprise , i can not be suffer to hazard more of her majesty subject upon so uncertain a ground as my desire : which make i by constraint ( great charge already by i defray ) to prepare another 203 course for the west Indies , without hope there to do any thing worth note : and so common be it indeed to many , as it be not worth the register . neyer - thelesse , i have yield to your former importunity , and send you this my journal to supply a vacant room among your more important discourse . now be provide for this last enterprise , rather to see some practice and experience , than any wonder or profit , i weigh anchor from Southampton ride the six of November 1594 . but the wind fall scant , it be the 17 . day of the same month before i can put into the sea upon this day my self in the bear a ship of 200 . ton my admiral , and captain monk in the bear whelp viceadmiral , with two small pinnace call the frisk and the earwig pass through the needle , and within two day after bare in with Plymouth . my business at this port - town dispatch , i set sail ; whither again by contrary wind to my great misfortune , i be enforce to return back . i may call it misfortune ; for by this mean i utter ( for all the voyage ) lose my viceadmiral ; which be the cause likewise of loose my own pinnace , which three be the principali stay of my voyage . for at this last leave of England in a storm i lose my own pinnace , as be before say . notwithstanding all these cross all alone i go wander on my voyage , sail along the coast of Spain within view of cape Finister , and cape S . Vincent , the north and south cape of Spain . in which space have many chace , i can meet with none but my countryman or country friend . leave these spanish shore i direct my course the 14 . of December towards the isle of the canary . here i linger 12 day for two reason : the one , in hope to meet my vice - admiral : the other , to get some vessel to remove my pester man into , who be 140 . almost in a ship of 200 . ton , there grow many sick . the first hope be frustrate , because my vice - admiral be return into 204 England with two prize . the second expectation fall out to our great comfort : for i take two very fine caravel under the calm of tenerif and Palma , which both refresh and amend my company , and make i a fleet of 3 . sail . in the one caravel this m . Ben - call the intent , i make Benjamin wood captain , -------- in the other , one captain Wentworth . thus cheer as a desolate traveller with the company of my small ftheyeere and new erect fleet , i continue my purpose for 1596 . send the west Indies , and first for cape Blanco in Africa with two upon the desert of Libya . my last hope be to meet my lose ship , and withal to renew my victual upon u ^ on pa the canther , which be Portugal fisherman : but the fir the south canther have be so fright by Frenchmen , as i sea and fir can get none . ride under this white cape two es ^ / this day , and walk on shore to view the country , i saint find it a waste , desolate , barren , and sandy place , gentleman the sand run in drift like snow and be very stony ; for so be all the country sand upon stone ( like Arabia deserta , and Petrea ) and full of black venomous lizard , with some wild beast and people which be tawny moor , so wild , as they will but call to my caravel from the shore , who ride very near it . but not desirous to make any long abode in this place , by reason of the most infectious serena or dew that fall all along these coast of Africa , i cause my master Abraham Kendal to shape his course direct for the isle of Trinidad in the west Indies ; which after 22 . day we descry , and the first of February come to a anchor under a point thereof call Curiapan , in a bay which be very full of pelican , and i call it pelican bay . about 3 . league to the eastwards of this place we find a i of Marcazites which glister like gold ( but all be not gold that glister ) for so we find the same nothing worth , though the Indians do assure we it be Calvori , which signify gold with they . Theise Indians be a fine shape and a gentle people , all naked and paint red , their com - 205 sir Robert Dudley . a description ofCapeBlanco in Africa . the ysle of Trinidad descry . Punta de Curiapan . 1595 - mander wear crown of feather . Theise people do often resort unto my ship , and bring we hen , hog , plantan , potato , pino , tobacco , and many other pretty commodity , which they exchange with we for hatchet , knife , hook , bell , and glass button . from this Paracoa , or Parico . bay i fall down low to a place call Paracoa , where i desire rather to ride , because it be a convenient they ensconce themselves . place to water , ballast