lie in the sand on shore . in this river as we be go up , there be at certain season great store of lightning and thunder , with such abundance of rain , as though the sky will fall down : and so it do continue from midnight until morning : so that we be fain to go aboard the canoas , and with certain broad leaf which grow in the country , the mariner make a cover to cast over the ware which be lade in the canoas : and it do keep both the rain and sun from we which be passenger . the canoas be draw up this river of Magdalena by main force of the mariner in row and hale they with 175 rope . there be 7 . or 8 . Indians common which guide these canoas , beside the master which keep the helm , and the passenger . we be common two month in go up this river . it be 150 . league to the land place . and there the merchant unlade their merchandise , which serve for all the city and town which be in this new kingdom e of Granada . and the merchant lade the canoas back again from thence with great store of silver and gold which be get out of the mine for Cartagena , and there it be ship for Spain . and likewise here be great quantity of treasure lade in the say canoas which be for the king custom and other duty which be pay : but they be but a month or three week go down the river to Cartagena . these be the rich mine in all Peru . and thus i rest . from santa fee de Bogota in the new kingdom of Granada in Peru the 10 . of May 1590 . the licentiate John de labera . a letter of Hieronymo de Nabares to the licenciat John Alonso dwell in Valladolid , write from Panama to Sivil the 24 . day of August 1590 . touch the gainefulnes of the trade to the philippinas , and the extreme fear they have of the Englishman . ot long ago i write to your worship from Panama by the way of Havana : give you to understand of my be here , and of the state of these country . \ HC1 cj oc ul lhc oLdLv oi Lil CSC COU . i i after i depart from Spain , in 37 . day we arrive at Cartagena : ' . Cartagena : and from thence i take ship to go to number de dios , which be 80 . league from Cartagena : and in 4 . day we get thither . and from thence i go to Panama : where i have remain these 20 . day , till the ship go for the philippinas . 176 my meaning be to carry my commodity thither : for it be constant report , that for every hundred ducat a the great man shall get 600 . ducat clear . we must stay here ° f in Panama from August till it be Christmas . for in August , September , October and November it be winter here , and extreme foul weather upon this coast of Peru , and not navigable to go to the philippinas , nor to any place else in the south sea . so that at Christmas the ship begin to set on their voyage for those place : and then in these part the summer begin with very fair weather , and always we shall have the wind with we . for in July until October here be terrible thunder and lighten with extreme rain , so that it be not possible to go any way in this country . here be in Panama 10 . great ship of 500 , 400 , 300 , and 200 . tun apiece , and some 15 . bark which use common to sail in the south sea to Lima , to the valle , to Arica , and to the philippinas . this country in the summer be so extreme hot , that it be not possible to travel in the day time : it stand in 8 . deg . and and all this coast be in 9 and 10 . deg . here be great store of adder , snake and toad , which be in the house , but they do but small hurt . here bread , wine , and bacon be very dear , by reason the country do not yield it : for it be bring from Peru . a livre . of bread be worth here 2 . rial of plate : a quart of wine be sell for 4 . rial : for none grow here . here be very few sheep , and those extreme dear . the only food here for flesh , be ox , cow , bull and heffker : you may buy 20 . livre . Twenty li . off of beef for one rial of plate . their small money beefi may be of silver be a rial of plate , and very few of they , but all piece or 4 . a 8 . ror the silver mine which daily be find in Peru be wonderful to be speak of . if a man do not see the silver make , he will never believe it : for the very earth which come out of the mine , and be afterward wash , be but 3 . or 4 . year on a mount , yield great store of ten 177 m silver afterward again . but as here we get much , so our charge in meat , drink and apparel do cost very much . as for fruit here be none that be good , but only musk melon , and they be sell for 6 . or 8 . rial apiece . i can certify your worship of no news , but only , that all this country be in such extreme the english - fear of the Englishman our enemy , that the like be man extreme never see or hear of : for in see a sail , present fear earn Peru , . - . „ . • / here be alarm in all the country . 1 pray you to write unto i as touch the war that his majesty have with our enemy , and how his majesty do prevail . and thus i rest . from Panama in the firm land the 28 . of Aug . 1590 . Hieronymo de Nabares .