so sure we can but have a inward regard so far as may lie in we , to help either in all good sort towards the satisfaction of this their expectation , and by procure they some little benefit to encourage they and to nourish 123 this ready and willing disposition of they both in they and in other by their example against any other time of like occasion . but because it may be suppose that herein we forget not the private benefit of our self , and be thereby the rather move to incline our self to this composition , we do therefore think good for the clear of our self of all such suspicion , to declare hereby , that what part or portion soever it be of this ransom or composition for Cartagena , which shall come unto we , we do free give and bestow the same whole upon the poor man , who have remain with we in the voyage , mean as well the sailor as the soldier , wish with all our heart it be such or so much as may seem a sufficient reward for their painful endeavour . and for the firm confirmation thereof , we have think meet to subsign these present with our own hand in the place and time aforesaid . captain Christopher Carliell lieutenant general . captain Goring . captain Samson . captain Powell etc but while we be yet there , it happen one day , that our watch call the sentinel , upon the Churchsteeple , have discover in the sea a couple of small bark or boat , make in with the harbour of Cartagena , whereupon captain moon and captain Varney , with John grant the master of the tiger , and some other seaman , embark themselves in a couple of small pinnace , to take they before they shall come nigh the shore , at the mouth of the harbour , lest by some straggle spaniard from the land , they may be warn by sign from come in : which fall out accord , notwithstanding all the diligence that our man can use : for the spanish boat , upon the sight of our pinnace come towards they , run themselves ashore , and so their man present hide themselves in bush hard by the sea side , among some other that have call they by sign thither . our man present without any due 124 regard have to the quality of the place , and see no man of the Spaniard to show themselves , aboord the spanish bark or boat , and so stand all open in they , be sudden shoot at by a troop of spaniard out of the bush : by which volley of shot there be slay captain Varney , which die present , and captain moon , who die some few day after , beside some four or five other that be hurt : and so our folk return without their purpose , not have any sufficient number of soldier with they to fight on shore . for those man they carry be all mariner to row , few of they arm , because they make account with their ordinance to have take the bark well enough at sea , which they may full easy have do , without any loss at all , if they have come in time to the harbour mouth , before the Spaniard boat have get so near the shore . during our abode in this place , as also at saint Domingo , there pass diverse courtesy between we and the Spaniard , as feast , and use they with all kindness and favour : so as among other there come to see the general , the governor of Cartagena , with the bishop of the same , and diverse other gentleman of the better sort . this town of Cartagena we touch in the out part , and consume much with fire , as we have do saint Domingo upon discontentment , and for want of agree with we in their first treaty touch their ransom , which at the last be conclude between we , shall be 100 and xoooo . ducat for that which be yet stand , the ducat value at five shilling six penny sterling . this town though not half so big as saint Domingo , give as you see , a far great ransom , be in very deed of far more importance , by reason of the excellende of the harbour , and the situation thereof , to serve the trade of number de dios and other place , and be inhabit with far more rich merchant . the other be chief inhabit with lawyer and brave gentleman , 125 be the chief or high appeal of their suit in law of all the island about it , and of the main land coast next unto it . and it be of no such account as Cartagena , for these and some other like reason , which i can give you , over long to be now write . the warn which this town receive of our come towards they from saint Domingo , by the space of twenty day before our arrival here , be cause that they have both fortify and every way prepare for their best defence . as also that they have carry and convey away all their treasure and principali substance . the ransom of a hundred and ten thousand ducat thus conclude on , as be aforesaid , the same be write , and express for nothing more than the town of Cartagena , upon the payment of the say ransom , we leave the say town , and draw some part of our soldier into the priory or abbey , stand a quarter of a english mile below the town upon the harbour waterside , the same be wall with a wall of stone , which we tell the Spaniard be yet we , and not redeem by their composition : whereupon they find the defect of their contract , be content to enter into another ransom for all place , but special for the say house , as also the blockhouse or castle , which be upon the mouth of the inner harbour . and when we ask as much for the one as for the other ,