. and from Potossi to this harbour be great store of treasure bring to buy that country commodity , and so they be ship for 172 spanish letter intercept a . d . . i59 ° - Portugal : and the ship go and come again in short time . if his majesty will consent that we may have traffic from Spain to this harbour , it will be very profitable : and in five or six month i shall hear from you , and you shall do the like from i . and by the way of Cartagena it be sometime 2 . year before 2 % tedlous - we can receive your letter from Spain . by this way t my brother may write , and so by this mean the letter p ^ may speedy come to my hand . and thus i rest . from this city of Potossi the 20 . of July 1590 . the licenciate Christopher Uslano . a letter of Steven de Tresio to Alonso Martin Vaca in Sivil from Panama the 21 . of August 1590 . touch the king desire to borrow money upon privy seal , and the want of the country . t may please your worship to understand , that i have receive a packet of letter from you , wherein you write unto i of the great misery and the calamity of Spain . and i promise you that these country be in no less . for here be great want of corn and other kind of provision : for here be almost none to be have for any money , by reason that from Lima there be no ship come with maiz . here we have have news from Spain of the great provision which be make ready for those great war which his majesty be in prepare , and of the great sum of money that his majesty stand in need of : so that it do put we all that be dweller here in such a perplexity and confusion , that we know not what we shall do . i pray God his majesty take not away our money which we have send to Spain in the fleet . for here be merchant that have send some 200000 . pezo , some 100000 . pezo , some 60000 . some more some less , to have it employ in commodity of that 173 privy seal to borrow money send into Peru . abundance of money to come from Lima and from the valle . country . although the king have send hither his schedule or bill of assignment sign and seal by his majesty , which have be proclaim here : the content whereof be , that what man soever merchant or other will send their money into Spain in that fleet , his majesty will not take away any part or portion thereof , ( which in so do will be a great comfort unto we all ) yet here we be in doubt that he will take it from we all . news from the city of Lima as yet we have none : but i can certify your worship , that all thing be very dear here , and that we stand in great extremity for want of victual ; and likewise we have great want of money . also here be order come from the king with certain privy seal for to lend his majesty money , for that he have great need thereof . this country at this instant be very poor , and there be none that can lend the king at this time any money at all , by reason that this land be leave so provide of money : but we be look for great store of money , which be to come from Lima and from the valle . from Panama the 12 . of August 1590 . Steven de Tresio . a letter of the licentiate John de labera to the licentiate Alonso Sapata de Henao in Castille in Calamea de la Sorengo , write from saint fee de Bogota in the new kingdom of Granada , the 10 . of May 1590 . touch the rich silver mine of marequita new find out , and the long way thither by the river of Magdalena . in | the other letter which i dispatch from hence in August 1589 . i write unto your worship by 2 . or 3 . way : but i know not whether you have receive they or not . present after i depart to the government of Popayan , which join with the city of Quito in the coast of Peru , in company of the governor lieutenant don Diego Ordonez the 174 Lara of Salamanca . but i be fain to forsake his company , by reason i fall sick in the city of marequita , where they have discover the great silver mine : which city be above 200 . league from Cartagena : where i remain a certain time very sick . and because this country be extreme hot , and i every day grow worse and worse , i be fain to travail 30 . league further up into the main land to a city call the atu of saint fee in the new kingdom of Granada , be on the ta fee in coast of Peru : which be a cold country : where i be off admit a procurator , for that the royal audience be Granada . keep in this city . so i find my self very healthy of body , by reason this country be full of all kind of victual , very good and very plentiful , as bread , cheese , bacon , beef , great store of hen , and great store of comfeiture . only here be want of gold : so that this country will be utter undo , if the mine of marequita help not to restore the same again : whereof there be good hope : for here be great store of metal already great store of find , and the workman be in hand to refine the say metal : so that we be in good hope that great store of silver will be find in these mine of great value and profit to his majesty . this river be call the great river of Magdalena . there be a fish in the river call the great cayman , which follow after the canoas : and if it can ° fmag - reach any man in the canoa , it will hail he out and a of devour he . all night they