. yard in breadth , and in the enter in thereof there lie a channel in the midst of it , which be 200 . yard broad , and 20 . or 15 . fathom water , some place more , some less . and to enter into the harbour you must go through this channel , and the land do double in and out . and at the enter in of the say harbour , after you have pass this channel , you must bear up to the shoareward near unto the hand of care , and look 137 how much be overplus more than the two hundred yard of the channel , all the rest be certain ledge of rock , cover with two or three foot water upon the top of they , some place more , and some less . So the ship which must enter in at the mouth , must bring very good pilot with they , which must be very skilful : yet all this will not serve , but they must carry their boat before , and sound with their lead to know where the best place of the channel lie for they to go in , so it will be small hindrance to any ship that shall enter , neither yet danger at all of sink . there be three place about the say city , where the Francis enemy may give a attempt by land the one of they drake . js where the enemy do enter in and land , which be a sandy bay , and on the other side of the bay be the sea , and on the other side a great lake which go towards the harbour . the sandy bay or bank , on the one side be 500 yard broad , all sandy ground without any tree . so that the enemy which give the assault in this place must be constrain to march all alongst this sandy bay , the enemy lie open these 500 yard , which reach until you do come to the trench : and on the backside other 500 yard , till you do come unto the city . the say sandy bay or bank be 130 . yard broad , where the trench be build . and in this place this city have be take by the enemy twice . wherefore here we have drive in a great many of wooden stake , which go down into the sea 50 . yard deep : and this we have do , because this be a very dangerous and filthy coast . and below in the bottom of the valley there we have build a little sconce , where we may plant 3 . or 4 . piece of ordinance . and likewise we have make a deep ditch , which do answer to both part of the sea ; so on this side the city be very strong and sufficient . for this be the place whereof the citizen be most afraid . the other enter be lower down by the say sandy 138 bay , which be call Cienaga , or the fen deal Roreado . this be another place which be on the say sandy bay , which be 300 . yard broad from the one place down to the sea . and on the other side there lie the Cienaga , which be a certain plat of ground that be overflow with water all the year long . so that the enemy which shall come this way to win the city , must come march over land a good way upon a sandy bank or bay , where the sea lie on the one side , and a grove or bosk of wood on the other side , and through a plat of ground which be overflow with water , but not all cover . so in this place we have make a fort or sconce with certain flanker belong thereunto . and i have cause a deep ditch to be dig of 60 . foot in breadth , so that the sea do come to that plat or place which be overflow . and in this order we have stop this passage , so that the city stand in manner like unto a hand . there be 2600 . yard distance from this place to the other trench where the enemy Francis Drake do land last . the enter in of this harbour be by the bridge and Causey which do go from the city to saint Francis ; the say Causey be 300 . yard in length , and 12 . yard in breadth : and the water be on both the side of the say Causey : so this be the strong place of all the rest of the three place . also in this place there be order take to make a draw bridge , and upon the top of the say bridge to build a platform , and plant ordinance upon it : and on both side of the bridge there be certain trench make , where our man may be close keep . at the point of this land call ycaco , which be in the enter in of the harbour towards saint Anna , we have make a fort of timber foursquare of 300 . foot every way , and trench , where we may plant 15 . or 16 . piece of ordinance , and keep 50 . man in garrison , and behind the bourd on the backside of the timber , a barricade of earth or mud wall be four foot in thickness , and behind the mudwall , sand : so this fort will be of 139 great importance for safeguard of this harbour , because all the ship which do enter into this harbour do come close to this place where it be strong , so that sometime one may cast a stone into the ship when they be come in : and when any ship of war or pirate will give any attempt to enter into this harbour , there be the galres tf order give that the two galley shall go forth , and put Cartagena . themselves behind the fort with their prow to the sea , and so shoot at their enemy in the forepart of the ship , and then the fort answer likewise with their ordinance at the side of the ship , and at their tackle , so the enemy be in the harbour all unrip , they must of necessity be constrain to lie hover within the harbour , or else they must drive upon the