go in ship of great burden and draught then any we have in our fleet . 131 we pass thus alongst the coast hard aboard the shore , which be shallow for a league or two from the shore , and the same be low and break land for the most part . the nine of June upon sight of one speciali great fire ( which be very ordinary all alongst this coast , even from the cape of Florida hither ) the general send his skiff to the shore , where they find some of our english countryman ( that have be send thither the year before by sir Walter Ralegh ) and bring they aboard : by who direction we proceed along to the place which they make their port . but some of our ship be of great draught unable to enter , anchor without the harbour in a wild road at sea , about two mile from shore . from whence the general write letter to master Ralph lane , be governor of those english in Virginia , and then at his fort about six league from the road in a island which they call Roanoac , wherein especial he show how ready he be to supply his necessity and want , which he understand of , by those he have first talk withal . the morrow after , master lane himself and some of his company come unto he , with the consent of his captain he give they the choice of two offer , that be to say : either he will leave a ship , a pinnace , and certain boat with sufficient master and mariner , together furnish with a month victuali , to stay and make far discovery of the country and coast , and so much victuali likewise as may be sufficient for the bring of they all ( be a hundred and three person ) into England , if they think good after such time , with any other thing they will desire , and that he may be able to spare . or else if they think they have make sufficient discovery already , and do desire to return into England , he will give they passage . but they , as it seem , be desirous to stay , accept very thankful and with great 132 gladness , that which be offer first . whereupon the ship be appoint and receive into charge by some of their own company send into she by master lane , before they have receive from the rest of the fleet the provision appoint they , there arise a great storm ( which they say be extraordinary and very strange ) that last three dayes ' together , and put all our fleet in great danger , to be drive from their anchor upon the coast . for we break many cable , and lose many anchor : and some of our fleet which have lose all ( or which number be the ship appoint for master lane and his company ) be drive to put to sea in great danger , in avoid the coast , and can never see we again until we meet in England . many also of our small pinnace and boat be lose in this storm . notwithstanding after all this , the general offer they ( with consent of his captain ) a other ship with some provision , although not such a one for their turn , as may have be spare they before , this be unable to be bring into their harbour . or else if they will , to give they passage into England , although he know we shall perform it with great difficulty than he may have do before . but master lane with those of the chief of his company which he have then with he , consider what shall be best for they to do , make request unto the general under their hand , that they may have passage for England : the which be grant , and the rest send for out of the country and ship , we depart from that coast the 18 . of June . and so , God be thank , both they and we in good safety arrive at Portesmouth the 28 . of July 1586 . to the great glory of God , and to no small honour to our prince , our country , and our self . the total value of that which be get in this voyage be esteem at three score thousand pound , whereof the company which have travel in the voyage be to have twenty thousand pound , the adventurer ! 33 the other forty . of which twenty thousand pound ( as i can judge ) will redound some six pound to the single share . we lose some seven hundred and fifty man in the voyage ; above three part of they only by sickness . the man of name that die and be slay in this voyage , which i can present call to remembrance , be these . captain Powel . ) ( captain Bigges . captain Varney . ( ) captain Cecill . captain moon . ( ) captain Hannam . captain Fortescue . ) ( captain Greenefield . Thomas Tucker a lieutenant . Alexander Starkey a lieutenant . master Escot a lieutenant . master Waterhouse a lieutenant . master George candish . master Nicholas winter . master Alexander Carliell . master Robert Alexander . master Scroop . master James Dier . master Peter duke . with some other , who for haste i can sudden think on . the ordinance get of all sort brass and iron , be about two hundred and forty piece , whereof the two hundred and some moor be brass , and be thus find and get . at s . Iago some two or three and fifty piece . in s . Domingo about fourscore , whereof be very much great ordinance , as whole cannon , demi - canon , culverin , and such like . in Cartagena some sixty and three piece , and good store likewise of the great sort . in the fort of S . Augustin be fourteen piece . the rest be iron ordinance , of which the most part be get at saint Domingo , the rest at Cartagena .