Monsieur de la Barbotiere be satisfy : and then we be great friend again , to all our joy . the 12 of August 1593 our captain be send aboard our ship : but before his departure he request the captain of the french ship that he will give i passage home with he , to certify the owner what have pass in all the voyage , as also of the unruliness of the company . and this day we take our leaf the one of the other ; the Edward for England : and we bear in for gonnavy , where afterward we find the Frenchman boat . the last of November 1593 Monsieur de la Barbotiere depart from a port call Laguna in Hispaniola . the 17 of December next ensue it be his fortune to have his ship cast away upon the northwest part of the isle of Bermuda about midnight ; the pilot make themselves at noon to be to the southward of the island twelve league , certify the captain that they be out of all danger . so they demand of he their wine of heighth : the which they have . And be , as it shall seem , after they have their wine , careless of their charge which they take in hand , be as it be drunken , through 200 their negligence a number of good man be cast away : and i be but a stranger among 50 and odd Frenchman and other , it please God to appoint i to be one of they that be save , i hope to his service and glory . we make account at the first that we be cast away hard by the shore , be high cliff , but we find our self seven league off : but with our boat and a raft which we have make and tow at our boat stern , we be save some 26 of we ; among who be no more english but my self . now be among so many stranger , and see not room for the one half , i dare neither press into the boat , nor upon the raft , for fear lest they shall have cast i over board , or else have kill i : so i stay in the ship which be almost full of water , until the captain be enter the boat , call i unto he be at hand , for that it stand upon life or death : and so i present enter , leave the better half of our company to the mercy of the sea . after this we row all the day until a hour or two before night year we can come on land , tow the raft with the boat . when we come T & descrip - on shore , be all the day without drink , every man * ™ < > ftheisle take his way to see if he can find any : but it be i r u ‘ long before any be find . at length one of the pilot dig among a company of weed find fresh water to all our great comfort , be only rain water : and this be all the fresh water that we find on shore . but there be in this island many fine bay , wherein if a man do dig , i think there may be find store of fresh water . this island be divide all into break island : and the great part i be upon , which may be some 4 or 5 mile long , and two mile and a half over ; be all wood , as cedar and other timber , but cedar be the chief . now it please God before our then save of ship do split , that we save our carpenter tool , or tkwptnur else i think we have be there to this day : and have l ^ atim ' recover the aforesaid tool , we go roundly about they a bark cut down of tree , and in the end build a small strange build bark of some 18 tun , for the most part with tronnel and fatvuhed . 201 good harbour in you east part of Bermuda . a excellent fish for pearl in Bermuda . the people near cape Briton use traffic of rich fur . very few nail . as for tackle we make a voyage aboard the ship before she split , and cut down her shrowd , and so we tackle our bark , and rig she . in stead of pitch we make lime , and mix it with the oil of tortoise ; and assoon as the carpenter have calk , i and another , with each of we a small stick in our hand , do plaster the mortar into the seam , and be in April , when it be warm and fair weather , we can not soon lie it on , but it be dry , and as hard as a stone . in this month of April 1594 , the weather be very hot , we be afraid our water shall fail we ; and therefore make the more haste away : and at our departure we be constrain to make two great chest , and calk they , and stow they on each side of our main mast , and so put in our provision of rainwater , and 13 live tortoise for our food , for our voyage which we intend to Newfoundland . in the south part of this island of Bermuda there be hog , but they be so lean that you can not eat they , by reason the island be so barren : but it yield great store of fowl , fish and tortoise . and to the eastward of the island be very good harbour , so that a ship of 200 tun may ride there landlocked , without any danger , with water enough . also in this island be as good fish for pearl as be any in the west Indies , but that the place be subject to foul weather , as thunder , lightning and rain : but in April and part of may we have very fair and hot weather . the 11 of may it please God to set we clear of the island , to the no little joy of we all , after we have live in the same almost the space of 5 month . and the 20 of may we fall with the land near to cape Briton , where we run into a fresh water river , whereof there be many , and take in wood , water , and ballast . and here the people of the country come unto we , be clothe all in fur , with the fur side unto their skin , and bring with they fur of sundry sort to sell , beside great store of wild duck : so some of our company have save some small bead , buy 202 some of their duck . here we stay not above four hour , and so depart . this shall seem to be a very good country . and we see very fine champion ground , and wood . from this place we run for the bank of Newfoundland , whereas we meet with diverse , but none will take in a man of we , until it please God that we meet with a bark of Falmouth , which receive we all for a little time ; and with she we take a french ship , wherein i leave capitan de la Barbotier my dear friend , and all his company , and stay my self aboard the english bark : and have passage in the same , in the month of August i arrive at Falmouth 1594 .