massive timber of great tree like mast . the lieutenant general be determine to pass the river this night with 4 . company , and there to lodge himself entrench as near the fort , as that he may play with his musket and small shot upon any that shall appear , and so afterward to bring and plant the battery with he : but the help of mariner for that sudden to make trench can not be have , which be the cause that this determination be remit until the next night . in the night the lieutenant general take a little row skiff , and half a dozen well arm , as captain Morgan , and captain Samson , with some other beside the rower , and go to view what guard the enemy keep , as also to take knowledge of the ground . and albeit he go as covert as may be , yet the enemy take the alarm , grow fearful that the whole force be approach to the assault , and therefore with all speed abandon the place after the shoot of some of their piece . they thus go , and he be return unto we again , but nothing know of their flight from their fort , forthwith come a french man be a phipher ( who have Nicholas be prisoner with they ) in a little boat , play on his borsoisnm - phiph the tune of the prince of Orange his song ; and be call unto by the guard , he tell they before he put foot out of the boat , what he be himself , and how the Spaniard be go from the fort , offer either to remain in hand there , or else to return to the place with they that will go . ten 129 i upon this intelligence , the general , the lieutenant general , with some of the captain in one skiff , and the viceadmiral with some other in his skiff , and two or three pinnace furnish of soldier with they , put present over towards the fort , give order for the rest of the pinnace to follow . and in our approach , some of the enemy bold than the rest , have stay behind their company , shoot off two piece of ordinance at we : but on shore we go , and enter the place without find any man there . when the day appear , we find it build all of timber , the wall be none other but whole mast or body of tree set up right and close together in manner of a pale , without any ditch as yet make , but whole intend with some more time ; for they have not as yet finish all their work , have begin the same some three or four month before : so as , to say the truth , they have no reason to keep it , be subject both to fire , and easy assault . the platform whereon the ordinance lie , be whole body of long pine tree , whereof there be great plenty , lay a cross one on another , and some little earth among . there be in it thirteen or fourteen great piece of brass ordinance , and a chest unbroken up , have in it the value of some two thousand pound sterling by estimation of the king treasure , to pay the soldier of that place , who be a hundred and fifty man . the fort thus win , which they call S . Johns fort , and the day open , . we assay to go to the town , but can not by reason of some river and break ground which be between the two place : and therefore be enforce to embark again into our pinnace , we go thither upon the great main river , which be call as also the town , by the name of saint Augustin . at our approach to land , there be some that begin to show themselves , and to bestow some few shoot 130 1586 . upon we , but present withdraw themselves . and in their run thus away , the sergeant Major find one of their horse ready saddle and bridle , take the same to follow the chase ; and so overgo all his company , be ( by one lay behind a bush ) shoot through the head : and fall down therewith , be by the same and two or three more , stab in three or four place of his body with sword and dagger , before any can come near to his rescue . his death be much lament , be in very deed a honest wise gentleman , and a soldier of good experience , and of as great courage as any man may be . in this place call S . Augustin , we understand the king do keep , as be before say , one hundred and fifty soldier , and at another place some dozen league beyond to the northward , call S . Helena , he do there likewise keep a hundred and fifty more , serve there for no other purpose , than to keep all other nation from inhabit any part of all that coast ; the government whereof be commit to one Pedro Melendez marquess , nephew to that Melendez the admiral , who have overthrow master John Hawkins in the bay of Mexico some seventeen or eighteen year ago . this governor have charge of both place , but be at this time in this place , and one of the first that leave the same . here it be resolve in full assembly of captain , to undertake the enterprise of saint Helena , and from thence to seek out the inhabitation of our english countryman in Virginia , distant from thence some six degree northward . when we come thwart of saint Helena , the shold Santa Helena , appear dangerous , and we have no pilot to undertake the entry , it be think meet to go hence along . for the admiral have be the same night in four fathom and a half , three league from the shore : and yet we understand by the help of a know pilot , there may and do