a true report of a voyage undertake for the west Indies by m . Christopher Newport general of a fleet of three ship and a pinnace , viz . the golden dragon admiral , whereof be captain m . Newport himself ; the prudence viceadmiral , under the conduct of captain Hugh Merrick ; the Margaret under captain Robert Fred ; and the virgin our pinnace under captain Henry Kidgil : begin from London the 25 . of Januarie 1591 . write by m . John twit of Harewich , Corporali in the dragon . in which voyage they take and burn upon the coast of Hispaniola , within the bay of Honduras , and other place , 3 . town , and 19 sail of ship and frigate . he 12 . day of February An . 1591 . we set sail from Dover ride , and have a prosperous wind , the 27 . day of the same month we fall with cape Cantin on the coast of Barbary , and on the 28 . we arrive at Santa Cruz ride , where have refresh our self some 3 . or 4 . day , we put off to sea again , and about the 5 . of march we pass by the hand of the canary : and have a favourable wind , the 4 . of April An . 1592 . we fell with Dominica in the west Indies : where make stay a day or two , we barter with the savage for certain commodity of they , viz . tobacco , hen , potato root , etc pass from thence to a water place on the other side of the cliff , we take a Portugal ship of Lisbon of 300 . tun , which come from guinie , and be bind for Cartagena , wherein be 300 . Negros young and old . which ship we take along with we to saint Juan de Puerto 184 rico , where we land the merchant and one Spaniard moor within a league of the town , and land some 20 . or 30 . musketeer , some 20 . horseman make towards we ; but we retire to our boat without any service do . the 9 we lay hover all day before the town , the castle make a shot or two at we . the reason why we set the Portugal merchant aland there be , for that he hope to help we to some money for his negro there , but he falsify his word with we , so that pass along to the westermost end of the say hand , about some 9 or 10 . league from the town we land the negro , and sink their ship . the 11 . of April we pass from thence to Mona some 15 . league off , where we land : there be on the hand about 19 soul , the child of a old Portugal ! , and his wife who afford we such fruit as their hand yield , viz . swine flesh , potato root , etc from thence along we pass to Saona , a long hand and very fruitful , replenish with store of wild beast and swine , where we land , hunt , and train our man . pass from hence westward along the south coast of Hispaniola , we descry a frigate , which we chase and take : wherein be 22 . jar of copper - money , be bind for saint Juan de Puerto rico , to buy wine there . the next day we take 2 . small frigate more , but nothing of any value in they . the 15 . of April at night we sack a town in the say hand of Hispaniola call Ocoa , where be a ingenio , wherein we find sugar 8c poultry great store , but the people have discover our ship over night , and be flee into the mountain . this town stand a league from the seaside , consist of some forty or fifty house . they bring we much cattle , and two wain load of sugar , to ransom the town . while this action be perform , Robert free of Harwich , captain of the Margaret , take two frigate with certain Spaniards on the other side of the bay , which come to lade sugar there at a ingenio . 185 this town stand from the water side a league . after we have here refresh our self , we stand along for cape Tiburon , where we water : and make no stay there , about the 23 . of April we leave our ship in a fair roadstead under a hand not inhabit , and with our frigate which we have take before , wherein we ship all our strength which possible we can afford , leave only so few aboard our ship as can hardly if need have be , have wrought they ; we pass along by the say hand to the northwest part of Hispaniola , to a town call Yaguana ; where the 27 . in the morning 2 . hour before day we land ; but we be discover by mean of a frigate that lie lade with victual , bind for Carthagena , the man of which frigate recover on land before we , give a alarm to the town , who be present up in arm to the number of a hundred and fifty horse . we march notwithstanding along to the town , have a Spaniard for our guide , where by that time the day break , we be before the town , where upon a fair green make a stand , we be encounter by the horseman have no strength of foot , but certain few loose shot which lie in a low valley at the entry of the town . the horseman charge we very fierce , but see they can not prevail , bring in a drove before they of two hundred beast or more : and so forcible think to have break our array , it please God to cause their cattle to return back upon themselves : and thus their own device sort out to their own detriment . in this skirmish we slay their governor , a man very hardy , and of great valour . in the end , by reason of the Spaniard brag which they give out , ( as by the life of their wife and child , etc that not one of we shall go aboard again ) a great doubt of intercept of we and of our boat be strike into our captain heart then need : and so for that time we retire to our boat not enter the town , and so pass with our boat to our ship again ; where the same night our captain determine to go up with our ship , but it fall so calm , that all the next day until 186 night we can not get up , and they have discover we , barricade up their way , and convey all that they have into the mountain , leave their house only bare and naked , notwithstanding we land , and with great difficulty we pass their barricado with the loss of two man at both conflict , enter their town and fire it , leave not a house unburnt , be a town of three street have about 150 . household . the same night we pass with our boat to a small village call Aguava , where we find excellent fruit of the country , which by reason of their cowardly brag we also set on fire . be thus frustrate of our pretend voyage , we stand