be great quantity of stone and timber very serviceable : so this way may be make with that treasure which your majesty do receive of the average and custom of number de dios and Panama , which do amount unto twelve or fourteen thousand pezo yearly : and a order may be take for the same , that the say money may serve for the building and repair of these way . Panama . PAnama be the principali city of this diocese : it lie 18 . league from number de dios on the south sea , and stand in 9 degree . there be 3 . monastery in this say city of friar , the one be of dominick , the other be of augustines , and the three be of saint Francis friar : also there be a college of Jesuit , and the royal audience or chancery be keep in this city . this city be situate hard by the sea side on a sandy bay : the one side of this city be environ with the sea , and on the other side it be enclose with a arm of the sea which run up into the land 1000 yard . 148 this city have three hundred and fifty house , all Panama have build of timber , and there be six hundred dweller and 35 ° tone . eight hundred soldier with the townsman , and four hundred negro of Guyney , and some of they be freeman : and there be another town which be call Santa Cruz la real of Negros Simerons , and most of negro sime - them be employ in your majesty service , and they rons ™ rtaU be ioo . in number , and this town be a league from this pan ^ ar ^ s city upon a great river side , which be a league from the sea right over against the harbour of Pericos . but there be no trust nor confidence in any of these negro , and therefore we must take heed and beware of they , for they be our mortali enemy . there be three sundry way to come to this city , beside the sea , where the enemy may assault we . the one be at the bridge which be build upon the river : and on the one side of this , there lie a creek : so on this side the city be very strong , because it be all soft muddy ground , for in no way they can go upon it . and right over against it there lie a river which be in manner like unto a ditch or moat ; and on the other side of the river there lie a great lake or pond which be full of water all the winter , and part of the summer , so that on this side the city be very strong , for with very small store of soldier this place may be keep very well . the great danger for the surprise of this city be the way that do come from number de dios : for all this way be plain ground and no wood : and 2000 yard from this city there lie a river call Lavanderas , where the woman do use to wash their linen : and this river do go into the creek , accord as i have certify your majesty : and be once pass this river , there be a causey which go direct unto they . the other way which do go towards the city be low down towards the sea at a stone bridge lie upon the way which go to the harbour of Perico . Theise two way can be keep nor resist , because it be all plain ground and meadow . 149 the best way to take Panama . Perico . upon the east side of this city there be your majesty royal house build upon a rock join hard to the sea side , and they do aswell lean towards the sea as the land . the royal audience or chancery be keep here in these house , and likewise the prison . and in this place all your majesty treasure be keep . there dwell in these house your majesty treasurer , the lord precedent , and 3 . judge , and master attorney . all these do dwell in these house , and the rest of your majesty officer : which be six house beside those of the lord precedent , the which be all dwell house , and all adjoin together one by another along upon the rock . and they be build all of timber and bourd , as the other house be . so where the prison stand and the great hall , these two place may be very well fortify , because they serve so fit for the purpose , by reason they be build towards the sea , and that there lie certain small rock , which at a low water be all discover and dry , and some of they be a island in see at a high water . right over these house to the tpanamaur astwardes there lie a island about five hundred ’ yard from these house , and the island be in form of a half moon ; and in this order it run all alongst very near the main land : so over against these house there lie the harbour where all the ship do use to ride at a anchor , after that they have discharge and unlade their merchandise . for when they have their lade aboard , there can come in none but small bark , and at a low water the ship be all aground and dry , and so be all the space some thirty yard from those house . right over against they stand the city . when news be bring to this city of those pirate which be come upon this coast , the lord precedent and judge command that there shall a sconce be make , and trench round about , make all of timber for the defence of this city against the enemy , place good to and to keep your majesty treasure . so your officer land tn . cause Venta de cruze to be fortify , and likewise 150 Chagre , and quebrada , and fortify the garrison of Ballano : for all these be place where the enemy may land , and by this mean spoil all this country . there be three sundry place where this city may without difficulty be take , and