certain spanish letter intercept by ship of the worshipful master John Wattes write from diverse place of the island and of the main land as well of Nueva Espanna , as of Tierra Firma and Peru , contain many secret touch the aforesaid country , and the state of the south sea , and the trade to the philippinas . a letter send from Havana in Cuba from the general of the fleet John de orimo to the king of Spain the 18 of October 1590 , touch the build of certain excellent frigate , etc t may please your majesty that at the date hereof one of the frigate be launch : and three more will be ready against the fleet depart from hence . they be very big and excellent of sail , which will carry 150 man a piece with soldier and mariner . and have good ordinance , there be few or none of our enemy that can ofiend we . for we shall both leave and take at all time when we listen . but it behoove your majesty to send both soldier and mariner to man the frigate . for we have great want of soldier and mariner , with tackle , anchor , powder , shot , caliver , and all kind of furniture for they . for these thing be not here to be have for money : and likewise to send some great ordinance for the zabra . for the merchant ship be so weak and so unprovide , that they have almost none to defend themselves . also we shall be constrain to give the carena again unto all the ship ; for they be very weak by reason of the long voyage : and the mariner and soldier be weary with their long travel and keep of they here . thus if it will please your majesty to 158 command with all expedition that these soldier and mariner with all kind of other furniture may be send we , than the fleet may set forward and so proceed on their voyage . God preserve your catholic royal majesty . from Havana the 20 of October 1590 . your majesty servant , who royal foot i kiss . John de orimo general of your fleet . a letter send from the governor of Havana John de Trexeda , to the king of Spain , the twenty of October 1590 , touch the want of that place . y three ship which depart from this harbour since the fleet arrival here , i have give your majesty at large to understand , what have happen as much as i can , and what thing be here to be do in this city , and what your majesty must provide . and now once again i will return to put your majesty in mind thereof . i beseech your majesty to command to be provide and to . be send hither two hundred negro , if you will have this ™ fortification to go forwards : because your majesty be here at great charge with the master workman and the officer . and for want of pioner the work go not forwards . for as the work go daily forward and increase far and far , so we want man to work , and to guard it , and likewise to keep it . we dare not meddle with those of the galy . and likewise it may please your majesty to send new work tool of iron , accord to a remembrance which i have send to your majesty of late , which do signify our want more at large . likewise it be needful that your majesty shall send powder and match to furnish these fort . and likewise soldier send to send money to pay those soldier which be new * havana - come hither , and for that company of soldier which be 159 five frigate make at Havana , John de orimo general of the fleet . the excellency of the great Frygates build in Cuba . copper mine new find in Cuba . send from Mexico to this place . for it behoove your majesty not to have they as yet leave , till such time as the defence about the fort be finish , and that which be in build upon the hill , which will be end very short if you send the negro and iron tool . likewise i have certify your majesty , that with all speed i be make ready of the five frigate , that they may carry all the treasure . also John de orimo see that it be of so great importance to have they dispatch , do furnish i with some money , although somewhat scant , until such time as your majesty do send he some order therefore . i beseech you to command it to be do ; consider the great charge and expense that we be at here , as by the account your majesty shall more at large perceive , what have be spend . Theise frigate will be make a end of without all doubt by the month of February : but as yet their tackle and sail be not here arrive : but i do stay the come thereof every day , accord as the duke of Medina and John de Ibarra have write unto i , that those ship which shall bring the same be ready to depart from thence . all these thing it behoove your majesty to send in time : for i can assure your majesty that you shall not have upon the sea such good ship as these be . for as touch the other ship of the fleet , which be in this harbour , it be not convenient to venture the silver in they . this counsel your majesty shall not take of i , for i be a soldier , and have but small skill in navigation . but every day it be tell i open and in secret by many of the pilot , captain , master and mariner . as touch the copper , 1 have put it in practice twice more , and have make proof thereof : wherein there have be more spend , then encage be willing there shall have be , because i have get no fruit thereof : i know not the cause , but that it be not do effectual by those that have the work thereof . therefore i beseech your majesty to send i that same founder which i write to 160 reissue . a pdf can be download from the web address give on page iv