a relation of a memorable fight make the 13 . of June 1591 . against certain spanish ship and galley in the west Indies , by 3 . ship of the honourable sir George Carey knight , then martial of her majesty household , and captain of the he of wight , now lord Hunsdon , lord Chamberlaine , and captain of the honourable band of her majesty pensioner . he 13 . of June 1591 . being Sunday , at 5 . of the clock in the morning we descry 6 . sail of the king of Spain his ship . four of they be armada , ( viz . the admiral and viceadmiral of 700 . tun apiece , and the other 2 . of 600 . apiece ) and the other 2 . be small ship , each of they about 100 tun . we meet w ‘ they off the cape de Corrientes , which stand on the hand of Cuba . the sight of the foresay ship make we joyful , hope that they shall make our voyage . but assoon as they descry we , they make false fire one to another and gather their fleet together , lie all close by a wind to 178 the southwards . we therefore at 6 . of the clock in the morning ( the wind be at east ) have make our prayer to almighty God , prepare our self for the fight : and ( in hope they have be of the Cartagena fleet ) we bear up with our admiral and viceadmiral , to determine of the combat for the better direction thereof . our parley be end , our admiral , viceadmiral , and the hopewel give their admiral the prow , bring themselves to leeward of he . we in the content bear up with their viceadmiral , and ( range along by his broad side aweather of he ) give he a volley of musket and our great ordinance : then come up with another small ship ahead of the former , we hail she in such sort , that she pay room . thus be in fight with the little ship , we see a great smoke come from our admiral , and the hopewel and Swallow forsake he with all the sail they can make : whereupon bear up with our admiral ( before we can come to he ) we have both the small ship to windward of we , purpose ( if we have not be too hot for they ) to have lay we aboard . thus ( the fight continue between we and they 3 . hour ) we be force to stand to the northward , the hopewel and the swallow not come in all this while to aid we , as they may easy have do . our admiral by this time be in fight with their viceadmiral , and another great ship of they , stand off to sea with his topgallant sail , and all the sail he can make : then may the hopewel and the swallow have pay room to second he , but they fail he as they do we , stand off close by a wind to the eastward . all this time we be force to the northward with 2 . of their great ship and one of their small . they have a loom gale ( we be altogether becalm ) with both their great ship come up iaire by we , shoot at we , and on the sudden furl their spritsail and mainsail , think that we can not escape they . then fall to prayer , we ship our oar that we may row to shore , and anchor in shallow water where their great ship can not come 179 nigh we , for other refuge we have none . than i . of their small ship be man from i . of their great , and have a boat to row themselves in , ship her oar likewise and row after we , think w ‘ their small shot to have put we from our oar , until you great ship may come up with we : but by you time she be within musket shoot , the lord of his mercy do send we a fair gale of wind at the northwest off the shore . what time ( they be all to leeward of we ) we stand to the east . the small ship be under our lee within falcon shoot , and another great ship lie to the westward , so that we can not way possible escape they upon that board : then ( we think to avoid they by cast about to the westwards ) the other great ship gate under our lee , and the small ship on our weather quarter , purpose to make we pay room with the great ship , by force of her small and great shot . than ( we be lerboord tack , and they sterboord ) we make her spring she looffe , and by a fortunate shot which our gunner make , pierce she betwixt wind and water . hereupon she be force to lay herself upon the carena , and to stand with one of the other ship for aid . afterwards ( commend our self to almighty God in prayer , and give he thanks for the wind which he have send we for our deliverance ) we look forth and descry two sail more to the offen : these we think to have be the Hopewell , and the swallow that have stand in to aid we : but it prove far otherwise , for they be two of the king galley . now have a loom gale of wind , we ship our oar , and row off the shore : and our watch be no soon set , but we espy one galley under our lee hard by we , boge up with we . than ( because it be evening ) one of the great ship discharge six great shot at we , to the end the galley shall know that we be the ship they look for . then the galley come up , and ( hail we of whence our ship be ) a Portugal which we have with we , make they answer , that we be of 180 the fleet of Tierra firma , and of Sivil : with that they bid we amain english dog , and come upon our quarter starboard : and give we five cast piece out of her prow , they seek to lay we aboard