rock call the ismo , or else upon those rock which be cover with the sea at the hand of care . and put case that in this place we can do no good by this mean , and that the enemy will venture to come in with their long boat and pinnace through this narrow mouth ; then we be to have in a readiness 4 . frigate to aid and help the galley , and to row with oar , and so to go to the narrow mouth , and there to stay in the channel . and forasmuch as the enter in be so dangerous , accord as i have certify your majesty , there can no ship come into this harbour , but we must needs sink they ; so that these defence shall not only be annoyance to the enemy , but also animate and encourage the inhabitant of this city : for they have be and be in such fear of the enemy , and pirate , that if we have not make these fortification , strengthen the city in this order , and put some soldier in garrison , the citizen will have flee , and forsake this city : for all the persuasion make to they by the governor can not persuade they to the contrary , but they will be go , if it have not be for this fortification , and yet for all this we have much to do to make they to stay here : so now by reason of these soldier which shall come hither , the people of the city have take 140 heart of grass : so i have tell they that your majesty will command that this city and the harbour shall be better fortify and make strong , and all this which i have cause to be build , be with that money which i have borrow of the citizen . as touch the safeguard and defence of this harbour , thepoyntof if your majesty so please , here may we build a very fair and strong castle with four bulwark , on the point of the ycaco which do lie on the side where the city be build , because all the ship which do come to this harbour , must come close aboard this shore , so near , that we may cast a stone into they , and so overtake any ship .. so likewise if the ship will go on the other shore , than they do go in great danger , because of those shoald and ledge of rock , and so be often cast away . and forasmuch as those ship which here do arrive be bring hither by easterly wind , and sometime with those wind which come out from the sea , and therefore perforce must give a good birth off , otherwise they can enter into this harbour , therefore of necessity they must come so close to the shore : and on the other side where the island of care stand , there may we build another tower foursquare , and plant some four or five piece of ordinance , and this will serve for the night , if occasion be offer that any small ship or bark shall come in here , or any pinnace in the night , to do any harm , or to attempt to burn any fleet which shall ride here at a anchor within this harbour : so the fort be on the one side , and the tower on the other side , keep good watch , there can no ship nor bark come into this harbour , but they will be espy . in the narrow mouth at the enter in the other way towards the island of care , where the channel ! do run near the shore , as i have already certify your majesty , there may another castle be make , and there four or five piece of ordinance plant , and some six or eight man to keep watch and ward : this be do , 141 your majesty shall have this city very well fortify , by reason it be of such importance for the service of your majesty , and the trade of all Spain and Peru , and all the Indies : for this be the principali fort of all this country . over against this point of the ycaco , in the isle of care , hard by the water side , there be great store of stone , free stone , and other stone to make lime , and wood to burn the stone withal for the lime , and great part of the stone do lie about the water : so the wood will cost but the cut of it down , and the work of it , and with little pain take it will be bring to good perfection , for we have already make trial thereof , for there be never building that go to decay after it have be make , nor perish by the sea : so the charge hereof will be but little or nothing . and for to put this in practice to build a fort , it be needful that your majesty shall send hither and to many other place , where any fort shall be make , some store of negro , and to this place will be send 150 negro bring from Guyney : and if the negro of Havana be not to be employ there , nor those which be in Sant Juan de ullua , it may please your majesty to cause they to be send for to this place , for most of they be artificer , some mason , bricklayer , smith and sawyer , and to send some mason from Spain to teach our man these occupation . and after these fortification be end and all furnish , than the negro may be sell to great profit , for a negro that be of any occupation be sell here for 600 . and 700 . pezo . number de Dios . number de Dios be build upon a sandy bay hard by the sea side , it be a city of some thirty household or inhabitant : their house be build of timber , and most of the people which be there be foreigner , they be there to day and go to morrow : it be full of wood and some place of the land be overflow 142 with water continual by reason of much rain which do fall upon the hill . it be a very bad harbour ,