there be a great river which go up into the main land , unto diverse town and city , which be near to this river . and thus trouble you no far i rest . from Mexico the 20 of June 1590 . your obedient son , Sebastian Biscaino . a letter of Bartholomew canon to Peter de Tapia in Seville , from Mexico the 30 of May 1590 , touch the state of Nueva Espanna , and the fleet of that year . ecause i have answer your letter which i have receive in the last fleet , as touch that matter i have no more to say . the occasion of my write unto you at this time , be to give you to understand , that those commodity which come in the last fleet , be sell at the first good cheap , and those that buy they , get much by they . for now at this instant white roan cloth be sell for 8 or 9 real a vare . the cause of this be , by reason there come a caravel of advise from Havana ; which bring we news , how the army that his majesty do send for England , be all spoil and cast away : and therefore they of Spain do write that there will come no fleet from Spain hither this year : and this be the cause that 166 all linen cloth be very dear in these part . Wines also be very dear : for they be sell for 90 and 100 demina a pipe . when the frigate depart from hence in August last 1589 . Cochinilia be sell at that instant for 50 peso the quintail ; and now it be sell for 55 pesoe . and since that news come from Spain in a caravel of saint Lucar , that it be sell there for 72 ducat the quintail , there be lade in this fleet 14000 Arovas of Cochinilia , and 7000 Arovas moor be lade in the frigate which depart before the fleet . there be lade in the fleet great quantity of treasure , more than have be send to Spain these many year , both for the king and the viceroys account . and the merchant and gentleman of all these province do send great quantity to supply the king want : for that his majesty have write to the viceroy and to the gentleman of these country to aid he with much money towards the maintenance of his war against France and other place , and therefore they have send good store : God send it well to Spain . there be likewise lade aboard the fleet to the number of 100000 . hide , and great store of other kind of this country commodity . so that the fleet go very rich lade . quick silver be here very dear , for here be almost none to be have for any money to work in the gold mine : for without quick silver we can refine our gold . and no man upon pain of death may bring any from Spain hither ; but all must come for the king account : and so the king do sell it here : there be exceed great gain therein . and thus i rest : from Mexico , the 30 of May 1590 . Bartholomew canon . 167 [ a letter a letter of Frier Alonso new elect bishop of mechuacan , to the king of Spain , write in Peru in the city de los Reyes the first of march 1590 , touch the state of Arica a chief haven in Peru . the people of the river of plate . 100 man want . Pon Christmas even the year 1589 , i receive your majesty commission in Potossi . for which i be and shall be continual bind to pray for your majesty long health , for the great benefit which your majesty have bestow upon i , in send i to mechuacan : whereby my great travel and pain may be recompense , which i have take with that ungrateful and desperate people of the river of plate , which they have be the occasion of , in deal so bad with i their pastor , which have counsel they , that they shall have a great care to serve God , and be dutiful to your majesty , accord as every good and true subject aught to do . now for this gift which your majesty have bestow on i , i most humble kiss your majesty hand a thousand time . thus present i depart from Potossi somewhat sickly , to accomplish that which your majesty have command i . so i arrive at Lima in safety the first of February by the way of Arica , which be a haven town , where they embark all the bar of silver . and there i have see what be do , 8c what they have provide against the Englishman in that haven : which be ; that there be a little fort make hard by the water side , with certain small piece of ordinance in the say fort to offend the enemy , if occasion shall serve that they shall offer to come into the harbour and offer any violence . but the principali thing of all that we want be to have soldier , foot man , and horseman . for accord as i be inform , here want 100 man which shall keep the coast , if they shall offer to land and march up into the 168 country . and likewise the people of this country have tell i , that if upon a high mount which be here in the harbour near to the haven mouth , on the southside of the harbour where the sea do beat , there be two or three great canon plant on the top of the hill , ( where very good watch be continual keep ) from that place they good watch may reach to do the enemy great hurt , a league into the c ^ nua ^ sea . the new viceroy don Garcia Urtado de Mendosa , ‘ worthy of that dignity , be in great favour with all those of these realm : for that he be a great solliciter both by sea and land in all kind of diligence , not loose one hour in your service , and that which he have in charge . with as much speed as may be i will depart from hence to mechuacan , to serve that church and your majesty : and there