the land be by a narrow strait chanel , which continue as long as a caliver shoot , and from that place the river open broad and broad : there be in the enter in , two point which make with the land , whereupon be new build two strong fort , which be fortify with very great store of ordinance : beside another strong and famous fort which be in the city , so that it be impossible to take it . there be in these three fort , a thousand soldier in garrison . and likewise here be two galy to keep the coast . yet for all this , the audacious Englishman be without all shame be 163 the soldier run away from Havana . the boldness of the english . 18 ship build in Cuba against England . Acapulco the harbour where the ship lie that go for China . not afraid to come and dare we at our own door . our journey to go for England be most certain in the year 1592 . here be make with great expedition 18 ship , which be call frigate for that effect . they be very strong ship , and will draw but very little water , whereby they may enter among the should on the bank of Flanders : they be build the high because here be great store of timber and excellent good and incorruptible . it be report that the fleet will depart from hence in February , by reason that at that time the Englishman be not depart out of their own country . and thus i rest , from this island of S . Christopher in Havana this present day on saint Luke even ; the 17 of October 1590 . your worship servant , John de Porva canavate . a letter from Mexico , of Sebastian Biscaino to his father Antonio Biscaino in Corchio in Spain , touch the great profit of the trade to China , and somewhat of m . Thomas Candish . write the 20 of June 1590 . ave write to your worship by a friend of i at large , now i will be somewhat short . and this be only to give you to understand , that four month past , i come from China , and land in Acapulco , 70 league from Mexico , which be the harbour where the ship that go down to China lie : and all the merchant of Mexico bring all their spanish commodity down to this harbour , to ship they for that country . it be one of the best harbour in all Nueva Espanna ; and where the ship may ride most safe without all kind of danger . for it lie under a neck of land , and behind a great point . and in this harbour here be four great ship of Mexico of 600 and 800 ton a piece , which 164 only serve to carry our commodity to China , and so to return back again . the order be thus . from hence to China be above two thousand league , far than from hence to Spain . and from hence their two first ship depart at one time to China : and be 13 or 14 month return back again . and when those two ship be return , than the other twain two month after depart from hence . they go now from hence very strong with soldier . i can certify you of one thing ; that 200 ducat in spanish commodity , and some flemish ware which i carry with i thither , i make worth 1400 ducat there in the country . so i make account that with those silk , and other commodity which i bring with i from thence to Mexico , i get 2500 ducat by the voyage : and have get more , if one pack of fine silk have not be spoil with salt water . so as i say , there be great gain to be get if that a man return in safety . but the year 1588 i have great mischance , come in a ship from China to Nueva Espanna : which be lade with rich commodity , be take by a Englishman which rob we and afterward m - Thomas burn our ship , wherein i lose a great deal of treasure c ^ ish . and commodity . A . D . 1590 . FromAcapulco , to China above 2000 league . flemish ware good in China . a wonderful gain . if i shall write to you of the state of this country of China , and of the strange thing which be there , and of the wealth of the country , i be not able to do it , in a whole quire of paper . only i may certify you , that it be the goodly country , and the rich , and most plentiful in all the world . for here be great store of gold mine , silver mine , and pearl , great store of cotton cloth : for the country people wear nothing else but fine cotton cloth , which be more accept than silk . for here be great store of silk , and they be good cheap . all kind of victual , as bread , flesh , wine and hen and all kind of fowl , be very plentiful . here be great store of fresh river . the people be very love . here be very fair city and town with costly building , better than those in Spain . and 165 gold mine , silver mine , and pearl , in China . fine linen cloth great esteem in China . the country people go very rich apparel both in silk and gold . but here we have order from the king of Spain , that a Spaniard may not dwell in China , above 3 year , and afterward they must return again into Nueva Espanna , and other soldier must come in their place . the country be very unwholesome for we Spaniard . for within these 20 year of 14000 , which have go to the philippinas , there be 13000 of they not above one dead , and not past 1000 of they leave alive . there be ^ iart ^ t ^ a p ^ ace in China which be a harbour , call Macaran , P ^ pp ^ , which the king have give to the Spaniard free : which shall be the place where the ship shall come and traffic . for in this harbour