between this fort and the say city , a exceed strong barricado on the top of a very high hill , the passage be not above 25 or 30 foot in breadth , and on each side marvelous steep - upright , and the wood so thick that no man can pass for his life : which indeed at our return back we find to be true . upon which speech our general demand of he if there be not any other way : who answer , there be another way marvelous bad and very ill to travel , which the Indians do common use : but he think that the Spaniard have stop the same , by cut down of great tree and other thing , as indeed they have . This Spaniard be a very weak and sickly man not able to travel , so our general send he aboard his ship , and there keep he . in the take of our 3 small caravel at Cumana , we have a Spaniard in one of they that have travel these way to the city of saint Iago . he tell we he will carry we thither by any of both these way , if afterward we will set he at liberty : the which be grant . while we remain at the fort by the water side , the Spaniard come down unto we by the great 8c beat way on horseback , who be discover , our general send out to meet they captain Roberts with some 40 or 50 musketeir , who come to skirmish with they , but they will not stay . the same day in the afternoon we march forth towards saint Iago , and take 218 the indian way call the unknown way . in our march we come to diverse Indians house , which we never hurt , but pass by and leave they untouched : but the indian be all flee into the wood , and other place , we know not whither . we march until it be night over such high mountain , as we never see the like , and such a way as one man can scarce pass alone . our general be in the forward , at length come whereas a river descend down over the mountain , and there we lodge all that night . here in go this way , we find the spanish governor confession to be true : for they have barricade the way in diverse place with tree , and other thing in such sort , that we be drive to cut our way through the wood by carpenter , which we carry with we for that purpose . the next day be the 29 of May early in the morning we set forward to recover the top of the mountain : but ( God know ) they be so extreme high and so steep - upright , that many of our soldier faint by the way : and when the officer come unto they , and first entreat they to go , they answer , they can go no further . than they think to make they go by compulsion , but all be in vain : they will go a little and then lie down , and bid they kill they , if they will , for they can not , nor will not go any further . whereby they be enforce to depart , and to leave they there lie on the ground . to be short , at length with much ado we get the top of the mountain about noon : there we make a stand till all the company be come up , and will have stay long to have refresh our man : but the fog and rain fall so fast , that we dare not stay . so we make haste to descend towards the town out of the fog and rain : because that in these high mountain by report of the Spaniard themselves , it do almost continual rain . assoon as we be descend down near half the way to the town the rain cease , and go down a little further , on the top of a hill we see the town not far distant from we . here we all clear our musket : and 219 when our colour come in sight , we discharge a second volee of shot to the great discouragement of the enemy . thus we march on a round pace . the enemy be in readiness a little without the town to encounter we on horseback . be now full descend from the mountains we come into a fair plain champion field , without either hedge , bush or ditch , save certain trench which the water have make , as it descend from the mountain . here we set our self in a readiness , suppose the enemy will have encounter we : but have pitch our main battle , and march forward a good round pace , captain Beling , and captain Roberts take each of they some loose shoot , and march in all haste towards the enemy before the main battle , wherein be our general with captain . summer and come to skirmish with they : but it be soon end : for the enemy flee . one Spaniard be slay in this skirmish , and not any one of our company touch either with piece or arrow , God be the ci tie of S . thank . we soon march into the town , and have ** without any more resistance : but there we find not tfMaye 2 $ the wealth that we expect : for they have convey all into the mountain , except such good as they can not easy carry , as wine , and iron , and such thing . by three of the clock in the afternoon the 29 of may , we enter the city . here we remain until the 3 of June without any great disturbance , save sometime by night they will come on horseback hard unto our corpse du guard , and find we vigilant , and ready for they , will depart again . the first of June , there come a Spaniard near unto we alone : the corpse du guard perceive he , call our general , who soon come towards he : but before he approach , the Spaniard make sign that he shall lay aside his arm : which he refuse to do , but promise as he be a soldier , if he will come , he shall have free passage . upon which promise he come to he on horseback , and our general bring he within the 220 town , and there commune with he . who demand what he mean to do with the town : he answer that he mean to remain there and keep it ;