the victorious voyage of captain Amias Preston now knight , and captain George Sommers to the west India , begin in march 1595 . wherein the isle of Puerto Santo , the isle of coach near Margarita , the fort and town of Coro , the stately city of saint Iago de Leon be take sack and burn , and the town of Cumana ransom , and Jamaica enter . write by Robert Davie one of the company . aptaine Amias Preston , and captain Sommers , both valiant gentleman and discreet commander , lie ready with two tall ship , the ascension and the gift , and a small pinnace at Plymouth , for the space of a month attend the come of captain Jones their consort , which in all that time , through the bad deal of those which he put in trust , can not make his ship in readiness , accord to his appointment , the 12 . of march 1595 . set forward on their voyage for the west Indies . we with captain Jones in the darling , and captain Prowse in the angel , follow after they the 19 of the say month . the last of march , captain Preston by give chase to a sail , be separate from captain Sommers , and his pinnace , so that they utter lose sight each of other : whereupon captain Preston in his ship alone , resolve to surprise the isle of Puerto santo , and short after come before the same . this island stand in the northerly latitude of 33 . degree , and lie to the northward of the isle of Madera , and be inhabit by old soldier , which the king of Portugal be wont to reward for their former old service , by place of they there . this island be rich in corn , wine , and oil : and have good store of sheep , ass , goat and cow : they have also plenty of fowl , fish , and fruit . 213 the I | will of Puerto Santo take and the chief town in it burn . captain Preston come before this island with one ship only seek with 2 . long boat to land his man and to force the same : but the people be on shore in warlike array , with barricado and trench make , ready to withstand they . whereupon , consider the great danger , and disadvantage of the place , he cause his people to return aboard again . and the next morning 3 or 4 hour before day , he land in a place of great security , with 6o man only , who lie close in a chapel , to defend themselves from the rain till break of the day , and so march forward upon the back of their enemy , which keep their barricado upon the shore . by this time the enemy be 500 strong . but , be so sudden surprise , after some resistance of our musket , when they see our pike approach , and have taste somewhat of their force they begin to flee into certain thicket , and shrub , think from thence to gall our man : but with very little or no loss at all , our man dislodge they of that place also . hereupon , they all flee towards the chief town of the island : but once again they think to make a new stand at a certain house by the way , from whence they be repulse by captain Roberts . so in the flight part of they be slay , and a ensign , which one captain Harvey a english man have lose not long before , be recover : and the chief town it self be by our man whole win and possess . but before the entrance of our man they have convey their wife , their child , and the rest of their good into a exceed high hill which stand near the town , and can not be conquer , but with exceed loss . although they send diverse time to redeem their town , which be very fair and large , yet in regard of their cruelty and treachery , which they use towards captain Harvey and his people , captain Preston will show they no favour , but utter burn their town to ash , and send his man to waste the rest of their village of the island , prefer the honour and just revenge of his country man , before his own private gain , and 214 Amias Preston and George Sommers a . d . .. * 595 - commodity . and so with small pillage and great honour he retire in safety and all his small company with he , from the conquer island unto his ship . but we in our ship meet not with he , until the 12 . of April follow . we therefore in the darling pursue our voyage , have sight of the isle of the canary the 6 of April , and the 8 of the same , we water on the southeast side water of the grand Canaria . there we meet with captain . o o i • • o 1 • / * t t - Canaria . bommers , and his pinnace , and 3 ship or Hampton , in one whereof be cap . Willis . the 9 of April we all depart for tenerif to seek captain Preston : and stand over towards tenerif , the 9 day at night i come into captain summer ship . the 10 in the morning we break our main yard , yet we recover tenerif , and the same day towards night we anchor under the southside of the same . there i go aland in our boat , and find 3 or 4 fisher boat , and bring one of they off . the rest bulge themselves . here we ride to mend our yard till the 11 at night : than we set sail to find captain Amias Preston : and stand towards Gomera , the 12 in the morning we have sight of he . than we think to have land in Gomera : but the wind blow so much , that we can not . so we depart altogether with joy the 13 of April , and set our course for the west Indies . and the 8 of may next ensue , we arrive at the island of Dominica . in all which time Dominica . nothing happen unto we save this , that the 18 day of April at midnight , our admiral lose her long boat in tow . we stay at Dominica till the 14 of may , to refresh our sick man . here the Indians come unto we in canoas mad of a whole tree , in some whereof be 3