a heath , which this Cayo have in the midst of it , which be like to a sail ; but all night bear but your foresail a glass one way and another glass the other way until it be day , and then enter the channel , and leave these Cayos , on the larbourd side of you . note , that if you be within sight of the parcel , and the g - eat see two little island of white sand , that than you be parcel - on the cantle of the parcel : and if you go more a head coast the parcel , about fifteen league , you shall see three island full of tree , which be call las lasanguiuas . Anguillas and all these three island bear north and south one from another . item from Cayo de Cruz to Havana , if it be by day , stir away west northwest ; but if it be by night , then stir a point more to the westward : and if in this course you chance to see the parcel , fear not ; for in the low water there be six fathom ; then cast about to the southwestward to get out about two glass , and then stir away westnorthwest until it be day and so shall you go by the Cayos : and in this course you must keep twenty four league or thereabouts . and from this Cayo the another Cayo Cruz six or seven league lie another Cayo upon and ° r 7 segue the north - east and by north , which be great and white , e and all even ; but the point on the southwest be 329 el puerto de Matanzas or the haven of slaughter . las Sierras de Guana . Cruz del Padre . la Bata de Conel . la Baia de chaos , or Cayos . or cameloquea . small , and upon the say point be a shrub or bush which show like a sail : also there be a bank of white sand along by the seaside , which in the midst thereof make a cliff full of tree that seem like a saddle : and upon the north - east side ( for on this manner the coast lie along from the cape ) go by the channel you shall see certain hill eighteen or twenty league long lie north - east and Southwest be all saddle - like : and bring the point Southwest off you , you shall be in the midst of the channel : and from thence you have as far to Matanzas as to Cayo Romano . likewise from thence on the side of Havana you shall see certain hill which show to be three , and lie Northeast and Southwest , and that on the southwest be high : they be call las Sierras de Guana : and north and south from they lie a flat , which be call Cayo de Nicola , which stretch out two league into the sea , and in the middle of the say flat there be a little island of white sand : and from thence you must sail to Cruz deal Padre . mark of Cruz deal Padre . cruz del Padre be a cape all break in piece : and from thence you must stir away Northeast , because of the bay that be there , call the bay of Conell , and this bay stretch to the bay of chaos , which be within 20 league of the say point : and then stir away west northwest to go with the port of Matanzas , and with the hill of Camoniaca . mark of the hill of Camoniaca . the hill of Camoniaca lie northwest and southeast , and the southeast side be low land and even : also upon the north - east side it be even land , and run towards the bay of Matanzas , and in the middle of these hill there be one high hill , and upon the north - east side there appear a round heap : and 330 if you see this hill at west Southwest , the pan or round heap of Matanzas will bear off you west and by south . mark of the round hill call el pan de Matanzas . this pan be a round heap stand on a low land and if you bring your self north and south with it , it will make you two saddle ; and on the west side it make a great part land as it be sink with the sea . note that wheresoever you shall go to seek the Tortugas , and shall come with the coast and find it bear off you north - east and Southwest , i advise you to go along the coast to the southwestward : you may not deepen more than forty five fathom , for if you do , you shall cast your self without the Tortugas . also you must note , that if by chance you find your self shoot between the Tortugas , and the martyr , and that you can go on the outside of the say Tortugas , then cause one to go to the top , to see if you can descry they ; and if you can see they , stir away southwest until you see they ; and have get sight of they , sound , and you shall find eighteen or nineteen fathom : and so shold stir away south and by west , and go by this course . and fear you not the shold , for you shall meet with 12 fathom , and shall have black sand in your sound . And go near to the end of the say Tortugas ( for he that be on the top shall see they all ) as you pass by , you shall find but eight fathom , and stony ground , and that be the shall water you shall have . and you shall pass by a bustle of a tide , that shoules out of the chanel that way : but you need not fear any thing for you shall have no less than eight fathom water : and be past the say bustle but a minion shoot , you shall loose the ground and be in the channel . 331 note . when you shall pass this course , go not out of sight of the Tortugas . and if you will go from thence to Havana , have a fair wind , stir away Southwest because the current may not set you off : and if with a fresh wind and northerly , then stir away southerly .