the isle of S . Iago the 30 of August , we present land at Praia , 268 1596 . where we find a small bark in the road lade with wine and meal . after we be depart from this vile coast of Guyny our general to our great comfort begin to recover strength ; so that be now at Praia , he be able to the town of land with we . in our land the people make a show $ of great resistance , but we enter the town without ta ^ n 0 ‘ hindrance , be a very pretty town , have a small fort in it , with 6 or 8 cast piece . be here on shore , and find nothing leave in the town , diverse of our company be very importunate with our general , that he will go to the city of saint Iago be 6 mile off : through their importunity he yield consent , and so we march towards the city with 280 soldier . as we pass by the negro and herdsman , they will cry unto we guarda s . Iago . that night we lose our way , and lie under a hedge . the next morning the ordinance of saint Iago be shoot off to give we notice where the town be : so we march towards it at the break of the day . the country then be all spread over with people make show of fear only to draw we into the town : but we far march with our colour fly by the drum . the gentleman will come gallop by we and view we very much . but when we come in sight of the town , we can see no way how to get into it , but by one little path down a very steep hill , only man by man to go down . the strength a description and situation of this town be sufficient to have daunt town ° f a man of very good courage , for it stand between two ? ' it take steep cliff strong house , and three exceed good drake fort command the whole , the chief and best stand upon the top of the hill right over the town : so that from thence with musket they command every street , the other 2 fort stand by the water side , all three command then ride , and these two every street in the town . upon the front of the town the sea beat , the rest stand between two mighty cliff , not accessible 269 but by one small path , by which we be enforce to go . our general see himself thus straight , and perceive the drift of the Portugal be to draw he into this trench , and know well that he can not return as we come , by reason of many straight and advantageable place , with a excellent resolution ( like unto himself ) cry out , all courage my heart : assure your self that the device of the Portugal shall serve our turn this day ; for they will suffer we quiet to pass down into their suppose trap , and then will pursue we , than which nothing can happen better . the day be we now show your self as i know you will : and so present we descend into the trench . And be down the enemy pursue with a mighty cry , and all the cliff on both side be beset full of man ; shot , and stone we want none from they on every side in great plenty ; for this natural trench be not half a musket shoot over . those that attempt our rearward by our general policy be so receive that they make a stand , and never more come near we . we have now half a mile to the town , into the which when we come , we be receive with the street full of soldier , who join with we at the push of the pike . but their captain and diverse of they be slay ( fear possess they ) the town of they flee : and our general pursue with such furious * ien speed , do so dismay they that they flee the town , and Sherle ^ the three of August we possess both the low fort . be now master of the town , we present by the general direction ( who skill , spirit , and diligence can never have sufficient commendation ) barricade up all the street , and bring our self into a very convenient strength . after we have be six hour in the town the Portugal still come in great multitude to the upper fort , begin to sally down upon we , and to assault we at every barricado : so that in the first assault they slay and wound eighty of our man , to our very great weaken . but they have small cause of triumph , for their loss be thrice more than we : but they still 270 .... I596 ’ prosecute their assault , not give we ● ime either to sleep or eat , so that we be in exceed extremity ; for their force do daily increase to the number of three thousand person : but we daily lose of our poor number . while we be thus keep the town , our ship come about unto we , who receive many dangerous shot from the upper castle . our general find himself thus straight , and discreet look into the policy and strength of the enemy , and scarce able to defend any one assault more , send to the fort and to his ship that about ten of the clock in the dark of the night they shall shoot at the upper fort with all possible diligence , and send all the boat ashore , which be accord perform . and we likewise keep a tumult in the town , the enemy suppose that our purpose be to assault the upper fort , ( which God know be most impregnable for we ) retire from their plot purpose for the defence thereof . so we in a soldierlike order with very good safety depart the town , although the Portugal have espy our general policy come very furious upon the back of we , after we have keep it two day and two night . in the road of saint Iago we take a ship with wine and cloth , which do great refresh our man