for cape de la Vela by night by the course abovesaid , and come into a whitish water , then sound and thou shall find 40 . fathom , and thy sound will be certain small sandy white oaze , and some small weed . and than thou may make account that thou be north and south with the river call Rio de Palominos , which come out of the midst of the Sierras Nevadas . And be benight thou shall go westnorthwest , or west and by north until day : and be day then thou may hale in with sight of the land Southwest , because thou may be sure to come right in with it . if thou go from cape deal Aguja for Cartagena , if it be by day , thou shall go west and by south , and shall go to have sight of Morro Hermoso , that be the fair mountain , which lie to the westward of Rio grande . And be alone , and with a good ship of sail , and draw towards night , than thou must come to anchor behind Morro hermoso : and after the first watch thou must set sail , and go out west and by north , because thou must be sure to keep a seaboord from the island de Arenas , which lie 2 league to seaward right against Samba . and if thou go from cape deal Aguja by night , thou shall go west and by north : and so thou shall go without the force of the water of Rio Grande . and 288 be by day thou shall go along the coast , and shall see Morro hermoso , which , as i have say , lie to the west of Rio Grande , and have for mark , a face of a black land not very high , and it be round . and if thou depart by day from Morro hermoso , thou must go west , and must take heed , as i say before , of the isle de Arenas , which lie north and south of Samba . Samba have for a mark as it be a galley tow . And go this way by day , thou shall see el buio del Gato , which be a high el buio < kl land with certain white cliff to the seaward : and also Gat0 ‘ moor to the west thou shall see the point call Punta Punta de la de la Canoa , which be a low land even with the water : cmoa ' and there end the coast which lie east and west . and the bay that go to Cartagena begin here , Cartagena . and lie north - east and Southwest . and take this for a warning , that if thou be benight against Samba , thou shall take in thy sail , and lie off to the offward until midnight without any sail abroad until midnight : and from midnight forward thou shall lie so into the land without sail : and if in the break of day thou see no land , then go Southwest , and if this way thou have sight of certain white cliff , make account it be buio deal Gato . take this for a warning , if thy ship be great come not nigh the land in the bay : i mean thou may not with a great ship come nigh the land from the point de la Canoa until thou come to Cartagena , because in many place there be not above 3 or 4 fathom at the most . in all this bay there be no high land but the galley , which be right over the harbour of Cartagena . and if it chance that any man come for this place that the land never be here before , then let he look for a little ° f hill like a tow galley lie east and west , and all carta & na - the land be low , and seem to be full of tree . have these sight , then make account thou be against Cartagena , and to go in thou have nothing to be afraid of : but keep thyself hard aboard the point the point of of ycaco : and then when thou come to double the Acatos . ten 289 t a shall half a league to the sea . the isle of care . sal Medina . Cabeza de Cativa . Rio de Francisco . the isle of Cativa . Punta de samblas . Sierras de santa Cruz . point del judeo , give a breadth off , because there be a shall . i advise thou that if thou be benight , when thou be at the point de la canoa , and will enter into Cartagena by night , that thou take good heed of a shall that lie half a league to the sea , and so thou shall go in 8 fathom , and sandy ground . and when thou find thy self in deep water , as in 30 fathom and more , than the harbour will be open before thou . and if thou have any fresh northern wind , then loof up to the seaward , and lie with thy stem eastsoutheast , and so thou may go in east through the midst of the channel : and though it be by night , yet thou may go in safe , because it be all clear . and if the night be clear thou shall have sight of the island call care , and it be a high land . come from Cartagena to go for number de dios in the time of the northern wind , thou must bring thy self to the offward of sal medina : and thence stir west till thou bring thy self north and south with Cabeza de Cativa ; and then go Southwest and by west , and thou shall so fall with Rio de Francisco . it have for mark a certain land not very high , and within the land certain high hill lie east and west . and on the west of the river of Francisco thou shall see certain cliff that bee six league from number de dios , incline towards the sea . i advise thou that go this course above write ; if thou see 3 or 4 isle lie low with the sea , and also lie east and west , thou may make account that they be the island de Cativa