good carry away . up within this bay there be a little village but of no force , where we find a great fresh river , our man row up some two league find pillage , as wine and oil , and some small quantity of iron . after our come hither to anchor , and the solemn burial of our general sir Francis in the sea : sir Thomas Baskervill be aboard the defiance , where m . bride make a sermon , have to his audience all the captain in the fleet , sir Thomas command all aboard the garland , with who he hold a council , and there show his commission be accept for general , and captain Bodenham make captain of the defiance , and m . Savill captain of the adventure . the 27 die captain Josias of the delight , and captain Egerton a gentleman of the foresight , and James wood chief chirurgeon of the fleet out of the garland . 240 the 28 die Abraham Kendal out of the saker . at this place we water again , wash our ship and make new sail , it be by the general and all the captain agree , that if we can by any mean turn up again for Santa Martha , we shall , if not , to go direct for England . here also we take in some ballast as our need require . the 6 of February the Elizabeth of m . Wattes be discharge and sink , and that day the Pegasus jolly be go on shore for water , carry no guard : the Spaniard perceive it come down upon they , kill two of they , and take 2 or 3 prisoner , and so run up into the wood again . the seven the delight and captain Eden frigate be discharge and sink because they be old and leak , and the queen ship want sailor . that day our man be muster we have sick and whole 2000 and the next day we set on shore all our prisoner as Spaniards and Negros . but before at our first come to Puerto bello sir Thomas send two of those Spaniard to number de dios and to Panama to fetch ransom for some of the chief prisoner , but they never return again . as we be set sail there come one with a flag of truce , and tell the general that they have take 18 of our man , and that they be well use , add that if he will stay 8 or 10 day long they shall be bring from Panama . we suppose this to have be but a delay to have keep we there while the king force have come about by sea , as they daily expect . we set sail the 8 of February , turn up for Santa Martha , and the 14 day we see the hand of Baru some 14 league to the westward of Carthagena : the general that night tell we he will stand in for the town of Baru in the bay : but that night blow so much wind and continue that small moon , that the same night we lose the foresight , and the next day stand again to make the land which we have make , ten 241 queen we lose company of the Susan parnel , the help , and the Pegasus . then the next day we put over for cape S . Antony , and give over Santa Martha . the grand the 25 we see the hand of grand cayman some cayman . league to the northwestward of Jamaica , be a low sandy hand , have many tortoise about it . the 26 we see the high land of Cuba to the eastward of the break hand , to the east of the hand of Pinos , and be imbay in among those dangerous place . but perceive it , we stand out again southsoutheast and so get clear , and then stand away west the ik of and by north for the he of Pinos , which we see the Pinos . first of march . it be a low land with wood and fresh water to the western end . if you come in with the midst of it you shall see rise up above the rest of the land 8 or 9 round hammock , and the westermost have three in one . be shoot forth with the west end , and stand in for to water we espy 20 sail of ship about one in the afternoon . this be a three part of the fleet which the king send for Carthagena , the rest of the fleet be go for the Honduras . they be in all 60 sail send only to meet our fleet , be command wheresoever they hear we be , to come upon we with all their three force . this fleet which we meet withal come stand for cape de los Corrientes , and have be refresh at Havana . as soon as they descry we , they keep close upon a tack , think to get the wind of we : but we weather they . and when our admiral with all the rest of our fleet be right in the wind eye of they , sir Thomas Baskervil put out the queen arm , and all the rest of our fleet their bravery , bare room with they , and command the defiance not to shoot , but to keep close by to second he . the vice - admiral of the Spaniard be a great ship than any of we , and the best sailor in all their fleet loof by and give the concord the two first great shot , which she repay 242 last voyage of drake and Hawkins a . d . . 1596 . present again , thus the fight begin . the Bonaventure the fight bebare full with she , ring her such a peal of ordinance between they and small shot withal , that he leave she with tear side . ^ nSllsh the admiral also make no spare of powder and shot . but the defiance in the midst of the spanish fleet i thunder of her ordinance and small shot continue the fight to the end . so that the vice - admiral with 3 or 4 of her consort be force to tack about to the eastward , leave their admiral and the rest of the fleet , who come not so hot into the fight as they do . the fight continue