Havana , all the coast be full of high and low hill , which they call la quadrilla de sierras , which be as much to say , as a company of hill together like soldier on a heap ; and more to the eastward you shall descry a high hill which be call el pan de Cabannas . and if you fall with Havana , you shall see on the southwest side a hill call la meza de Marien , or the table of Marien ; and if it be clear , you shall see low to the westward the heap or loaf that be call el pan de Cabannas . you must note , that about Havana it be all low land even with the sea , till you come to Mesa de Marien , and then look well within the land , and you shall see 2 . little round tree like to the teat of woman breast ; and bring your self north and south , you shall be with the harbour of Havana , and then shall you soon perceive the tower that be upon the cliff of Havana . mark of the haven or port call Puerto de Marien . puerto de Marien be a harbour that you may enter into without any danger or fear , but at the entrance thereof you must borrow on the west side , by reason of the rock and shelf , and when you be within , then borrow on the east shore , and leave the note . other side , and so shall you enter safe : and from this place to Havana be all low land . note , that if you overpass the harbour of Havana to the eastward , or if the current have set you past it by mean of calm , then shall you perceive at full sea upon the Chipiona a coast certain break place like the entrance of har - towne stand bour , because the land be low ; and come near ^ fAndalu ^ ia shore you shall see in some place of the coast next unto saint Playas or strand of sand which show like unto Lucar . Chipiona : and look eastward along the sea coast , 324 you shall see a round loaf which be call el pan de ElPan Matanzas : and also you shall perceive in certain tanz ^ ' place round white heap of sand call Barrancas , if you will recover Havana , go along the coast close creek or by the land , for the current run very swift in the break channel , and there be no fear but of that which you may see ; for all the coast be clean ground . * the course from Havana to Spain . if you will sail from Havana to Spain , you must stir away Northeast , till you come to the head of the martyr call la Cabeza de los martyr . if it chance before you come to the say head , that the wind shall chap up at north on you , then stand to the eastward , until you bring your self as far ahead as Matanzas ; then cast about to the west , to discover the land of the martyr , or of Florida , that the current may not set you on the mimbre : and if by chance you see the pan de Matanzas at full sea , it have these mark follow . it be a round heap or loaf , and high withal , and on the western side thereof , appear a rock like to the head of a tortoise : and between this pan and the hill of Seluco , there will appear unto you a great break land , like as it be sink place , and upon the east side of this pan towards Punta de los puercos it be all low land , and you shall see no high land at all : and be so far shoot , that this pan de Matanzas shall bear westnorthwest and southsoutheast off you , and be desirous also to avoid the fury of the current of the channel of Bahama , stir away northnortheast , and by this course you shall pass the channel , and win the coast of Florida . Cabeza de los MarAres . which MarAres be a number of small hand lie ahead the cape of Florida . los mimbre . the mark of pan de Matanzas . Punta de los puercos . the furious current in the channel of Bahama . mark of the head of the martyr call Cabeza de los martyr . the head of the martyr be three heap of white sand full of tree , and that in the midst have on the top a crown , as it be of white sand , and be high 325 direction to and big than the other two : and to know whether you know whether be entrej ; unto the channel , mark well how the coast lie chaneuof you ; and if you perceive that the coast bear off Bahama or no . you east and west , you be not in the channel ; but if the coast shall bear off you north - east and Southwest , then be you in the channel ; and take your heighth you shall know : for if you find your self in 24 . degree and then be you east and west with the head of the martyr : and if you see the coast bear off you north - east and Southwest , ( as i have say ) stir away 4 . or 5 . league from the landward right off ; and then stir away Northeast : and be in 28 . degree and a Cabo de half , you shall be shoot out of the channel , and then shall Cannaveralin you he gast anj west with cape de cannaveral , or ahalfi : the cape of reed . the course to come through the channel of Bahama homeward for Spain . the course in t f in winter you shall pass through the channel of winter . i [ Bahama for Spain , stir away the first Sangradura or course Eastnortheast , and afterward east and by north , and so shall you pass by the south side of Bermuda : and you must take heed that you go these four hundred or five hundred league , because you shall the isle of not come near the say isle of Bermuda ; and when Bermuda . you be go this course , then put your self in what heighth you will , and make your way as you will your the