rest of the Indies we have not see : it abound with beef and cassavi , beside most pleasant fruit of diverse sort . we have not find in the Indies a more pleasant and wholesome place . during the time that we remain in this isle the captain of the isle come often aboard we , we have pledge for the security of their promise . they be in fine at our general devotion , to dispose of all thing , and in all thing as he please , so that now we be as one people and in one peace together . be almost ready to depart , m . captain Parker of Plymouth come into the road in his ship boat the second of march , with who our general consort to go for the bay of Honduras , where by his persuasion we have great hope of a very good voyage . And depart from Jamaica the 6 of march , we sail to cape de Corrientes in Cuba , to look for a bark of m . Parkers for our better strength : but not find she , we go for the cape of Honduras , where we purpose to entrap the watch , and so to sack the town of Truxillo , but the watch discover we , make great fire , and the town present shoot off a great piece , and answer with fire . notwithstanding the next day be the 31 of march we bring our ship under the fort , and land our man , but it be a vain purpose : for the town be not to be take but by exceed multitude , for it be invincible by nature . it stand upon the top of a very steep hill , border close to the sea : so environ with wood of such exceed thickness , that there be no passage among the 274 tree , which if they be go , yet there be no climb up the hill , only have one narrow lane to go into the town ; at the end whereof be a great gate very strong fortify , so that it be not to be approach unto , so that with the loss of some few man , we retire from this enterprise , be altogether impossible to be achieve by our few and weak man . we depart from Truxillo the second of April and Puerto de go for Puerto de Cavallos lower down in the bay , ken ^ still nourish our hope of good success : and come - ‘ ming thither find it reasonable fortify , but we present prevail and take it the 7 of April , be the most poor and miserable place of all India . now our hope be all frustrate and no likelihood remaining how we can by any mean make a voyage : our general reserve unto himself his silent inward impatience , labour to do some memorable thing . and in fine conclude by Rio dolce to search with his boat some narrow passage or Isthmos for the south sea , allege that if he can but find a boat there , it shall serve he to great purpose ; against which there can be no reasonable contradiction . all his chief sea man consent hereunto , but especial the captain of the admiral . So sail with the ship to cape de tres puntas in the bottom of the bay , there leave the ship well more the ten of April he depart with his boat for Rio dolce , which in many Charts have his passage through the land . up this river by many uncertain wind we pass 30 league and better , where we find a strong build fort , a town , and diverse storehouse : but for money or merchandise we find none . we learn by the miserable people that we take , that the south sea be 20 league from the near of that river , and that it be 50 league to Guatimala , 40 league to sonsonate , and 30 league to Sacatocaluca , be town which we hope to march unto : so that now we be in worse case than before : for we be fall sick with the Guatemala , Sanson eat , and Sacatocaluca . 275 unholsomenesse of this air , and our victual so waste , as that we be desperate how to recover our country . theirreturne . whereupon with most unwilling mind we return to our ship , and with all possible expedition weigh , and so labour upon the tack to turn out of this very deep bay , be 60 league within the point of land . be out of the bay , we shape our course for cape S . Anthony . our general , who restless spirit continual labour to avoid the frown of fortune , have now plot with the bevice and Galeon to go for Newfoundland , and there to revictual , and to have fresh man , of which we stand in good assurance , and so to depart for the streit of Magellan , and so by his very good policy will have conclude his voyage in the east India , which plat i think it unnecessary here to reveal , be put in principali trust by he . be thwart Havana , by what chance i know not , but all his ship forsake he the 13 of may , and here in a desperate place he be leave desperate alone . the George depart by consent with his letter , the Galeon i know not how : but our misery in the admiral be very great , for there be not one in the ship that be ever before in the Indies , beside our miserable want of victual , the danger of the place , and the furious current of the chanel . notwithstanding we be enforce without stay to disemboque : which happy be perform , we shape our course for Newfoundland . and by God mercy we arrive there the fifteen of June , not have one hour victual to spare , and there by our countryman we be well refresh : where we stay till the 24 of June , still expect the Galeon , for the execution of this his last purpose : but she not come , and that plat overthrow , we return for England , where we find the right honourable the earl of Essex bind to the sea , with who we present depart in his lordship ship , to do he our humble service .