a true relation of the voyage undertake by sir Anthony Shirley knight in anno 1596 . intend for the he of San Tome , but perform to saint Iago , Dominica , Margarita , along the coast of Tierra firma , to the he of Jamaica , the bay of the Honduras , 30 league up Rio dolce , and homeward by Newfoundland . with the memorable exploit achieve in all this voyage . e depart from Hampton the 23 of April with nine ship and a galley . the bevice admiral be 300 ton , the Galeon vice - admiral be 240 ton . the George rearadmiral be 160 ton . the Archangel be 250 ton . the swan 200 ton , the George Noble be 140 ton , the wolf 70 ton , the mermaid 120 ton , the little John 40 ton the galley and a pinnace . all which ship we sufficient victual and furnish for ten month , with all necessary fit for the voyage . they be also man with soldier and sailor , exceed well appoint with all furniture necessary for the intend purpose of our general to the full number of 900 . ratable and orderly distribute into every ship . we arrive at Plymouth the 29 of April , where we find the right honourable earl of Essex ready for the attempt of his Cadiz action , with who our general leave three ship and 500 soldier well victual and furnish . So the 21 of may we depart from Plymouth with the bevice , the Gallion , the George , the George noble , the wolf and the galley and pinnace , determine our voyage for the he of saint Tom6 . but if our whole force have remain with we our general purpose be to have first sack the Madera he , and 266 so to have proceed for saint Tome . the 27 of may we arrive upon the coast of Spain , coast all the shore , hope to meet with some of the king ship . from thence we pass in sight of the coast of Barbary , and come to masagant , within shot of the fort , which the fort of our general report to be a excellent fortification , masagant . where the Spaniard be in strong garrison . And bend our course for the canary isle there purpose to water , our galley lose her rudder ; so our general direct the George noble to go for the lie mogador , there to repair the galley want . between which place and the canary isle we take a flyboat of two flyboat hundred ton bind for Brasill , have nothing aboard ta ^ en ‘ her but some small portion of victual for their relief . the captain of this flybote take upon he to be a perfect pilot of S . Tome , and willing consent to stay with we , be a fleming . have water at the canary , by the counsel of this Fleming we shape our course for the isle of cape Verde , he assure we that we shall there meet the fleet of saint Tome , for the year be so far pass , that we know they be all depart from saint Tome . the first of July we fall with the isle Maio , where we see small hope of any fleet to be expect , and therefore depart for cape Verde , the appoint place * for the George noble to meet we : where we arrive the five of July , and there find he . and so instant we proceed for our voyage , because the year be far spend . at this place most unfortunate our general fall exceed sick , and we want water be enforce to go with a place name pescadore in 10 degree of north latitude , where we have many skirmish with the barbarous negro . our general now hopeless of life , and we all dismay and comfortless through that his exceed extremity , have his memory very perfect , he call all his captain , master , and officer unto he , unto who he make a very pithy and brief speech , tend to this purpose : that as we 267 be christian and all baptise and breed up under one and the true faith , so we shall live together like Christians in the fear and service of God : and as we be the subject of our most excellent sovereign , and have vow obedience unto she : so we shall tend all our course to the advancement of her dignity , and the good of our country , and not to enter into any base or unfit action . and because we come for his love into this action that for his sake we will so love together as if himself be still live with we , and that we will follow ( as our chief commander ) he , unto who under his hand he will give commission to succeed himself : all which with solemn protestation we grant to obey . then for that the year be pass , and find the cost of guinea most tempestuous , he see in reason that the bay of . / Ethiopia will be our utter overthrow , and infect we all to death : whereupon he advise we to be respective of our self , and to divert our purpose from saint Tome , either for Brasil or the west India , yield many reason that it be our best course : but we all with one voice desire to proceed for saint Tome . and so depart from this contagious filthy place , we direct our course for saint Tome , but can by no mean double the shold of Madrabomba , but very dangerous run into shall water , still hope of the best . in fine we be enforce to bear up and take some other course ; for the time waste , our man fall sick , and the coast be contagious always rage and tempestuous . the water fall from the heaven do stink , and do in 6 hour turn into maggot where it fall either among our clothes , or in wad of Ocombe . so by a general consent it be hold to be our best course to go for the west India ; and so much the rather , because we have good pilot for that place , who undertake more than be after perform . so we bend our course for the isle of cape Verde , and arrive at