in the sea with 3 or 4 hurt and sick man , and take the rest of our man into their ship , as the prisoner which we take at saint Juan de Puerto rico tell we . the 4 of November we begin to unlade the Richard , one of our victualler , which be by the next day unlade , unrip and then sink . than we stand northwest and by north : and the next morning see the hand of monserrata , Redonda , Estazia , saint Christopher and Saba . the big of these island be not past 8 league long . there be good ankorage in 8 , 7 , and 5 fathom water fair white sand . than we stand away Southwest , and on the 8 in the morning be Saturday come to a anchor some 7 or 8 league off within certain break hand call las virgin , which have be account dangerous : but we find there a very good road , have it be for a 1000 sail of ship in 14 , 12 , and 8 fathom fair sand and good ankorage , high island on either side , but no fresh water that we can find : here be much fish to be take with hook and net : also we stay on shore and foul . here sir John Hawkins be extreme sick ; which his sickness 229 the fight at saint Juan de Puerto rico . begin upon news of the take of the Francis . the 18 day we weigh and stand north and by east into a lesser sound , which sir Francis in his barge discover the night before , and ankor in 13 fathom , have high steep hill on either side , some league distant from our first ride . the 12 in the morning we weigh and set sail into the sea due south through a small strait but without danger , and then stand west and by north for saint Juan de Puerto rico , and in the after noon leave the 3 small island call the passage to the southward of we , and that night come up to the eastermost end of saint John , where sir John Hawkins depart this life : upon who decease sir Thomas Baskervil present go into the garland . at 2 of the clock we come to anchor at the estermost side of the chief town call Puerto rico in a sandy bay 2 mile off : where we receive from their fort and place where they plant ordinance some 28 great shot , the last of which strike the admiral through the mizzen , and the last but one strike through her quarter into the steerage , the general be there at supper , and strike the stool from under he , but hurt he not , but hurt at the same table sir Nicholas Clifford , m . brown , captain Stratford , with one or two more . sir Nicholas Clifford and master brown die of their hurt . then we set sail and stand to the eastward , and at midnight tack about to the west , and in the morning come to a anchor before the point without the town , a little to the westwards by the 3 island . the 13 we ride still until night , when in the beginning with twenty five pinnace , boat and shallop man and furnish with firework and small shot we go into the road within the great castle , and in despite of they fire the five zabra of frigate , all ship of two hundred ton the piece or more , quite burn the rearadmiral down to the water , which be the great ship of they all , and also mighty spoil 230 last voyage of drake and Hawkins a . d . ... I595 - the admiral and viceadmiral , notwithstanding the castle and ship give we a hundred eighty and five great shot , beside small shot abundance . they have also sink a great ship in the mouth of the channel and raft it over with her mast almost to the very fort and castle , so as they think it impregnable . the frigate have in each of they twenty piece of brass , and a hundred barrel of powder . their chief lade that they bring thither be silk , oil , and wine . the treasure which they go to fetch , which be bring thither in a ship call the Vigonia , be convey into the strong and sure castle of defence ; be , as one of the prisoner confess , three million of ducat or five and thirty ton of silver . also they have send all the woman , child , and unable person into the wood , and leave none but soldier and fight man in the town . the fight on our side be resolute , hot , and dangerous : wherein we lose some forty or fifty man , and so many be hurt . there be also great death of the Spaniard aboard the frigate , with burn , drown , and kill , and beside some take prisoner . the 14 we ride still , be within shot of the uttermost castle : but they fear the next night we will come in again , begin to warp up the other 4 frigate , begin first with the admiral : which whether by chance or their own will we see to sink ; and as we suppose so do they with all the rest , or else by stealth get up far within their chief force . the 15 also we ride still , and at afternoon we espy a caravel come from the castle point : but before our pinnace can fetch she up , she run on shore , where our boat can not come at she because of the breach , and also many of the islander come down to guard she with shot . the beginning of this night we weigh , and stand one hour to the east , and then tack about to the west . the 16 be Sunday , and the 17 also we be becalm . 231 the 18 we anchor a little to the southward of the southwest point of the island , give the point a birth because of a shall of sand that lie some two cable length off : there we ride in four , five , and six fathom fair white sand , where we set up more pinnace , wash our ship , and refresh our man