and thou shall see the cape have the mark aforesaid . and from cape S . Vincent thou must go east southeast , till thou be Northeast , and Southwest , with the bar of saint Lucar : and then go Northeast for the bar . take this for a warning , that if go in 37 . degree thou have not sight of cape S . Vincent , and haste sight of certain high hill , make account they be Sierras de Monchico . 300 i advise thou , that if thou stand in fear of man off to avoid war about the cape of S . Vincent , then go in 36 man tf ^ arre . degree | . And find thy self within the cape , if thou see many sign of green weed , then cast about to the north Northeast , and by this way find land , and the same show white , be sure it be the castle of the castle of Aimonte . Aimmte ' a rutty for the old chanel from the east point of Cuba by the north side thereof to Havana . go from the cape of S . Nicolas , thou shall go the cape of north northwest , but thou must keep to windward off - the point , that thou may weather it , and it be call the point of Mayaci : and it be a very low land Punta de and smooth : and above up within the land about a Mayaci . league it have a long hill , which be not very high but flat . and from that point to Baracoa be 7 . league . and be dispose to go into Baracoa , keep the Baracoa . weather - shore all along , until thou open the harbour . and to know if thou be open of the harbour , look upon the south side ; and thou shall see a hill by it self , which make as it be a crown upon it . and if thou come along , it make as it be a fort with port about it : and this be the mark if thou come out of the sea and this hill be north and south of the harbour , over the harbour of Baracoa . and if thou will go in , thou must take heed of a shall which asholdonthe lie on the east side , and thou must keep the west east side ° f side : and go not much from the shall , because the baracoa - foote of they shall that shoot westward have 5 . fathom water . and when thou be within the shoalds , thou must go a little within they , and then let fall a anchor : and look that thou come not much on the east side , for it be shoaldie . and come out from Baracoa , be to pass through the old chanel , you shall set your course northwest until you come with the Cayo de Moa , or Cayo de Moa . then shall of Moa , until you think you be Northeast 301 this word Cayo in the Biskayne tongue signifies a flat or a shall . pracellas . the mosowe . camoloquea . the flat of i ala to be avoid . Cropeda a flat island . z . rock of stone . Punta de Caucus . Matanzas . and Southwest with it , or till you think you be go 12 . league : and you shall know that you be upon Cayo de Moa . for before you come at it by 2 . league or more , you shall understand that it have a point of low land , and upon the point it have a palm tree ; which tree you shall see always , before you see the point : and it be like a sail . from thence to the pracella or flat you shall stir northwest two part of your way , that you have to run from Cayo de Moa to the say Pracellas or flat , and the one half part of the way north northwest and by west . and this way you shall see the pracella or flat in a clean place of they shall above the water , for all the breach of the sea . the mosowes be from the Pracell west , and you shall leave they to windward . and if you will go with the pracella or flat , you shall find 4 . or 5 . fathom : and you may go sure without danger a northwest course until you come in 7 . fathom . and if you will go upon they shall , you shall go upon that depth , until you have run 40 . or 45 . league : and from thence you shall set your course Southwest , till you see the flatte of the main land . you shall then see to the westward a rock divide into 3 . part , which be call the camoloquea . and look that when you come from the pracellas southwest , you have certain flat before you : take heed of they that you fall not by night with they by four league , for fear of the Mecala : and you shall set your course west northwest until day : and when it be day , you must bear close aboard the shore , and than you shall see a flat island with many break sand , which be call Cropeda , and lie but a little out of the trade way , somewhat to the northward . off that you shall see 2 . rock of stone , which be the point of all the flat : and two league from they on the main land you shall see a point which show like break land . this be call the point of Caucus . and from that point to Matanzas 302 on the northside of Cuba be 12 . league , and your course lie west and by north : and than you must borrow upon the land all that you can , because of the current : for the current will carry you into the channel . And be at Matanzas , you must run all along the shore , because of the current . Remember that when the current . you see one league before you a rock , and a shall , that have upon it but 2 . fathom water ; and your mark if you come