mark of the three small island call Islas de los santos , or the island of Saintes . warlike and dangerous Indians like those of Dominica . los santos be 3 . Islandes lie one close by another upon the south side of Guadalupe . for to go with saint Juan de Puerto rico you must stir away northwest , until you fall with the isle of Saba . mark to know the isle of Saba . saba be a little island , and round about it you shall see the bottom ; but fear not , for there be no danger but that which you shall see ; and round about it , it make as it be certain heap of white sand ; and by the side thereof it show like a ship under sail : but follow that direction that i have give , and you shall see la virgin gorda . mark to know the isle call la virgin gorda . la virgin gorda be a high island and round , and see it , you shall espy all the rest of the virgin which lie east and west one from another , and be bare without any tree . you may go about by they until these z . the white and the grey island be rather bare rock in the sea , fir so do far - rallon the spanish word signify . but 1 interpret it island , because all the rock separatedfrom the big island be say to be little island . this white y bare island be make white by the dung of bird and sea you see the little grey island , which you shall see by it self by the virgin ; and come near to the say island , over that you shall by and by raise sight of the white that little island , which seem like a ship under sail . and if resort unto it . 3 ° 9 you will pass between this little white island or bare rock , and the green island , you must beware that you leave the white island on the larbourd side of you , and come no near it then a caliver - shot , and so shall you pass through 12 . fathom - water : and then stir away northnorthwest , and so shall you enter into the haven of Puerto rico : and if you chance to pass the say island by night , go by the foresay direction , until the first watch be out , and then take in your sail , and so drive until it be near day : and then hoist sail , and stir away Southwest , seek the say port : and when you come to the enter within , you must stay till 10 . of the clock for the sea - turne . and know , that have the Loguilo at Southwest , then shall the harbour be off you north and south . direction from monserate to Santa Cruz . he that depart from monserate to Santa Cruz , must stir away westnorthwest : and by the same course you shall seize upon saint Juan de Puerto rico . ' mark to know the isle of Santa Cruz . santa Cruz be a island not very high , all full of hammock : and come with it at full sea , it will show like the virgin : and upon the east side there be two hammock high than all the rest . and by this course you may go to the isle of S . Juan de Puerto rico ; and have find it , you may sail along the south coast east and west , until you come to Cabo roxo . mark to know cape Roxo . cape roxo be a low cape and trail to the seaward , have certain heap of break ground thereon , which be like a homocke , and at full sea the same show like a little island from the land by it self , but come near unto it , it will make all a whole land . 310 direction from Cabo roxo to the isle of Mona . if you will seek Mona from cape roxo , you must stir away west and by north . mark of the isle of Mona . the isle of Mona be a low , round , and smooth island , lie low by the sea , and full of tree : and to go from thence to the isle of Saona you must stir away west ; and if you fall with it in the night season , and come any thing near the land , then stir away west and by south , until it be near day , that you may keep your self by the land ; and if so be that in the morning you see it not , then stir away northwest , and so shall you find it : and if it be fair weather , and you perceive that the current have set you to the southwest , then stir away northnorthwest , and so shall you go clear off the land . mark of the isle of Saona . if you chance to see the isle of Saona , it be a island smooth with the sea , and lie north - east and Southwest , and you shall see the tree before you see the island : and on the southwest end of this island appear a great high bank of white sand which be call the head of Saona . and if you will come to a anchor , you may , for all be clear ground . and to go from this island to Santa Catelina , you must stir away northwest . mark of the isle of Santa Catelina . santa Catelina be a little low island all full of low rock even from the water , and have not any tree , and it be close by the land ; and if you do not run along the coast of Hispaniola , you shall not see it : and from that island to go to saint Domingo , you shall sail along as the land lie , west and by north : ^ 11 and before you come to the point call causedo , you shall see certain hole in rock , which lie alongst as these rock the rock do that cast up the water , which will show be call los to spout of whale . and a little ahead off the mute ’ ° r that » y ° u shah see the point of Andresa : and ahead the point of thereof the point of causedo . this point