it be cape de Corrientes . and if thou go from cape de Corrientes for cape de Santo Antonio , thou must go westnorthwest , and so thou shall go with the cape . the mark be a low land full of tree with certain white sandy bay : and upon the cape it self thou shall see two thick grove of great tree , and they be upon the cape it self . to go from the cape de Sant Antonio for Havana in the time of the north wind , thou shall go northwest until thou be clear of all the shoald of the cape , and then hale thy bowlines , and go as near the wind as thou can possible , until thou bring thy self unto 24 . degree , and there sound , and thou shall find it the Tortugas , and thy sound will be white sand . thou must take heed what be say in the chapter before : for he that write the same have see it , and be witness to this : that come from Seranilla , and stir north and by east he have sight of a island stand in 16 . degree , and it be on the shoald of cape de Camaron . and from thence , if thou have the wind large , go Northeast and by east , because of the variation of the compass , and thou shall make thy way Eastnortheast , and thou shall fall with Isla de Pinos . this i say , because the current set sometime west : and so it fall out to be true in march , anno domini 1582 . i tell thou far , that we come out from this aforesaid isle stir north 293 case de Corrientes . cape de San Antonio . the Tortugas . seranilla . a island in 16 . degree . Baxos de Cabo de Camaron . the variation of the compass . Isla de Pinos . the current set here sometime west . the latitude of Cozumel in 19 deg . and one tierce . las Tortugas . the little isle call Vermeja . Marks of Villa Rica . and by east , for the wind will not suffer we to lie near the east , and one evening at sun go down we fall with a land , that have the same mark to our judgement with the cape de Corrientes : and because night be at hand , we wrought to double cape de Sant Antonio , stir west : and about midnight we have land all high right a head , and the coast lie southwest : and then we cast and lie Northeast till day : and be day , we see the land all a head , and we ply to windward to the east , and keep it a larboard till we have bring it southwest . and to be short , we go here on land in the same place that we first fall with in the evening before : and it be a island call Cozumel , lie on the coast of Yucatan . and this island be the land which we see first , seem by the mark to be the cape de Corrientes . we come to a anchor about the midst of the island , rather to the norther then the Souther part : there we find a town of Indians , who give we all thing which we need for our money : and we carry our astrolab on shore and take the height in 19 degree and one tierce . a man may go between this island and the coast of Yucatan , and the cape de Catoche at pleasure Northeast ; and the water will set in thy favour : and thou must go till thou be in 24 . degree , and so thou shall have the sound of the Tortugas . the course to be keep from the cape de Santo Antonio for Nueva Espanna . if thou go from the cape de Santo Antonio for Nueva Espanna , and be late , thou shall stir westnorthwest till thou be in the height of 24 . degree : and from thence thou shall stir something to the west , until thou bring thy self north and south with the little hand call Vermeja : and when thou be so , thou shall go Southwest , and by this way thou shall find villa Rica , which be in 19 degree and a half , and the sign be these . thou shall find a 294 ledge of high hill lie north - east and Southwest . but if thou chance to fall with a coast that lie north and south , than thou may account , that it be about the low ground of Almeria which have these mark . the it be a land not very high , and it be full of little copy . and if thou have clear weather , thou shall see within the land certain high hill which be call the hill of Papalo . and i advise thou that be so far shoot as the point call Punta delgada , which be the end of all those hill of villa Rica , thou may stir thence south and by west , and thou shall go along the coast , and shall see a low land , and with this land thou shall fall , go for saint Paul , and be so far shoot as saint Paul , if thou will go into the harbour , thou must stir Southwest : and this be the course that thou must keep be shot into the bay and thou shall go along the coast of the low land in sight thereof : and keep this course thou shall see on the other side a black hill , and it be call Monte de Carneros . take this for a note , that it lie over the house of buytron : and as thou do come near to the point of rock , thou must be sure to keep thy lead go , and shall have four fathom and a half or five fathom , and so thou may go through the midst of the channel . And come against the castle , thou shall give it some breadth off towards the arrecife or rock : and have double the castle , thou shall go from thence and shall bring thy self to a anchor hard by the Herreria , which be a clean bay , and thou shall ride against