, and then run west , and so thou shall go along the coast . and if thou see by this way a point of low land , make account it be Punta de samblas : and upon it thou shall see a row of high rocky hill , and they be the mountain of Santa Cruz . if thou come from Cartagena to go to number de dios in the time of the sea wind , when thou be out from sal Medina , thou shall go west and by north , that thou 290 may have sea - room , and take the Brisas or northern wind when they come : and go till thou be north and south with the harbour of number de dios : and from thence go Southwest , and if by this way thou see a row of high hill on a coast that lie north - east and Southwest , make account they be Sierras de las mina Sierras de las viejas , which mina vieja lie north and south with the mina vtejas - harbour of velo alto . have keep this course abovesaid , Puerto de and have sight of the former mark , thou may a ^ 0 ' account that thou be on the west side of number de number de Dios . Dios - furthermore when thou have sight of a high land , and thou be north and south with it , and in the top thereof thou see as it be a little table , if it be high towards the east , then make account that thou be north and south with number de dios , i say , with the harbour of number de dios , and this hill be call Sierra de sierra de Capira . and if thou will go into the harbour , thou must keep thy prow right against this hill , and come near to the shore , thou shall see a ledge of rock , and ° f it be without , and thou may go in what depth thou rocks - think good , or at which place thou find most water in . and to the west of the harbour thou shall see two or isla de hs three island call Islas de los bastimentos . Bastimentos . take this for a warning , if thou come out of number Tbe course to de dios in the time of the Brisas or northern wind , and will go for Cartagena , thou shall come out in the dios to morning , and shall go northnorthwest until 3 of the Cartagena . clock at afternoon , and then cast about to the land , until thou be hard aboard the shore , and so thou must go turn until thou have double Cabeza de Cativa : and have double it then ply to windward all that thou may : and if thou be eastnortheast off it , than thou shall have sight of the hand of Baru , which be 3 or 4 island Islas de Baru . lie low , and be all full of tree : and then present thou shall have sight of the galley that be over Cartagena , and it be like a galley tow . i advise thou , that if thou come for Cartagena in the 291 time abovesaid , and come from Cabeza de Cativa , if the wind will not suffer thou to lie but west , then go thus if thou see a great high island full of mountain , and on the north side thereof thou see a ledge of rock two league into the sea , thou may be islafuerte . sure it be Isla fuerte : but if thou see not the rock , give they a good breadth : and if thou will come to nc s ' anchor , thou may ride well on the west side of they , betwixt the main and they in fifteen fathom ; and the sound be clay . and if thou will go between this and Islas de San the island of saint Barnardo to go into Cartagena , thou bat nardo . may go safe . and if any man ask thou how thou know the island of Baru and San Barnardo , thou may answer true , that the isle of San Barnardo be full of high hill , and certain sandy bay to seaward ; and the say isle have a good depth two or three league la Bacilla , to the sea : and this depth be call the Bacilla . and these be all the mark for the island of San Barnardo . And touch the isle of Baru , they be 3 or 4 little island and very even with the sea , and full of tree , and there be no good depth about they , but hard aboard they . the shoald ofSerrana . seranilla . a rutty from Cartagena to Havana in Cuba . come from Cartagena to go to Havana , thou must go northnorthwest until thou be in fourteen degree : and then forwards thou shall go with great care to anchor every night , and when it be day set sail . and this be to be do in this place because of the shoald of Serrana : and so thou may proceed with a care to anchor when thou come about Seranilla , or near to it , which be in fifteen degree and a half . and upon it thou shall see a low flat land lie north - east and Southwest : and the sea beat upon it round about , except that on the southeast part it have certain shelf of sand , and on the west side it have a certain little copy , which from sea seem to be a ship under sail : and 292 be north - east and Southwest off it , scant a league from they shall come out on the west side a certain shall , whereupon the sea do always beat . i advise thou that if thou can not pass on the west side , than thou must go betwixt the say little copy that it be like a sail and then shall : for the passage be good . but if thou depart from the serranilla to the northwest , and see a low land with the sea , and certain white sandy bay , and on the west side see a low land , and on the Eastside a little coast lie east and west , thou may make account