or causedo causedo . lie low close by the water , and pass thereby , the coast will make to thou northwest and southeast ; and San Domingo , from thence to saint Domingo be 5 . league . and if the wind chap up at north upon you , by mean whereof you shall be cast off from the coast or port , and that Sierras de las you happen to see the old mine ( call Sierras de las mina mejas . mjnas viejas ) bear northwest off you , and the teat which be within the land be open of you , then shall you be north and south with the harbour ; and if the old mine bear north off you , then shall you be below the harbour . the point of Hisao . the isle of Beata . Ocoa . Puerto hermoso . the isle of Alto velo . direction from saint Domingo to Nueva Espanna . if you will sail from saint Domingo in Hispaniola to Nueva Espanna , stir away southsouth west , until you come up as far as the point of Nizao : and from thence stir away westsouth west , and so you shall find the isle of Beata . and if you sail from this point of Nizao for Ocoa , you must pass along the coast west and by north , until you come to Puerto Hermoso , or the beautiful haven , which be 18 . league distant from saint Domingo : and if you proceed from Puerto Hermoso for Nueva Espanna , you must stir away southsouthwest , until you look out for Beata and Alto velo . mark of the isle of Beata . beata be a small island and not very high : you may pass along the outside thereof , and there be no danger but that you may see ; and by and by you shall raise alto velo : and from thence you must stir away 312 west and by south , to give a birth from the island call los frail , or the friar . and when you los frail . be as far ahead as the frail , then must you stir away west and by north , and so shall you go right with Bacoa , and before you come to it , you shall see bacon . high craggy cliff , and at the descend of they white path like great sheet ; these high craggy mountain be call las sierras de donna maria . and before you alas ster ^ s de come to the say point of Bacoa , you shall discover a anam ' little low island even with the sea and full of tree , which be call Isla Baque . Ida Baque . direction from Isla Baque to cape Tiburon . if you will go from the island Baque , or from the ape point of Bacoa for cape Tiburon , or to the isle of gf Navaza , you must stir away westnorthwest , and edge jqavaza 0 in somewhat to the northwest , and you shall pass between Navaza and cape Tiburon . mark of cape Tiburon , which be the western cape of Hispaniola . cape Tiburon lie slide down to the seaward , and make a sharp cliff like the snout of a tiburon or shark - fish ; and upon the top thereof it appear like white way with certain gullet or drain upon it , which be cause by the passage of the water from the mountain in the winter time . mark of the isle of Navaza . NAvaza be a little round island full of low tree or shrub , and it lie east and west from cape Tiburon , and from this small island to go for Sierras de Cobre , or the mountain or mine of copper upon the southeast part of Cuba , you must stir away northnorthwest . [ direction from 3 * 3 direction from cape Tiburon to Cabo de Cruz in Cuba . Sierras de Cobre . Sierras de tarquino . if you will sail from cape Tiburon to cape de Cruz in Cuba , you must stir away northwest , and you shall see the Sierras or mountain de Cobre ; and from thence you may go along the coast west towards Cabo de Cruz ; and before you come at it you shall see the great tarquino , and from this tarquino you shall have to cape de Cruz 30 . league , and this great tarquino be the high land upon all that coast ; and then by and by you shall see the lesser tarquino , from whence to the foresay cape you have 12 . league , and so shall you go discover the coast , until you come to Cabo de Cruz . mark of Cabo de Cruz . cape de Cruz be a low cape full of shrub ; and from thence westward you shall see no land ; for the distance or bay be great between the say cape and the isle call los Jardines . direction from cape de Cruz to Isla de Pinos . if you sail from cape de Cruz to seek the island of Pinos , you must stir away westnorthwest . and note , that if in this course you happen to sound , do not fear ; for you have nine fathom . if also go this course , you meet with certain little island upon los Caimanes . the larboard side , which be call the caimanes , or the crocodile , have sight of they , stir away northwest , and so shall you find the island of Pinos . and if by see the say island call Caimanes you be amaze , you shall know by the latitude , whither they be the Jardines or no : for if you find your self in one and twenty degree , then be you sure they be loss Jardines . the Jardines , and then stir out again south , till you be 314 clear of they ; and when you have bring they north of you , then may you stir away west , if it be by day ; if it bee ’ by night , west and by south , till you see the island of Pinos . the mark of Isla de Pinos . the island of Pinos stretch it self east and west , and it be full of hammock , and if you chance to see it at full sea , it will show like 3 . Islands , as though there be diverse sound between they , and that in the midst be the great ; and in row with they , it will