that on the west end it be low , and the eastermost be the high . and if thou fall with the midst of the island , than thou shall go a long it to the west unto Cabo Roxo , which be cape roxo . the end of the isle . and from thence the coast run north to Punta Aguada . Cape roxo have certain red cliff . thou must steer west and by south from cape Roxo to find Mona , and so thou shall have sight of Mona . Mona . and the mark thereof be these , it be a low land lie east and west : and on the east end it be high , it have a slope towards the sea , and stand in 18 . degree , rather less than moor . and if it be by day , than thou shall run west and shall see Saona : Saona . which be a island lie without Hispaniola , and lie east and west , and be full of tree ; and have certain sandy bay . and if it be clear weather thou shall see within the land of Hispaniola certain high hill call las Sierras the yguey . And be benight upon Mona , alas Sierras de than thou shall steer west and by south , because of certain shoald that lie off Saona : but have day light and no sight of land , thou shall loose up northwest and so pass by it , and as thou go along the coast of Hispaniola , and see the sea to be cast up into the air , than thou shall be about 10 league off the harbour of Santo Domingo , and these mounting up be call the spout . be the spout . but i advise thou , that if thou be benight when Santo thou fall with Santo Domingo , than thou must keep Domingo . the hill call Sierras de las mina viejas to the north - 283 Puerto hermosa . west . and if thou will go into Santo Domingo , and meet there with a forcible northerly wind , than the best way be to run east till it be day . and have daylight thou shall cast about , and so thou must ply to windward until the northerly wind be do : and when it be past , make all the sail thou can to hale with the sight of Calle de las i Damas : and when thou have sight thereof thou shall lie with thy stem with a sandy bay , which lie on the other side : and thou must take in thy main sail , and go so till thou bring thy self open with the midst of the river ; and so have open the river , thou must go with great care in the midst of the same , with all thy sail up , except thy main sail , and thou must have thy boat out , if it be needful to sound or to tow thy ship , if she cast too much to the loof , for the current will cast here to the loof : wherefore be sure to have thy boat out to help thy steerage : and this be the way whereby thou must work . the course from Santo Domingo to go for Nueva Espanna . i advise thou that if thou will go from Santo Domingo for Nueva Espanna , thou shall go Southwest and by south , and so thou shall have sight of Punta de Nizao , which be a low point , and be the end of the hill call Sierras de las mina viejas , and towards the northwest of they thou shall see a low land , and to go into Hocoa thou shall stir from this point of Nizao westnorthwest , and thou shall see the point of Puerto Hermoso , and the bay that it make : and thou must be sure to keep near the shore to find a good road , and fear not to go near the land : for all be deep water , and clear ground , and let not fall thy anchor till thou be past all the river ; and beware of the land , for if thou ride much without , thy anchor will come home , because it be rocky and flat ground . and thou must be ready , that when thy anchor come home , 284 thou have thy moaring ready in thy boat to carry on shore with four or five man , and if thou think good , thou may let they fall on land with a rope . and when thou be come to ’ anchor thou may send on shore to moare , so shall thou be best moar . the course from Hocoa to Nueva Espanna . go from Hocoa to Nueva Espanna thou shall stir Southwest : and this way thou shall find the isle Beata , and Alto velo : Beata have these mark : Beata , and than it be a low land with the sea , and full of tree : and mar ^ s of - on the east side a high land or cliff ; and Alto velo alto velo , and have these mark . a black round land , and the easter - ma ^ s most part thereof be high , and it have a downfall . when thou be north and south with * than thou shall go west , until thou be so far shoot as the frail : and from thence go west and by north , frail . and keep this course thou shall have sight of cape Tiburon . and if by keep this course thou have sight of a little island , thou may make account it be the isle of Baque : and it be hard to the land , and the isle of from thence thou shall go west , keep thy self out until thou double a point that make as it be a great bay , and than thou must go west and by north , till thou come to cape Tiburon , that have a round black cape de land , and in some part thereof certain white cliff . Tiburon . i advise thou that when thou be against cape de Tiburon , thou stir northwest , and so thou shall have sight of Cuba , which lie east and west : and thou Cuba . shall see certain hill which be call Sierras deal Cobre