, and in the high of they be the harbour of saint Iago de S . Iago de Cuba : and find thy self so , thou may run west unto cape de Cruz . and before thou see cape de Sierras de tarquino . self . and if thou chance to have the water trouble , as though thy ship do raise up the sand from the 285 Cruz thou shall see the hill call Sierras de tarquino , and from these hill to cape de Cruz the land wax low and low , and it be low of all at the cape it cape de Cruz in 19 , deg . and better . los Jardines . the isle de Pinos . cape de Corrientes . Cape de Sant Anton in 22 . degree . ground , be not afraid : for this place be call the nine fathom : for thou shall find no less water upon it , and it be the shallow water that thou shall have . thou must mark that cape de Cruz make a end of the coast that come from the east to the west , and begin the course that go north and south , and stand in 19 degree , rather more then less . from Cape de Cruz thou must stir westnorthwest : and this way thou shall have sight of the isle de Pinos , and if thou have fair weather , than thou must go northwest , and by west , because of the current that will set thou out to sea . And keep this course thou shall have sight of a high land . i tell thou it be the mark of the isle call los Jardines , and be common call the land of Zagueio : and than thou shall go west and by south : and if it be by night , then go westsouthwest until thou have bring thy self out from the Jardines . And be by day thou shall keep off the land , and shall go westnorthwest , and so thou shall see the isle de Pinos . the mark to know the cape de Santo Antonio . the headland call Capo de Santo Antonio be a low land , and full of tree , and upon the cape it self it have two or three thick wood , and the coast lie northwest and southeast . and thou must also take good heed that thou have sight on the same coast of a white sandy bay ; and it be on the same coast that lie northwest and southeast . and these be the mark from Punta de las Arenas , or the point of the sand , to the cape of saint Anthony , and from the cape de Corrientes to Punta de las Arenas thou shall have a great bay , be so long , that if thou be not very near the shore thou can not see land , it be so low . and if thou see not the land well , it will show to be a tuft of tree . and the cape of S . Anthony stand in 22 . degree . 286 a rutty that a man must keep from Dominica to Martinino , and so to Tierra firma . i advise thou that go from Martinino or Dominica , if thou will go for Margarita , that thou stir south and by west , because of the great current that go here , and set northwest . and by this course thou shall find the Testigos , which be 4 or 5 island : and the Testigos . if thou will not go so much to windward , than thou shall see frail , which be three small island . and frail . if thou will go into the harbour of Manpater , it be present in double of the point on the east side to the southward . And be mind to go for puerto de Puerto de Juan Griego , which lie on the northside , then go Juan g ™ ? . 0 - neere the land , and along the coast of the west , and present thou shall have sight of puerto de Juan Griego ; it stand in 11 . degree . i advise thou that go from Matalino , which stand in 13 . degree , if thou will go to Cartagena , thou shall go west and by south , and by this way thou shall have sight of the isle of Curazao and Aruba , Curasao . which stand in 12 . degree : from these island thou aruba - shalt go west ; and when thou be north and south with Monjes , thou shall see they to be three little Monjes three white hand , and they be white because of the multitude an ^ s ‘ of bird that be there : they stand in a triangle . from thence thou shall go west , if it be by day , and so shall have sight of Coquebacoa that stand in 12 . Coquebacoa . degree . And be by night , then go northwest : and by day thou shall cast to go for the land again westsouthwest . Coquebacoa have a certain point not very high , and within this point thou shall see in the inland certain hill which be call las Sierras de Avite . go from this point of Coquebacoa thou shall run west , and shall run along the coast , and shall go to have the sight of Baya honda and Portete , which be a low honda . land even with the sea . Portete . 287 Rio de palominos . morn hermoso . Rio grande . Isla de Arenas . Samba or hamba . the cape de la Vela lie with a red show not very high ; and without this cape about a league there be a little copple rock . a man may be bold to go betwixt this rock and the main . and go from this cape to have sight of cape deal Aguja thou must stir Southwest , and thou shall have sight of the Ancones which lie at the end of the hill call Sierras Nevadas . and then present thou shall see the cape deal Aguja : the mark whereof be these : it be a low cape , and upon it be a copy not very high , and there begin the high land of the Sierras Nevadas , or snowy mountain . take this for a warning that if thou go