on shore . here the general take a pinnace of Hispaniola with diverse letter , signify that two Englishmen of war have do great hurt along their island . the 20 the general row to the phoenix , the delight and the caravel , and cause they to weigh and anchor right against the mouth of a fresh river in two fathom water in ozy sand to the southward of the other ship some league or more . the general go into this river three or four league up , and take horse in the country . sir Thomas Baskervil row up the river , and stay there all night , and go up into the land three or four league . the 23 we discharge a bark call the pulpit and burn she : and at three of the clock that afternoon , when we be ready to set sail , there come aboard the defiance our admiral , a Spaniard with his wife , who fear some great torment for not have repair to the town accord to the general commandment of that island , who have command that all able man of the fleet shall repair to the town to defend it against we . than we stand again west and by north because of a ledge of rock that lie sink 4 or 5 league off the southside of the island . the 25 we stand away southwest , and see Mona Mona , be a low flat island between Hispaniola and S . Juan de Puerto rico . that day the exchange of captain winter spend her boult - sprite ; and in the begin of the night the phoenix be send back to seek she : which by God help that night meet with she , and keep her company until the next morning , then take in a small cable from she for a tow : but by 9 that morning she spend her main mast and split her foreyard , 232 last voyage of drake and Hawkins o . . 1595 - break also her tow : so as they be fain to save some trifle out of she and the man , and to sink the hull . than we stand away south and south and by west after the fleet : and the 26 in the morning have sight of the fleet again . the 29 we have sight of the island call Curazao the isle of within eight league of the main , and on the north - Curazao . west side come to a anchor in very deep water hard aboard the shore without any danger : but the general weigh present and stand away northwest and by west , and northnorthwest for the main , and that night see Aruba , be somewhat a less island than the Aruba . other : we leave it some three league to the southward of we . on Sunday morning be the last of November we see three or four little island call the Monjes , Monjes . betwixt Aruba and the next north point of the main . at 12 of the clock we see the main , where we see a great current set to the westward , and also the water change very white . the phoenix , the caravel , and one of the catch keep within , and at midnight come under cape de la Vela , and make a fire , cape de la whereby the rest of the fleet come to anchor under ela - the cape , where be a very good road , fair shold and sandy ground , fourteen , twelve , and ten fathom near the shore . the cape be a bare land without tree or shrub , and fall in eight or ten league southeast and northwest : and a saker shoot off the point stand a little island like Mewestone near Plymouth , but somewhat big . in the morning the first of December we embark all our soldier for Rio de la Hacha , which be a town twenty league Rio de la to the westwards , one of the ancient in all the main , HacJia taken - although not very big : but it stand in a most fertile and pleasant soil . our man take it by ten of the clock in the night . the ship bear all that night and the day before in 5 and 6 fathom , the lesser ship in two fathom and a half water : the 233 phoenix go so near the shore by the general commandment , that she strike on ground , but get off again . there lie to the eastward of the town a A shall of mile or thereabouts he shall of sand : therefore give a san ^‘ birth some half league or more before you come right against the town . there we come to anchor in two fathom , but the great ship ride off in five and six fathom . there be a fresh river about a bowshot afresh river . eastward of the town ; whereinto our pin - ness can scarce enter by reason of a bar of sand in the river mouth , but within it be navigable for bark of twenty or thirty ton some six or eight league up . the six day the Spaniard come in to talk about the ransom of the town , but not to the general his like : and that night sir Thomas Baskervil march up into the country to overrun those part : and the general the same night with some hundred and fifty man go by water six league to the eastward , la Rancheria and take the Rancheria a fisher town , where they take . drag for pearl . the people all flee except some sixteen or twenty soldier , which fight a little , but some be take prisoner , beside many negro , with some store of pearl and other pillage . in the house we refresh our self , and be all embark to come away , and then have sight of a brigandine or a dredger , which the general take within one hour chase with his two barge : she have in her indy - wheat , which we call maiz , and some silver and pearl , but of small value . on Saturday the seven , master York captain of the hope die of sickness , and then master Thomas Drake the general brother be make captain of the hope , and master Jonas Bodenham captain of the adventure , and master Charles Caesar captain of the