course in self . but if you pass the channel in the summer time over ™ 1 ™ ? towards Spain , stir away eastnortheast , and you shall northerly . pass by the north side of Bermuda ; and when you have bring your self in 35 . degree , stir east and by north until ! you bring your self to 25 . degree and and from thence stir away east for the isle of Fayal or of Flores . mark to know the isle of Fayal . the island call Fayal upon the southwest side , make a high hill or loaf like to the top of Brasilia in the island of Terzera ; and behind that 326 high pike or loaf be a harbour call Puerto Pini , Puerto Pint . and upon the east side it make a little plain island ; and upon the north side there stand a rock or island by it self . and from this island be one of the azore , you may shape your course to which of the island you please , or to any other place which you know . mark to know the isle of Flores . if you happen to fall with Flores first , by this you shall know it : the island lie Northeast and Southsouthwest , and the west end thereof make a rock or cliflfe like the cliff of Tiburon ; and come near the land , you shall see two little island near the point of the land ; and to the northward of this cliff or rock a little from the land you may ride and water ; and between that and the village , in every bay you may likewise ride and water : and you shall see the water run into the sea in every part that you look on . now follow the course and direction to sail from passage on the north - east part of saint Juan de Puerto rico , unto Havana , by the north side of the isle of Hispaniola , and by the old channel . f you depart from saint Juan de Puerto rico to seek Cabo deal Enganno , you must stir away westnorthwest , and so shall you see a round heap or loaf in the sea , which lie on the southwest side of the gulf of Semana ; and from thence it begin about the hill of the cape del Enganno , and this be the mouth of the gulf . and if it shall be near night when you see this land , stir away northwest with a small sail , because of certain rock el passaje a place on the north - east part of the isle of S . Juan de Puerto rico . Cabo del Enganno the most easterly cape of Hispaniola . or Samana . call alas ovejas , or the sheep : and in the morning cast alas ovejas . about to see the land to the southwestward ; and if when 327 Isla de tortuga : otherwise call Hinagua . the isle of Jaico . las sierras de cabanca . Cayo Romano . this word Cayo in the biscaian tongue signifies a flat or a shall . Cabo de Cruz . you see the land , it seem unto you a small island at full sea like a round mountain , then be it the cape deal Enganno : and from thence stir away west and by north towards Cabo Franco . mark of Cabo Franco . CAbo Franco be a low cape even with the sea , and have these markes * and from thence stir away west , and you shall see a high mountain , and on the top thereof a cloudy homock like the top of a hat : and at the foot of this hill be the haven or harbour call el puerto de plata . and if you will go into this port , you must leave the island on the west side , and then take heed of that which you see , and borrow on the castle side . and from thence to go with the old channel , you must stir away northwest , until you come out of sight of land , and then stir away west and by north , and so shall you go with the land of Baracoa , and here be hill very high , which make the teat which look like 3 . crown . and you shall pass between the isle of Tortugas , or Hinagua , and the island of Jaico : and from thence run alongst the coast Northeast and Southwest ; and have double the outmost high hill or mountain , you shall see in the midst thereof a round hill , and upon the southwest side by the sea you shall see a low even land four or five league long , and a low point , and this point of the hill be call la sierras de cabanca ; and then begin the bay of Cayo Romano : and ahead the sierras you shall see a round loaf which be in the midst of the same bay , and ahead of that you shall see a hill flat on the top like a table six or seven league , which hill be not very high , and from these hill to Cayo Romano you have five and thirty league , and you must stir the one half of the course northwest , and the other half northwest and by west , and so shall you make or see the say Cayo Romano upon the larboard side of you . note , that from Cayo Romano to Cabo de Cruz you have three league , and they lie north and south one from another . 328 Romano be a high island , and lie north - east Southwest , and stretch it self as it be 4 . league : and come on it north - east and Southwest , it make a loaf or round heap or homock ; in the midst this island lie ioo . league from Havana . there be two saddle , as we term they , or low partition , the one on the one side , and the other on the other side ; and come with it north and south , it make all one low send or saddle in the midst . and if night shall come on you at this Cayo Romano , enter not the channel , because in the mid way be a isle , flat , or Cayo , which lie north and south with Cayo Romana , and it be call Cayo de la Cruz : and at full sea you shall discern