a voyage of master William Parker of plymouth gentleman , to Margarita , Jamaica , Truxillo , Puerto de Cavallos situate within the bay of Honduras , and take by sir Anthony Shirley and he , as likewise up Rio dolce : with his return from thence , and his valiant and happy enterprise upon campeche the chief town of Yucatan , which he take and sack with six and fifty man , and bring out of the harbour a frigate lade with the king tribute , and surprise also the town of Sebo . n the year 1596 , master William Parker of Plymouth gentleman be furnish with a tall ship and a bark at his own charge , the ship call the prudence of one hundred and twenty ton , wherein himself go captain , and the bark call the adventure of five and twenty ton , whereof be captain one Richard Hen , depart from the foresay haven of Plymouth in the month of November , have one hundred man in his company . the first place where we touch in the west Indies be the isle of Margarita on the coast of Tierra firma , where we take a spanish gentleman and other , who for his ransom set at liberty master James Willis , and five other Englishman which be prisoner in Cumana , who otherwise be never like to have come from thence . thus pass from thence , we sail over to the isle of Jamaica , where the second of march we meet with sir Anthony Shirley , who before our come have take the chief town in the island , and be now almost in a readiness to depart . and here consort our self with he , we depart from Jamaica 277 Margarita . six english man redeem . Truxillo the sixth of march , and resolve to set upon the strong assail . town of Truxillo near the mouth of the bay of the Honduras . and have sail to cape de Corrientes upon Cuba , to seek a bark of i for our better strength ; but not find she , we go for the cape of Honduras , where we purpose to entrap the watch , and so to have sack the town of Truxillo . but the watch discover we , make great fire , and the town present shoot off a great piece , and answer with fire . notwithstanding , the next day be the one and thirty of march , we bring our ship under the fort , and land our man : but it be a vain pur - pose , for the town be invincible by nature , and stand upon the top of a very steep hill join close to the sea , environ with wood of such exceed thickness , that there be no passage through the tree : there be also but one very narrow and steep lane to go into the town , at the end whereof be a gate very strong fortify : so that it be not to be approach unto , unless it be upon the sudden , and with surprise of the watch : wherefore with the loss of some few man we retire from this enterprise . from hence we pass up far into the gulf the second of April , with intention to invade the town of Puerto de Puerto de Cavallos , where we arrive the seven of April , and take the same , find it well fortify , but a n ' nothing answer our expectation for wealth . whereupon sir Anthony Shirley and i be hitherto frustrate of our hope , resolve here to enter up to the bottom of Rio dolce , and to pass overland unto they they pass south sea . wherefore we set forward , and enter k ™ su ° Rio ab ° ve thirty league up the say Rio dolce , think doke ^ 10 to have pass overland with two company of man , and to have carry a pinnace in six quarter to be set together with screw , and therein to have embark our self in the south sea , and there for a time to have try our fortune ; and to have return overland to the bay of Honduras . but this our diligence take 278 * 597 - no effect , because of the huge highness of the mountains , and the length of the way , be more than be give out at the first . then with much grief we return out to Truxillo , where i depart from sir Anthony Shirley . after my departure from this worthy knight , i set my course for cape de Cotoche which lie on the east part Cabo de of Yucatan from whence i range all the north coast Cotoche . of the say promontory of Yucatan , until i come unto cape Desconoscido , where i put 56 of my man into a Cabo desconos - periago , or long indian Canoa ; and leave my ship Cfdo ‘ six league from the town of campeche at three of the clock in the morning * i land hard by the monastery * Cn easter of San Francisco , and take the say town of campeche , with the captain and Alcalde , find therein five campeche hundred Spaniards , and in two town close adjoin take . to the same eight thousand Indians . the multitude of the Spaniard which flee upon my first assault by ten of the clock in the morning assemble together renew their strength , and set furious upon i and my small company . in which assault i lose some six of my man , and my self be shoot under the left breast with a bullet , which bullet lie still in the chine of my back . be thus put unto our shift we devise on the sudden a new stratagem : for have diverse of the townsman a new prisoner , we tie they arm in arm together , and strata & m . place they in stead of a barricado to defend we from the fury of the enemy shot . and so with ensign display , take with we our six dead man , we retire with more safety to the haven , where we take a frigate which ride ready fraught with the king tribute in silver and other good commodity , * which be * to the value present to be transport to saint Juan de ullua , and 5 °°° bring the same and our Periago or Canoa to my ship , * own ‘ which lie in two fathom water six league from the town , be not able to come any near for the shold upon that coast . over against the place where our ship an indian road , stand a town of 300 or 400 Indians call Sebo , town take . 279 which we likewise take , where we find champeche - wood good to dye withal , with wax , and honey . this do we leave this coast , and turn up to cape de Cotoche again , and ankor every day at noon , because of the brize , and in turn up i lose my bark call the adventure , which be take by 2 frigate of war , which be man out from campeche : wherein captain hen and thirteen of my man be take , and afterward execute , as since we understand by some spanish prisoner that be take in those part . after we have stay five week on this coast , we shape our course for Havana , where find nothing , we disemboqued , and come along by the isle of Bermuda , and cross over to the bank near cape race in 22 fathom : and from thence sail for England , we fall with silly about the first of July , and within two day after arrive at Plymouth , where we find the right honourable the earl of Essex set forth with a great fleet for the isle of the azore .