the voyage true discourse , make by sir Francis Drake , and sir John Hawkins , chief pretend for some speciali service on the island and main of the west Indies , with six of the queen ship , and 21 other ship and bark , contain 2500 man and boy , in the year 1595 . in which voyage both the foresay knight die by sickness . ee break ground out of the sound of Plymouth on Thursday the 28 of August , and that night ankor again in Causon bay , where we ride till Friday . than we set sail and stand Southwest : and about three of the clock the next morning the hope , wherein sir Thomas Baskervil go , strike upon the eddy stone , and shoot oflr a piece , but after clear herself well enough . on Monday at six of the clock in the morning the land end bare northwest and by north , and 226 last voyage of drake and Hawkins then we stand away Southwest and by south for the coast of Spain . the 8 of September we take two small flemish fliboat bind for Barbary ; which we carry a while with we and afterward dismiss they without do they any harm : only we learn news of they , and stay they from descry our fleet to the enemy . the 26 we see Forteventura , be one of the island of the canary . the 27 be Saturday by break ot day we nad overshot the chief town of grand Canaria to the north - east , and then stand about for it again , and by nine of the clock be at anchor fair before the fort to the eastward of the town some league . at one of the clock we offer to land one thousand and four hundred man in the sandy bay betwixt the fort and the town : but by our detract of the time they have make a bulwark in the sandy bay and plant ordinance : so that by reason thereof , and the great breach of the sea that go then on shore we be not able to land without endanger our whole force , which our general will not do . there be of Spaniards horseman and footman some 900 , which play upon we out of their trench , most of they be shoot . at the time of our land there go by commandment of our general within musket shoot of the shore , and ride there at anchor some three hour , the Salomon , the Bonaventure , the Elizabeth Constance , the phoenix , the jewel , the little John , the delight , the Pegasus , the exchange , the Francis , the caravel , and the two catch : but when the general sir Francis Drake give over the land being in his barge , the ship weigh be in some danger , and stand off again to the great ship . than we go to the west end of the island and there water : where captain Grimston go up the hill with 6 or 7 in his company be set upon by the herdsman , who with their dog and staff kill the captain and three or four of his company : 227 the rest be sore wound : the Salomons chirurgeon take prisoner , who disclose our pretend voyage as much as in he lie : so as the viceroy send a caravel of adviso into the Indies , unto all such place as we do pretend to go to . howbeit they have intelligence from the king of all our voyage the eight of August , which be three week before we set forth of England : as also by a fleme that have see all our provision at London . the 28 be Sunday at ten of the clock at night we set sail , and stand away Southwest and Southsouthwest some 200 league , until we come in the height of the island of cape Verde , and then more westerly for Martinino , one of the island of the west Indies , which we see the 27 of October : but the night before we have a storm , in which sir Francis with four or five other ship bear on head of the fleet be Dominica , separate . than we stand for Dominica , a island full of inhabitant of the race of the cannibal , not past ten league distant from Martinino . in it grow great store of tobacco : where most of our English and french man barter knife , hatchet , saw , and such like iron tool in truck of tobacco . before we come to Dominica our general sir Francis Drake alter his course , and go for Marigalante , which we have sight of the 28 day , and come to a anchor on the north - east side a saker shoot off the shore in 13 fathom water fair shold . there the general go on shore in his barge , and by chance meet a Canoa of Dominicans , to the people whereof he give a yellow waistcoat of flannel and a handkerchief ; and they give he such fruit as they have , and the dominicanes row to Dominica again . they come thither to fetch some fruit which they sow and plant in diverse place of that island , which they keep like garden . the next morning by break of day we weigh and stand between the todo santos , which be 4 or 5 little island between Guadalupe and Dominica . there 228 be nothing upon these island but wood . we come to the southeast side of Guadalupe and there anchor hard aboard the shore : the southwest side of the island be deep water and good ankorage : where that day sir John Hawkins come to we again stand up from the south side of Dominica . there we water , wash our ship , set up our pinnace , and refresh our soldier on shore . the 30 captain Wignol in the Francis , a bark of 3 5 ton , be the sternmost of sir John Hawkins fleet be chase by five of the king of Spain frigate or zabra be ship of 200 ton a piece , which come of purpose with 3 . other zabra for the treasure of saint Juan de Puerto rico : the Francis go room with they , suppose they have be our own fleet , be by they take in sight of our caravel . they leave the Francis drive