make all a firm land : and upon the east side of these three hammock it will show all ragged ; and on the west side of they will appear unto you a low point even with the sea , and oftentimes you shall see the tree before you shall discern the point . direction from the isle of Pinos to cape de Corrientes . if you sail from the foresay isle of Pinos to cape de Corrientes , stir away west and by north ; and before you come to the say cape upon the northside of you , you shall see certain mountain all full of hammock , which be call las Sierras de Guanaguarico , las sierras de and that upon the west part have more hammock than that on the other . mark of cape de Corrientes . cape de Corrientes be a low cape , though not so low as the other part of the land that lie along by it ; for it be more low , and have upon it 4 . or 5 . great splat like unto ox , and the very point of the cape be all white sand : and from thence westward you shall discern no land , for it make a great bay : and from hence you must sail to cape de Sant Anton . [ mark of 315 the cape of Sant Anton be low by the sea , and all full of shrub or tree ; and you shall see within the land a lake of fresh water ; and if you want water , there you may water : and upon the north side of the say cape you shall discern a palm tree high than the rest of the tree , and it show round like a bowl at the top , like to the top of a ship : and north from the cape be certain sholde which be 2 . or 3 . league long . direction from the cape de S . Anton to Nueva Espanna on the outside of the small island call los Alacranes or the scorpion . if you will sail from cape Sant Anton to Nueva Espanna with a north wind , then stir away westnorthwest from 21 . to 22 . degree , and then sound upon the pracel or flat ; and if you see by this direction , that you hold water , then stir away northwest , until you lose the ground ; and then follow your course again , until you have bring your self into 24 . degree and J . and then sail west until you the isle bring your self north and south with the isle of Vermeja . Vermeja , or the red isle : then stir away Southwest , Villa rica . and by this way you shall find villa rica on the coast of nueva espanna . and if by go this course you be in 19 degree and J . and chance not to see the land , then stir away west until you see villa rica , and from thence sail you south for the harbour of 8 . Juan de S . Juan de ullua : and if you shall be near the ullua - land you must stir south and by west towards they a volcan or same harbour . and if you chance to see the Volcan urmng 1 . or burn bill to bear west and by south from you , then know , that the harbour of saint Juan de ullua shall | be east and west off - you . 316 Villa rica stand in 19 degree and J . and the sign thereof be certain high hill full of hammock of many head , which have on the top of they certain white patch after the manner of white beat way ; and these hill lie north - east and Southwest . and if you doubt whether these be the Sierras Sierras de or hill of saint Martin , wet your lead or sound , and if Sant Martin . you find bottom , they be the Sierras of Villa rica : Sierras de and sail you to the landward , and look by how much rica ‘ you come near the land , so much will they seem low unto you : but so do not the hill of saint Martin ; for the near you come to they , the high will they appear to you : and likewise if they be the hill of saint Martin , you shall not find bottom , but even at land it self . mark of Rio de las palmas , and of the river of mountain call Rio de las montannas . Rio de las palmas . Rio de las montannas . Rio de panuco . Rio Hermoso , or the beautiful river . the current of the bay of Mexico { the wind be at the east ) set to the north , and 40 . league from the shore to the north - east . f you shall chance to fall with Rio de las palmas , or the river of palm , or else with the river of mountain , it be all a plain land , and full of tree and certain woody hammock , and among they certain heap of sand , and all this along by the sea side : and if you go by land to the river of Panuco , you shall have many mouth or opening of plaias or strand , where also be many liza or oazy place , which stretch to Rio Hermoso . you must beware what part soever you happen of this coast to fall withal , to discover it , and although you know it , you must sound the depth ; because if the wind be easterly , the current set there much to the north : but if you shall be 40 . league at sea , than this current set to the north - east . [ mark of 3 ' 7 s . Luis de tampice . mark of Rio Hermoso or the beautiful river . if you will seek the river call Rio Hermoso , look well within the land , you shall see three hammock of a high hill , and those two which be to the landward within , be round than the other which be near the sea , for that it be long and big , and lie north and south , and you shall be 4 . league at sea when you shall see they : and they be call the sierras , or mountain of Tamaclipa ; and from thence to the river of Panuco there be no high land