of this coast be for the most part to the northward of the east , except when the sun be on this side of they . equinoctial ! , for than it often veare southerly , but most in the night . this our guide be of the laos , who do all mark themselves , thereby to how the bee know from other nation after this manner . with natim ° ftke the tooth of a small beast like a rat , they raze some their ^^ emshvet to face , some their body , after diverse form , as if it be know be with the scratch of a pin , the print of which rasure from other can never be do away again during life . when 457 port Howard otherwise call Gowateri . he have sometime converse with our Indians , that go from England with we , he become willing to see our country . his sufficiency , trustiness , and knowledge be such , that if the pretend voyage for Guiana do take place , you shall ( i doubt not ) find he many way able to steed your lordship in your design and purpose . for beside his precise knowledge of all the coast , and of the indian town and dwelling , he speak all their language , be breed in Guiana , be a swear brother to Putima , who slay the Spaniard in their return from Manoa , can direct we to many gold mine , and in nothing will undertake more , than he assure will perform . to the westward this bay have many good road under small island , whereof the great name Gowateri , be inhabit by the shebaios : and beside the plenty of foul , fish , fruit , wild pork and dear , which be there to be have , where Caiane fall into the sea , ( for it stand in the mouth of Wia and Caiane ; ) it yield safe and good harbour in four and five fathom for ship of great burden . on all that coast we find not any like it : we therefore honour this place by the name of port Howard . the road under Triangle island , which be the westermost from the rest and stand in five degree , which have also store of fish , foul , dear and Iwanas , be good , but not comparable with this other , where in all wind and weather , ship , though they be many , may all ride secure . the hill and high land be limit to this bay on each side : for to the eastward beyond it appear none at all , and to the westward of mount Hobbeigh very few . where the mountain fail , there Brasill wood be no far to be seek for : but in all part cotton , pepper , silk and balsamum tree do grow in abundance . the root of the herb wia - passa be here most plentiful : i find they in taste nothing different from good ginger , and in operation very medicinable against the flix and headache . Theise river , as also other near Raleana , do all fall out of the plain of this empire over rock , as the river 458 Caroli do into Raleana : and in most place within the utmost hedge of wood , the land within be plain , void of tree , and bear short grass like arromaiaries country . next adjoin unto these , be the river Cunanamma , uracco , Mawara , Mawarparo , amonna , marawini , Oncowi , wiawiami , Aramatappo , Camaiwini , Shurinama , Shurama , Cupanamma , Inana , Guritini , Winitwara , berbice , Wapari , Maicaiwini , Mahawaica , Wappari , lemdrare , Dessekebe , caopui , pawrooma , moruga , waini , barima , amacur , aratoori , Raleana . from cape Cecyl to Raleana , the from cape coast trend two hundred league next hand west - 200 northwest . in this variety of goodly river , amonna among the rest pour himself into the sea in a large and deep channel : his swiftness suffer no bar , nor refuse any ship of what burden soever they be : within his mouth for good and hopeful respect be port Burley place . the inhabitant that dwell eastward , do never pass low than berbice to trade . above Curitini in the wood they gather great quantity of honey . far to the eastward then Dessekebe , no Spaniard ever travel . in which respect , and that no sea - card that i have see at any time , do in any sort near a truth , describe this coast : i think the liberty of impose English name to certain place of note , of right to belong unto our labour ; the rather because occasion thereby offer it self grateful to acknowledge the honour due unto they that have be , and i hope will still continue favourer of this enterprise . the Indians to show the worthiness of Dessekebe ( for Dessekebe it be very large and full of island in the mouth ) doe calle ^ the call it the brother of Orenoque . it lie southerly into the land , and from the mouth of it unto the head , they pass in twenty day : then take their provision they carry it on their shoulder one day journey ; afterward they return for their canoas , and bear they likewise to the side of a lake , which the laos call Roponowini , the charibe , Parime : which be of such 459 the great lake whereon Manoa or el Dorado stand . in September . this Spaniard understand the guianian language , and be repute a very sufficient man . bigness , that they know no difference between it and the main sea . there be infinite number of canoas in this lake , and ( as i suppose ) it be no other then that , whereon Manoa stand : in this river , which we now call Devoritia , the Spaniard do intend to build they a town . in Moruga it be , that they hunt Wareo and his people , about half a year since . arromaiarie , who win so great credit by overthrow the Tivitivas of Amana , and make free the passage of that river ( but now again live in disgrace