the second voyage to Guiana . Unday the 26 . of January , in the year of our lord 1596 . we depart from Portland road , in the darling of London , have in company the discoverer , a small pinnace , who we lose at sea , in foul weather , the Thursday next follow . Friday , the 13 . of February , we fall with the Canarie island , where we expect our pinnace , accord to our appointment , seven or eight day . here we take two boat , the one a passenger , we bulge , the other we tow at our ship stern , steer southsouthwest for the island of cape Verde . therehence we set sail the 28 . of February , keep a westsouthwest 452 course . in this passage we find very smooth sea , fair weather , and steady wind , blow ordinary between the east and Northeast point . near 30 . league from these island , we come into a grow sea , the swell water make a strange noise and hurtle together , as if it may be two strong current encounter each other . the 12 . of march we sound , and have sandy ground in 47 . fathom . at midnight in twelve fathom we come to a anchor , the ground sandy oaze . Sunday the 14 . towards night , about some six league from the shore , we descry a low land in the bottom of a bay . from the 9 of march until this time , we keep for the most part a southsouthwest course . the water in this place be smooth , but muddy , and the colour red or tawny . from the westermost of the cape verde - island unto this bay i do estimate the distance to be near 550 . league . it seem to most of our seaman , to be the very bank of a shall upon a lee - shore : the rather because without it , in the clean green sea we have but 7 . fathom depth : but after by proof find that there be no sudden alteration in any part of the coast , and that the sea be smooth near the land , we always at night seek to anchor in three or four fathom . and doubtless as the hand of God be wonder in all his work : so herein his merciful providence be most at notable admirable , that upon a lee - shore subject unto a perpetuali observation . easterly gale , neither much wind can endanger ship , by reason that the foul heavy water be not capable of vehement motion , and the soft light oaze , if they touch , can bruise they : nor be there any jeopardy in be wind - bound , or imbay : for the most forcible wind make the great flood - tide , whereby the freshet when they take their ordinary course of ebb , do grow strong and swift , set direct off to sea against the wind . they anchor in we by turn go clear of all bay : howbeit in this the mouth of case , as also in the river , the use of a drove sail seem a , rrowari a good and ready help . the first place wherein we anchor , be in the mouth of Arrowari , a fair and great ute , . * 453 river . it stand in one degree and fourty minute : for we fall so far to the southward by your lordship direction . the bar without have at the least three fathom , at the shoald place , when it be low ebb . the depth within be eight and ten fathom . the water always brackish . we find not any inhabitant in this place near the sea coast . i omit here to recite the name of the nation that be borderer , their town , captain and commodity that their country do yield , as also the sounding , tide , and how the coast lie etc think it fit to reduce these disjoin and scatter remembrance to one place . as we pass we always keep the shore within view and stop the flood , still anker at night in three or four fathom . when we come to the north headland of this bay ( which we name cape Cecyl ) we see two high mountain like two island , but they join with the main . in this tract lie northnorthwest near 60 . league , there fall into the sea these several great river , Arrowari , iwaripoco , Maipari , Coanawini , Caipurogh . we anchor in two fathom not far from these hill , and fill all our cask with fresh water by the ship side , for in the sea thirty mile from the mouth of any river it be fresh and good . this second bay extend it self above thirty league to the westward , and contain within it these river Arcooa , Wiapoco , Wanari , Caparwacka , Cawo , Caian , Wia , Macuria , cawroor , curassawini . here leave the ship at anchor , i take into the boat John provost , my indian interpreter , John Linsey , and eight or nine other , intend to search some of these river , and to seek speech with the Indians . in Wiapoco , at the foot of the eastermost mountain , where the river fall into the sea , we find twenty or thirty house , but not inhabit . we stay there but one night . Wanari we overpass , because the entrance be rocky and not deep . in Caperwacka we sail some fourty mile , but can see no indian . at one of their port under the side of a hill , we take in so much Brasill wood as our 454 boat can carry . among other tree we cut down one for a example , which i do very believe to be the same sort of cinnamon , which be find in the strait of Magellan . from Caperwacka we pass to Cawo , and there meet with a Canoa , wherein be two Indians . it be long time before we can procure they to come near we , for they doubt lest we be Spanish . when my interpreter have persuade they the contrary , and that we