the end desire to return to their house , lest the spaniards find they from home , and imagine that they do purposely absent themselves , shall take away their wife and spoil their dwelling . they far resolve if it be possible to cut they off : which afterwards they do perform . for when they be disperse in their house seek Cassavi , sudden at one time , in all place they be assault , and not one of they escape . Carapana , who hand be in lay this plot , send we this news , as we return down the river . ten 465 2 g they have eminent head like dog , and live all the day time in the sea , they speak the charibe language . a sudden as salt of the Spaniard by the Indians . the two other canoas that come from Trinidad by Amana , notwithstanding that we keep a league before the ship with our boat , see the ship before we have sight of they , and present with all speed go to Berreo to advertise he of our come . he forthwith dispatch two or three messenger to Trinidad . one of his canoas meet with our spy , who the Indians of Barima have leave to go with we : they rifle he of his victual , give he knife , and dismiss he .. in eight day sail still before a wind , we arrive at topiawaries porte , in all which time no indian that we know came aboard we . for the time of our return promise at your lordship departure from thence be expire ; they in despair sever they - self among the other nation . here the Spaniard a ranchma have seat their Rancheria of some twenty or thirty “ kmtedbj the house . the high rocky island , that lie in the Spaniard at midst of the river , against the mouth of Caroli , be a port of their fort or refuge , when they misdoubt safety in toftawary . their town , or have notice of any practice against they : but now leave both town and island , they join themselves altogether , and return to the mouth of river Caroli , place there a secret ambush , to defend the passage to those mine , from whence your oar and white stone be take the last year : we all not without grief to see ourselves thus defeat , and our hungry hope make void , be witness of this their remove . as we ride at a anchor within musket shoot of their town , a indian come unto we with lean cheek , thin hair , and a squint eye , to inform we that they be very strong , that Berreo his son be with he , that they have but two small pinniss at Trinidad , which they daily look for to come up the river , and last to view our ship well , and our provision , but especial to learn whether Gualtero , topiawarie his son be with we . this informer very countenance give he to be 466 suspect , and therefore partly by threaten , partly by promise of reward we win he to confess the truth . which he do , assure we that Berreo have not full fifty five man with he , whereof twenty come late from Trinidad , twenty from Nuevo Reyno , and the rest he bring with he about six month since , when he flee from Carapana his porte , and be drive with his small company to keep the aforesaid island near Caroli . and that though now his number be thus increase yet dare he not adventure at any time to leave the fast wood , and to go but half a league from his hold into the plain . that some few of the Arwaccas be abide with he . that he daily look for his son from Nuevo Reyno , for his campemaster from Trinidad , and for horse from the Caraccas . that topiawarie be dead : the Indians of that coast all flee , and disperse , except the son of one Curmatoi , and another woman of account , who the Spaniard hold prisoner , for consent to the death of their nine man , and the holy friar in morekito his time . This Curmatoi be flee topiawarie towards Guanipa , and be a man of speciali note among the Indians . that iwiakanarie Gualtero his near kinsman , have hold the country to his use , by his father appointment , ever since your be in the river . that there be ten ship , and many Spaniard at Trinidad . that the Indians our friend do fear , lest you with your company be all slay , and your ship sink at Cumana ( for so the Spaniard noise it among the common they , ) that some of Gualtero his friend with Putijma , be in the mountain not far from the hill aio . fantar esand that Berreo have send for six piece of ordinance , which he mean to plant , where they may best command the river . when we have stay here two day , consider that where no hope be leave of do good , to abide there in harm way do nothing , will be bootless : i resolve to seek Putijma in the mountain : and 467 turn down the river with the force of the stream some twenty mile in six hour : the next morning with ten shot i go ashore , intend if the Indians shall think themselves too weak , with our help to displant the Spaniard : to set some of they on work , for hatchet and knife to return we gold grain , and white stone from such place , as they shall be direct unto . when we come to the place of their usual abode ; we see that they late have be there , but can speak with none of they . it may be that fear ( which be easy of belief ) persuade they that we be Spaniards . Gilbert my pilot here offer to bring we either to the my of white stone near winicapora , or else to a gold my , which Putijma have show he , be but one day journey overland , from the place where we now stay at a anchor . i