to the reader . ecause there have be diverse opinion conceive of the gold oar bring from Guiana , and for that a Aiderman of London and a officer of her majesty mint , have give out that the same be of no price , i have think good by the addition of these line to give answer aswell to the say malicious slander , as to other objection . it be true that while we abide at the island of Trinidad , i be inform , by a indian , that not far from the port , where we anchor , there be find certain mineral stone which they esteem to be gold , and be thereunto persuade the rather for that they have see both english and Frenchmen gather , and imbark some quantity thereof : upon this likelihood i send 40 . man and give order that each one shall bring a stone of that mine to make trial of its goodness : which be perform , i assure they at their refurne that the same be marcasite , and of no riches or value : notwithstanding diverse , trust more to their own sense , then to my opinion , keep of the say marcasite , and have try thereof since my return in diverse 343 place . in Guiana it self i never see marcasite , but all the rock , mountain , all stone in you plain , wood , and by the river side be in effect throughshining , and seem marvelous rich , which be try to be no marcasite , be the true sign of rich mineral , but be no other than el madre del oro ( as the Spaniard term they ) which be the mother of gold , or as it be say by other the scum of gold : of diverse sort of these many of my company bring also into England , every one take the fair for the best , which be not general . for my own part i do not countermand any man desire , or opinion , 8c i can have afford they little if i shall have deny they the please of their own fancy therein : but 1 be resolve that gold must be find either in grain separate from the stone ( as it be in most of the river in Guiana ) or else in a kind of hard stone , which we call the white spar , of which i see diverse hill , 8c in sundry place , but have neither time nor man , nor instrument fit for labour . near unto one of the river i find of the say white spar or flint a very great ledge or bank , which i endeavour to break by all the mean i can , because there appear on the outside some small grain of of gold , but find no mean to work the same upon the upper part , seek the side and circuit of the say rock , i find a clift in the same from whence with dagger , and with the head of a axe , we get out some small quantity thereof , of which kind of white stone ( wherein gold engender ) we see diverse hill and rock in every part of Guiana , wherein we travel . of this there have be many trial , and in London it be first assay by m . Westwood a refine dwelling in Woodstreet , and it hold after the rate of 12000 . or 13000 . pound a ton . another sort be afterward try by m . Bulmar 8c m . Dimock assay - master , 8c it hold after the rate of 23000 livre . a ton . there be some of it again try by m . palmer comptroller of the mint , and m . Dimock in goldsmith hall , 8c it hold after 26900 . livre . a tun . there be also at the same time , 8c by the same person a trial 344 make of the dust of the say mine which hold 8 livre . 6 . ounce weight of gold in the 100 : there be likewise at the same time a trial of a image of copper make in Guiana , which hold a three part of gold , beside diverse trial make in the country , and by other in London . but because there come ill with the good , and belike the say Aiderman be not present with the best , it have please he therefore to scandali all the rest , and to deface the enterprise as much as in he lie . it have also be conclude by diverse , that if there have be any such oar in Guiana , and the same discover , that i will have bring home a great quantity thereof : first i be not bind to satisfy any man of the quantity , but such only as adventure , if any store have be return thereof : but it be very true that have all their mountain be of massy gold , it be impossible for we to have make any long stay to have wrought the same : and whosoever have see with what strength of stone the best gold oar be environ , he will not think it easy to be have out in heap , and especial by we , who have neither man , instrument , nor time ( as it be say before ) to perform the same . there be on this discovery no less than 100 person , who can all witness , that when we past any branch of the river to view the land within , and stay from our boat but 6 . hour , we be drive to wade to the eye , at our return : and if we attempt the same , the day follow it be impossible either to ford it , or to swim it , both by reason of the swiftness , and also for that the border be so pester with fast wood , as neither boat nor man can find place , either to land or to embark : for in June , July , August and September , it be impossible to navigate any of those river : for such be the fury of the current , and there be so many tree and wood overflow , as if any boat but touch upon any tree or stake , it be impossible to save any one person therein : and year we depart the land it run with such swiftness , as we drive down most common against the wind , little less 345 than