ioo . mile a day : beside our vessel be no other than whirry , one little barge , a small cockboat , and a bad Galiota , which we frame in haste for that purpose at Trinidad , and those little boat have 9 or 10 . man a piece , with all their victual , and arm . it be further true , that we be about 400 . mile from our ship , and have be a month from they , which also we leave weak man in a open road , and have promise our return in 15 . day . other have devise that the same oar be have from Barbary , and that we carry it with we into Guiana : sure the singularity of that device i do not well comprehend : for my own part , i be not so much in love with these long voyage , as to devise , thereby to cozen my self , to lie hard , to fare worse , to be subject to peril , to disease , to ill savour , to be parch and wither , and withal to sustaine ' the care and labour of such a enterprise , except the same have more comfort , than the fetch of marcasite in Guiana , or buy of gold oar in Barbary . but i hope the better sort will judge i by themselves , 8c that the way of deceit be not the way of honour or good opinion : i have herein consume much time , 8c many crown , 8c i have no other respect or desire then to serve her majesty and my country thereby . if the spanish nation have be of like belief to these detractor , we shall little have fear or doubt their attempt , wherewith we now be daily threaten . but if we now consider of the action both of Charles the 5 . who have the maidenhead of Peru , and the abundant treasure of Atabalipa , together with the affair of the spanish king now live , what territory he have purchase , what he have add to the act of his predecessor , how many kingdom he have endanger , how many army , garrison , and navy he have and do maintain , the great loss which he have repair , as in 88 above 100 sail of great ship with their artillery , 8c that no year be less unfortunate but that many vessel , treasure , and people be devour , and yet not - 346 withstand he begin again like a storm to threaten shipwreck to we all : we shall find that these ability rise not from the trade of sack , and Sivil oringe , nor from aught else that either Spain , Portugal , or any of his other province produce : it be his indian gold that indanger and disturb all the nation of Europe , it purchase intelligence , creep into counsel , and set bind loyalty at liberty , in the great monarchy of Europe . if the spanish king can keep we from foreign enterprize , and from the impeachment of his trade , either by offer of invasion , or by besiege we in Britain , Ireland , or elsewhere , he have then bring the work of our peril in great forwardness . those prince which abound in treasure have great advantage over the rest , if they once constrain they to a defensive war , where they be drive once a year or often to cast lot for their own garment , and from such shall all trade , and intercourse be take away , to the general loss and impoverishment of the kingdom and common weal so reduce : beside when our man be constrain to fight , it have not the like hope , as when they be press and encourage by the desire of spoil and riches . Farther , it be to be doubt how those that in time of victory seem to affect their neighbour nation , will remain after the first view of misfortune , or ill success ; to trust also to the doubtfulness of a battle , be but a fearful and uncertain adventure , see therein fortune be as likely to prevail , as virtue . it shall not be necessary to allege all that may be say , and therefore i will thus conclude , that whatsoever kingdom shall | be enforce to defend it self may be compare to a body dangerous disease , which for a season may be preserve with vulgar medicine , but in a short time , and by little and little , the same must needs fall to the ground , and be dissolve . i have therefore labour all my life , both accord to my small power , and persuasion , to advance all those attempt , that may either promise return of profit to our self , or at least be a let and impeachment to the quiet course and plentiful trade 347 of the spanish nation , who in my weak judgement by such a war be as easy endanger and bring from his powerfulness , as any prince of Europe , if it be consider from how many kingdom and nation his revenue be gather , and those so weak in their own being , and so far sever from mutual succour . but because such a preparation and resolution be not to be hope for in haste , and that the time which our enemy embrace , can be have again to advantage , i will hope that these province , and that empire now by i discover shall suffice to inable her majesty and the whole kingdom , with no less quantity of treasure , than the king of Spain have in all the Indies east and west , which he possess , which if the same be consider and follow , ere the Spaniard enforce the same , and if her majesty will undertake it , i will be content to lose her highness favour and : good opinion for ever , and my life withal , if the same be not find rather to exceed , than to equal whatsoever be in this discourse promise or declare . i will now refer the reader to the follow discourse , with the hope that the perilous and chargeable labour and endeavour of such as thereby seek the profit and honour of her majesty , and the english nation , shall by man of quality and virtue receive such construction , and good acceptance , as themselves will look to be reward withal in the like . W . R .