tell they what we be , wherewith they come back willing aboard we : and of such fish and Tortugas egg 392 * 595 - as they have gather , they give we , and promise in the morning to bring the lord of that part with they , and to do we all other service they can . that night we come to a anchor at the part of the three goodly river ( the one be the river of Amana by which we come from the north , and run athwart towards the south , the other two be of Orenoque twa branch which cross from the west and run to the sea towards the east ) and land upon a fair sand , where ’ we find thousand of Tortugas egg , which be very wholesome meat , and great restore , so as our man be now well fill and high content both with the fare , and nearness of the land of Guiana which appear in sight . in the morning there come down accord to promise the lord of that border call Toparimaca , with some thirty or fourty follower , and bring we diverse sort of fruit , and of his wine , bread , fish , and flesh , who we also feast as we can , at least we drink good spanish wine ( whereof we have a small quantity in bottle ) which above all thing they love . i confer with this toparimaca of the next way to Guiana , who Toparimaca . conduct our galley and boat to his own port , and carry we from thence some mile and a half to his town , where some of our captain karouse of his wine till they be reasonable pleasant , for it be very strong with pepper , and the juice of diverse herb , and fruit digest and purge , they keep it in great earthen pot of ten or twelve galon very clean and sweet , and be themselves at their meeting and feast the great karouser and drunkard of the world : when we come to his town we find two cacique , whereof one be a stranger that have be up the river in trade , and his boat , people , and wife encamp at the port where we ancker , and the other be of that country a follower of Toparimaca : they lie each of they in a cotton Hamaca , which we call brazil bed , and two woman attend they with six cup and a little 393 ladle to fill they , out of a earthen pitcher of wine , and so they drink each of they three of those cup at a time one to the other , and in this sort they drink drink at their feast and meeting . that cacique that be a stranger have his wife stay at the port where we ancker , and in all my life i have seidome see a better favour woman : she be of good stature , with black eye , fat of body , of a excellent countenance , her hair almost as long as her self , tie up again in pretty knot , and it seem she stand not in that awe of her husband , as the rest , for she speak and discourse , and drink among the gentleman and captain , and be very pleasant , know her own comeliness , and take great pride therein . i have see a lady in England so like to she , as but for the difference of colour , i will have swear may have be the same . the seat of this town of Toparimaca be very pleasant , stand on a little hill , in a excellent prospect , with goodly garden a mile compass round about it , and two very fair and large pond of exedra town of Lent fish adjoin . this town be call Arowocai : the arowocay . people be of the nation call Nepoios , and be follower of Carapana . in that place i see very age people , that we may perceive all their sinew and vein without any flesh , and but even as a case cover only with the great skin . the lord of this place give i a old man ^ er ^ ore ^ or ot ’ who be great experience and travel , and we know the river most perfect both by day and night : and it shall be requisite for any man that pass it , to have such a pilot , for it be four , five , and six mile over in many place , and twenty mile in other place , with wonderful eddy , and strong current , many great island , and diverse shold , and many dangerous rock , and beside upon any increase of wind so great a bilowe , as we be sometime in great peril of drown in the galley , for the small boat dare not come from the shore , but when it be very fair . 394 the next day we haste thence , and have a easterly wind to help we , we spare our arm from row : for after we enter Orenoque , the river lie for the most part east and west , even from the sea unto Quito in Peru . this river be navigable with bark , little less than a thousand mile , and from the place where we enter , it may be sail up in small pinnace to many of the best part of Nuevo reyno de Granada , and of Popayan : and from no place may the city of these part of the Indies be so easy take and invade as from hence . all that day we sail up a branch of that river , have on the left hand a great island which they call Assapana which may contain some five and twenty mile in length , and six mile in breadth , the great body of the river run on the other side of this island . beyond that middle branch there be also another island in the river call Iwana , which be twice as big as the isle of wight , and beyond it , and between it and the main of Guiana , run a third branch of Orenoque call Arraroopana : all three be goodly branch , and all navigable for great ship . i