from the rest of his Indies : in which he have have so many misfortune , and against who the natural people be so impetuous bend , and oppose : be it not , that it exceed all the rest in abundance of gold , and other riches . the case then so stand , be it not mere wretchedness in we , to spend our time , break our sleep , and waste our brain , in contrive a cavil false title to defraud a neighbour of half a acre of land : whereas here whole shire of fruitful rich ground , lie now waste for want of people , do prostitute themselves unto we , like a fair and beautiful woman , in the pride and flower of desire year : if we do but consider , how unhappy Berreo his affair , with his assistant have of late year , in our own knowledge succeed : who can say , if the hand 487 of the almighty be not against they , and that he have a work in this place , in stead of papistry , to make the sincere light - of his gospel to shine on this people ? the effect whereof shall be a royal crown of everlasting remembrance to all other blessing , that from the beginning the lord have plentiful pour on our dread sovereign , in a eminent and supreme degree of all perfection . if the castilian , pretend a religious care of plant Christianity in those part , have in their do preach nought else but avarice , rapine , blood , death , and destruction to those naked , and sheeplike creature of God ; erect statue and trophy of victory unto themselves , in the slaughter of million of innocent : do not the cry of the poor succourless ascend unto the heaven ? have God forget to be gracious to the workmanship of his own hand ? or shall not his judgement in a day of visi - hermajestie . tation by the ministry of his choose servant , come on these bloodthirsty butcher , like rain into a fleece of wool ? aliquando manifesta ; aliquando occulta ; semper justa sunt dei judicia . to leave this digression , it be fit only for a prince to begin , and end this work : the maintenance and order thereof require sovereign power , authority , and commandment . the river of Raleana give open and free passage , any provision that the Spaniard can make to the contrary notwithstanding , ( for once yearly the land near the river be all drown ) to convey man , horse , munition , and victuali for any power of man that shall be send thither . i do speak it on my soul health , as the best testimony , that i can in any cause yield to aver a truth , that have now the second time be in this country , and with the help of time and leisure well advise my self upon all circumstance to be think on ; i can discern no sufficient impediment to the contrary , but that with a competent number of man , her majesty may to she and her successor enjoy 488 this rich and great empire : and have once plant there , may for ever ( by the favour of God ) hold and keep it , contra ludaeos and gentes . Subjects , i doubt not , may through her majesty gracious sufferance , join their strength together , invade , spoil , and overrun it , return with gold and great riches . but what good of perpetui tie can follow thereof ? or who can hope that they will take any other course then such , as tend to a private and present benefit ; consider that a empire once obtain , be of congruity , how , and wheresoever the charge shall grow , to be annex unto the crown ? the riches of this place be not fit for any private estate : no question , they will rather prove sufficient to cross and countervail the Spaniard his proceed in all part of christendom , where his money make way to his ambition . if the necessity of follow this enterprise do nothing urge we , because in some case better a mischief , than a inconvenience : let the conveniency thereof somewhat move we , in respect both of so many gentleman , soldier , and young brother , who , if for want of employment they do not die like cloy cattle in rank easefulnesse ; be enforce for maintenance sake , sometime to take shameful and unlawful course : and in respect of so many handycraftsman have able body , that do live in cleanness of tooth and poverty . to sacrifice the child of Belial unto the common weal , be not to defile the land with blood , because the law of God do not prohibit it , and the execution of justice require it to be so : but yet if the waterboughe , that suck and feed on the juice , and nourishment that the fruitful branch shall live by , be to be cut down from the tree , and not regard : lucky and prosperous be that right hand , that shall plant and possess a soil , where they may fructify , increase , and grow to good : thrice honourable and bless be the memory of so charitable a deed , from one generation to another . 489 to conclude , your lordship have pay for the discovery and search , both in your own person , and since by i . you have frame it , and mould it ready for her majesty , to set on her seal . if either envy or ignorance , or other devise frustrate the rest , the good which shall grow to our enemy , and the loss which will come to her majesty and this kingdom , will after a few year show it self . we have more people , more ship , and better mean , and yet do nothing . the spanish king have have so sweet a taste of the riches thereof , as notwithstanding that he be lord of so many empire and kingdom already , notwithstanding his enterprise of France and Flanders , notwithstanding that he attend this year a home invasion : yet he send twenty eight sail to Trinidad ,