and request the whole camp to witness it , and Domingo de vera firm it thus . it be well and firm do . and underneath . before i Rodrigo Caranza , register of the army . the first of May they prosecute the say possession and discovery to the town on Carapana . from thence the say master of the camp pass to the town of Toroco who principali be call Topiawary be five league far within the land then the first nation , and well inhabit . and to this principali by mean of the interpretor they give to understand that his majesty and the say corregidor command they to take the possession of that land , and that they shall yield their obedience to his majesty , and to his corregidor , and to the master of the camp in his name , and that in token thereof he will place a cross in the middle of his town . whereunto the say cacique answer they shall advance it with a very good will , and that he remain in the obedience of our lord the king , and of the say governor Antonio de Berreo who vassal he will be . 436 the four of May we come to a province above five league thence , of all side inhabit with much people , the principali of this pedple come and meet we in peaceable manner : and he be call revato , he bring we to a very large house where he entertain we well , and give we much gold , and the interpreter ask he from whence that gold be , he answer , from a province not pass a day journey off , where there be so many Indians as will shadow the sun , and so much gold as all yonder plain will not contain it . in which country ( when they enter into the Borracheras or their drunken feast ) they take of the say gold in dust and anoint themselves all over therewith to make the brave show ; and to the end the gold may cover they , they anoint their body with stamp herb of a gluey substance : and they have war with those Indians . they promise we that if we will go unto they , they will aid we ; but they be such infinite number , as no doubt they will kill we . And be ask how they get you same gold , they tell we they go to a certain down or plain , and pull or dig up the grass by the root : which do , they take of the earth , put it in great bucket , which they carry to wash at the river , and that which come in powder they keep for their Borracheras or drunken feast : and that which be in piece they wrought into eagle . the eight of may we go from thence , and march about five league : at the foot of a hill we find a principali call Arataco with three thousand Indians , man and woman all in peace with much victuali , as hen and venison in great abundance , and many sort of wine . he entreat we to go to his house , and to rest that night in his town , be of five hundred house . the interpreter ask whence he have those hen : he say they be bring from a mountain not pass a quarter of a league thence , where be many Indians , yea so many as grass on the ground , and that these man have the point of their shoulder 437 high than the crown of their head , and have so many hen as be wonderful ; and if we will have any , we shall send they Jew harp , for they will give for every one two hen . we take a indian , and give he five hundred harp ; the hen be so many that he bring we , as be not to be number . we say we will go thither ; they tell we they be now in their Borracheras or drunken feast , and will kill we . we ask the indian that bring the hen , if it be true ; he say it be most true . we ask he how they make their Borracheras or drunken feast ; he say , they have many eagle of gold hang on their breast , and pearl in their ear , and that they dance be all cover with gold . the indian say unto we , if we will see they , we shall give he some hatchet , and he will bring we of those eagle . the master of the camp give he one hatchet ( he will give he no more because they shall not understand we go to seek gold ) he bring we a eagle that weigh 27 . pound of good gold . the master of the camp take it , and show it to the soldier , and then throw it from he , make show not to regard it . about midnight come a indian and say unto he , give i a pickeaxe , and i will tell thou what the Indians with the high shoulder mean to do . the interpreter tell the master of the camp , who command one to be give he : he then tell we , those Indians be come to kill we for our merchandise . hereupon the master of the camp cause his company to be set in order , and begin to march . the eleven day of may we go about seven league from thence to a province , where we find a great company of Indians apparel : they tell we that if we come to fight , they will fill up those plain with Indians to fight with we ; but if we come in peace , we shall enter and be well entertain of they , because they have a great desire to see Christians : and there they tell we of all the 438 i594 ’ rich that be . i do not here set it down , because there be no place for it , but it shall appear by the information that go to his majesty : for if it shall here be set down , four leaf of paper will not contain it .