of the say mountain the river of Papamene . Papamene which descend into Marannon or Amazones pass through the province Mutylones where don Pedro de Osua who be slay by the traitor Agiri before rehearse , build his brigandine , when he seek Guiana by the way of Amazones . the isle of between dawney and Beta lie a famous island in Baraquan . Orenoque now call Baraquan ( for above Meta it be not know by the name of Orenoque ) which be call Athule , beyond which , ship of burden can pass by reason of a most forcible overfall , and current of water : but in the eddy all small vessel may be draw even to Peru it self : but to speak of moor of these river without the description be but tedious , and therefore Orenoque a i with leave the rest to the description . this river of Orenoque be navigable for ship little less than 1000 Peru , Nuevo mile , and for lesser vessel near 2000 by it ( as afore - reyno , and say ) Peru , Nuevo reyno , and Popaian , may be invade : Popaian may it also lead to the great empire of Inga , and to the province of Amapaia , and Anebas which abound in gold : l ' ’ J he branch of Cosnero , manta , Caora descend from the middle land and valley , which lie between the easter province of Peru and Guiana ; and it fall into the sea between Marannon and Trinidad in two degree and a half : all which your honour shall better perceive in the general description of Guiana , Peru , Nuevo reyno , the kingdom of Popayan , and Roidas , with the 408 province of Venezuela , to the bay of Uraba , behind Cartagena westward ; and to Amazones southward . while we lay at anchor on the coast of Canuri , and have Canuri . take knowledge of all the nation upon the head and branch of this river , and have find out so many several people , which be enemy to the Epuremei , and the new conqueror : i think it time lose to linger any long in that place , especial for that the fury of Orenoque begin daily to threaten we with danger in our return : for no half day pass , but the river begin to rage and overflow very fearful , and the rain come down in terrible shower , and gust in great abundance : and withal , our man begin to cry out for want of shift , for no man have place to bestow any other apparel then that which he wear on his back , and that be thorough wash on his body for the most part ten time in one day : and we have now be well near a month , every day pass to the westward far and far from our ship . we therefore turn towards the east , and spend the rest they return . of the time in discover the river towards the sea , which we have not view , and which be most materiali . the next day follow we leave the mouth of Caroli , and arrive again at the port of morequito where we be before : for pass down the stream we go without labour , and against the wind , little less than a hundred mile a day . assoon as i come to anchor , i send away one for old Topiawari , with who i much desire to have further conference , and also to deal with he for some one of his country , to bring with we into England , as well to learn the language , as to confer withal by the way , the time be now spend of any long stay there . within three hour after my messenger come to he , he arrive also , and with he such a rabble of all sort of people , and every one load with somewhat , as if it have be a great market or fair in England : and our hungry company cluster thick and threefold among their basket , every one lay hand on 409 1595 - the last conference of sir Walter Ralegh with Topiawari . who son he bring into England . counsel to be follow in other conquest . Macureguarai the first town of Guiana , and of rich and apparel people . what he like . after he have rest a while in my tent , i shut out all but our self , and my interpreter , and tell he that i know that both the Epuremei and the Spaniard be enemy to he , his country and nation : that the one have conquer Guiana already , and the other seek to regain the same from they both : and therefore i desire he to instruct i what he can , both of the passage into the golden part of Guiana , and to the civil town and apparel people of Inga . he give i a answer to this effect : first that he can not perceive that i mean to go onward towards the city of Manoa , for neither the time of the year serve , neither can he perceive any sufficient number for such a enterprise : and if i do , i be sure with all my company to be bury there , for the emperor be of that strength , as that many time so many man more be too few : beside he give i this good counsel and advise i to hold it in mind ( as for himself he know , he can not live till my return ) that i shall not offer by any mean hereafter to invade the strong part of Guiana without the help of all those nation which be also their enemy : for that it be impossible without those , either to be conduct , to be victual , or to have aught carry with we , our people not be able to endure the march in so great heat , and travel , unless the borderer give they help , to carry with they both their meat and furniture : for he remember that in the plain of Macureguarai three hundred Spaniard be overthrow , who be tire out , and have none of the borderer to their friend : but meet their enemy as