, for the riches , and for the excellent seat , it far exceed any of the world , at least of so much of the world as be know to the spanish nation : it be found upon a lake of salt water of 200 . league long like unto mare Caspium . and if we compare Fran . Lopez , it to that of Peru , and but read the report of Francisco LoPez and othersj iter will seem more than credible : and 120 * ’ ? because we may judge of the one by the other , i think good to insert part of the 120 . chapter of 356 Lopez in his generail history of the Indies , wherein he describe the court and magnificence of Guaynacapa , ancestor to the emperor of Guiana , who very word be these . todo el servicio de sum casa , mesa , y cozina , era de oro , y de piata , y quando menos de plata , y cobre por mass rezio . tenia en sum recamara estatuas huecas de oro , que parecian gigantes , y las figuras all propio , you tamanno the quanto animales , ave , arbole , y yerva produze la tierra , y de quanto piece cria la mar y aguas de sus reynos . tenia assi mesmo sogas , costale , cestas , y trox de oro y plata , rimeros de palos de oro , que pareciessen lenna raiada para quemar . en fin no avia cosa en sum tierra , que no la tuviesse de oro contrahecha : in an dizen , que tenian los Ingas un vergel en una Isla cerca de la Puna , donde se yuan a holgar , quando querian mar , que tenia la ortaliza , las flores , y arbole de oro y plata , invention y grandeza hasta entonce nunca vista . Allende de todo esto tenia infinitissima cantitad de plata , y oro por labrar en el Cuzco , que se perdio por la muerte de Guascar , ca los indios lo escondieron , viendo que los espannole se lo tomavan , y embiavan a espanna . that be , all the vessel of his house , table and kitchen be of gold and silver , and the mean of silver and copper for strength and hardness of metal . he have in his wardrobe hollow statue of gold which seem giant , and the figure in proportion and bigness of all the beast , bird , tree , and herb , that the earth bring forth : and of all the fish that the sea or water of his kingdom breed . he have also rope , budget , chest and trough of gold and silver , heap of billet of gold , that seem wood mark out to burn . final , there be nothing in his country , whereof he have not the counterfeit in gold : yea and they say , the Ingas have a garden of pleasure in a island near Puna , where they go to recreate themselves , when they will take the air of the sea , which have all kind of garden - herb , flower and tree of gold and silver , a invention , and magnificence till then never see . beside all this , he have a infinite quantity 357 of silver and gold unwrought in Cuzco which be lose by the death of Guascar , for the indian hide it , see that the Spaniard take it , and send it into Spain . and in the 117 . chapter Francisco Pizarro cause the gold and silver of Atabalipa to be weigh after he have take it , which Lopez set down in these word follow . Hallaron cinquenta y do will marcos de bvena plata , y un millon y trezientos y veinte y sey will , y quinientos pesos de oro , which be : they find fifty and two thousand mark of good silver , and one million , and three hundred twenty and six thousand and five hundred pezo of gold . now although these report may seem strange , yet if we consider the many million which be daily bring out of Peru into Spain , we may easy believe the same : for we find that by the abundant treasure of that country the spanish king vex all the prince of Europe , and be become , in a few year , from a poor king of Castille , the great monarch of this part of the world , and likely every day to increase , if other prince forslow the good occasion offer , and suffer he to add this empire to the rest , which by far exceed all the rest : if his gold now endanger we , he will then be unresistable . such of the Spaniard as afterward endeavour the conquest thereof ( whereof there have be many , as shall be declare hereafter ) think that this Inga ( of who this emperor now live be descend ) take his way by the river of Amazones , by that branch which be call papamene : for by that way follow Orellana ( by the commandment of Gonzalo Pizarro , in the year 1542 ) who name the river also bear this day , which be also by other call Marannon , although Andrew Thevet do affirm that between Marannon and Amazones there be 120 league : but sure it be that those river have one head and beginning , and the Marannon , which Thevet describe , be but a branch of Amazones or Orellana , of which i will speak more in another place . it be attempt by Ordas ; but it be now little less than 70 358 year since that Diego Ordas , a knight of the order of saint Iago attempt the same : and it be in the year 1542 that Orellana discover the river of Amazones ; but the first that ever see Manoa be Juan Martinez master of the munition to Ordas . at a port call morequito in Guiana there lie at this day a great anchor of Ordas his ship ; and this port be some 300 mile within the land , upon the great river of Orenoque . i rest at this port four day : twenty day after i leave the ship at Curiapan . the relation of this Martinez ( who be the first that discover Manoa ) his success and