do eat of all sort of corrupt fruit , and make meal of fresh fish without season , of Tortugas , of Lagartos or crocodile , and of all sort good and bad , without either order or measure , and beside lodge in the open air every night ) we lose not any one , nor have one ill dispose to my knowledge , nor find any Calentura , or other of those pestilent disease which dwell in all hot region , and so near the equinoctial line . where there be store of gold , it be in effect needless to remember other commodity for trade : but it have towards the south part of the river , great quantity of brasil - wood , and diverse berry that die a most perfect crimson and carnation : and for paint , all France , Italy , or the east Indies yield none such : for the more the skin be wash , the fair the colour appear , and 426 the short , easy , and commodious navigation to Guiana . the discovery of Guiana a . d . ... * 595 - with which , even those brown and tawny woman spot themselves , and colour their cheek . all place yield abundance of cotton , of silk , of balsamum , and of those cotton , silk , kind most excellent , and never know in Europe , of all sort of gum , of indian pepper : and what else an the country may afford within the land we know not , neither have we time to abide the trial , and search . the soil beside be so excellent and so full of river , as it will carry sugar , ginger , and all those other commodity , which the west Indies have . the navigation be short , for it may be sail with a ordinary wind in six week , and in the like time back again , and by the way neither lee shore , enemy coast , rock , nor sand , all which in the voyage to the west Indies , and all other place we be subject unto , as the channel of Bahama , come from the west Indies , can well be pass in the winter , and when it be at the best , it be a perilous and a fearful place . the rest of the Indies for calm , and disease very troublesome , and the sea about the Bermuda a hellish sea for thunder , lightning , and storm . this very yeere * there be seventeen sail of Spanish 1595 . ship lose in the channel of Bahama , and the great fillip like to have sink at the Bermuda be put back to saint Juan de Puerto rico . and so it fall out in that navigation every year for the most part , which in this voyage be not to be fear : for the time of year to leave England be best in July , and the summer in Guiana be in October , November , December , Januarie , February , and march , and then the ship may depart thence in April , and so return again into England in June , so as they shall never be subject to winter - weather , either come , go , or stay there : which for my part , i take to be one of the great comfort and encouragements that can be think on , have ( as i have do ) taste in this voyage by the west Indies so many calm , so much heat , such outrageous gust , foul weather , and contrary wind . 427 to conclude , Guiana be a country that have yet her maidenhead , never sack , turn , nor wrought , the face of the earth have not be tear , nor the virtue and salt of the soil spend by manurance , the grave have not be open for gold , the mine not break with sledge , nor their image pull down out of their temple . it have never be enter by any army of strength , and never conquer or possess by any christian prince . it be beside so defensible , that if two fort be build in one of the province which i have see , the flood set in so near the bank , where the channel also lie , that no ship can pass up but within a pike length of the artillery , first of the one , and afterward of the other : which two fort will be a sufficient guard both to the empire of Inga , and to a hundred other several kingdom , lie within the say river , even to the city of Quito in Peru . there be therefore great difference between the easiness of the conquest of Guiana , and the defence of it be conquer , and the west or east Indies : Guiana have but one entrance by the sea ( if it have that ) for any vessel of burden : so as whosoever shall first possess it , it shall be find unaccessible for any enemy , except he come in wherry , barge , or canoas , or else in flat bottomed boat , and if he do offer to enter it in that manner , the wood be so thick two hundred mile together upon the river of such entrance , as a mouse can sit in a boat unhit from the bank . by land it be more impossible to approach , for it have the strong situation of any region under the sun , and be so environ with impassable mountain on every side , as it be impossible to victuali any company in the passage : which have be well prove by the spanish nation , who since the conquest of Peru have never leave five year free from attempt this empire , or discover some way into it , and yet of three and twenty several gentleman , knight , and noble man , there be never any that know which way to lead a army by land , or to con - 428 ... I595 * dust ship by sea , any thing near the say country . Orellana , of who the river of Amazones take name , be the first , and don Antonio de Berreo ( who we displant ) the last : and i