2 h Trinidad , to fortify there , and keep the passage of this river , be a evident argument that the king fear and doubt the sequel of this discovery . for can it be a small matter ? or have he so waste employment for his man and ship , that upon no ground , he will send eight and twenty ship , to keep we only from tobacco ? for what else that good be can Trinidad yield we ? no doubtless , if the return of Berreo his campmaster with ten of these ship be compare with precedent advertisement concern he : it will appear more than probable , that the guiana - golde wage these man and ship : and that they be now more careful to obtain this place , than to keep other , which they have already get , which note , except in matter of extraordinary account , be not incident to their policy and proceed . again , it can be think that either it be senseless madness in the governor of Margarita , and the Caracas , to bring their state and live in question , by seek , contrary to their king order , to enter Guiana , and kill Berreo with his follower : or else the abundance of pearl in Margarita , and the gold mine in the Caracas , seem matter of small account : Guiana only be in their judgement , rich , plentiful , and able of it self to redeem their trespass and offence , how great soever it shall be . the sundry attempt and overthrow of the Spaniard be man of power , and honourable place , in labour threescore and three year and upwards , to enlarge the kingdom of Spain with this mighty and great empire , do plain show , that they long time seek a path , where in one month a high way be find : that the loss of their life witness their desire , and the worthiness of the thing , where to we the easiness of obtain discredit the greatness of the attempt : and that if now at the last they do prevail , they must hold by tyrannic that which they get by the sword ; where than our return nothing by the Indians be more wish for , nothing expect more earnest . 482 those objection , which have be make by many seem wise , and the impediment likely to arise , as they have suppose , be best answer by the unreproved witness of those man action . some have term these discovery fable , and fantasy , as if there have be no such land or territory : other allow both of the place , and that such a kingdom or country be discover , make conclusion , that if it have be so rich as we have suppose , that no doubt the king of Spain will by this time have possess it . but if they consider that the spanish nation have already conquer the two empire of Mexico and Peru , with so many other kingdom and province : we may very well answer , that his power be not infinite , and that he have do well for the time . and yet it be manifest , that this very empire have be by all those several Spaniard ( the catalogue of who name be by it self hereunto annex ) at sundry time undertake , and never perform . howbeit , the world have reason to admire their constancy , and their great labour , and we may well blush at our own idle , despairfull , and loiter disposition , that can find ability in another barren , and starve nation , to possess so much of the world , and can do nothing but frame argument against our self , as unfit and powerless to possess one province already discover , and of which our nation Kath assurance of the people love , and that all the chieftain and principal have vow their obedience to her majesty ; the navigation be withal so short , dangerless , and free from infectious sickness . if doubt of peril may moderate the mind of our man once move with steadfast hope , that gold shall be the reward of their travel : it may easy be perceive , that all those let and hindrance that can any way be allege , or wrest so much , as but to touch we , do deep and near concern the spanish king , and in a manner violent withhold he from that , which he notwithstanding carry with success , while we 483 out of season do affect the bare stile , to be name man stay and circumspect in our proceed . it be report , that Calanus the indian throw down before Alexander the great , a dry sere piece of leather , and then put his foot on one of the end of it : the leather be tread down at that side , rise on all part else . by this the wise man do show unto he a figure and similitude of his kingdom , which be exceed large , must of necessity in all other part , except the place of the king residence , be always full of stir , tumult , and insurrection . the end afterward confirm , that this empire consist of sundry nation , can not keep it self from dissolution . no potentate living have , or can have so faithful and incorrupt counseller , as be the example and history of forepass time and age . we may therefore be bold to think that the governor of the spanish affair shall mind it , that their king lustful desire , and ambitious thought to establish over all Europe one law , one lord , one religion , be build and erect on a dangerous ungrounded resolution : consider that many of the neighbour kingdom be of equal force in man , or great than he can make , be settle in a long continue estate , be entire within themselves , and hate to hear the voice of a stranger . it be not unlikely that they in this case shall lay before their king the fatal destiny of many worthy , that have be constrain for want of sufficient number of their natural subject , after many year spend in the war , to retire to their own country