of the people call Cantyman , who have the year before bene with captain Whiddon , and be of his acquaintance . by this Cantyman we understand what strength the Spaniard have , how far it be to their city , and of don Antonio de Berreo the governor , who be say to be slay in his second attempt of Guiana , but be not . while we remain at Puerto de los espannole some Spaniards come aboard we to buy linen of the company , and such other thing as they want , and also to view our ship and company , all which i entertain kind and feast after our manner : by mean whereof i learn of one and another as much of the estate of Guiana as i can , or as they know , for those poor soldier have be many year without wine , a few draught make they merry , in which mood they vaunt of Guiana and of the riches thereof , and all what they know of the way and passage , my self seem to purpose nothing less than the entrance or discovery thereof , but breed in they a opinion that i be bind only for the relief of those English which i have plant in Virginia , whereof the bruit be come among they ; which i have perform in my return , if extremity of weather have not force i from the say coast . 351 8 Englishman betray by Antony Berreo . i find occasion of stay in this place for two cause : the one be to be revenge of Berreo , who the year before 1594 . have betray eight of captain Whiddons man , and take they while he depart from they to seek the Edward Bonaventure , which arrive at Trinidad the day before from the east Indies : in who absence Berreo send a Canoa aboard the pinnace only with Indians and dog invite the company to go with they into the wood to kill a dear , who like wise man in the absence of their captain follow the indian , but be no soon one harquebus shoot from the shore , but berreos soldier lie in ambush have they all , notwithstanding that he have give his word to captain Whiddon that they shall take water and wood safe : the other cause of my stay be , for that by discourse with the Spaniard i daily learn more and more of Guiana , of the river and passage , and of the enterprise of Berreo , by what mean or fault he fail , and how he mean to prosecute the same . while we thus spend the time i be assure by another cacique of the north side of the island , that Berreo have send to Margarita and Cumana for soldier , mean to have give i a cassado at part , if it have be possible . for although he have give order through all the island that no indian shall come aboard to trade with i upon pain of hang and quarter , ( have execute two of they for the same , which i afterward find ) yet every night there come some with most lamentable complaint of his cruelty , how he have divide the island and give to every soldier a part , that he make the ancient cacique which be lord of the country to be their slave , that he keep they in chain , and drop their naked body with burn bacon , and such other torment , which i find afterward to be true : for in the city after i enter the same there be 5 . of you lord or little king ( which they call cacique in the west Indies ) in one chain 352 1595 - almost dead of famine , and waste with torment : these be call in their own language Acarewana , and now of late since english , french and spanish be come among they , they call themselves captain , because they perceive that the chief of every ship be call by that name . those five captain in the chain be call wannawanare , Carroaori , maquarima , tarroo - panama , and aterima . so as both to be revenge of the former wrong , as also consider that to enter Guiana by small boat , to depart 400 . or 500 mile from my ship , and to leave a garrison in my back interest in the same enterprise , who also daily expect supply out of Spain , i shall have savour very much of the ass : and therefore take a time of most advantage i set upon the corpse du guard in the evening , and have put they to the sword , send captain calfield onward with 60 . soldier , and my self follow with 40 . more and so take their new city which they call S . Joseph by break of day : they abide the city of not any fight after a few shot , and all be dismiss \' a ^ e ^ ntm but only Berreo and his companion , i bring they Berreo with i aboard , and at the instance of the Indians , i prisoner . set their new city of saint Joseph on fire . the same day arrive captain George Gifford with your lordship ship , and captain Keymis who i lose on the coast of Spain , with the Galego , and in they diverse gentleman and other , which to our little army be a great comfort and supply . we then haste away towards our purpose discovery , and first i call all the captain of the island together that be enemy to the Spaniard ; for there be some which Berreo have bring out of other country , and plant there to eat out and waste those that be natural of the place , and by my indian interpreter , which i carry out of England , i make they understand that i be the servant of a queen , who be the great cacique of the north , and a virgin , and have more cacique under she then there be tree in ten 353 z sir W . Ralegh pass 400 . mile towards Guiana . that island : that she be a enemy to the Castellani in respect of their tyrannic and oppression , and that she deliver all such nation about she