the wind and current be both very strong , so as we be drive to go in those small boat the bay of direct before the wind into the bottom of the bay Guanipa . of Guanipa , anj from thence to enter the mouth of some one of those river which John Dowglas have last discover , and have with we for pilot a indian of Barema , a river to the south of Orenoque , between that and Amazones , who canoas we have former take as he Barema . be go from the say Barema , lade with cassavi - bread , to sell at Margarita . this arwacan promise to bring i into the great river of Orenoque , but indeed of that which he enter he be utter ignorant , for he have not see it in twelve year before ; at which time he be very young , and of no judgement : and if God have not send we another help , we may have wander a whole year in that labyrinth of river , year we have find any way , either out or in , especial after we be pass ebb and flow , which be in four day , for i know a wonder ap the earth do not yield the like confluence of ‘ stream stream and branch , the one cross the other so many ' time , and all so fair and large , and so like one to another , as no man can tell which to take : and if we go by the sun or compass , hope thereby to go direct one way or other , yet that way we be also carry in a circle among multitude of island , and every island so border with high tree , as no man can see any further than the breadth of the river , or length of the breach . 380 but this it chance , that enter into a river , ( which because it have no name , we call the river of the red cross , our self be the first Christians that ever come therein ) the two and twenty of May , as we be row up the same , we espy a small canoa with three Indians , which ( by the swiftness of my barge , row with eight oar ) i overtake year they can cross the river , the rest of the people on the bank shadow under the thick wood , gaze on with a doubtful conceit what may befall those three which we have take . but when they perceive that we offer they no violence , neither enter their canoa with any of we , nor take out of the canoa any of they , they then begin to show themselves on the bank side , and offer to traffic with we for such thing as they have . and as we draw near , they all stay , and we come with our barge to the mouth of a little creek which come from their town into the great river . as we abide there a while , our indian pilot , call Ferdinando , will needs go ashore to their village to fetch some fruit , and to drink of their artificiali wine , and also to see the place , and know the lord of it against another time , and take with he a brother of he , which he have with he in the journey : when they come to the village of these people , the lord of the island offer to lay hand on they , purpose to have slay they both , yield for reason that this indian of we have bring a strange nation into their territory , to spoil and destroy they . but the pilot be quick , and of a dispose body , slip their finger , and run into the wood , and his brother be the better footman of the two , recover the creek mouth , where we stay in our barge , cry out that his brother be slay : with that we set hand on one of they that be next we , a very old man , and bring he into the barge , assure he that if we have not our pilot again , we will present cut off his head . this old man be resolve that he shall pay the loss of the other , cry out to those in the wood to save Ferdinando 381 the river of the red cross . two nation of the Tivitivas , call ciawani , and waraweete . a description of the mighty river of Orenoque or Baraquan . what manner of people the Tivitivas be . our pilot ; but they follow he notwithstanding , and hunt after he upon the foot with the dear - dog , and with so main a cry , that all the wood echo with the shout they make : but at the last this poor chase Indian recover the river side , and get upon a tree , and as we be coast , leap down and swim to the barge half dead with fear . but our good hap be , that we keep the other old indian which we handfasted to redeem our pilot withal ; for be natural of those river , we assure our self he know the way better than any stranger can . and indeed , but for this chance , i think we have never find the way either to Guiana , or back to our ship : for Ferdinando after a few day know nothing at all , nor which way to turn , yea and many time the old man himself be in great doubt which river to take . those people which dwell in these break island and drown land , be general call Tivitivas ; there be of they two sort , the one call Ciawani , and the other waraweete . the great river of Orenoque or Baraquan have nine branch which fall out on the north side of his own main mouth : on the south side it have seven other fall into the sea , so it disemboqu by sixteen arm in all , between hand and break ground , but the hand be very great , many of they as big as the isle of wight , and big , and many less . from the first branch on the north